Bienvenue. My name is Nate Higgins. I am the director of the United States
non-profit Energy in Our Future. I am also the host of the podcast, The Great
Simplification. Yesterday, upon the invitation of my colleague in Canada,
Kira Cooper, I gave a presentation to the Environmental Studies Association of Canada
to the Academic Congress of Canada 2024, which next week will be viewed by some 10 to 15,000
professors and affiliates of universities. Kira was gracious in allowing me to speak
as long as I wanted to. Of all the presentations I've done, this is the most comprehensive,
most up-to-date. I forgot a few things. I'm sure I'm missing some things. The world is changing.
I'm still learning. But if you're looking for one-stop shop, it's about an hour and 45-minute
talk. There's a brief intro by Kira, followed by a part one, the drivers and constraints of our
situation, the implications and scenarios, followed by a multiple-scale portfolio of
potential responses by us. It is my hope that many professors around the world start to integrate
this system science of our human predicament instead of continuing to work in silos. We need
the silos, but as part of a larger collective of information and cross-disciplinary sharing.
I hope you learn from this presentation and share it. It will take a village. Here's Kira Abiento.
Greetings and bienvenue au congrès 2024. Au nom de l'association canadienne d'études
environnementales et de nos partenaires, j'ai le grand honneur de vous présenter, Dr Nate Higgins.
Nate est le directeur de l'Institut for the Study of Energy and our Future et haute
to podcast the great simplification. Welcome. My name is Kira Cooper and I'm the co-president
of the Environmental Studies Association of Canada. I wish to acknowledge that today
I'm speaking to you from the traditional territory of the Haudenosaunee, Anishinaabe,
and Neutral Peoples. I would also like to recognize the immense natural resources,
energy, and human capital that make it possible for us to be here on this call.
On behalf of ESAC and our partners, I am honored to welcome Dr. Nate Higgins as our 2024 Congress
keynote speaker. Nate is the co-founder and director of the Institute for the Study of Energy
and our Future and host of the great simplification podcast. He is a highly respected and widely
trusted thought leader and communicator extraordinaire at the nexus of energy,
environment, and finance. I am thrilled to have Nate join us as we discuss what sustaining
shared futures means in these critical times. Without further ado, bienvenue and welcome, Nate.
Merci beaucoup, Kira. Thank you for the nice introduction.
This will be the longest presentation I've ever given in my life. This is a culmination of 20
years of research on multiple disciplines. I know most of you are scientists and academics
and probably haven't heard some of this. Some of this can be a little bit hard-hitting.
There will be references on every page of my slides. You can watch the video later and research
things. Kira will offer now since we'll be on a tight timeline. I know we'll have time for a few
questions, but if you wanted to reconvene another time for your colleagues in Canada to have a
conversation and questions, I'd be happy to do that. I'm going to speak fast. There's a lot of
slides. We are part of a systems story. If you are a member of our species, which if you're watching
this, you are. In the 300,000 years we've been a species, there's about an eight to 10% chance
that if you're human, you're alive right now. We've arrived at a species-level conversation,
which is what I'm going to discuss today. I'm going to have five sections, a brief introduction.
I'm going to describe the human ecosystem, the super-organism implications and scenarios for
the future. Then I've got quite a long what to do section. This isn't a prescriptive talk, but I
can give ideas for the direction for the world, for Canada, for civil society, for the academy,
and for you as individual humans. Brief introduction. Those of you watching this,
since this is a scientist plenary, you have different priorities. You also want to contribute
to better futures for humanity. You want to live a good life. I couldn't find a transparent image
of a took here. I'm going to focus on your research hat a little bit and make you think about what
we need to be researching and the role of the academy in the future. I'll come back to that
at the conclusion. We hear a lot of stories in the news about what's going right and what's going
wrong with the world, and I won't spend bandwidth here. In order to diagnose the patient and figure
out what to do, we first have to understand actually what's wrong and the drivers and the
constraints of what we face. That's what this talk is going to be about. The two predominant cultural
narratives, at least in North America, are a green new deal. We migrate our energy systems to 100%
renewables, work towards net zero emissions, and everything will be fine. There's also business as
usual. There's nothing wrong with our past model. There's no shortages for anything. We need to
deregulate and reduce taxes. This story is going to tell a wider and deeper history and explanation
of our human predicament. From a siloed perspective, there's lots of important aspects to a more
sustainable future. Renewable energy, there's a lot of experts on that. If we take an aerial view,
we can see that we have islands of expertise in our world that rarely talk to each other,
and that ends up meaning that we have lots of concurrent, urgent and eloquent and erudite
conversations that lack the aerial view that look at how things are connected. We have islands of
expertise in our cultural conversations separated by oceans of incoherence. How do we make sense of
things and put them together? The human ecosystem. I'm going to go over this in several slides. We
take energy, invent things, combine it with materials, develop products, represent these in
our economic system by dollars, Canadian or US or others, and we do this all to generate the same
emotional states of our ancestors, and the whole thing creates pollution. I'm going to first talk
about the biophysical side of this. Energy is vital in nature. Nothing in nature moves without
energy, and energy is also vital in human systems. Every single good or service in our global economic
system that results in economic growth requires energy to invent, to mine, to create,
to manufacture, to package, to deliver, to maintain, to repair, to run, to dispose of. There is not a
single thing that contributes to GDP that doesn't require energy. I don't know about Canada, but in
the United States the average household has over 60 devices plugged in all the time, even if they're
not running, and we take this for granted. We don't see the sea of energy that we are swimming in.
This is a picture of me on my farm here in Wisconsin. That's a picture of my horse who
does the work of about one horse, which is 10 times more work than I can do. That's my utility
vehicle with a little bit of gasoline, can do the work of 45 horses, and that's my truck with
some diesel fuel, can do the work of 300 horses. The next time you're taking a flight to Toronto
or Vancouver, imagine 100,000 horses invisibly pulling that jet across the sky. This is the power
and the benefit that we get from this ancient carbon, which is oil. One barrel of oil has 5.7
million British thermal units worth of energy, which equates to around 1700 kilowatt hours worth
of work potential, compared to about 0.6 kilowatt hours in a human daily work output,
and after you do the math that's around four and a half years of physical human labor is in every
barrel of oil. We use in the global economy about 100 million barrel of oil equivalents of coal,
oil, and natural gas every year, which means we effectively have armies of fossil helpers to the
tune of 400 or 500 billion human equivalents compared to around 4 to 5 billion actual human
workers. What this has done is underpin the story of industrialization, where humans have
replaced things we used to do manually or with draft horses by adding machines, and those machines
and various technologies are all powered by energy, mostly fossil energy, and what this has
done is raised our profits and our incomes and the size of the human enterprise. Here's an example
of something in Wisconsin, we still are the dairy state, we have cows. The benefits that we get
massively increase our profits and our wages. A person milking a cow spends around 30 minutes
manually and makes around $5 an hour. If you add an automated system, you're adding 180 times more
energy with the technology, but you're boosting the profits or the wages by almost four times to
$20 per hour. Then you can even take it further and add a fully automated milking machine, which
is 400 times more energy than an individual human, and that boosts the profit to around $25 an hour.
What's really important, and one of the key takeaways from this presentation, is as energy
prices increase, very energy-heavy processes like aircraft or aluminum smelting, many mining things
not only become less profitable, but become unprofitable. The left panel here, the blue,
orange, and gray are what happens to the hand milking if prices increase, nothing. The middle
example shows if prices go from five cents in blue to 10 cents in orange to 15 cents a kilowatt
hour in gray, there's a reduction in the profits. But as you'll see in the right panel here, and a
doubling of energy prices from five cents to 10 cents, there's a massive drop in the heavy industry
processes. If we triple, we are now operating at a loss. This was started to see last year because
of the Ukraine war in Europe as natural gas prices spiked. Our economies are incredibly sensitive to
increases in the main input to our current global enterprise, which is energy. Because of this
industrialization, we have higher wages, higher profits, lower price stuff, and economic growth
for more people. We actually do have more people. In the last few hundred years, we've gone from a
billion people to eight billion people alive today, but even more dramatic is the goods and services
available per person. The average human today is 14 times materially wealthier than the average
person 200 years ago. And the average person in the United States is 50 times as wealthy
as the average human was 200 years ago. This doesn't account for inequalities and such. This is just
geometric arithmetic average. If you combine these two stats, the human economy measured by the number
of people times the average goods and service consumption of those people is a thousand times
bigger than it was in the year 1500. But in our economic schools, our business schools at
McGill University, we don't teach that energy is important. We teach that energy is its cost
share of an input to a process. So $1,000 worth of oil is equal to our economy as $1,000 worth of
pencils or bike helmets or water bottles or cupcakes. So in effect, our culture has become
energy blind. This is a circular economy graph that's shown in beginnings econ 101 classes that
show that people demand things, corporations and the market produce the things. And there's this
virtuous cycle. And that's how the economy goes forward. This cycle neglects the source of the
majority of the inputs, which is the new non renewable energy and materials, and it neglects the
sink, which is the the carbon and other waste capacities of our planet. So our current economic
system conflates the dollar value of energy with the work value. And we largely don't include the
cost of pollution at all. We are energy blind. And if you look at what we are doing, we are drawing
down ancient carbon millions of times faster than it was geologically sequestered and trickle
charged by the son of ancient phytoplankton and algae and diatoms. So we are alive during what
one day may be referred to as the carbon pulse. And we have 300,000 year history as a species,
and it might look like this zooming in the 20,000 year horizon, the carbon pulse might look like
this of all the coal oil and natural gas stacked on top of each other. Out of 1000 year period,
it might look like this and we are near the top of this carbon pulse. We're somewhere between
the yellow star and the red star. Because energy is so important and vital from an economic
perspective, we hope we're near the white, the yellow star, because that means we have more
decades ahead of this cheap fossil armies to support our technology and consumption.
From a biosphere climate, which I'm going to talk about a little later standpoint,
we hope we're at the red star because we've been emitting this warming effect, a thermal blanket
from adding this ancient carbon so fast to the atmosphere that we don't want to continue to do
that. But this carbon that we've taken for granted is finite. We take out the best first,
then we get complicated machine tools to get more, but it is finite and depleting quite rapidly.
The graph on the left shows a story of humans overcoming energy depletion with technology.
The United States peaked in oil production in 1970, decline, decline, decline for 40 years,
and then we discovered how to frack. And technology overcame depletion. Well, a different story is
using the exact same data and charts, but broken out by geological province. The green shows the
lower 48 states, the conventional oil. The orange shows Alaska, which is separated from the United
States by Canada. It's not even a contiguous part of our country. The blue is offshore oil,
it's not on the land, it's underneath the Gulf of Mexico. And this red is what has been fracked,
the light tight oil. The light tight oil depletes at 80% in the first 18 months and you have to
continue to drill to find more. And there's nothing left after the tight oil. This is the
source rock where all the other oil originated. And what ends up happening is, I'll go through this
really quickly, the gray here shows the decline rate of all the oil wells drilled in the United
States before 2014. The orange shows the decline rate and it's a little bit steeper for 2014,
all the way up to 2019 in the red. And you can see every year we add more and more wells
and the United States has drilled more wells than the rest of the world combined. And the decline
rate becomes steeper. So we are having to run faster and faster in place, just to stay in place.
So what ends up happening is technology, in the case of shale oil, acts as a larger straw,
largely the same amount of original oil is there, but we're just getting it out faster
and becoming that much closer to the slurping sound which we hear at the end of the milkshake.
Yes, new technology does access some resources that we wouldn't have been able to, but largely it
just takes things out faster than we would have got without technology. What about so-called
renewable energy? So one of the important concepts of energy blindness is the fact that
all energy is not fungible, it's not equal, it's not interchangeable. So here are a few
points on renewable energy. First of all, renewable energy isn't, it's a meme. Renewable energy is
rebuildable. Oak tree is renewable, a chicken is renewable as long as we find an acorn or a male
and female chicken to make an egg, they are renewable. Wind turbines, solar panels, etc,
are complicated machinery with polysilicon and a global supply chain, they are no more renewable
than a pickup truck. The sun and the wind are renewable, but the devices we use to make them
are not. Another point is renewable energy produces electricity, but only 20% of global
energy use at the present moment is electric. There are lots of things that because of the
energy density don't run on electricity, they could in the future, but only at a much higher
cost. And I showed you early the impact of profits and viability from a higher cost.
There is also all of our plans for a techno utopia future kind of wave away the fact that
we've been growing, growing, growing our energy every single year with the exception of recessions
for the last 100 years. This at some point in the near future will change. And what will renewable
energy and other technology do on the downslope of the carbon pulse? Once these 500 billion
fossil workers start to retire. Also, higher full system cost means lower economic benefits,
as I said before, there's a difference between a technology being viable and being affordable
and scalable. Also, there are around 6000 other products that are generated from oil and natural
gas. And, you know, we have asphalt and plastic and medicines and tires and all kinds of medical
devices, etc. These all come from oil. So if we stopped using oil, we would need to find alternatives
for many of these 6000 inputs that are byproducts of our current barrel of oil. So far, the energy
transition has not been. It's been more of an energy addition. If you look at the last 200 years of
human energy use, the green is biomass, the brown is coal, the black is oil, the dark blue is gas,
nuclear, etc. Solar and wind end up being about two and a half percent of final consumption.
They are growing quite rapidly, and they're growing faster than fossil fuels. But on an
absolute basis, globally, fossil fuels are still growing. They've grown 55% in the last 15 years.
So far, there has not been a green revolution, only a green addition. And by the way, we are now
using more biomass shown in green here than we were in the year 1850, which was before we
started using fossil fuels. Lastly, it is true that renewable energy is much more efficient
than coal or oil in various processes. However, society doesn't maximize energy use or maximize
efficiency. We maximize power, which is energy use per unit time that creates work. This is called
the fourth law of thermodynamics, which is the maximum power principle, which is we operate in
nature at intermediate states between efficiency and full resource use. And usually that's at an
intermediate state. And the implications for this is that this is an average load at three
different times during the year. This is what our societal demands require. And this is what we
work during the day, and there's a spike, and then we go to sleep at night, but we still have a lot of
baseline things that are going. But society cares about creating this graph. And the best thing for
that is potential energy that is stored that we can burn at a flick of a switch and meet these
demand curves. We can use solar and wind better than we are doing now, but it's going to look like
a much different society. Okay, briefly on materials, energy and GDP are 99% correlated globally.
Materials and GDP are 100% correlated. So if you look at the red line here is global GDP.
The purple line is the material footprint, which is a composite of energy and materials.
And you can see they're incredibly tightly linked. We are growing renewable energy faster than we're
growing fossil fuels, which is why the global CO2 continues to increase, but it increases at a lower
rate than energy and GDP. But they're very tightly linked. The problem is, is as we decarbonize,
we're going to have to rematerialize because renewable energy is very copper, metal, rare earth
dependent. Another issue is much of these materials like cobalt and nickel and lithium and copper are
found in countries that are in the global south. They are poorer material countries. They already
have civil strife, and they're going to be experiencing higher wet bulb temperatures
and chaos and uncertainty from a warming climate. This is a real problem for the scaling of the
current net zero EV plans. This graph shows the blue lines are the production of the country of
Chile of copper, and the red line are the consumption of energy. In the United States,
we used to have 20% ore grade in the 19th century that went down to 2% ore grade and now is 2 tenths
of 1%. So we have to get more and more rock and overburden to get the same amount of copper.
The point here is that even in materials and in every aspect of society, everything we do will
become more expensive if we can't reduce the energy consumption of various processes faster than
energy prices grow. Okay, what about technology? How does technology fit into this? Well, every
unit of GDP has three things in common, energy, materials, and information or the technology.
There are no exceptions. So there are two types of technology. The first type is ways to make energy
use more efficient or a new energy technology like a better solar panel. The other type of
technology type two is creating devices that replace what humans used to do manually or new
inventions that our prior ancestors never had access to. The vast majority of technology in our
world today is of this type two, which ends up increasing the baseline for more energy requirement
the following year. So this graph shows that humans get better at inventions and we get more
efficient in our energy use over time, around 1.2% a year more efficient over the last 200 years.
However, during that same time, this is another color chart showing the energy stack of various
energies over the last 200 years. We continue to grow our total energy. In fact, energy efficiency
has increased 36% in the last 35 years. But during that time, our energy consumption has increased
63%. This is called the rebound effect or Jeven's paradox that as we make more profits because we
got more efficient, we funnel those profits back into economic growth, which is a draw on energy.
What about money? Money is what makes the world go round, right? Well, money is actually a claim
on energy. When you spend your loony at Tim Hortons or any other thing in our daily lives,
every time we spend something, it's a call on energy. Economic textbooks tell us that money
is lent out from existing capital at banks. This is incorrect. The reality is that the vast majority
of money is lent into existence. Banks don't lend money, they create it. And when they create it,
the financial system is in balance. There's the same amount of assets and liabilities,
but the biophysical world is not because when 10 million Canadian dollars come into the system
from a bank, the same amount of timber or moose or copper or dolphins or trees exist.
So here's a conceptual showing from time from left to right that we had sustainable flows
of the biogeochemical use of nature, the soil, the sun and the wind. And in around the 1700s,
we hit a capacity on that. There's a different sort of curve, which is a Gaussian or normal curve,
which is for finite resources. And we started to access things like oil and copper and coal.
These were buried underground, but they're finite. And we started to add them to our
economic system, but there will be a peak and a decline of these like there will on the carbon
pulse. Overlaid on all that is a monetary thing, which is a cultural creation by our species that
we create monetary markers for all this stuff. And if you put all these three things together,
they create this little graphic. And with access to this ancient sunlight, which is indistinguishable
from magic on human time scales, our economic system grew so fast and large that land no
longer explained our wealth. And gradually, the economics profession parsed our explanations
into capital and labor. And using the social construct of credit, which is largely run by
central banks in the world right now, we pulled resource consumption forward in time. Now our
world views our future and our culture through a financial lens. We have not only financialized
the human experience, but also the explanation of it. Okay, that's the energy material tech part
of the story. Now, what about the environment? What about the pollution that comes from our
economic system? This could be its own two hour talk, but I'll just give the highlights
right here. It's not just climate, but there are many aspects that the human system is affecting
the natural world. This shows the last 400,000 years of CO2 in the atmosphere shown in green,
global temperatures shown in the middle panel in red, and sea level rise shown in the bottom
in blue. We have already had 400 feet of sea level rise in the last 20,000 years,
and we are in uncharted territories from any time before the Emean. We are now going into
a warmer period than at any time when humans lived on this planet. And I could argue that
humans are changing climate today, but climate change actually caused humans. The red chart in
the bottom is expanded here in the last 20,000 years. Around 15,000 years ago, the climate
warmed and stabilized, unbelievably stable for the last 10,000 years, which is when we expanded
around the world with agriculture and settlements and hierarchy and technology, et cetera. And now
we're moving out of that stable band into the unknown. The only known is it's barring a nuclear
holocaust. It's likely to be warmer to much warmer. So this carbon pulse that we are living through,
yet it's invisible to us, is really distinctly important because many, most of the prior mass
and mini extinctions were correlated with carbon pulses. The blue spikes here show the percentage
of the genus-level extinctions on Earth over the last 300 million years, and the magenta bars are
when there were large outgassings of volcanic provinces that were near-term pulses of carbon,
and this ended up being disastrous for species on the planet. Unlike most mass extinctions linked
to volcanic pulses, our pulse is not from volcanoes, but from Volkswagen's and Vacations
and deforestation and other things. This is a monthly graph of the temperature anomaly from the
pre-industrial baseline. You can see that many of the hottest divergences are this year, 2024.
One could argue that this would be the coolest year of the rest of your lives. I'm not sure
that's entirely valid because this is an El Nino year, but you can see that the heat is on. Part of
the climate discussion that is not often discussed is the impact on oceans, and there are many,
many ocean risks. There's ocean acidification. There is the erosion of coastlines since
the sea level is going to rise as the glacier and ice melts. There's overfishing. There is the loss
of some calcium carbonate in shells. There's the impact on food webs. Ocean oxygen content is already
declined by 2% and 20% in the shallows. The Amock, the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation
in the Atlantic Ocean, has slowed already 15%. This is all because the oceans are absorbing
90% of the heat from the extra thermal warming from fossil fuels.
Beyond climate itself, and climate is the key because it affects all the other things I'm
talking about, we neglect our impact on the other 10 million species we share this planet with,
what I refer to as the real stock market. Since I was born, we have lost almost 70% of the animal
populations on this planet, and it's probably worse than that because that stat is six years old.
We don't see that that much in North America because we've only lost 25% here, but in Asia,
in Latin America, it's much more extreme. This chart shows on the left the estimated biomass
of wild animals 100,000 years ago, relative to the orange of wild animals today, relative to
the light pink, which is our cows, pigs, and sheep, and humans. Humans in our livestock now
outweigh wild mammals at a ratio of 50 to one. It's not only animals, insects are declining at
one to 2% a year in biomass. This is trillions of tiny robots doing tasks humans couldn't do without
them that we take for granted. Birds eat insects. Birds are also declining. These are Canadian
statistics here showing the percentage decline of various types of birds. One thing that's
increasingly in the media is the impact not only of plastics like plastic bottles and the fact that
plastic now outweighs all animals on earth and will eventually outweigh all the fish in the ocean,
but microplastics. There's something called PFAS, which is a forever chemical. We don't,
scientists don't really understand the endocrine disrupting impacts. However, sperm count in humans
and in other animals is declining at an accelerated pace globally. Sperm count is dropping at around
2.5% a year. Right now, one couple in seven cannot have a baby because of lack of sperm
motility. And that's shocking, but what's even more shocking is 20 years ago, it was zero in seven.
And there are some estimates by 2050 under current trends that we won't be able to have babies.
Okay, that's a pretty rugged little summary I went through there. And it's as many times as I say it,
I still get kind of a pit in my stomach as I'm sharing this with strangers online, because many
of you are aware of those things. But if you haven't heard those things before, it can feel like a
punch to the gut. And I will just empathize with you that that is a normal, totally acceptable
reaction. And if that is your reaction, I offer you a brief apology, but these are the times we're
alive. This is why I'm sharing this stuff, because I think most people, more people need to understand
and engage with these issues. Okay, let's moving on to the core driver of this stuff, which is the
human, human behavior, starting with our feelings. So we are related to every single other creature
on earth. We share a common universal ancestor. If you look on the Tree of Life, there's humans
way down here in the corner. We're 99.9% related to all other humans, including Canadians, we're
98% related to other apes, bonobos and chimpanzees, 90% related to cats, 85% genetically related to
mice, 80% to cows, 60% to fruit flies, 60% to chickens, and we are 50% genetically related to
mushrooms. We are kin with everything else on this blue green earth, and we often forget that.
We go through our life, like other biological organisms, trying to match the same emotional
states of our successful ancestors. So bagging a gazelle on the Pleistocene savanna, today we
make a stock trade or make a Bitcoin profit and with the same areas in our brain light up.
Humans are intensely social and status conscious. This has to do with the concept of sexual selection
in nature, which in the case of a peacock, this giant ornate tail has three fitness hits to the
peacock. It is a cost of all its minerals and calories going to this tail. It makes it more
apparent and obvious to a predator, and if a predator chases it, it's harder to get away.
All three of those were overcome by the preference from the female peacock for such a display,
and are we that different than this? This picture here shows Tiger Woods, who's a billionaire,
his yacht pulling into a marina where his ex-wife's boyfriend's yacht is 10 feet longer than his.
So we constantly compare ourselves to others at various scales, planet-wide. We also have neural
circuitry that hijacks our ancestral reward system and tricks us into thinking that the
things we're doing are actually good for us and good for our status and our respect in our tribe.
For instance, some students may be watching this presentation, might play Overwatch or some video
game, and their brains feel like they're bagging a gazelle for their tribe, but they're actually
sitting in a couch in their mom's basement accessing a coal-fired server. The dopamine
superhighway is really central to planetary overshoot and our consumption, because what ends up
happening, shown in this graph, there's academic research reference on the bottom, that we get
the signal, and the signal causes a behavior, and we do the work, and then we get the reward.
We don't get the dopamine when the reward happens, but before, it's the anticipation of reward.
But what ends up happening in our culture is energy has become so cheap and we have
such a smorgasbord of consumption that our work and our behavior is disconnected from the reward,
because we get reward all over the place all the time without doing the work.
So we end up in a situation, and this is a picture of my storage shed here, where the ghost of
dopamine past ends up buying things constantly, and the wanting of things ends up being a more
powerful driver of our behavior than the halving of them. All of you go home this weekend and look
in your garage, in your storage shed, etc. We got short-term dopamine hits for those purchases,
but they weren't sustainable, and we had to buy more to feel the same way at some point in the
future. So important point, our brains are flow-based, but our world, our economic system,
is stock-based, and we're driving down the stocks of non-rubble energy and resources millions of
times faster than they were built up in order to get ephemeral dopamine. In effect, we're turning
billions of barrels of ancient sunlight into microliters of neurotransmitters. We also have
different belief systems, and the human brain can utter millions of times more sentences than can
exist in biophysical reality. So the virtual world in our minds is really more powerful than our
biophysical reality, and this is why science and the academy hopefully can play a vital role
in our path going forward, because science is a light in the dark and can distinguish
fantasy from reality. It's the best tool that we have. We are incredibly in-group and out-group
oriented. We quickly and strongly form groups, and we defend and support our group and tend to
ostracize and root against others. Groups could be a few people, or they could be nation-state
size, shown here is Canada beating the US in hockey. We are very social. We're ultra-social,
so our behaviors are plastic, but we copy other humans, and this is good news because cultural
evolution happens at lightning speed versus biological evolution. Okay, so those are the
primary drivers of the human ecosystem. How do those fit together? How does the whole system
fit together into a narrative that explains our current reality? I'm sure you've seen
starlings in nature. Starlings follow three simple rules. Do what your neighbor does, don't get too
close, and fly towards the center. Those three simple rules result in this emergent behavior of
these beautiful murmurations of birds in the sky that look like they're choreographed, but
they're not. It's an emergent property. Humans do something similar. In our current world,
importantly, this is not the way that it always was, and it's not the way that it has to be in
the future, but we coordinate in our families, in our small businesses, in our corporations,
even as entire nations, to acquire financial surplus, which is linked to energy. We spend the
surplus, and we pursue culturally accepted behaviors. The emergent property of that is this
vast interconnected material and energy-hungry system of human habitation and commerce across
the planet. If you look at this, the brake lights and the headlights in this aerial view of a city
are not biophysically too dissimilar than the veins and the arteries of a human body, and the
hemoglobin that is being passed through these veins and arteries is gasoline and diesel fuel
from oil. We have a global transport system. This is the airline routes through the earth.
So our culture keeps score of this system by gross domestic product. If you add up all the
countries in the world, it's gross world product. Well, GWP, given the 99% correlation between
energy and GDP, could rightly be named gross world burning, because energy and GDP are and will
remain tightly linked. So my economic research, my academic research, has likened human culture to
an energy dissipating structure, a mindless superorganism akin to a blind, hungry amoeba.
So human society has a metabolism, and metabolism has a waste product in the form of CO2 and other
things. So the global north has been trying to go to renewable energy, getting rid of coal,
although we're still using natural gas. But the developing world, especially China and India,
are growing as much energy as they can. So since the 2015 Paris Agreement, we actually have a global
increase in coal use. China is building six times more new coal plants. India plans to double their
coal production. They are aware of climate. India is going to be one of the most susceptible
countries to climate. The reason they're doubling their coal is because it's the cheapest thing
that they can do, and they need more air conditioning and fans. So trying to mitigate climate change
within our existing economic structure is like arguing with a forest fire. This is an uncomfortable
conclusion, but it's one that I've come to believe. There is no one driving the bus of our economic
system, not politicians, not billionaires, not the rich and powerful. The market is pulling us
forward, and we have outsourced our wisdom and decision making to the financial markets. So this
is kind of a metaphor from Lord of the Rings, the Tower of Sauron. I've graphically shown here the
history of humans and technology. Shown in the bottom is we left our hunter-gatherer ancestry
and started to produce agriculture, which created agricultural surplus, which we could trade. We
had hierarchy then. We had mayors and kings and artisans and warriors and accountants. And then a
couple hundred years ago, we accessed the power in flammable fossils, and then we turbocharged this
faster by creating fiat currency that were markers for real things, and we accelerated the whole
thing. And now we're using artificial intelligence to make all these processes even faster. And this
whole thing is this Borg or this Eye of Sauron pulling this economic system forward. And it's my
opinion, and there's ample evidence in the last few months to underpin this, is under our current
economic aspirations and goals, which are, of course, fluid in our lifetimes, artificial
intelligence is going to, much like shale fracking, act as a larger draw on the energy in the
environment. And that doesn't include, it doesn't focus only on how much energy the servers are.
Today, a news story came out that said that just the data servers alone in the United States are
going to use as much energy between now and 2030 as 150 million electric vehicles. That's not the
point. The point is that AI is going to make energy extraction, it's going to make alternative
energy, it's going to make all the processes in our world more efficient, potentially, and all of
that is going to accelerate impact on the environment. Okay, we're getting nearer to the conclusions of
this part one. Under the framing that I presented here, what is not likely to happen? Growing the
economy and mitigating climate change and the six mass extinction. Growing the economy by replacing
fossil fuels with renewables, we're actually adding. Culture en masse choosing to leave fossil
carbon in the ground and governments embracing limits to growth before limits to growth are
well past. Under this framing, what is likely to happen? A growth in gross energy while net
energy declines. Massive money creation and financial market support by central banks and
governments, wider and deeper poverty globally and more inequality. AI is going to accelerate the
energy and environmental problems unless we shift our goals. A rightward shift in politics because
as things get scary and uncertain, people tend to get more conservative and want
ways, things to be the way they used to be in the past. This is happening rapidly in Europe.
We're yet to see what's going to happen in North America. A reduction paradoxically in global
environmental regulations. And under the superorganism framing, it's going to be pedal to the metal
until we hit some sort of a crisis or hit a wall. Implications and scenarios of all this. So there
generally four scenarios that are discussable. One is a green growth future that we use technology
and create more productivity in the world and we become so profitable and productive that we can
use the excess to heal the environment. The second scenario is what I refer to as the
Mordor economy, which is we are going to continue to grow, but more and more of our economic
energy and materials will be directed to the energy and mining sector of the economy,
meaning there will be less available for hospitals and universities and entertainment and travel and
things like that because our economy will instead of using 5% of our energy to get the energy
materials, it'll be 10% and 15% and 18% leaving less for discretionary society. I call this the
Mordor economy and I would say this is the default. We're also going to need more and more energy
and money to mitigate environmental problems like droughts and floods and hurricanes and heat
problems, etc. Let me explain the trajectory of the Mordor economy using this chart.
The red line on the far left is when Reverend Thomas Malthus lived on the planet and he said that
the geometric production of humans would outstrip our arithmetic production of food
and he was wrong. He was wrong because he didn't know about fossil fuels that were underneath
the ground. Fast forward to 1969 and Paul Erlich wrote a book called The Population Bomb saying many
similar things and he was wrong, at least about that at that time, because he didn't know about
debt that we have increased our debt faster than we've increased our GDP in every single year
since 1969 and he didn't know about globalization that we could outsource the production of things
to the least cost areas in the world. Fast forward to 2009, the next red line and we had a great
financial crisis that was bailed out by the central banks taking over the role of monetary
creation from the commercial banks. We had COVID in 2020, again the bazooka of the Federal Reserve
and other financial guarantees and what will be the next can to kick. If we grow at 3% a year,
that means the energy and materials given the stats I said earlier will double every 30 years.
So if there is a 15-year-old watching this presentation by the time she is 75, there will
not only be a doubling but a quadrupling in the energy and material use of the human economy.
Is that possible? Is that desirable? What happens if that happens? What happens if it doesn't happen?
These are some of the central questions of our time. So that is the Mordor economy.
The third category which is what I've named my podcast and my work is called the great
simplification which is we will not continue to grow but we manage a graceful descent.
The average person in America uses 100 times more energy than our bodies need in terms of
calories. If we went down to 70 or 60 or 50, it wouldn't necessarily be a bad thing. So the great
simplification is at some point in coming decades when we remove this ubiquitous credit
with a shift to more costly energy and resources and a return to solar inputs and renewables which
are viable but more costly in a system-wide perspective, we will no longer be able to
maintain our system of financial claims and one of the next three recessions will be a depression.
There is a musical share element to our current system of claims and I refer to this as a great
simplification shown here as one trajectory out for the next 30 years. Lastly, the fourth
quadrant would be the Mad Max scenario which is that we decline and there is no stability and
social contract holding things together and I'm sure you've seen enough movies about that
scenario. However, in our social discourse the vast majority of people talk about this one scenario
and the other three scenarios are really not given that much discourse. I would argue that the true
odds are more like the areas of these shapes shown here and I'm advocating that we should
consciously try towards a great simplification which is a smaller, more local economy that still
has the benefits of civilization but different relationships with each other, with the natural
world and hopefully less pollution to the other species and ecosystems. Between here and there,
however, we have some constraints that are now unavoidable and I want to briefly talk about
what I call the four horsemen of the 2020s which I've recently changed to the five horsemen.
The first one is a financial bend or break moment. We keep papering over our problems with more
credit and central bank largesse. In the past 10 years government debt has grown 60% to 83 trillion
dollars. Corporate debt, household debt have also grown. We are in a new era where every few months
we're increasing the debt in the United States by a trillion dollars. We're just adding that to,
we're transmuting wealth into income. We have this natural endowment of resources, energy and
ecosystems and we're creating new claims on that at an accelerating rate. We create debt much more
faster than GDP but we're stretching this relationship to our underpinning reality and
there's going to be a snapback at some point because all these financial claims that we're
creating will eventually have to be paid back in energy and materials and ecosystem services.
The reason that you don't hear talks like this is there is no credible institution or
government body in the world that is specifically planning for an end to growth because it's a
very uncomfortable conversation to have. In the meantime, we're papering over our problems with
more and more credit while the energetic and material basis for our currencies deplete.
So we don't think of it this way but when we take on debt as a nation, as a company or as a person,
the debt must be paid back with energy but as I said earlier our energy, our high quality energy
is starting to flatline and will eventually start to decline but at the same time we're growing the
red line which is our monetary markers. Okay, second horseman of the next decade is geopolitics.
This is June 7th. There are Russian warships headed to the Caribbean. Russia announced yesterday
they're going to be selling weapons to countries that are antagonistic to the West. We are approaching
this biophysical shift from a world that focused on money and technology to one that focuses on
energy and ecology and a lot of the energy in the world is in countries that aren't necessarily
so friendly to us. Around two-thirds of the remaining oil is within 600 miles of Israel.
Around half of the world's purchasable oil navigates the Strait of Hormuz, this two-mile wide
strait between Iran and Saudi Arabia every day. These are things that we take for granted.
In the, I would say unlikely, I don't know how unlikely it is, it's certainly possible
but we have between the United States and Russia about 12,000 nuclear warheads
and if there were to be an exchange or a strategic escalation this graph shows the impact on climate.
This is one way that the climate would actually cool is if there were enough nuclear weapons
sent into the atmosphere that the soot blocked out the sun this would be the absolute worst
Armageddon disaster scenario of all because although the climate would ultimately be cooler
it would wipe out most of complex life in the process. This is a crappy thing to say to a bunch
of Canadian scientists but this is something that our society has shrugged under the carpet and is
a very real risk in our world. People were really worried about it 50, 60 years ago
and now it's really not in part of our discourse. Also we have to realize that we have a six
continent supply chain this globally interconnected economy that is just in time products. 80% of our
pharmaceutical ingredients are made in China and India for the United States which has 4%
of the world's population and 50% of the world's medical prescriptions. We have many many just in
time supply chains that some complicated part is made in South Korea and ends up in Toronto three
days later that without that part we couldn't do some industrial process so this is something that
we take for granted. Also the social contract I don't know how things are in Canada but things
are really starting to get a little uncomfortable in the United States. There is an enormous partisan
divide in the media in the United States very few people read the same news sources we have
different facts artificial intelligence is making it difficult to believe what is true or what is
not which is another reason that the academy is vital for coming decades because we trust in scientists
is declining but it's still among the highest trust that people have is in science. The fifth
horseman which if you live in British Columbia and other places you're already aware of is the
ongoing impacts of climate change on our ecosystem. There are droughts there are floods there are fires
there are wet bulb temperatures where people can't survive. The other day in Delhi India it was 129
degrees in early June climate is warming right now and this is going to be a story for the rest of
our lives. I promise you that I'm going to leave you with some actionable ideas and and directions
but I do think it's important to understand the landscape of what we face here are some summary
points of the first part of this presentation. Long term growth was not the norm we are living
through a unique exponential period of economic growth for our species. There were several periods
in the last 2000 years that lasted for hundreds of years with flat to declining growth. All of our
economic rules and explanations of how the world works were created in this little red
bubble here and what does that pretend for the future. Cheap abundant fossil energy underpins
our societies and our society's expectations this is a stock that we have culturally treated as a
flow. It is principle we're drawing down not interest. We have completed the proximate drivers
of progress and growth with the ultimate drivers. Most people think that politics technology and
money are what drive our economic systems but they do but they are sitting on top of a large
flux of around half a billion fossil worker equivalents and on the living breathing biosphere
of which we're all dependent. We don't pay for the ecosystem services of Mother Earth.
As long as growing GDP is our global goal better technology is going to tend to grow and not shrink
CO2 emissions and impact because of the rebound effect and Jeven's paradox. Technology could be
really important for future decades but it's going to have to be stuff that is appropriate
for our economies and we're going to have to change our economic system if this is no longer
going to be the case. In other words the energy transition which is oft lauded in the press
is not really about energy it's ultimately about how we relate to each other how we relate to the
natural world our levels of consumption our change in consciousness and all that and yes
energy will also play a role but it's not the driver. Barring a new boost in productivity which
is possible it's kind of on the come I don't know from artificial intelligence growth is likely
soon over and when that happens there is a musical chair situation and the first challenge is going
to be responding to a financial recalibration. At that moment we should aim for bending which
is holding the system together and landing at a lower material throughput scale as opposed to
breaking. Breaking would be bad. Rather than choose austerity governments and central banks will
continue to print and monetize debt eventually leading to currency debasement and possibly
currency reform. We do not actually face a resource shortage but rather a longage of
expectations. As I said earlier the average American uses 100 times more energy than our
bodies need most of the best things in life are free after basic needs are met. Here's me
reading a story to my dog at bedtime with two of my college friends talking about birds and
doing bird songs with a bunch of kindergartners in India and some friends I met I just got back
from India a couple months ago. Another point we do need renewables and technology but the way
they're touted now they renewables are the right answer to the wrong question. The question is how
do we land the plane this century with viable technology that supports ecosystems and a thriving
human population. Right now we're just using renewables as kind of an appendage to the global
superorganism not as a construction of a new system. There is a biophysical phase shift occurring in
global politics alliances and agreements. This means there's a shift between as I said earlier
money and technology narratives to energy and material narratives and that is going to change
the power structure and the international agreements and the trade and the economic growth
in the future. Climate change is not the problem but climate change is one of many
symptoms of a much larger dynamic dysfunction which is the ecological concept of overshoot
which is a species in this case ours has overshot the carrying capacity of the planet given our
current population and consumption levels. This is a scene from the movie Don't Look Up
which was so spot on that I included it in this presentation. This presentation that I'm telling
you all today cannot be voiced aloud in politics and media because it's too strange, it's too
complex, it's too abstract, it's too threatening, there are no easy answers and if senior people
verbally share that they agree with this what are the solutions? It becomes politically dicey
and uncomfortable, that doesn't mean we shouldn't discuss it, we have to discuss it behind the
scenes to create blueprints, a brake glass in case of emergency and other and other paths forward.
Last point here is our current resource tech situation can power a great culture and a
meaningful civilization just not this one, not at this size and scale. The current system uses
19 terawatts of power continuously which is 190 billion light bulbs turned on 24-7
that is not sustainable. What do we do to get out of this? I think the only way out is through
and here are some thoughts at various scales of what we should do. I no longer talk about
solutions, I prefer to talk about responses and there are million possible responses.
Each of you sitting in the audience or sitting at your office or at your home
just briefly think about what do you think the solution is, what do you think some of the responses
should be to the human predicament that I've just laid out the choreography of and by the way
I may have some pieces of it wrong and I learn stuff every day and I may be missing some important
things but I think if you squint and look at how the pieces fit together I think what I've described
will roughly hold its shape in the coming decades. So if you think about what would be the responses
to what I just described they are different to different people based on what they care about
where they live what their value system is. There are a list of solutions for rich or well-off people
or rich or well-off countries. There is a list of solutions for poorer countries and people.
There is a list of responses and solutions for other species and other ecosystems
and there's a list of unborn humans of future generations and unborn of other species of the
10 million currently a species we share the planet with. So there's not one size fit all
responses so keeping that in mind most people care about themselves. The only thing we might
care about more than ourselves is our children but beyond that our family our community our
region our nation our world other species other generations get exponentially less care
and our economic decisions. This is also something that we have to to recognize when we talk about
responses. So in effect we are somewhere between the yellow star and the red star and all of our
cultural stories are about the green arrow continuing forward in time. So here is the
way that I think about this there are three distinct timelines for interventions. The red
is the time now before the crises arrive that we have to prepare as best as we can as individuals
as universities as communities as nations given the synthesis I've laid out. The yellow is the
time where there this financial recalibration happens that could be as soon as three months
or 15 years. I don't know but that is when there's going to be a currency bond financial
reckoning and I think we have to focus in that moment and now in preparing for that moment
to bend and not break. And then where do we land this plane metaphorically what are the
sustainable practices that Canadians and humans around the earth should start practicing for
the longer term because that's what's going to be more sustainable. So there are people that
should be working on all three of these timelines and everyone's preference is is different but
it's not just let's do one thing there are three timelines and not only are there different
timelines but there are different scales and I'm going to briefly give a list here of some
categories of response at the global level the civil society community level for the academy
and universities and for individual humans. So culturally we have a road close sign ahead of
us and many of us are starting to see that in the distance that what we're doing is unsustainable.
So what is the goal of a talk like this what is the goal of my podcast and my work it's to
normalize the conversations around these topics so we get more people involved in discussing them
being pro-social and being creative and rolling up their sleeves and getting engaged. What we're
trying to do now is change the initial conditions of the future moments when these events start to
ensue. So what we're doing is kind of creating a time capsule to imagine what are the things we're
going to be need to be doing in coming decades. So here's some categories to consider. At the
global level first of all as I mentioned earlier we are moving from a unipolar world to a multipolar
world and what are the governance structures and ways of doing things that will allow a peaceful
navigation through that period. Another is our incentives. We look at the prices of things and
then we make economic decisions but everything that our culture aspires to is linked to GDP
monetary surplus and growth and if we change our incentives to include nature and human health
and well-being and the ecosystem health of the world that's going to mean different incentives
different prices and different signals. So one thing that I don't know how viable it is to do
right now but we could add a tax to anything that is an input to our economic system that is
non-renewable in nature not only carbon but copper or fossil water aquifers or lithium or
anything like that. If we add a tax to these things what will happen is our devices will be
much more expensive but we will give signals to consumers to conserve things that are mostly
non-renewable and we will give signals to inventors and innovators about the real cost of depleting
things and they will use these scarcer resources more sparingly so we will conserve and innovate at
a better level. The main input to renewables is human labor so if we added a tax and we taxed
everything that was non-renewable we would remove all taxes on individuals and corporations.
We would have to have some sort of a regressive help for that would be a regressive tax scheme
but it would favor renewable build-out and other things that weren't dependent on non-renewable
inputs. In addition to changing the incentives we need to change the aspirations so this graph
is from Canadian Voslav Smil who is in Winnipeg showing that the energy supply used per capita
gives us a massive increase in well-being and a human development index from low levels
but once we're at around 100 gigajoules per capita any additional increase in energy consumption
per capita doesn't give us that much. The United States uses almost three times as much energy
per capita as Italy or Japan yet we're about the same on the human development index and we're
actually declining in life expectation and other diseases of despair in my nation so to move beyond
GDP again most of the best things in life are free after basic needs are met. If I asked you
while watching this presentation what are your five best memories of your life most of you would
not say that they required a lot of money or energy but it would be playing cards at a slumber
party with your friends or fishing on Lake of the Woods with your family or time in nature in the
beautiful forests in Canada with your dogs or things that don't require a lot of energy and
money and our society our individuals recognize this but our society because we've outsourced
things to the market do not. We need an icon to represent the future of the 3,000 some emojis
on our phone there is no icon to represent the future my colleague DJ White and I created this
tee with an arrow just as a suggestion but we need something to represent the future.
Another category is advanced policy the reason that it's called advanced and not policy is the
things that we're going to need to do as a governing body in Canada and the U.S. and the world can't
be happening at the margin because they're too politically or socially difficult now so we need
to have something like a council of elders that is building break glass plans or blueprints or
in case of emergency do this ahead of time so we know what to do when some of these events
come to pass like the bender break moment I talked about this the rubber band snapping back in the
in the financial system from the perspective of the carbon pulse what governance structures
best fit after the red star I don't know the answer to that but democracy and communism and
things like that were designed for small groups of people not necessarily eight billion people I
mean this is a a conversation for a political scientist to integrate the biophysical story
that I'm I'm telling here we need different technology technology is vital but the technology
that we have now is just feeding the hungry ghost of the economic superorganism as I said
earlier solar panels can power a wonderful civilization just not this one so from the
perspective of the carbon pulse what are the top four human inventions of all time according to Nate
the bicycle is the most energy efficient invention ever made to get a person from point A to point
B using the least amount of energy is a bicycle the story or playing Dungeons and Dragons or
anything that is in the virtual world of our mind sitting with other humans the unexpected reward
and novelty of listening to other people is free and it's an amazing invention number two is the
dog which really isn't an invention it's a co-evolution this is my golden retriever Quinn
they give us unlimited oxytocin serotonin and some dopamine and what a wonderful thing by
the way I could not do this work without having a golden retriever around because it's it's pretty
intense and the number one invention could be music because we are can be transformed again with
not a lot of energy and materials into a different mental state and emotional state and physical
state from music so Homo sapiens is wise man so far we've been much more clever than wise what
sort of technology will be most suited for the downslope of the carbon pulse I think something
that I would refer to as Goldilocks tech which is not some fancy drone gadget and not going back
to the Stone Age but something in between that scalable and affordable and sensible for instance
instead of lithium mining in Bolivia we can make batteries from sodium which is from salt it's a
simpler material it's not as powerful not as great as lithium but it's you know a Goldilocks tech
there are many many such things like that and I think we should start thinking two or three
steps ahead about that sort of technology of course the market and the superorganism will
continue forward and do all kinds of fancy dopamine creating expensive splashes of technology
but we need to at the same time simultaneously be building out these alternative technologies
and using them and scaling them in communities around the world globally we also need to change
our culture towards more of a regenerative society and that means right now we are not only the
regeneration that hits the earth the net primary productivity all over the earth how much plants
grow every year we're taking 40% of that and adding it to the humans system leaving 60% for
the other 10 million species but in addition to that we're taking millions of years of stored
productivity and adding it to the system this is patently unsustainable and for instance we need
to have global cooling shown on the left is whale poop whale poop acts as a carbon sink in the
ocean because the phytoplankton bloom and then drop to the bottom and they sequester carbon
shown here is biochar a new farming technology that absorbs carbon into the soil so we need
a whole new culture shift in the way that we think about our economic system and I would offer
especially to the young people watching this that we have arrived at a species level conversation
where we know GDP is ultimately self-terminating either ecologically or with war on our current
path so I offer perhaps we could aspire to a life ethic and I'll briefly read the components of that
life existing is preferable to no life existing more kinds of life existing is preferable to fewer
vibrant complex ecosystems are preferable to small fragmented brittle ecosystems
ecosystems with large complex life are preferable to ecosystems with only microscopic life
ecosystems supporting conscious minds which are the virtual worlds of human minds and and
gorillas and dolphins etc are preferable to ecosystems without them it is preferable to
maximize existence happiness love and understanding and to minimize the suffering of minds in the
universe the future both near and far is real in the same sense that now is real and via causality
is determined by what is done now things which are preferable by this definition may be considered
good things which are less preferable may be considered evil we should maximize good and
minimize evil since the universe does not so it's one of my wishes is to educate and inspire humans
to culturally extend not narrow our circle of care this is happening around the world with
ecosystem restoration and there was a lot of humans that are trying to step towards a regenerative
culture okay that's at the top scale what about civil society we need better education
shown here is a civilian land core of young people learning ecological skills and and how to
you know sequester carbon and grow food and and other things we are headed for a simplification
we see this road close sign ahead all many of us feel it i call it the walking worried and yet
there's still all this entertainment and smorgasbord and amazon brown truck deliveries and cool vacation
junkets and hockey games and all this stuff in the meantime so we get distracted but if you look
two or three steps ahead all this information especially if you understand human behavior you
know that en masse as a culture we're not going to voluntarily tighten our belt which means we
will eventually hit a wall what can we do to simplify ahead of that time by simplifying reduce
complexity reduce energy consumption and any individual any town any country that voluntarily
reduces complexity first will be out competed by other individuals towns and nations which is
something called a multipolar trap but some nations or towns will be forced to do this because maybe
there's a natural gas pipeline is shut off to germany etc so there is a short term cost to
simplifying but a long-term gain because those people towns universities nations that do this first
while everything holds together are going to develop new models and new ways of doing things
that those that are still the the the rabbit running around at the high consumption level won't have
time to do it once things change supply chains again showing this Byzantine structured
Rube Goldberg machine which is the global supply chain as things become more sensitive and fragile
in the global system and as energy becomes more expensive and as credit becomes less available
the world is beginning to going to become a larger place again so localizing on shoring near
shoring uh regionalizing supply chains especially for basic goods and important things is going to
be important uh shown here is the red circle I think Toronto is within that circle I'm not even
sure um and you know that would be the the real core stuff and then the blue circle is you know
you trade with with other areas but those areas are much easier to get to than than china or
india or south korea etc a shadow council one of my favorite movies was contact with jody foster
and they built a machine that would travel to outer space but there was a religious fundamentalist
that sabotaged the machine and we thought the movie was over but lo and behold they had
another machine that they built not telling anyone in hakaido japan and jody foster spoiler
ended up traveling to another dimension in the same way our city councils and the high status humans
at universities as well will be resistant to the information in this presentation
for many very valid reasons so to construct a shadow council which ostensibly doesn't have
the power and the authority as the regular city council but they can be talking about these things
and learning and building social capital and creating ideas ahead of time it's something that's
working off to the side that's unofficial but it's still working towards a great simplification
I can't speak to canada but the united states is really bifurcated we uh have echo chambers many
many of them here's a list of memetic tribes from left to right politically there are many
different social groups that really don't talk to each other and we're going to need diplomats
that can suppress their own political agendas and the things that they care about in order to host
discussions with wider groups of humans because without that we're really in trouble so we need
to have diplomacy and facilitation with people that don't agree with us transmutation a word from
king mitis who everything he touched turned to gold everything we've been doing is is transmuting
the natural world over time into money over time so while we can change monetary markers into real
capital uh real capital is natural capital which is our forests and our healthy soil and our rivers
social capital is our friends our relationships here's two of my dogs uh that dog shown there
mazy is going to be 14 in september by the way this is my house built capital there's solar
panels and chainsaws and an aloe vera plant and human capital which is our our health and our
knowledge and our skills these are real capital and we should use our monetary markers to turn
into more of these things healing we have most of our population has experienced trauma
some of you are probably experiencing trauma watching this presentation we are increasingly
unhealthy society and in order to address some of the challenges i'm presenting today
i suggest we need in every community across canada and in the united states and in the world
libraries but we also need libraries of healing where we have mental health
buttressing and meditation and exercise and healthy food and dance and community events and
social interactions i spent six weeks in india earlier this this year and i was surrounded with
30 people for six weeks and we chanted and sang uh every morning and did calisthenics and we had
lectures and you know we've become so rich as a as a culture on average that we just live in our own
little castles and order stuff online and we don't need people anymore but in the near future we're
going to need people again and we're going to need to have healing of people and i think mental
health as we approach the great simplification is going to be a huge issue and there are many
people who are qualified who are watching this show this this presentation right now
in canada that have abilities to make this happen a life brigade again this is my appeal to
um uh an animus uh respect of of nature um we need a cultural change some of us to say no the
superorganism is not allowed in this corner of canada in this part of my community in saskatchewan
or in ontario this part is sacred and the economic superorganism is not allowed here this is not a
economic statistical argument this is an argument from the heart uh that um we treat these things
as sacred and as this entire economic system uh has increased and now including artificial
intelligence are we in service of power or of life is a central question uh for the coming decades
okay moving to uh the academy uh and again i'm i have a phd but i'm not affiliated with the
university now i used to teach at the university of minnesota these are just some suggestions of the
importance uh that the university is around the world and in canada can play towards this story
first of all is we need to realize the context of our lives so again the global human economy
is a thousand times bigger than it was five centuries ago most of the science about humans
and about human societies especially social science was developed during this very anomalous period
i think the academy needs to understand the carbon pulse and the moment that we're at
because it informs all of our futures and so this should be a driving backdrop for all people at
universities is to understand some part of the system story so instead of silos uh academic silos
we really need to integrate the disciplines at universities around the world and have people
horizontally doing doing horizontal and vertical research and sharing and integrating
because it's the system science integration that matters uh the time of reductionist
expertise is is over we still need that but only as part of a larger narrative
what does education look like what are the things that we need to be teaching young people
as we approach the nadir of the carbon pulse what are some of the things we teach at universities
that are really trivia and facts and figures that are no longer relevant to the future what are the
things that are going to matter to the young humans that will live during the 21st century
i think it's an incredible opportunity for uh the privileged academic curious people who are
professors to apply whatever their knowledge is with a passion and intensity that matches the scale
and stakes of our time and so still be scientists be the best scientists you can be but also be
warriors at the same time because you have a contribution to make maybe it's developing an
alternative to PFAS chemistry in our in our products or maybe it's a new collective governance system
or maybe it's a regenerative agricultural technology i mean there's vast contributions
that the academy can make but we need to wake up and and really rise to the occasion because the
academy has more degrees of freedom than a lot of areas of our of our culture i suggest that for
those professors that are approaching retirement that in the last few years before they retire they
do a pro-social capstone that is relevant to this biophysical story of humans in our future
that is a contribution to the future of humanity given their domain and their expertise
and lastly i suggest that many social contracts have occurred in the past this is a
20 000 years ago the cave of the hands in Leskow but in my experience the vibrance and
curiosity and revolutionary spirit often happens in cities that have universities
and it's at a university that the mitochondria of something to replace the superorganism may be
born and as stewards and chaperones of these young humans i think you as professors can breathe life
into this new mitochondria last but not least you are professors you are citizens but you're
also humans and i'm going to finish with some recommendations of how to take this all on board
in your own life first category is being how do you be during this time first of all it is totally
normal to grieve of the future that we thought existed but now you're starting to understand
that a different future lies ahead and if you're sad about this it's totally normal what's not
normal is you were dismissive or laughed about this or felt indifferent to grieve is is appropriate
to what we face so give yourself some time to reflect on this and by the way don't believe me
in what i'm saying this research for yourself and come to your own conclusions but even if you think
i have a 10 chance of being right in what i've said today i hope you will integrate some of these
ideas into your work remember to keep perspective if we're alive at the top of the carbon pulse
that seems like a really scary thing but what about the inuits in none of it or the ucon or up in
the north of canada if you told them if you told a human i'm going to set you out on a minus 50
degrees celsius ice flow you would think that's a death sentence but to the people living up there
it's just another normal day so we have to keep perspective of how much amazing uh opportunity
we have we have access to all the information ever acquired by our species for free at our
fingertips to give one example don't forget to live i forget this a lot because this is stressful
toxic stuff that i've chosen as my hey my job to teach but we have to live and love and play
music and dance and play with baby ducks and go on hikes and take naps and all the things that that
humans do and not forget to have gratitude every day for all the amazing things in this in this
time that we have these perilous risks but there's a lot to be grateful for and i'm grateful for a
lot in my life we have to remember that this is a marathon and not a sprint and to nourish our own
bodies and souls and minds with healthy food with exercise with timeouts we have to heal our our
amygdala and our fight or flight response of our reptilian system and pause and reflect and and be
healthy i think in addition to goldilocks tech inner tech is going to be a necessity something i
will benefit from myself i need to walk the talk before i really advise this but we are faced with
a smorgasbord of different uh advice and opportunities and dopamine and consumption and travel but
really our culture has shortened and shortened our attention spans and dopamine has become a
predominant neurotransmitter in our behaviors and especially young people they increasingly have
lower attention spans they can't read a book they can only watch short tiktok videos and my advice
especially to the young humans watching this is to avoid the shallows and make sure to have dates
where you set technology aside dates and windows and times because your brain is your most important
asset going forward and you want to have the attention span to be able to plant gardens
and read a book and do longer term projects so the real asset allocation shift isn't necessarily
from money into real capital it's also from our focus on dopamine into a more healthy
portfolio of neurotransmitters like serotonin endorphins and oxytocin doing what do we do with
all this information well you simplify first and beat the rush most of the best things in life
are free after basic needs are met and to simplify if you really understand that society is not going
to do these things ahead of time that gives you an interesting impulse on the back end because it
empowers you to do things now because you know that society probably won't and to simplify your own
life and don't be reliant on a large house that's going to be a lot of money to heat or cool or a
boyfriend in in holland or any well if you really want a boyfriend in holland i'm not going to
gain say you but my point is that energy and money are going to become more more expensive in the
not too distant future learn skills you know you can imagine what skills are going to be needed
in in coming decades and a lot of us are are um neglecting physical skills because our culture
is so rich that we can outsource the skills to someone else ask yourself if half of what i'm
saying comes to pass what is a skill that you could contribute to in your own community that you're
kind of good at and are interested in avoid the consensus trance we are such social creatures
that we look to others to confirm what's true and have as as academics you're probably not as prone
to this um but avoid group think and what other people uh think you should do and think what is
our reality and come to your own conclusions intermittent humans don't need baseload energy
we are baseload energy so we get massive energy benefits from the first few of the 100 uh 100
what light bulbs we have um uh invisibly behind us um the first few uh have sufficiency and then
there's enough and then there's plenty and our current cultural goal is more and more and more
stuff so we have to remember that we don't have a true resource scarcity but rather a long edge
of expectations carrying dissonance uncertainty is physically uncomfortable for humans which is
why people uh tend to gravitate towards really polarized positions because then they don't have
to devote any uh mental energy towards other what ifs so the natural response to a presentation
like this if you haven't studied it is oh my gosh technology will solve it this is too malthusian
we'll figure something out there's no problem or oh my god we're screwed it's mad max um but the
reality is going to be in the middle uh and we have to become more comfortable with uncertainty
and navigate the pathways between fantasy and doom find the others um this is a scene from lord
of the rings and one of the reasons that i love the book and many people love the book is the
fellowship the fact that these nine they're not even people there were hobbits and men and dwarves
and they got together and shared an experience we need to do the same thing we are on a runaway
train where the market and the superorganism is shoveling fuel into the engine car so we need
to meet with others in the dining car and have conversations about what matters and work on
things that we're passionate about and just enjoy life with people uh and find the others that are
on the same moral intellectual uh educational uh pathway that you are sharpen the sword uh we have
the agenda of the gene as biological organisms we are a product of what worked in the past we're
walking forward but our eyes are looking backward but we don't have to follow the agenda of the gene
it is not our friend so sharpening the sword is improving yourself towards a direction that you
care about and you're capable of and sharpen the sword because the sword is you we are an intense
comparing social species we compare ourselves to others i talked about tiger woods and his
wife's new boyfriend but we do this all the time we flex and do other things just to raise our status
but we have to keep in mind that on an absolute basis the average person in north america is richer
materially than kings and queens of old from an energy and material standpoint and yet a lot
of us feel like we're failing because we're comparing ourselves to the advertisements on
television so consider the absolute uh wealth that you have and the access to things that you have
instead of comparing yourself all the time to others lastly being doing and we we need to expand
the definition of self to be commensurate with our times so one pro-social thing we can do is there
is a auto correlation with negative sentiments and negative emotions and anger and distrust one
person smiling and changing the behavior can break the chain of this so don't be afraid to be kind
and smile at strangers and do unexpected behaviors of grace because you never know what sort of chain
you're going to disrupt and start a new chain in a new direction we don't know what's going to
happen in the future i think this presentation might have put some new walls on the probability
distribution of what's possible but one suggestion i have is to wind your way towards something that
you're passionate about and care about this is my good friend and colleague dj white who ended up
being the co-founder of greenpeace international and he ran earth trust this is when he was 22 he
was a geologist living in indiana and he didn't really know much about the world except he loved
dolphins in wales but he determined there were no dolphins in wales in indiana and he bought a one
way ticket to hawaii and volunteered cleaning dolphin poop out of aquariums and within 15 years
he was the single most effective environmental activist of our time he stopped the the drift
nets in in the oceans he did the um flipper uh dolphin safe tuna at star kist he stopped a dolphin
drive kill in taiwan and many other success stories just because he took a step in a direction without
a plan of something he was passionate about so i recommend uh that you wind yourself towards
something that you feel passionate about with a purpose uh towards that end give yourself a 24
hour vacation from other people and technology in a place you personally find meaningful and ask
yourself who do i wish to be in this life why do i wish that and how might that may be made real
and the answers are for you alone but you might be glad uh to have them intrinsic we often uh get
validation externally for our behaviors and our self-worth but given the stakes of everything
i've described today we have to follow our own moral compass of what feels right and what feels
wrong and what feels rewarding and meaningful and follow a true north moral compass according to you
not according to other people and be intrinsically motivated do something for the benefit of someone
else that nobody else including the person or or animal uh or forest will ever know examine
closely the complex feelings this causes to arise within you as a first step in sorting social
motivation from personal altruism especially for the younger people rocks in the river uh metaphorically
as the water starts rushing in our economic systems many uh people who are not grounded are
going to metaphorically tumble downstream and if you have resources and you are psychologically
sound and have a pro-social outlook try to ground yourself as a large rock in the river of your
community that other people can rely on and enough if enough people do this we can actually not only
help our community and our university but we can redirect the flow of the water maximize your
impact once we hear about climate change and all the negative things going on in the biosphere
there's a tendency to try to be perfect and not eat meat and drive electric cars and not travel
and recycle and the list gets endless and i think that all those things are good personal hygiene at
these times but i would much rather you especially as universities in a wealthy country of canada
to take this opportunity to maximize your impact on the planet as opposed to just being one eight
billionth of a slightly smaller part of a problem so this is the uh the list of advice i have for
you i'll i'll close with this quote from uh ilia priogen an ecological economist when a system is
far from equilibrium small islands of coherence can shift the entire system maybe some of those
islands of coherence could be universities in canada as a mitochondria of a new cultural
social system thank you all so kira um you had no idea what i was going to say you know my work
i hope this wasn't too much for your your colleagues in canada this is the longest talk i've ever given
but i do think it's important to see the bird's eye picture and we've got some time for some
questions if you have any i have tons of questions but i want to respect your time as well um one of
the things that really jumped out on me in this talk and some more recent talks i've heard you give
is around this idea of libraries of care and why this is really salient i think when i'm educating
in this space one of the hardest things hardest questions that i hear from students is what's
the point and that breaks my heart in a million different directions what's the point from the
sense of like an apathy or a system overload where they're witnessing the foreclosure of nature
they're seeing the horsemen come in they are watching war live streaming war on their phones
and they say what's the point or i can't do anything or on the flip side they'll say something like
what's the point technology will save us and that is baked into this you know very
short-sighted dopamine reward system that they're working within when you brought up the idea of
libraries of care and i immediately thought well the institution is this incredible library um
we have many libraries on campus but how can we nurture a different kind of library and what
would that look like for healing and building capacity and resilience that would really support
the young people who will be alive much longer than we will who will be inheriting the mess we're
giving them i think you kind of answered your own question i mean we need people organically to step
up and say this is what our our young humans need as part of a university of experience there needs
to be a feeling of community that goes beyond competition for grades and getting a resume
but actually involves meditation and cooking and singing and outdoor group activities
and i think the the antidote to apathy is finding other people in a community because
as i mentioned i deal with this toxic stuff a lot and the thing that supports me and leads me away
from apathy is the dozens and now hundreds and growing to be more than that people that have
my back that i talk to about this and feel as passionate about it as i do and we're sharing
ideas and and working on projects and we're rolling up our sleeves and doing it alone feels
like what's the point but doing it in a small group as market meet it's said it's small groups of
humans are the only thing that can change the the planet or something she said i forgot the
exact words but i i think we need to heal our reptilian and emotional systems as a precursor
to the intellectual thing because our cognitive brain that perceives facts and studies for tests
sits atop a much larger pyramid of things going on that in our modern age we're not that healthy
are regulated we're constantly in a in a fighter flight mode and our amygdalas are activated
and so universities need to i think and communities have to have places to go that that aren't scarlet
letter stigma for people that have oh they went to the mental health clinic it's it's not like that
it's actually this is where i go to be human it should be promoted and i want to go there and
be with these other humans because we're talking about all this stuff and we're doing cool things
and activities and we had exercise and and good food and i i don't know that university structure
the way it is now how to go from here to there but something like that is is sorely needed
hmm another thing that comes to mind is how can we widen our boundaries for imaginaries and
possibilities we're working in these silos literally the the climate control everything
is within these boxes do you have any ideas as an educator as a communicator do you think getting
people outside maybe outdoors is there anything you can think of that might be helpful there
well first of all ask what would nature do spend as much time in nature as you can
it calms your nervous system it grounds you and living in canada you have plenty of access to
that that some people in the world don't i think we need tangible examples we need more examples
and pilots of people doing cool interesting things there's research shown that if someone sees
another person doing an act of altruism they're 300 percent more likely to do an altruistic thing
themselves so i think the problem with many of these lectures and these concepts is they're all
a bunch of scary facts and then another to-do list of what to do in your own life without tangible
examples but the people listening to this we need to start doing those tangible examples and
promoting them and showing that life doesn't have to be a disaster if we're using less energy
and less stuff and so i think just start by by doing more things with other people in the
direction of a simplification very cool and a question for Nate Hagens as a human not a
communicator and an educator but you know i always like to ask you what are the coolest birds you've
seen lately and also what is growing in your garden right now well i've seen a lot of birds
and as you know i think i told you i have the merlin cornell thing on my phone that identifies
them and yesterday and the day before i identified a blackbilled cuckoo which you can look it up
i've never seen one but i hear it now two days in a row and i'm trying to see it and i looked it up
online and sure enough that is the sound that i'm hearing i see pilliated woodpeckers every day
i will give you an honest answer about my garden my girlfriend is growing a lot of things garlic
and tomatoes and onions and spinach and kale i'm responsible for potatoes and the potato
patch looks like the Tasmanian devil went through there because i've been so freaking busy that the
weeds are larger than the potato plants so i will be frequenting my farmer's market this fall
but it is a failing of mine that i've been working too much this spring because not only
is the produce itself yummy and rewarding in the fall but it's the act of being out in the soil
with my birds my chickens and ducks and guinea fowl and and dogs so i my garden is is not
as it should be this year kira but i endeavor to change that in the future through a great
simplification well it it's a challenge right because i know this is coming and i'm trying to
affect it with with our work of our of our channel and our our communication and in doing that i've
complexified my own life at the same time that i know a simplification is coming and i'm sure many
people can relate to that but i have grown a wonderful garden in past years so i at least
have the skills and i can still cook the stuff but i to be totally blunt and honest i we were just
talking about this last week redwing minnesota where i live has a huge farmers market and in
september in between traveling i'm i'm going to go there and support the local csa's and and put
away our our v8 and our tomato sauce and and our pumpkins and squash and the root cellar and and
things like that amazing nape it has been a honor a pleasure and i am super grateful for your time
on behalf of the environmental studies association of canada and our partners thank you very much
nothing but amazing things to say about your work thank you also to the people behind the
scenes to leslie to luke and to misty everyone who's contributed today deep thanks from canada
we are very grateful good day my friend thank you very much
