Sea otters were almost completely extinguished due to hunting and by the 19th and early 20th century.
They were only found in one or two remote islands in the Aleutians.
And one of those was going to be used for the largest underground nuclear test that the U.S.
ever conducted. This is the early 70s and a local biologist tells them,
you guys are going to have a problem. You're going to do this underground explosion.
You have thousands of otters here and their pressure waves are going to kill them.
I've got a solution. We'll take your otters and we'll bring them back to the historical areas
where they had been found for thousands of years and had been extirpated.
It's a term we call trophic rewilding. Almost within a few years of bringing those sea otters back,
the kelp forest came back and fisheries for fish came back.
Eagles started hunting differently. So the whole system changed. That's, to me,
the inspiration of how animals can transform ecosystems if we restore them.
An essential component of any healthy ecosystem is adequate nutrient availability of vital
minerals such as nitrogen and phosphorus. Joining me today to unpack how animals
uniquely disperse such nutrients across the biosphere, as well as the threats to their
ongoing ability to do so, is conservation biologist Joe Roman. Joe Roman is fellow and
writer-in-residence at the Gund Institute for the Environment at the University of Vermont,
where I happen to get my PhD. His research focusing on endangered species conservation
and marine ecology has appeared in science, the proceedings of the National Academy of Science,
Trends in Ecology and Evolution, and many other journals. His latest book, published last year,
is titled Eat Poop Die, How Animals Make Our World. And that book is the basis of our discussion
today. If you're a fan of the Earth science-heavy episodes on the Great Simplification, you will
be sure to enjoy this one. And it does drive home the need for more focus from all of us on supporting
biodiversity on our one blue-green planet in the universe. Please welcome Joe Roman.
Joe Roman, great to see you. Nice to see you, Nate. Thanks for having me on.
We are going to talk about your new book, Eat Poop Die. What a attention-grabbing title. But
first, before we get to that, you and I were at the Gund Institute for Ecological Economics
back in the day. I never knew how you got started on all this. Can you tell us how you
became interested in wildlife biology research, and then we'll get to your book and your current work?
I grew up in New York. The suburbs and Queens, very few animals around me there. So the one place
that I could go to was the ocean, in particular salt marshes. And for some of your listeners,
they might be aware of Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge. It's the area that you fly over when you leave
JFK or you land in JFK. And I worked with a bunch of high school students for my first job. We were
cleaning the marshes, and I was teaching marine ecology with pretty much no training in marine
ecology. Teachers know I would get up in the morning and write a lecture from a couple of textbooks.
But it got me really excited about the processes, their work in the marshes as well as the oceans,
and that's sort of led to a career that's spanned many of the oceans around the world looking at
how different animals can impact marine ecosystems. So you have written quite a few books, including
one on the history of whales and another on the animals who have come and gone on the United States
endangered species list. Not to mention you have a blog on managing invasive species by eating them.
But I'd like to focus today's conversation on your most recent book Eat Poop Die, which in your
words covers the past decade or so of your research. So what moment inspire you to write this book?
And what is this book about? And why is it important?
Sure. I was lucky enough to be in a Fulbright in 2019 working on, and we'll talk about this, I'm sure,
the ecology of whales. And I had spent a year looking at migrations of whales, what they ate,
what the impact of their poop was and where they died. And as I was writing the final lecture for
like the capstone lecture for that fellowship, I realized that their three words can encapsulate
my entire career, which was eat poop die, how animals make the world. So whales were my way in
to this. And then after that, I started looking at everything from whales, of course, being the
largest creatures ever to existed on the planet down to midges, which an individual midge might not
have a big impact, but they can number in the trillions. So this book follows the stories of
a few species of whales that we stood few species of animals we still share the planet with that
are moving nutrients across thousands of miles. In the case of a midge, it might just be from a lake
out into the surrounding grasslands. And you think, well, how much could that be?
It turns out millions of kilos by one estimate, two million meatballs worth of meat comes up out
of this lake every year onto the grasslands around there. From midges. Just from midges.
You know, there's tiny little midges, but they're feeding and they're larvae in the lakes. They come
up once every couple of years to mate. They go out onto land, and then they die in enormous numbers.
The animals react to it, the plants react to it, even the people do. The researcher that I spoke
to about this, Claudio Gratton, he said he was really excited when he got this number. So he
brought it to the local Icelandic farmers. And they're like, yeah, we've known this all the time,
because they're farmers and they're sheep farmers. And they had a term called me grass or midge grass
for the years that the midges emerged. Because for much of Icelandic history,
it wasn't a global culture. You depended on that meat source. So if you'd had a bad year
for the grasses, that means your sheep were going to have a bad year and it was going to be a really
tough winter for you. So everything from the smallest animals to the largest ones that are
traveling across the planet are moving nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus to essential nutrients
that we need for our DNA, for muscle, for fats, for everything. We're using these nutrients all
the time. Plants depend on them. And what we've been looking at is how animals could start moving
these nutrients around the planet and what that might mean for different ecosystems.
I have so many questions. I don't even know where to begin. My initial thought is you were
saying that animals are moving nutrients around the planet and eat poop die. Humans are animals,
but maybe our moniker would be eat poop, turn billions of barrels of ancient sunlight into
microliters of dopamine, then die. Because we are also dispersing nutrients and pollution
across the planet as one species. But maybe we could talk about that later. But do you have
any initial thoughts on that? For sure. I mean, I sort of fell off my seat the first time I've
read this number. Right now on the planet, of all the mammals on the planet, humans are 1 third of
all biomass. Cows, sheep, pigs are 60%. All wild animals on the planet are only 4% of the biomass.
It's not surprising that we think humans are, that animals don't matter because we wiped most of
them out. They still survive in pockets. But it's this really that the book looks at, okay,
here's where these animals survive. I was talking about mammals. Of course, they're insects and
birds. We have an impact on those, not as severe. We can look at the individual animal species that
have survived and then get an idea of what it might have been in the past and how we can restore
those pathways in the future. Everything else aside, CO2 and biodiversity, setting those things
aside, are the nutrient flows and the nutrient cycling around the world in Earth's ecosystems?
A fraction of what they were 150 years ago when there was a lot more megafauna and mammals,
or versus 10,000 years ago when there were considerably more mammals and floating around
and moving around and dispersing nutrients. That's right. Chris Dowdy and I worked on a paper.
He's based in Arizona and he's a modeler. He's been looking at these questions. He started out
looking at giant sloths and thinking about how they might have moved nutrients around.
Then he looked at Pleistocene animals in general and we worked together to look at what it would
have been like historically for whales, for seabirds, for large herbivores. Think about
North America. We think of bison as being pretty large herbivores. They were pretty small compared
to the mastodons, the mammoths, the giant sloths, the enormous armadillos that were around the
Americas at that time. Beavers the size of Volkswagen's. I've heard it described and not
that long ago. We were obsessed with dinosaurs, but 20,000 years ago the American midpoint was
like a Serengeti with five species of tigers and lions, big cats. It was amazing.
Exactly. It's almost hard to imagine, but this is sort of a starting point for scientists like
Chris and I is thinking about, okay, we know what it's like now, what could have been in the past.
We think that those numbers, that movement of nutrient has been
declined by at least 90%. By taking out the herbivores, we also had an impact on salmon.
So another way that nutrients can move are through especially anagymous fish that are
migrating from the oceans into the mountains. A lot of times when we're looking at these,
we're thinking of how these nutrients can either be dispersed or move uphill because, of course,
things like nitrogen and phosphorus, as we well know, tends to flow downhill. That's no surprise.
It's how do you get it back? How do you get it into the mountains? So it's things like salmon.
It's these herbivores. It's the carnivores. The whales are moving it up and up in the ocean column
and seabirds as well are taking these nutrients from the oceans on to land. And in fact,
really the first time anyone thought about this, at least in western science, was guano.
Alexander Humboldt was one of the first people to bring guano back from South America, sending it
to France, finding the highest amount of phosphorus that had ever been found in any substance at that
point. Humboldt didn't believe it came from living birds, even though the locals, the local Inka,
told him that this was from living birds. He thought it was kind of like coal that it had been,
these were historical layers. But it turns out this was a renewable resource until, of course,
we exploited it too much and then the numbers started to decline. But that's just one great
example of how numerous animals can make a big difference not only on local ecosystems,
but also in local agriculture. Why does this matter? I mean, I intuitively know why it matters,
but is this a shifting baseline sort of situation that, look at all the nutrient flows today in
2024, things must be working. The earth is this amazing biological pump and things are moving
all around and yet you just said we're at 10% of this nutrient cycling moving around versus
the past due to the decimation of the megafauna and biodiversity. But to the lay person,
why is this important? Sure. Let's look at phosphorus. So it's non-renewable resource.
Almost all the phosphorus we're getting right now is mined, a lot of it around the Sahara.
So we're taking this out of the ground because it's so rare now. Now, animals used to move this
phosphorus around. Think about it, and Chris has done the math on this. You can still see
legacies of those large Pleistocene fauna where they had pathways. Why does size matter in this
case? Because they have a long gut. So when they eat, they move long distances and then they
defecate or they pee and they release those nutrients far away. If they're just a small
animal, those nutrients don't tend to travel far. So size absolutely matters for these. They're also
moving distances either to feed or to breed. And then when they die, there's this enormous,
almost like a firework on the landscape of nutrients that are going into that area.
We've replaced that natural system by intensive agriculture. And that's why we're always
struggling. And we could talk about nitrogen too. The problem with both of these is there's
areas now that are really depleted and areas where we have too much. That's runoff and pollution.
So we're battling both of those. Animals can help restore that pathway.
So we have a higher standard deviation of those nutrients today because,
like many other things in our economy, instead of living off the interest,
which historically would have been the animal residue from healthy global ecosystems full
of megafauna, we're now mining the principle where the concentrated phosphorus stocks are
using Haber-Bosch from natural gas to make nitrogen fertilizer, etc. So it's another
principle versus interest story. I agree. And I think the Inca story about the guano in South
America is a great one. So the birds there, the source of that phosphorus and nitrogen were
protected. It was a legal hunt. You couldn't bring anything onto those islands. And for them,
as far as we know, it was sustainable for centuries that they were never deep mining it.
They were taking it off the surface and bringing it to local areas. That's when it was globalized
and then miners from around the world started were brought in in order to extract that.
That then, even though this could have been several hundred feet layers of guano
a few decades later, it was almost completely gone. One of the researchers on guano claims,
perhaps controversially, that the Anthropocene started with guano extraction. That was the
first sort of global nutrient that had a clear marker on earth. It really did revolutionize
agriculture around the world. They claim that even places like Australia and New Zealand,
before phosphorus was brought in, there wasn't much farming going on there. Once they brought
that external source of phosphorus, then they could raise the cows and sheep that we know about
from that area. When was that, the guano revolution? 1800s. Yeah, the 1800s. So it would have been
first discovered in the early 1800s and then mining would have taken over by, let's say,
the 20th century. I hate to ask this question, but since we're on the topic, do you have any
scientific data on the modern bat population on earth relative to times past?
Oh, that's a great question. And by the way, I mean, it's a natural link because, of course,
the caves were also mined for bat guano. So in places like Cuba, when I visited,
you could still see the tracks from tires and some of those caves that they had gone in there in
order to extract guano. Bat populations, I don't have a specific number, but of course the bat
populations have declined severely in Europe. And now, with the spread of white nose syndrome,
numbers are also declining here. And this affects cave-dwelling bats in particular.
So there's no question in my mind that this would have some impact on the movement of nutrients,
but to my knowledge, no one's been measuring that in bats at this point.
Well, the other thing is that the decline of insects, bats are largely insectivores,
I mean, most of the species. So that's got to have an impact on their populations as well.
Everything is so fricking connected, Joe. I mean, this is what I've intuitively felt for a
long time, and I increasingly get angry and frustrated that people use technology, politics,
and money lens to look at the world when we really should be thinking about the interconnection,
the ecological basis of how things really work to think about our time alive while we eat poop
before we die, and what are the broader implications of a more sustainable human society? I mean,
right now, we're using 30 to 40% of the net primary productivity from the sunlight and the
soil and the rain on the entire planet, directing it towards humans. And we're using millions of
years of fossil sunlight stored as coal oil, natural gas, and other minerals and
rare earths and things like that. So I love talking to wildlife biologists and ecologists
because this is their work, this is your work, and it seems important to me.
Thank you. And certainly, I think one way to think about this is, so whales dive deep to feed,
some of them more than a mile down beneath the surface. They're feeding in the deep sea,
they come to the surface where they rest, they digest, and they poop, and they could be really,
they're releasing phosphate and ammonium that could have been locked in the deep sea
for hundreds of years. That same nutrients picked up by phytoplankton consumed by herring and then
consumed by seabirds, which can bring those nutrients onto land. Salmon can also move those
nutrients into mountain systems where it can be moved by bears and other animals. So you can imagine
that these nutrient pathways can go everywhere from the deep sea to the mountains. Humans,
as we know, have interrupted that. It doesn't have to be that way. There's ways we can be
part of the ecosystem. Instead of taking phosphorus and taking nitrogen out, those nutrients can go
back into the soil. When we die, we don't have to bury our carcasses. They can decompose as all
the other animals do and one way of restoring that pathway for humans. Is that your plan?
That is my plan. The family still hasn't necessarily bought on. I want to call the area
behind our house in Vermont human meadows and just put bodies out there. We're not that far away.
We would have to bury it, but at this point, I really would plan on that. I also do P-cycle.
I also try and get the P back either to one of the local non-profits that takes it and then
distributes it to farms or, of course, you can put it in your own garden. Again,
I get a little pushback from the family. Unless I'm traveling, I pee outside in the yard all the
time. It wasn't that long ago that the entire country of China used night soil and they had
repositories for that to put on their gardens, et cetera. Oh my gosh, Joe, so many questions.
In your work, you give a powerful example of how animals can turn barren land into a living,
thriving environment with your work on Sertzi Island, which I believe is
by Iceland. Can you tell us a little bit about that island and how you've been involved with
working on that project? Sure. I mentioned that I worked in Iceland and I would drive along the
southeast coast and there's the small island called Sertzi, which emerged in 1963. It's a very
young island. In fact, several of the researchers that I work on the island are older than the island
itself and even cooler. Some of the birds that are nesting there are also as old as the island.
They have been nesting there. Wait a minute. You mean the island was discovered 50 years
ago? No, it erupted exactly. In 1963, volcanic eruption about 400 feet beneath the surface of
the ocean emerged. There was a local fishing boat there. They smelled some sulfur. They got caught
in a whirlpool. They weren't sure what it was, but then they noticed by the end of the day,
there was an enormous eruption column. Over the next year, it was growing, I think it was something
like 25 square yards per second. A great pyramid of Giza every day was built into this island.
It stopped being volcanically active about five or six years later. By that time,
there was just black lava. There was no life there. They hadn't even seen a vascular plant yet.
The first one, I think, was recorded a couple of years after the eruption. The only plants that
could survive there in the beginning were ones that floated in. Why could only ones that float?
Because if you float, you can carry your nutrients with you. They can bring the nitrogen with their
seed and then settle. In those early days, again, these researchers who were younger, who were
older than the island, knew every plant on the island. They had marked all the plants there.
It was a barren landscape for a long time, for maybe six or seven years. Occasionally,
a bird would land, a light fly off. The first breeding pair of Gilomots was in the early 1970s,
and then herring gulls came in, blackback gulls, kittywakes. Within a couple of years,
they were feeding in the ocean. They were breeding on this barren lava, but they were
releasing nitrogen and phosphorus in their poop. A typical seabird, about three ounces of poop per
day. They were releasing about 60 pounds of nitrogen per acre, which is comparable to what
a farmer might put on a permanent grassland, a significant amount. Within a couple of years,
you had a meadow in the system. The birds were bringing in the nutrients. They were also bringing
in the seeds that were on their feathers if they went on to land. I went there in 2021.
If you stole most of the island, it's just craggy lava hard to walk on, you get to the breeding
bird area, and it's like walking on a trampoline. It's lush. As one researcher joked, you could
have dairy cows on that island. The good news is, what Iceland did well is they decided to
protect that. People can only go on that island for two weeks per year, about 12 researchers.
I was fortunate enough in 2021 to be one of those. It is now a UNESCO World Heritage Site,
because it's really the only place on earth where we can look at an ecosystem, how it builds from
scratch. Most of the seeds come from the birds. The birds bring a lot of the nutrients, and
seals are also popping on the island, so you could see from space. If you just type in Cersei,
there's one strip of green to the north, and that's where the seals are popping, and then there's
this big area to the south of Cersei where the seabird's nest. This is a cool thing for ecologists,
but even as it turns out, the US government was interested in this island in the 1960s and early
70s because they were doing nuclear testing, and they were interested in how life could
recolonize after a blast. They actually funded the Icelandic researchers for about five or six
years, and some of the money, there's still a hut there that probably came from US government money
because they wanted to know what would happen. What are the implications of your research and
Cersei island for other restoration initiatives? For example, reintroducing wildlife to previously
deforested areas or retired mining sites. I mean, theoretically, I've read in the ocean that if we
don't fish in the ocean, that other than the real big fish, the other fish would regenerate within
seven years. How fast does nature regenerate, and what does this imply with some of the regenerative
agriculture, regenerative economic ideas floating around today? Sure. Here's the great thing about
animals is if you introduce a few, that population, if you bring it to the right area, is going to
grow. You don't really have to do much except release, let's say, a few dozen animals, let's say,
on an island system, or if it's bison in North America, or if it's going to be cougars somewhere
else. There's not a lot of input after that initial introduction. What can it do? Well,
we've seen evidence of that. In one experiment, people took elephants from the zoo in Denmark
and released them into a nature reserve. In a very short time, in a matter of months, in fact,
they were taking out a lot of the woody vegetation. They were disturbing that habitat in a way that
was likely, that's how it would have been historically. We can talk about whether you
want to move elephants around. That's a whole other question. For most conservation biologists,
we're comfortable with if animals have disappeared within the past few hundred years. When we start
thinking about going back to the Pleistocene, then we're meddling in another way. Nonetheless,
when we see these animals restored, whether it's these elephants, which is a really long time ago
before since they were in Europe, or bison, which is a better example. Bison only extinguished in
the 19th century. There used to be more than 30 million. They were down to fewer than a thousand
from tens of millions. I don't think anyone pushes the number down there. You can imagine what that
did, how that changed the systems. There were lots of plants and animals that depended on that
migration. When you took that out, the disturbance stopped. We tend to think of disturbance as maybe
bad, but for ecosystems, many of them are dynamic, especially if you want biodiversity.
You don't want too much nutrients. You don't want too little. There's like a goldilocks. One of the
terms is intermediate disturbance hypothesis, which means you want occasional disturbance
so that you won't just have a few dominant species, but not too much disturbance where
many of the species can't survive at all. That work has been studied largely in rainforests,
as well as in intertidal areas. Animals do that. Without the animals, you're just going to get
a more static system. We're never going to get to all my questions, Joe, because I keep thinking
of new ones. What about the standard deviation of number of species? To have a lot of animals,
like you mentioned elephants before, or bison. If you have big megafauna, they can transport a
lot of nutrients. What about a lot of people now are so proud that Spain is regrowing its forests
for biomass production and other things, but they're all monoculture. It's all one species.
What is the importance of diversity of species vertically and horizontally within an ecosystem
to do this nutrient cycling and the health of the ecosystem?
That's right. We often, you think of a forest and you think of trees, which makes sense, but
it's also the animals and the fungi that are in that system that are just as important.
They're essential to the diversity in life in these areas. Yes, a monoculture may serve your
purpose, if I don't know, you're trying to store carbon or you want to grow wood to cut down,
but if you're looking for diversity, obviously, then it's the opposite of that. The only way
you're going to have a dynamic system is by restoring several different trees, as well as
bringing those animals in. We see the differences, areas like the Atlantic forest and the Amazon
rainforest. The difference when you have animals and you don't, it's a much different system of
trees because a lot of the trees and a lot of the plants depend on animals for pollination,
to eat those seeds and to move them long distances, as well as to provide nutrients.
It's a restoration of the entire system that we often focus on. This is going to benefit people
as well. It's going to benefit the diversity of a system, but also human uses, human well-being.
It won't have the intense production that we have in monocultures, but it provides other
benefits like resilience and adaptation to climate change. We can talk about that.
When we have certain birds in a particular area, island systems are more protected from climate
change. In a lot of ways, these animals are going to be our allies. We just need them to be a little
bit more abundant, again, coming back to the idea that they're just this tiny sliver of the pie
right now. That's why we don't really think of animals as being that important because they're
so rare. Here's a thought. I'm sure you've seen the surveys on the decline in animal populations.
Since 1970, it's dropped about 70%. From 2018, I would imagine it's even more,
but the standard deviation of that is wildly different around the planet. In the United States
in North America, it's only like 30%. In Latin America and South America, it's over 90%. In
Asia, it's like 70% or 80%. I just wonder everything else being equal as we crest the peak and start
the downslope of the carbon pulse where we're drawing down ancient carbon and adding it to our
economies. Are those continents that have a reasonable amount of animals, biodiversity,
insects, birds, everything, are generally going to be better off because those are the organisms
that are in your book. I think you mentioned that plants are the lungs of the earth, but
the mammals, birds, insects are acting as the heart and arteries of the planet. Do you have
any thoughts on that speculation? Yeah. I think of it in almost like a cardiac arrest when we
took all those animals out of the system. We have them historically moving nutrients vast
distances. I study whales. They travel hundreds of miles every year from high latitudes where they
eat to low latitudes where they breed. They're moving and they're the largest animals ever to
have existed on the planet. They're moving nutrients either through their pee, but also
through their carcasses and their placentas. I mentioned whales because it's actually one of
the few trends that goes in the other direction. In the 1970s, many whale species were on the
brink of extinction. Through negotiations, fights, commercial whaling was almost completely stopped
by the 1980s. A lot of species like humpbacks are back maybe off Australia to numbers that they were
before we started hunting them. Northern elephant seals, another example, down to 20 individuals
in the late 19th century, now 180,000 probably as abundant as they ever were. Marine mammals are a
case where really we made the decision we're not going to kill them anymore. In fact, we're going to
try not to even kill them indirectly. That's been a bit more of a challenge.
Then there's different layers of indirectly because ocean food webs based on CO2 absorption,
that's a long-term risk. Absolutely. That's one that we, well,
just the warming of the oceans I've seen during my career, one of the papers I published in 2016
about nutrient cycling by right whales in the Bay of Fundy. They had been there
throughout my career, throughout the people ahead of me, their career. All of a sudden,
around 2017, they disappeared. They don't come back there anymore. This whole system just stopped
probably almost certainly because there was no food for them there anymore. The copepods,
when the food disappeared, they went to a new area that put them at risk because the protections
were in place there. The new risks weren't necessarily the local people's fault because
they'd never had whales there. Those systems are fragile in a time of climate change. I think that
holds true for almost any of these animals we're discussing.
But they can be reversed. You mentioned shifting baselines. We have a paper called
Lifting Baselines. There are lots of species out there that I have students who can't imagine
that Massachusetts, there weren't any seals and there weren't any whales there,
only 30 or 40 years ago. Now they're really abundant. As baselines can shift in a positive way,
that can cause conflict. I mentioned the seals in Massachusetts. A lot of fishers are not happy
to have the gray seals back and the seals have attracted great white sharks. Not every surfer
is happy that sharks are back in the waters either. But these things can change over time.
I can give you success over success and I do not deny that the overall trend is down.
That's the bad news. That's undeniable. But there are several trends that are
bucking up. If we decide that this is really important to us as a society,
we can turn a lot of this around. We're not going to win everything, but we can win a lot more
for all the other animals and plants on the earth.
I agree, which is one of the reasons I invited you on the show, Joe.
So you just mentioned a specific area of your research that you call a whale pump.
So that's pulling up nutrients from the bottom and disseminating them on the top,
and then there are other organisms that get involved. What was the inspiration for your
research on that? And how do you even begin to collect fecal samples of whales in the vast ocean?
And how do you analyze the data? Yeah.
Great question. So I mentioned the Bay of Fun Day. I worked for the New England Aquarium
in the mid-1990s. We were going out doing photo idea of North Atlantic right whale.
So taking pictures of them, knowing which individuals, where do they move? Where do they feed?
The first day I was on the water, though, a male right whale came to the surface,
mud on his bonnet, because he had been diving all the way to the bottom of the Bay of Fun Day
to feed, and he breathed. And then just before he dove, he released this enormous fecal plume.
And biologists get really excited often once they see a bunch of poop in the water,
because there's so much you can learn from it. At that point, 1990s, we were basically
just wanted to know what it was eating. But even then, I had a feeling, well, okay,
there are only 350 right whales on the planet. What would it have been like when there were 10,000?
Because you stare at a lot of empty ocean when you're on the water and the modern ocean.
So that started my thinking about, well, was there any ecological importance to this?
I learned about this process called the biological pump, which you mentioned, and that's basically
carbon photosynthesis only occurs at the surface of the ocean, because that's where the light is.
And when the phytoplankton and the zooplankton that eat it die, they bring that carbon down
to the bottom of the ocean, to the deep sea, where it can be sequestered for hundreds of years,
depending on where it occurs. When I learned about that system, I realized, well, actually,
whales are doing the entirely opposite thing. They're diving, and they're coming to the surface
and they're releasing carbon and nitrogen and phosphorus at the surface. I put together a
model that with a colleague of mine who, Jim McCarthy, biological oceanographer, often hard
to find oceanographers willing to entertain the idea that whales really matter. Most of them
look at phytoplankton, they look at the microscopic organisms. As one of my colleagues said, Joe,
is that ecologically important, or is it a fart in a hurricane? So that's what we did. We looked at
how much nutrient is actually getting into this system that I mentioned. As much nitrogen is
brought up to the surface by whales as all the rivers combined in the Gulf of Maine,
so a larger amount, and almost similar to what humans do. Obviously, we've changed the whole
the cycles here, but it has a large role now. And then if you look historically,
when there were five times more whales, then they would have been one of the dominant influences
in these areas. So I don't know if you watched the podcast that I did with Sir David King,
who's a chief science advisor to the UK government. And one of the things he mentioned was we have to
go towards global cooling. And one of the strategies that he's working on is to increase
the global whale population to do this pump that you described as a way of
pulling in carbon from the atmosphere. Yeah, so I did see that. I know he spoke about a friend and
colleague of mine, Victor Smetecek, who's been at the front of this iron, artificial iron fertilization
as a way to mitigate. That's controversial in its own way. Whales also move, we've been talking about
nitrogen, but in the southern hemisphere, it's iron that's limiting. And they also,
their poop is very rich in iron. So they can have an impact. And there have been several studies
suggesting that whale restoration could increase the amount of carbon that's absorbed.
I have to say, the data, in my view, are not really there. And I've seen some numbers that I think
are fantastical, like each whale is worth $2 million in carbon sequestration schemes.
And that all whales are worth $1 trillion a year. The evidence is not there. I'm sorry
to say that. I wish it was, but I've had many hours of research. We have papers out
about this. I want whales to be our climate champions, but they're going to play a very
small role. And by the way, I want all the whales back. And well, let me ask you a question there.
You know, there are ebbs and flows and Volterra model and predator prey and overshoot and
iron case species and such. Is it possible that, I mean, it's a future I would like to imagine,
but is it possible that if whales come back, that whales, because of us helping them or
whatever, could go into an overshoot situation? Or is that just fantasy land?
Yeah, I mean, animal populations fluctuate. So I mean, naturally, there wouldn't have been
any time when there would be a stable whale population, right? Things change. For whatever
reason, maybe their prey or there's a natural climate variation. And now at a time, of course,
climate change that's human caused almost certainly, sadly, we're probably going to hit that with whales,
not because the ocean, the current ocean doesn't have the carrying capacity, but because the ocean
is changing so quickly, that it's hard to imagine that a warming ocean is going to be better for
whales. Maybe a few, but for the most part, it's going to be a tougher future for them.
But again, I feel like the overshoot I understand in the context of humans,
but for animals, think about that the classic links and snowshoe hair studies that were done
where snowshoe hair populations increase, links increase, snowshoe hair populations go down.
That's just a natural state of things. And we see that in many times that these ecosystems
would have dynamic equilibrium. So yes, that was a long answer to say, are some whale populations
going to overshoot? Absolutely. And in fact, we've probably seen that with both gray whales
and humpback whales in the North Pacific. The problem is that we're having climate change too,
so it's possible their prey populations are depressed because of rising temperatures. In fact,
in the case of humpbacks, it's very likely that it wasn't that there were too many, but that their
prey populations declined. I don't know if you watched the podcast I did with Daniel Pauley,
who had the gill oxygen limit theory saying that fish are swimming poleward both in the
northern and the southern hemisphere because warmer water holds less oxygen, so they have to
swim for the northward. Is that also happening with whales either because of that mechanism?
Well, they don't have gills. So for whales, they're going to get one work around and that
they breathe the air. So they're not limited by the... Their prey might be, so they might be
moving because their prey has to move northward, but directly, there's still enough oxygen in the
air for whales to survive. However, as I mentioned, when prey populations shift,
whales have to eat 2% or 3% of their body weight every day in the summertime in order to
fast during the winter and have their offspring. So they are very dependent.
Wait a minute. When whales go south in the winter, they fast?
Yes. So here's really what's a cool thing, and this opens up a lot of things. So
whales can fast for about five or six months, and that might be hard enough for a male,
but think about a female that is having a calf lactating an enormous amount of milk
and swimming back and forth. That isn't true of all whales, but I would say the majority of
baleen whales fast. A few of them go to places where there's actually some food, so they get
to work around. And the evolutionary adaptation of that is because the advantage of surviving
offspring in the warmer waters without predators outweighs the nutrient benefit of continuing
to eat. That's one hypothesis as predator avoidance, killer whales in particular. Killer
whales do feed on calves, on vulnerable calves. So a lot of the whales, the bright whales I
mentioned, humpbacks I mentioned, they go to shallow sandy waters in order to have their offspring.
That's possible that the sand can help, because they're communicating with their calves. They
don't want it to be a dinner bell for the killer whales. So they stay in shallow waters. The killer
whales can't come and attack them from below, so it protects them from that. And it also might
muffle some of the sound. I have to say it's science, so there are a bunch of
hypotheses here about why that is. That's probably the dominant one. One of my colleagues thinks
it's also to slough skin. Algae can build up on the skin, and that can be like fouling. Think
about a boat when it's fouling. You can't operate a boat efficiently. So they may go to the southern
hemisphere, or rather the lower latitudes where there's very little growth. Think of how clear
the waters of the Caribbean or Hawaii are in order to get rid of those diatoms. Or it could be both.
And there are a couple of other hypotheses as well. One of them is metabolism, possibly because of
the warmer waters, as you had mentioned. It's metabolically advantageous for the calves. The
moms probably don't care, but the calves, it might be better since they're at that point,
they're still vulnerable, and don't have the blubber layer that the adults do.
So we've talked about whales and midges. Are there any other species that are particularly
powerful nutrient spreaders, especially ones you've personally worked on in the field?
So two answers to that. One is probably the classic example, is salmon.
There's anadromous fish, and think of the Pacific Northwest. So they spawn in river systems, spend
most of their lives in the ocean feeding, come back as adults, and they're semioperous. They just
breed once and they die. So you can think of the whole carcass of staying up in that area,
as well as they're releasing some urine and feces into the water column as well.
If you've ever seen pictures or you've been to a place like Alaska, that's attracting eagles,
it attracts bears, it attracts all kinds of carnivorous animals that are feeding on that,
and bringing some of those nutrients into the forests. This is a classic example. Again,
it's a bit science, so I have a colleague who I interviewed for the book who questions how much
of the nutrients and how important it is, but it is a classic example of moving between one ecosystem,
the oceans, onto a terrestrial or a freshwater system. Great one. And as a wildlife biologist,
I have to say, I went to Alaska, and it made me think about when Europeans first arrived
in New England or something, you really could walk on the backs of the salmon crossing a stream.
I didn't intend to do that, but they were so thick that you couldn't really avoid them
in that area. So that was phenomenal. So it's no surprise that a lot of organisms depend on these
animals. That's a nutrient flow. We haven't really spoken about eating all that much.
We were talking about rewilding, and I think probably the best case of both of these is the
sea otter. So sea otters were almost completely extinguished due to hunting, and by the 19th
and early 20th century, they were only found in one or two remote islands in the Aleutians,
and one of those was going to be used for the largest underground nuclear tests that the
U.S. ever conducted. They had done lots of tests in Nevada, but they were getting too big for
Nevada. The locals were not happy that they kept getting bigger and bigger bombs. So they took
this remote area. This is really the start of Greenpeace, by the way. This is the early 70s.
There's protests against this, and a local biologist tells, this is the Atomic Energy Commission I
mentioned earlier, tells them, you guys are going to have a problem. You're going to do this underground
explosion. You have thousands of idlers here, and their pressure waves are going to kill them.
You're going to have these bloody otters. It's going to be a terrible PR for you. I've got a
solution. We'll take your otters, and we'll bring them back to the historical areas where they had
been found for thousands of years and had been extirpated. This was before Alaska had oil.
Alaska was a poor state. They didn't have the money to do this. They wanted to do it.
The Atomic Energy Commission, as you can imagine, is this kind of money that they were talking about
hundreds of thousands wasn't even the smallest rounding error to them. He asked for radios,
and they're like, yeah, we can give you radios, but we can also give you planes.
Think a little bit bigger. If you've ever seen sea otters anywhere from Washington state to Alaska,
they're almost certainly the descendants of those animals that were evacuated before that bomb.
Wow.
It was released. There are 50,000. More than maybe half of all the sea otters in the world
are descendants of those that move there. Why this is relevant to the book is,
that's a term we call trophic rewilding. The impact of their feeding is in areas where
sea otters are absent, there's lots of sea otters. Herbivores, they feed on kelp,
and they create urchin barons when there aren't any predators around.
Almost within a few years of bringing those sea otters back, they love sea urchins are like
their top favorite thing to eat. The kelp forest came back and fisheries for fish came back.
Eagles started hunting differently. The whole system changed, and I think for me,
those sea otters, this is largely a food thing, but that's largely the impact of direct eating.
That's, to me, the inspiration of how animals can transform ecosystems if we restore them
to those areas. Let's be honest, as economists, there are trade-offs in this decision,
because they love benthic invertebrates. Not only do they eat urchins, but they also
really like clams and crabs. The fishers who were there had never seen a sea otter since they
had been gone for 100 years. They were used to a lot of bent invertebrates in those areas.
Those numbers went down. We have to be mindful that there are trade-offs when you restore these
animals. Many of us are all for bringing them back, but there probably needs to be a balance,
or at least a good discussion. My dream is that we use the climate crisis in the same way
that we think about animals as being, how can this crisis that we've created
help encourage us to restore biodiversity around the planet?
How is a warming climate and a built-in already going to be further warmer in coming decades,
how is that going to disrupt animals' ability to spread these nutrients generally, or specifically?
Yeah, probably a lot. It's too early, except for a few examples, which I've already mentioned,
North Atlantic right whales, for example. Studies looking at southern elephant, rather sorry,
whales in the southern hemisphere, that their numbers are likely to decline along with their
prey. As those numbers go down, it's going to have an impact on all the other species that
are dependent on them. I'll stick with whales for one second before we move on.
In the 1990s, people were just starting to discover hydrothermal vents and all these
deep sea ecosystems that no one had known had been there before. They also discovered
whale fall communities, communities that are entirely dependent on dead whales in the deep sea.
More than 100 species found that we know of now, and this is probably just scratching the surface,
they're entirely dependent on these dead whales. Also, there's some species that are only getting
out of the bone. One of the first reactions to this paper was, well, whales are so few that
how could they have an impact compared to diatoms? That's true in pure carbon numbers,
but when you have this big island of repulses, and in this area, one of my colleagues estimates
about 1,000 years of carbon falling out from diatoms or marine snow comes in one pulse.
And you have these species that don't even eat. They're just surviving animals that are surviving
on the sulfides and other compounds that are coming out of the whale bone. When we took those
habitats out through commercial whaling, probably some of the first extinctions in the ocean
occurred in these deep sea communities that we didn't even know existed at that point.
My point is we're just learning what the impact is of biodiversity loss as well as climate change.
How long have we been looking at new climate change? A couple of decades now, so it's hard
to tell. There are some concerning warning signs. It's hard to imagine most species are going to
improve or that this nutrient transport is going to get better, but it could help.
Here we can talk about why it matters. It could help mitigate or at least help us adapt to some
of those changes from climate. What about plastics and chemical pollutants? They're
increasingly in the news, PFAS, forever chemicals, endocrine disrupting chemicals.
Is this part of the story also affecting the process of nutrient cycling around the earth?
Absolutely. Pretty much every animal we look at has some this evidence of microplastics.
I'm going to stick to whales because it's what I know best.
Sad story, so a new species was described in 2018, the Gulf of Mexico whale or the rice's
whale. It's down to about 50 individuals only found in the Gulf of Mexico, probably became
critically endangered as a result of oil exploration in that area because it was mostly
found off of Mississippi where it's no longer found. If you know anything about that part,
there's lots of oil rigs in exploration. This species really hit the spotlight after Deepwater
Horizon when 20% of the whales died and we think 20% of them had reproductive failure
as a result of this one incident in that area. The plastic connection is the type
individual for this species, the one that we've realized that this is a new species,
washed up in the Everglades in I think it was 2019 and when they did the necropsy,
they found a piece of plastic and it's got about the size of a credit card and that's what likely
killed it. Think about what we're facing. If something that small can kill an animal that
large, you can imagine if it's sharp how it could happen but this is the warning sign that we have
to and this is one I feel like plastics out of the ocean, at least it's something we can decide
not to put anymore in. If we wanted to, getting it out is going to be a bigger challenge but
at least restricting how much plastic we put in the ocean, that's the smaller pieces.
Larger pieces also cause entanglements and direct death as well. On terrestrial systems,
again, I'm thinking more towards seabirds, lots of seabirds dying. They feed on whatever's floating
in the oceans and bring it back and die and they can even kill their chicks that way.
Getting a handle on this is essential. This is one that just across my career,
when I started teaching reconservation, I didn't talk about plastic at all. Maybe we mentioned it.
Now it's like three lectures. It's a huge issue. No one knew. I feel like 25 years ago,
we really didn't. There were a few biologists that were starting to put up the warning sign.
So huge issue, not only for direct impacts but also concerns about oil production.
Are there enough? Well, I know the answer is unequivocally no, but it seems like this is yet
another one of those David and Goliath situations. Are there enough wildlife biologists and resources
to look at the full Monty on these issues that you're talking about? It seems kind of
fascinating but esoteric and it's not part of the profit system to understand our
cousins, nieces, nephews in nature and the eat-poopa dying that's contributing to a healthier world
doesn't seem to be prominent in our cultural aspirations.
How do you feel about doing such important work but as a tiny minority?
I agree. If you don't have money, and I didn't when I started out, this is a hard field.
There's no straight line in order to be a conservation biologist or a whale biologist.
Most of my colleagues have noodled their way through in various different ways.
It's not like going to med school or law school where you have a clear path and also
most of my colleagues and I were not making a lot of money on this. We do it for other reasons.
Most of us are making a living though so we're fine. I do have long careful thoughts with young
people. If you want to do this field, please we need more of you but be aware of the challenges.
It's not for everyone. I see burnout in young people or among my colleagues. There's a certain
point maybe that you have your first 10 years where you're doing field work and it's really fun
and you're going to travel and then there's comes like a sort of a part too where there's a drop-off
point like somebody like okay well that was fun but I got to get a real job and then I feel like
if you can get through that bottleneck then most of my colleagues now are like okay this is this
is who I am this is what I do and we talk about it over beers like how to answer how to address
this crisis all the time. How do we address this crisis? The one that we've been focused on again
is returning to Wales. A lot of it is and we're doing this now and the book does this is about
storytelling. It's about creating metaphors because if I just give you a number and I say okay
80 million tons of nitrogen is moved around the world by this there are going to be a few scientists
that will be interested in that number but for people that are living their lives that's hard
to understand. I get it because it doesn't mean that it's meaningless to me too so creating
whether it's a circulatory system these metaphors creating these stories about individual animals
as well as the processes that they make can help I think expand
the tell the story to a wider audience this is the work that you do as well I mean whether we're
talking about economics or we're talking about ecology it's not the answer there's probably no
single answer but but it's one approach that I think is important. So the thinking there is
is change awareness through education awareness changes values values changes political advocacy
and behavioral choices and then we have a new cultural conversation and and emergent efforts
by individuals and organizations working on these issues. I'd like to believe that it that
sounds all too straightforward like I feel like it's probably yes but um to that one as I'm sure
you know in that uh like if I you know how did we come to view certain animals as really important
in others not you know why is it there certain charismatic animals that were willing to spend
a lot of money and a lot of time to protect whereas the vast majority by far the vast vast
majority of animals people don't really care about at all and to me they're just as important you
know a rare velvet worm in Brazil as important as a rare whale in in the north Atlantic I just
happened to work on the whale so we chat about that a lot um and it is you know it's a good question
how we expand that out from let's say the whatever number hundred the top hundred animals that people
care about right you know and probably if we think about it you could we've been talking a lot about
whales but lions tigers you know and a couple of other large charismatic species chimpanzees and apes
how much of how we care about animals um is because of their scarcity and rareness um like I don't
really care that much about raccoons where I live because they eat my chickens and ducks
periodically and there's so many of them and there's this one that's coming on my porch at night and
pulling out all the soil in my bonsai plants I don't know why but I'm kind of pissed off at the
raccoons here but in a broader sense how is that different than a messiah warrior wanting to kill
a lion that's encroaching so I wonder if our appreciation for nature is novelty scarcity
and maybe with more education and books like yours eat poop and die we can
appreciate animals partially because we're related to them there are kin we're connected to everything
on this blue green earth but also partially because of the benefits that they give to the
broader ecosystem which includes humans and our economies I think that's a wonderful point
we should be celebrating when animals are abundant right we're often it it's kind of
uncomfortable for me that you see a celebration when an animal is listed on the endangered species
act and often you'll see it like oh this is like well yeah I'm glad it's on there given its state
but really the you know all of our work is to celebrate when animals are abundant and by the
way we've been talking about wild animals and how rare wild mammals are any guess what's the most
abundant wild mammal on the planet the Norwegian rat by biomass probably by number white-tailed deer
well in north america no planet on the planet white-tailed deer fin whales second according to
the same folks that did the work on on biodiversity so there's 30 million white-tailed deer in in the
united states because I have actually researched that and a hundred years ago there used to be one
million because they are one of the species that benefits from our taking down of the forest and
putting up corn and soybeans monoculture wow I didn't know that's that's the single by biomass
it's the biomass it is that's right and now again it's not mice and and rats would outweigh them if
if we were talking about numbers and individuals right fin whales are number two second largest
animal ever to live on the planet my point is to follow up on your question is I spoke to some
old timers here in Vermont who can remember in the 50s or 60s going with their parents to go deer
watching because deer it was so amazing because white-tailed deer had basically been eradicated
from the state people would go like people go whale watching like I laugh he's like oh you know
the thought of like going out to doing that now uh it seems you know I don't think many Vermonters
do it but we should value again there's there's a there is a balance here I don't but we should
appreciate animals when they are abundant and we often there's a certain layer where level where
we're like oh really matters rare okay here and then there's you know a social carrying capacity
is like well now there's too many and and so we we need to value the numbers because 30 million
bison beavers are another good example beavers have a huge impact on the environment not when
they're rare but when they're abundant and there used to be tens of millions of beavers as well
how can the things you've learned about nature uh animals um nutrient cycling be part of what
many are talking about I have John Fullerton coming on here uh uh in the near future talking
about a regenerative economic system so we've been drawing down uh the the the fossil bank
account adding that primary productivity from the past to our current economies that has an
expiration date our current um you know cultural expectations based on non-renewable inputs
how can animals and the things you've been studying play a role in a more regenerative
economic system uh in a very direct way luckily so we've been talking about nitrogen and phosphorus
and when you look at the planetary boundaries there are often two areas where we've gone way
beyond the planetary boundaries right we've the we may be a peak phosphorus we can argue when that
occurs but some scientists would argue we're already at peak phosphorus we've had huge impacts
because of Haber-Abash and and the impacts of the use for fossil fuels in order to generate nitrogen
from the atmosphere we've looked at these flows in systems where we restore animals we've spoken
about Vermont so let's move away from the marine system for a moment. Anagamous fish coming in from
the lake so we have a problem here in Vermont of phosphorus pollution in the lake if we restore the
movement of fish going out of the lake that would be one way of getting night phosphorus out if we
restored beavers that's one way of retaining phosphorus on the landscape and making those
river systems more heterogeneous herbivores scavengers carnivores can help distribute that
so disperse it and that's the work that that Christaudi has done is that's what we've lost
when we've taken out these large animals is that we tend to have areas that are very concentrated
and areas that have almost none what animals can do in this regenerative sense is help restore that
balance they're not I don't want to think of them as like our warriors or you know in that
they're not going to be able to do it that's up to us but they can play an important role in helping
to move these nutrients in a way that that has been done historically where we're not losing
it all to the oceans. And it's not only animals right it's it's also insects like you said the
midges but that's a much more local impact. Sorry to interrupt but cicadas just recently
there's been this large cicada emergence and there's been studies looking at so they spend
the 17 year cicadas seven 16 and a half more years feeding on sap beneath the forest floor
they come up to breed once every 17 years an enormous resource of nitrogen and phosphorus
going out into those forests also to the animals that are feeding us the animals are changing the
ones that are preying on it but it's also supplying those nutrients to the forest system as well.
What will it take Joe for a young human and I remember living in a suburb of Chicago when I
was eight years old and we had that cicada bloom and I was fascinated at eight years old like look
at all these you know bugs and they're so colorful they're green and red eyes and things like that
and really noisy. And really noisy and you know what would it take for humans to look at that
and view it as a part of life and an ecosystem and the majesty of it and the 16 and a half years
of underground and now a release rather than just some noisy pain in the ass insects is it within our
phenotype as a species to have that viewpoint? Yes here's the good news so I went down to
Maryland for the the 2021 emergence of cicadas this was another three species coming out
in the trillions probably certainly many billions and there have been a lot of people scientists
out in the media talking about this you got a 17 year gap so it's a long time between
emergencies right a lot of the kids have never all the kids really if you're not 17 have never
seen one before. There was a lot of positive messaging and if you went back in time every
17 years they did look at least 17 years back so the last emergence where the word plague was more
common people think of them as locusts I don't even want to put bad on the locusts but you know
that's another question but they're not actually feeding when they're emerging you know they've
already they're they're basically just breeding and dying so they're not going to strip trees bear
or anything like that having that message out has been pretty good I mean so I feel like we are
making progress I don't know that we ever win it you know we can we can talk about political
scenario but I feel like cicadas and the midges both have gotten better story better coverage
in recent years when I was in Maryland I just sat down in a park and listened but you know I
didn't ask anyone questions just listen everyone who was walking by and many people were talking
about cicadas and it wasn't a negative you know it was pretty positive response so I feel like maybe
if you go back to where you grew up for the next emergence I'm hoping you'll feel like there's more
of a general appreciation as my dad once called me an environmental wacko which he then used as
a term of endearment but since I've become aware of these things over the past decades I am a little
strange in my behaviors like I'll go on a bike ride and there will be a night crawler on a rainy
asphalt road that clearly is going to die and sometimes I'll actually stop and get off my bike
and pick it up and chuck it into the woods where there's soil or things like that that I never would
have done 20 years ago and it seems like a waste of energy it's the sentiment that matters so let
me ask you this in one of my previous earth day talks I had the idea of a life brigade or something
locally this isn't your forte you're a scientist but what could happen if in every watershed
in every community across our country or maybe even beyond there was a cadre of people who
understood and cared about the things that you're discussing today what could people locally do to
expand the ability of insects and animals to play a productive role in the ecosystems of their
children and grandchildren where they live having lived in Vermont for about over 20 years now
one of the big problems in the spring is there's these large amphibian migrations they cross roads
in the spring from upland habitats to um vernal ponds ephemeral springs and by the way they're
bringing nutrient people have measured there's a large amount of nutrients that they're bringing
in when they're releasing eggs going from that system in just 20 years there was some concern
in the beginning and a few of us would go out on rainy cold nights and move the salamanders and
frogs from one side of the road to the other that felt good though it was also risk I mean you're
going on roads where there are people driving quickly um we actually did a local fundraiser
and put two or three amphibian underpasses that was endorsed by the town and I see around Vermont
now they call it big night where when I go out now it's rare on a rainy night in March that
I don't see other people with flashlights looking and moving them and that is relatively awesome
yeah it is awesome and that's happening in England too and the idea of of amphibian animal
underpasses and overpasses has become more popular that is something that was funded I think it was
go fund me you know the feds put in some money and the state put in some money but local people had
ownership in that we got I've never heard of that what what is an underpass what is that okay explain
that right now looking out the window you often see like two ditches running along a road and if
an animal is coming down from the mountain it's got to go into the ditch and over and then back
to the other side into the pond incredibly risky move going both directions so it's just putting
what we might call a culvert but a bigger one putting a large one you want to make it big enough
so that bobcats and other animals can do it too they're not big enough for white tail deer but
they're big enough for like small mammals as well as amphibians and it's reduced it by I don't have
the number off the top of my head but mortality is down by more than 80 percent so so the the
animals prefer the underpass to going over the road you have to you have to make it what they want
they they probably would go over the road so you're putting up you're putting either a fence or in
this case a concrete a low wall you wouldn't see it when you're driving but something that's going
to be challenged for either a frog or an amphibian to get up over there's a bit of there's an art and
a science to doing that of course but when it works it works beautifully and that's something
that local people can get involved with um what blew my mind I once took a class down in Massachusetts
and we went out on the water and we were working every day and like you guys can have the day off
today we got up early that day we came across just by chance a stranding of a couple of dolphins
and I'm like or we can just see what happens so it attracted maybe a hundred people including
police were there vets were there um volunteers were there and just people curious taking those
dolphins that have been stranded and releasing them on the beach side and it occurred to me
that this is part of the economy we don't think about that these people like a lot of these people
this is their job or they're donating money and because they care about it and I'll argue there
is not a thing no ecosystem services like those dolphins aren't doing anything for us except that
we care about them and they matter in the ocean don't put a dollar value on it because I'm going
to be skeptical um but you can see clearly that this is an important part of this economy and we
compared how much people donated and volunteered and worked in in this part on coastal massachusetts
comparable to commercial fishing it's a lot of money that people pay and this is coming up this
is bottom up you know I mean this is this is grassroots this isn't people coming in making
these decisions for other people let me ask you a personal question joe do you have children
I do my daughter just left she's going away for the weekend um do your children
care about animals and nature and whales uh as much as you do well some of our fondest memories
are amphibian I just mentioned the amphibian crossing so this year I was glad because she's
17 now she can drive she wanted to go out on a raid on a couple of rainy days and help cross them
so I'm happy to say that that that's still sticking with her um my wife is also a wildlife
biologist so there is a little bit of pushback you know I mean she's like you know animals like
oh nature uh there can be an eye roll part of it too but I honestly I know I know that she also
heard a friend she and her friends care about these things I don't know that that's going oh
actually whatever friends wants to be a marine biologist so so that may carry on I do believe
that they care in a way what I've seen the shift in young people is and you would know this in your
careers more thinking about the rights of the animals themselves that's been a long fight right
and but I hear it more I think even we have a unit you know Josh Farley I think he has a term I
forget something like the ecosystem services of the animals we're often thinking of the services
that animals provide for humans but of course the agency of the individual plant or animal also
they need they need whatever it is the food and the atmosphere and and all of those so
what I'm optimistic is expanding out beyond just thinking about people and especially people like
us but thinking beyond that to what are what are the rest of creation you had mentioned earlier
our cousins in the ocean are real you know that there there are cultures that that acknowledge
that I'm hoping we get there as a culture too that we can be comfortable using you did using
that terminology and not getting an eye roll or something like what Frank what call you know what
cousins I might get eye rolls but I can't see them because there are people watching on YouTube so
what projects are you currently working on and what's next for you Joe yeah contribute and die
maybe we are finally putting some numbers on what I describe what we describe as the great well
conveyor belt so this is the those migrations of great whales that they do every year we know
they're moving some nutrients and now we've got an idea that that nitrogen that's going from these
high latitudes to these low latitudes can be more than the amount of nitrogen that's just
coming in from upwelling in these particular areas this is external nutrients you know it's
like we mentioned the guano you know they're bringing nutrients from an entirely different
part of the world to here to these lower latitudes why does that matter if you've been to Hawaii or
the Caribbean the clear waters that many people like and are important that's also a sign that
there aren't many nutrients so the whales are bringing nutrients into this system and that can
help in the resilience of coral reef systems and even as one of my colleagues have noted
when seabirds are bringing nutrients to those islands they're increasing the growth of the
plants around the island and that with the fish eating in the sand can actually allow the islands
to grow more quickly than the absence of those birds and those fish be and making those islands
more resilient to climate change so that's that's the direction we're taking our work these days
excellent it feels to me that we're discovering all this stuff at the 11th hour and it's so
fascinating and so beautiful and so important but it's like we had to almost destroy it before we
realized that we're going to miss it and not only is it a sentiment but it's actually the
biological underpinning of of our ecosystems all these things connecting yeah I agree and you know
we've chatted about they can go in two directions we talk about them like a perturbation or we're
doing these global experiments I don't recommend doing this but we're doing them anyway whether
it's climate change or adding more nitrogen more phosphorus however so when we take animals out of
the system we we have a perturbation we see the change but we also see those changes when we store
them to areas right so these disturbances can have let's say positive impacts for biodiversity
if we're doing in the right direction or very strong negative ones it's up to us to decide
which direction we're going to take it in so this has been a fascinating discussion a lot
of things I didn't know and it just strikes a nerve with me to care about these things and it's
so fascinating you followed my podcast I'm sure you're aware of the closing questions I ask all
my guests but you're aware of the dwindling of nature but also the the human predicament more
broadly do you have any personal advice to the viewers of this program on being alive at this
time with all the things that we face yeah I mean from from my view the way I act I don't know if
it's advice I'll just be a it's give you one example of an approach is focusing on the local
and observing what you see around you and by the way all the work that I'm talking about today
a lot of it just came from me spending some time outside on the water allowing myself to be bored
in fact almost in a way I would say that would be the biggest recommendation I'd have for most
people is go out and just watch right you'll be you'll be amazed what you learn leave your
leave your social media device at home exactly exactly if you can and that was a benefit I've
worked a lot in Cuba and that there is no social media you know was enforced I couldn't I couldn't
access the internet or or a cell phone by by having that that and observing the natural world
for me it's about science but I also think it's an appreciation of wonder and understanding
the world around you and the the environmental history and just getting to know these animals
so that's on the simplest level and then getting involved also though on a societal level which
is what you do and what you talk about because it's not enough like on an individual level
if I go across a couple of frogs I feel good about it I'm glad I did it but the crisis is
much more about me and it's much more than those frogs so it is taking on whatever cause that that
resonates with you I wouldn't want to prescribe what that cause might be whether it's climate
equity or you know biodiversity all incredible ones that that can be tied together so for me I
try to operate on both of the see the importance of both of those levels that policy change matters
but so does being outside and enjoying the day and you are a professor now at the U of Vermont
and what sort of advice do you give to young people and how would you change what you just said
to a young 20 25 year old yeah I'm a fellow at UV at the Gund Institute right now I'm not teaching
but the advice I the conversations I have maybe I shy away from advice but the conversations that
we have is as I had said if you're interested in wildlife get out in it in whatever way you can
that that's a that's that's the first start and then looking at whether you're going to want to take
on whatever the call let's use biodiversity as an example if biodiversity is what you really care
about that's what drives me as a conservation biologist there are two ways of going about it one
is dedicating yourself through a career or volunteering and you know and working with an
organization I have seen both of those be incredibly effective the risks of a job as we
mentioned is there can be some burnout there's there's not a lot of there's a bottleneck for a
lot of these the benefits to making it your side job is that it gives you it's a maybe like the
pressure valve is off there and I feel like that's a personality you know I would certainly not
prescribe everyone to go out and be conservation biologists or that we don't have any right but
you know you you need to I think you want to think about what direction you want to go and I just
had lunch with one of my students who just graduated and doesn't know and that's okay I didn't know it
I didn't know a 21 or 22 either for her she was used to like always having like deadlines this is
what I do next this is what I do next not going to medical school wanting to work as a coral
ecologist it's not clear what's next and that that could work in your favor so maybe on a personal
level don't feel like you have to you know make know what's next for you because it up the world
and and one's own decisions can change what's next may change but what's first is caring about
and being interested in the animals and the ecosystems of which we are apart is how I see it
so what do you care most about in the world Joe I could I could probably guess but I'll ask just the
same so it's everything because it's biodiversity right in a way biodiversity includes all of us
and and everything on the planet so it's almost like every living thing and then I would I even
maybe want to expand it to non-living things but but let's go you know so it's very broad and and
really what I care about though I probably took me years to realize it is is where the the angle
that we've been thinking discussing in that that tree that I'm looking at across the street right
now where the the bird that's that's you know running it's flying by that they matter and
understanding how they live in the world and how we can protect them is what drives me so
biodiversity you know is the single word but also a thriving a planet where animals matter
where where all the other species in the world you know on the planet matter well to put in
different words your work and your career is in service to life so if you could wave a magic wand
and there were no personal recourse to your actions what is one thing you would do to improve human
and planetary futures the world we live in right now has an extinction rate that's probably a
thousand times higher than than it's ever been or at least at the average maybe or maybe even in order
of magnitude more so we're having many extinctions every year and extinction is natural just like
death is natural every species out there is going to go extinct at some point just like every person
we talk to is is going to die and sometimes I think the role of a conservation biologist
is similar to being a doctor right you want the you want a patient to have a healthy long life
good quality of life but you also know that at some point it's going to die so recognizing
that extinction is natural we have caused incredibly high unnatural extinction rate
right now so my goal the thing the wand I would be is getting it back to zero human caused extinction
whether that's convincing people to make that the priority or if the wand is allowed me to do it I
I think that's a really special one if I'm going to but I think the real goal is going to be humans
decide like they did with whales that this really matters we're going to put our time effort into
this that would be my wand is you know in in a way we're talking about how you get people to care
the wand would be well people are ready there and now let's discuss how we get there thank you
and and thank you for all your decades of of curiosity and work on these issues do you have
any closing comments for our viewers Joe yeah I just similar to what I've said get outside look at
this I mean appreciate right now you could probably go out and you know and go out in the world and see
an animal feeding pooping and dying and think about it in a different way you won't see it die a corpse
you probably won't see it die but you might see a carcass and think about how those processes
are influencing everything around you whether it's the river or the forest or even your yard
you know the these processes are happening all the time it doesn't have to be
um a white tail deer or a whale but it could be something as simple as a bumblebee
I'm going to go do it this afternoon thanks so much Joe to be continued my friend great I really
appreciate it thanks so much for the chat great questions if you enjoyed or learned from this
episode of the great simplification please follow us on your favorite podcast platform
you can also visit the great simplification dot com for references and show notes from today's
conversation and to connect with fellow listeners of this podcast check out our discord channel
this show is hosted by me Nate Hagans edited by no troublemakers media and produced by Misty
Stinnett Leslie Batlutz Brady Hyen and Lizzie Siriani
