Today's conversation is with my friend and colleague, Daniel Schmuckdenberger.
Daniel and I met a couple of years ago. Turns out he's working on what he refers to as the
metacrisis, how climate and geopolitics and artificial intelligence and everything fit together
into this collective of risks. I had never heard of him and he had never heard of me or my work
or my network looking at energy, money, growth, ecology. We talked on the phone and the first
time I talked to him, I'll never forget it, we talked for three hours. At one time in the
conversation, I got goosebumps on my left arm because he connected ideas that were in my head
that I had never connected. Those of you that know Daniel and listen to his podcast know that he
often does someone's thinking for them. He's that sort of an intellect. Daniel's
current main focus is on the risks that social media and artificial intelligence
pose as this exponentially growing function that's hijacking our minds as individuals
and at a cultural level is impeding or even negating our collective ability to orient and
adapt to our current challenges. Daniel and I always talk for hours. I wish I would have recorded
our previous long phone conversations, but we decided to start recording with this one.
Our intent was to lay the foundation of what I refer to as the energy blindness of our culture
and how many people miss the relationship between technology, energy, money and growth
and what that means for our future constraints. What we intended on doing is merging my story on
the macro superorganism that we self-organize towards profits. The profits are tethered to energy,
which are tethered to carbon and there's a growth imperative in there and merge that
with his story of an AI-induced profit-seeking, call it micro-organism, capturing our attention
into a grand synthesis of the human predicament and how we can steer society in the future
towards bending instead of breaking in the coming decade. In an unexpected way,
Daniel ended up interviewing me in this podcast. It was a bit weird, but I hope you find it helpful
and interesting background to the part two in the series in the near future, which is going to be
taking a deeper dive of how these things fit together and part three will be the bend versus
break, how we should think about this, what we should do as individuals and as a culture. I hope
you enjoy the conversation. Daniel, good to see you, my friend. Good to see you, my friend.
Happy to be in this discussion with you today. We scheduled this three weeks ago and I've had
three weeks to think about creative ways to shape my beard to compete with yours. I decided
I'm just going to settle for some beard compersion and be in awe of your beard. Compersion is a word
that you taught me, which is instead of being jealous, you can be happy for other people's
magnificence, well-being, et cetera. Welcome. I shaved off my giant COVID beard before we did
our podcast. Is that right? Okay. Daniel, you and I have known each other on two years now.
I found you, because many of my friends were sending links to your talks,
saying you guys have to join forces and have a conversation. We've now spent a couple weeks
in person working on various projects, dealing with technology, social media, risks to governance
and sense-making, et cetera. I just feel a deep bond with the fact that you are living your life
in a similar way to I am. I'm not knowing all the answers, but striving for some pro-social,
cultural transition and educating and inspiring people. I'm very happy that you're on the program.
Yeah, I was really happy that you were starting this podcast. I'm excited about the
things we get to talk about today. So, real briefly, for people in my network that don't
know about you, could you briefly describe your work, a little bit of a conciliants project,
and what you're trying to do? Yeah, roughly, I have been, as a kid, was interested in
environmental topics, social justice topics, animal rights topics, all different kinds of
activism, and also then had a deep interest in kind of system science and looking at
how all of those problems had certain interconnections, where you could solve one
problem but displace some of the problems somewhere else, or had common drivers, like perverse
economic incentive and collective action issues, and started forecasting and seeing that many of
those problems were reaching critical tipping points of global catastrophic risk. That just
kind of got me thinking about how do we make a mature civilization that can be a safe steward of
exponential tech, the power that exponential tech gives, and what is a civilization that makes it
through its technological adolescence look like? And so that looked like catastrophic risk,
existential risk, kind of assessment, and rethinking our social systems, governance,
economics, law, rethinking our kind of cultural and value systems, educational process,
and obviously also rethinking our technological systems. How do we make a technosphere and a
social sphere that are in harmony with the biosphere long-term? And so what we're focused
on with the Consilience Project right now towards those kind of big picture goals is
how to frame up the actual state of the world, the metacrisis, that so many different environmental
issues and exponential tech mediated x-risk issues and economic and supply chain issues are all
part of, right? That there's a profound interconnection of these things, there's some
core underlying stuff that has to get addressed. How do we frame up the metacrisis well enough
and what the design criteria of its solution, not one solution, there'll be lots of different
things that have to happen. Both the right design criteria are that a lot more of the world can start
innovating in a well-informed direction. And that's through papers, through kind of strategic
education of people in specific institutions and verticals and discussions like this. And
obviously this is how we got connected from my side was a friend connecting us because of you
having a big picture story on what the kind of metacrisis and overview of the state of the world
is, what some specific near-term catastrophic risks that are pretty fundamental are that are being
really under addressed, which I'm excited to actually dive into today, even though it's a subset
of the whole topic, the energy blindness topic, because it really is something that you emphasize
well and clearly that is so underrepresented in the overall assessment of the state of the world.
So yeah, that's a bit. I was happy to discover that you and I both use the same anthropological
reference to frame some of our work. The work of cultural anthropologist Marvin Harris called
cultural materialism. He frames all historical human cultures have something in common. They have
a superstructure, which is the ideologies, the beliefs, the memes, the stories that the culture
tells. In the middle is the structure, which is the institutions and the rules and the laws and
the economic system. But underpinning it all is the infrastructure, which is the energy and the
throughput and the way streams and how the system functions. So you and I both agree that what's
coming in the coming decades is we're going to have to solve all three of those. We're going to have
to move them together. I think that's what we're going to talk about today is a lot of people work
on just one of those areas and we're going to need all synthesized. But the energy, materials,
growth, money, technology, story, when we talk about cultural transitions, that is not as fluent
and as frequently dove into as social cultural change. And so I thought today you and I could
kind of take our version of a deep dive into that. Though it is a bit of a strange thing to do,
this being one of the early shows in your new podcast. I like the idea of me getting to kind
of ask you some questions regarding your core frames in this area since we've dialogue a lot
and I happen to know them and I think they're important and it's always tricky when you have
expertise in a topic and you host the podcast, you're holding context for other people's content.
This might be a nice way to get some of the core content through so that your listeners and maybe
future people coming on the show will have that as some of the context to speak into. So I would
like to talk with you specifically about the bend not break model as you propose it and energy
blindness and why that is both near-term and central. Though that is obviously a subset of all
the things for us to talk about and hopefully we'll do more of these. Does that sound good?
Yeah, great. So I have a elevator pitch about the human predicament and how we got here and then
there's a lot of components there but maybe I'll just start with that and then you just dive in
and interject and push back and ask questions. So energy is fundamental to nature. Energy is the
currency of life. In natural systems, organisms and ecosystems that self-organize around any
energy capture have an evolutionary advantage. If you don't have surplus energy as an animal,
you can't reproduce and have misses and have homeostasis and everything. So the ratio of
energy return to the energy invested as caloric pursuit in nature is a huge driver and that also
applies to human systems. We've been a species for 300,000 years and for 290,000 of those years
we were hunter-gatherers. We worked 20 hours a week and the rest of the time rested and told
stories and everything. And then when the climate changed around 10,000 years ago,
it warmed and stabilized in no fewer than seven places on earth. Did we stop our hunter-gatherer
ways and start more agricultural ways? And what we were doing there is spending,
we were time minimizing, we were accessing more energy surplus and we were able to store it.
It wasn't just meat that would go bad after a week, it was grain which we could store and that would
even out the feast or famine in coming months. And what that allowed to happen is we had access
so we could have more higher population, we could trade with other areas, we could devote
other people to be warriors or priests or accountants or guards or whatever. And so the agricultural
revolution changed everything about humans and you fast forward to nation states and beyond and
we started to expand around the world. And then we happened upon a vast bounty of energy surplus
that was stored underneath the earth. And since the 1800s or so, we have been drawing down this
energy battery which is the stored carbon and hydrocarbons in the form of oil, coal and natural
gas 10 million times faster than it was sequestered by the daily trickle charge of photosynthesis
in the deep past of earth and our economic system is treating this as if it were
interest when it actually is our principle. This fossil hydrocarbons are unbelievably
powerful relative to what humans did with muscle and animal labor before them. One barrel of oil,
Daniel, and I'm sure you know this, has 5.7 million British thermal units worth of energy,
which translates to 1,700 kilowatt hours of work potential. You or I digging ditches or hauling
hay bales or planting potatoes generate around six tenths of a watt of power in a workday versus
1,760 kilowatt hours. So one barrel of oil does around five years of our work. And all we have
to do is pay for the cost of extraction from getting it out of the earth. So if it costs $50
for us to get it out of the earth, we sell it to the market at 60 and our economic system treats
that as if it were just the same as any other $60, an expensive haircut or some food or some
earmuffs or whatever it is, and energy is needed for absolutely everything in our economies.
There is no substitute for energy other than another form of energy. So basically, we need
energy for everything that results in a good or service in our GDP. So right now, it doesn't have
to be this way in the future, but right now, GDP cannot decouple from energy because it's a measure
of how much stuff we burn. It's goods and services and there's energy that is required to refine,
deliver, maintain, run and dispose of every product on earth. We can get into that a little bit,
but let me finish the thesis. So we now are in a culture that optimizes for growth and we as
individuals, as families, as small businesses, as corporations, as nation states, we are trying
to maximize financial surplus, money, profits, which are tethered to energy, which are tethered
to hydrocarbons. And we can't stop or slow down because the system requires growth to
continue and to pay off the financial claims from the past. And so what we're doing is we're kicking
the can with various rule changes, with debt, et cetera, and we have to continue to grow. But the
growth is tethered to energy and the only way that we're continuing this right now is by central
banks and governments blowing up their balance sheets in order to keep goods and services flowing
to large populations. So what has happened is the market or the downward causation of a higher
level system than human individuals is imposing rules on our behavior that are out of our control.
And so we are de facto, the human species right now is functioning as an energy hungry
super organism. It's not like a hive mind like the Borg. It's that we as individuals are individual
cells of a larger entity that is compelled to grow. And you brought up the word energy blind.
Most people think that technology is what drives the human progress machine. And it's really the
combination of technology and energy that has brought us to this point. But technology is dependent
on energy. So one day when we don't have this amount of cheap energy at scale, technology is
going to play a much different role. Yeah, I think all of the really important points are touched
on there. And I just want to take this time and unpack them and kind of start from the beginning.
We could say that this is a kind of thermodynamic perspective that is focused on the fact that
for an evolutionary perspective to exist, the traits that are going to get selected for involve
an animal moving involve some kind of metabolic process. And the core to all of that is the
ability to harvest energy from the environment. One of the deepest definitions of life is actually
an entropy pump, something that can take more energy from the environment and externalize its
entropy. And so then you're looking at the way that human technology starting with stone tools and
then agricultural tech and then industrial tech allowed us to harvest more energy from our environment
than other animals to be able to do future surplus stuff and then to be able to compete with others
over the future surplus and grow populations faster and how fundamental of a kind of defining
characteristic this thermodynamic combined with competitive or like it's a thermodynamic and then
evolutionary theory together, where the tech ends up evolving our capacity to extract energy and use
energy for more stuff, which increases our kind of ability to win at wars and economic wars and
whatever else, driving an arms race of the ability to extract, externalize, et cetera, faster,
driving ultimately fragility of the planet writ large.
I don't think we've ever talked about this, but have you heard of the fourth law of thermodynamics
loosely defined called the maximum power principle?
Please explain it.
So in nature, organisms and ecosystems that self organize around capturing energy surplus,
as I said earlier, have an evolutionary advantage. So if they've taken aerial views over a forest
transect and the hottest place is the road where nothing's growing. The coolest place is where an
old growth redwood tree is growing because it's dissipating more energy. So in nature, those
ecosystems that are able to capture more energy have an advantage and it ends up
resulting in a scaling law called Kleber's law, which is that animals energy use scales to the
three-quarter power of their size. And this works for mice all the way up to blue whales.
And so the size of the organism dictates how much energy it uses. Well, low and behold,
if you aggregate all the countries in the earth, the slope of global GDP is right around
the size of the GDP to the two-thirds power. It's not exactly the same, but the relationship holds
even as a biological organism, the whole human economy.
Yeah. So you mentioned initially two types of surplus and extraction, both of which were hydrocarbon,
the first one being grain with the advent of the plow and baskets kind of early agriculture
revolution, the second being oil and coal, hydrocarbons at that time. I think it is kind
of interesting that they're both calories, they're both measures of energy, they're both hydrocarbons,
they're both sun impounded by plants turned into hydrocarbons as stores of energy. And one of them
is being generated every season, oh, or kind of in real time, the agricultural one. The other one
is from, you know, tins or hundreds of millions of years of storage. But they're both about
developing more technology, one case the plow, the second case like the oil drill and refinery,
to be able to extract stored sunlight. Yeah, I can, I call it current sunlight,
which is crops, old sunlight, which is trees, maybe you'll chop down a hundred year tree,
and then ancient sunlight, which is tens to hundreds of millions of years ago, and you're
right, you can use technology to access those pools of potential energy.
So to go back to the agriculture revolution, going from hunter-gatherer to an agrarian
culture and the plow, you were mentioning the key thing being that grains were more
storable than, say, what you could hunt and gather, meats and berries and stuff. More
storable means you can make it to the famine and grow the population faster. And then if you
grow the population faster, you can win a tribal warfare. And now you also have more stuff that
is worth invading for another tribe. So now you have to do defense and military and all the
things that go along with having that surplus. And now for the first time, the economics of
needing to deal with surplus come about. So private property ownership and inheritance and
all those things was like, it was a big deal, that particular transition.
That was when our species ate the apple in the Garden of Eden.
It's interesting, just if it's not clear, that was also kind of in one way the beginning of
the Anthropocene. Because before that, you want nature to be pretty much the way it is to hunt
and gather from. This is the first time you want to start clear-cutting an area to turn it into
agricultural land for lots of grain. Because in a gather environment, there's not enough grain to
be useful. You've got to row crop it to then be able to drag a plow behind it. So you can kind of
consider the beginning of the Anthropocene and the beginning of extraction of stored energy
corresponding together. Yeah, no, that's right. And what also happened is that's when inequality
really started to occur. We were always in equal in terms of status and respect and things like
that. But we were always incredibly equal in terms of consumption because we didn't have anything.
We didn't have stuff to carry around with us. Everyone's actual consumption of
outside of the body calories was pretty much the same. But once we started soaring surplus,
that's when the hierarchies started. Yeah, the beginning of the thing we call civilization
that started scaling well beyond the Dunbar number, which equaled how to
domesticate wild type humans that would have otherwise been Dunbar tribal.
Right. And I bring that up because there is, and we could talk about this another time,
but just briefly, there's a lot of binary discussion about human nature. And I strongly
believe that one of the generator functions of civilization is who we are as evolved organisms
in our evolutionary psychology. And we are incredibly plastic. And our cultural plasticity
is even greater than our individual plasticity. But to say that humans are this way, there's
thousands of examples of how cultures and humans lived in the past. And we just look around us and
think this is how humans are. And we are living an anomaly with this massive, massive amount
of exosomatic energy. And before I forget to say the point, exosomatic energy is energy
that we consume, but not by eating. It's outside of the body. So inside the body,
the average American consumes like 2,500 calories. Outside the body, the average American consumes
over 200,000 kilocalories per day in the lights and the airplanes and the shopping centers and the
libraries and the buses, etc. So we're the only species that massively uses energy outside of
the body. And that is only made available by the fact that we're accessing this pool of stored
hydrocarbons. So I can get back to that, but we completely are blind to the fact that our current
global culture uses 100 billion barrel of oil equivalents worth of coal, oil and gas. We use
around 30 billion barrels of oil and the rest is coal and natural gas. But that works out to at
five years per barrel. That means we have a global labor force of 500 billion human equivalents
relative to five billion real human workers, excluding children and old people. So we have
like a hundred to one armies of fossil workers standing behind us and the economic system only
treats their value as the cost of extracting them from the earth. And so economics textbooks have
completely missed this. And economists aren't dumb. They just told the wrong story as we were going
up. This moonshot of growth that we've had this last century, they have all kinds of complicated
formulas that explain it. Most of the story is now capital and labor that we apply those two
factors to our economy. And then this resulting riches and progress and productivity when the
reality is a good deal of that can be described by this additional labor that is in the form of
fossil carbon and hydrocarbons, which is energy. So it's easy to see once we have oil that is running
industrial engines and the tractor replaces the plow and the automated or the industrial mill
replaces kind of human labor. We can see the labor there. But if we go back to the earliest
examples of what you're calling extra somatic or extra corporeal energy, there's the storage for
human consumption, which was the grain. But then there's also the usage of it for things other than
just human caloric consumption, but that are part of our life. And you can see that going all the
way back arguably to harvesting fire. You could kind of see that as the beginning of starting to
use energy, probably mostly in the form of wood, drive entropy to meet human needs in a way that
was totally different than the rest of the animal kingdom. And so if we to just kind of finish out
that early part of the story, before hunter-gatherer ended with kind of agrarian or before the
agrarian mark of being able to do agriculture or store grains, there was the stone weapons and
the fire going all the way back to pre-sapien, right, homo habilis kind of time, where the stone
weapons meant that we could hunt, we increased our predatory capacity relative to the animals faster
than they could evolve, increasing their capacity to evade it in a way that didn't happen for any
other animal, because they weren't evolving their tools, they were just evolving physically,
and there's a cemetery of that evolution. So we were able to move from, we were able to over hunt
an environment, and then rather than have our population get checked, move to the next place
and over hunt that one. So even in that long hunter-gatherer time and burn stuff up for the
usefulness of fire, to make cold environments hospitable to us and food that wouldn't have been,
so you can see we kind of started doing that with the beginning of like fire and stone tools,
then we did it way more with agriculture, then we did it way more with industrial,
and then way more again with kind of information, but they're all steps in that same story.
Absolutely, absolutely. We are an innovative, creative, curious, problem-solving, can-kicking
species, but the big two movements were the agricultural access of grain and storing it.
We had been a couple million individuals and down to 100,000 individuals many times
over the last several hundred thousand years, and then agriculture within a few millennium,
we were 200 million, and now we're sometime next year, we'll cross eight billion.
But if you think about- Now this is where the oil story becomes so big, which is where you're
going to emphasize is because before oil, we were half a billion people.
That's right.
And we were from half a billion to eight billion in like that much time because of the industrial
revolution. So 10,000 years ago, animals, mammals relative to humans were like 99% of
the biomass. Now humans in our livestock, if you weigh all of us, we're 98% of the mammalian
biomass on the planet. But if you look back now versus 10,000 years ago, the amount of total
animal biomass on the planet today is 700% what it was 10,000 years ago. How can that be?
Because we've added that enormous bolus of fossil productivity to the food supply.
So the agricultural revolution was when we used technology to use the Haber-Bosch process to
take natural gas and create ammonia fertilizer, which added nitrogen to the fields. 60% of the
nitrogen in our bodies today has a chemical signature coming from natural gas. So we've
massively boosted the food supply directly from fossil carbon and hydrocarbons.
So not only did we originally gain extra storable calories, hydrocarbonized with grain,
and then we started getting extra hydrocarbon in the form of oil, we used the oil ones to be able
to increase the manufacture of grain and other agricultural products by orders of magnitude.
Yes. And there's a common stat out there that's actually slightly incorrect.
But for most of our history, our agricultural system was a net energy producer. We would spend
a certain amount of calories with our muscles and our animals, and we would get more calories than
that back. But now our food system is a massive energy sink. We spend 10 to 14 calories for
every calorie that we produce. The misnomer is that 10 calories of fossil fuels are added
to get one calorie of food. The truth is it's like two calories of fossil, but then the 10 to 14
comes from the processing, the packaging, the delivering, the cooking. So our entire food system
uses 10 times the energy that it produces in full cycle. And this is due to oil and natural gas.
And we just look at the end product and don't think about the full system that created it.
So when you're mentioning that energy is pretty pegged to the economy, that the
total GDP of the world and total energy use are pretty closely correlated,
because lots of things that we make out of one material we could make out of another material.
There's a lot of different things for conductors and insulators and whatever,
but they all require energy. That's pretty fundamental. And that whether we're moving
that value in the economy is moving atoms around in the physical world or bits around
in the virtual world, both of those require energy. This seems to be also very fundamental to where
you're going in terms of the viability of the economy, that the embedded growth obligation
is in the economy, but that creates an embedded growth obligation and the extraction of energy.
And we're getting to diminishing returns on the earth's stored ability to keep giving that,
and that that's really fundamental to what the near-term future portends. Can you impact that
a little bit? Yes, lots of things to say there. So no matter how you make a cup,
whether it's a coconut or gold or ceramic or glass or aluminum, you need energy, no matter what.
So you can get better and you can get more efficient over time, but energy is required
for any process. So before 1970, the relationship was almost one for one. Every time we grew our
GDP, we grew our energy use at around the same percent. Then we started to get efficient in the
1970s. And for instance, we were a lot of places were using oil and power plants, and burning
natural gas is much more efficient. We started to use coal in a smarter way. We started to
do new inventions that would use a little bit less energy to get the same product.
So in the last 50 years, there's two trends. There's GDP has been growing,
and energy use grows almost the same rate, but at around 99%. So on average, we get 1%
more efficient, and that matters. After 50 years, you're using 50% less energy than you were 50 years
ago. But no matter what, next year, if you have a factory where you make 100,000 cars and you decide
to expand your business and you want to make 200,000 cars, you're going to use almost twice as much
energy. So de facto, they're incredibly linked. But here's where there's a couple of misunderstandings.
Some countries have decoupled their economic output from their energy use. There's something
called the energy intensity of GDP, which is how much energy we need to generate a dollar of GDP.
The United States, the United Kingdom are service-based economies. So we actually have gotten
much more efficient generating GDP by using less energy. But the important thing from the
superorganism vantage point, which is our future sustainability, our ecosphere, our climate, our
oceans, is what the whole human system does. And the whole human system is extremely tightly
tethered, over 99%, because the United States and the United Kingdom, in America, the average
American consumes 57 barrels of oil worth of fossil fuels per year. But we import another 17 or so
from China. We don't import the oil from China. We import the televisions and the plastic,
salad bowls, and things like that. The energy was burned in China. We pay dollars for it,
and it comes here. So it's part of our consumptive footprint. But the bottom line is that,
globally, energy and GDP are tightly linked. One other caveat I would say there, the last
five to eight years, it seems to be globally a little bit more decoupling. And this is an artifact
of this massive blowoff in the financial markets due to central banks because of the way that pension
funds are treated in the GDP calculations. And when stock markets recalibrate, that relationship
will tighten back up around the 99-plus percent. Okay. So that second point equals,
I would just call it financial manipulation, where you can make more dollars that are not
actually indexing more goods and services, and that'll end up re-correcting. But in so far as
the dollars are indexing goods and services, you're going to get a pretty tight correlation.
I want to come back to, and it's important because sometimes people will see a financial
manipulation and treat it as if they're decoupling and then change our forecasts of
energy viability. And you're like, no, not really. You're kind of missing the point here. So I think
that's really important. I want to underscore it. But I want to come back to the nation's one for a
moment because what you're saying is, okay, so this kind of wealthy nation that doesn't do its own
manufacturing and production and waste management and largely exports kind of tech services can
make it seem like it has higher GDP relative to its own domestic energy use, but it's bullshit
because it's just exporting all of its really high energy intensive stuff to the manufacturing
that's happening somewhere else it then imports the product of. And I find this for so many things.
You can take a country that has a good genie coefficient, but it's just because it exported
all the cheap labor to somewhere else that it depends upon to get its stuff. So you're like,
you don't really have a good genie coefficient. Your economic inequality that's needed to make
your civilization run is still very high because you just buy your shit from cheap labor from
somewhere else. Yeah, well, this gets to your whole objective of your work is sense making and
information because on all these issues you can draw your boundaries somewhere and come up with
an answer and what humanity needs is wide boundary thinking. We need to look at the larger boundaries
because then we know what doors are shut and which ones remain open. So yeah, we need to look at the
wider boundary. This is why I think your super organism perspective is really important because
of course you can have what looks like a local improvement in one area that actually is and
now it's cool. We should understand that as a prototype, but oftentimes it's not really a
local improvement. It's just externalizing the harm somewhere else and then measuring inside of
a boundary, something that crossed the boundary. And so this is where we have to say, okay, for
the super organism as a whole, the countries that have to do the agriculture and the manufacturing
and the cheap labor and the whatever. Now let's look at the metrics and say for a civilization
that depends upon the whole thing because the countries don't depend on themselves. They depend
on six continent global supply chains and they depend on the commons of the oceans and all like
that. So we really have to look at the super organism writ large to really make any sense of
it that doesn't involve externality. So if people haven't read your paper on super organism issue,
I think it's fundamental. But I want to come back to this other thing that you were saying about
increases in efficiency, that energy does get slightly more efficient. Can you explain the
Jevons paradox to people for people who aren't familiar with it? Because it seems like a lot
of people have hope that we're going to solve the energy issue by increases in efficiency.
So William Stanley Jevons was a 19th century economist who paradoxically predicted that the
massive beneficial invention of the steam engine which made things way more efficient than horses
or what came before paradoxically would end up having humans use a lot more energy
even though it was more efficient. That's because more people could afford things,
things would be done faster, they would build more of these steam engines and that is of course
what happened. So today, let me first sidetrack and talk about the two types of technology.
So first of all, technology is deflationary because the market system and innovation and people are
incentivized to make better inventions. So over time, things that are tech heavy like flat screen
TVs will get cheaper and cheaper until the asymptotically you just can't get them any cheaper.
But so tech is deflationary. The counter to that is depletion, which is that we've accessed the best
fossil hydrocarbons that are the main input to our economies and then we have to access the next
harder tranche, etc. Eventually, there's nothing left but we're not there yet. So these two forces
between technological deflation and resource input inflation are battling. So when we think about
technology, there's really two categories of technology. The first category is ways to make
our energy use, our energy capture more efficient. For example, we could develop new
solar voltaic cells that are more efficient or we could take a power plant and the amount of
energy that we input, we get more electricity out of that. The second type of technology
is inventing new ways or ways that humans use energy that we used to do manually and now we
have machines do it. Or new ways like Facebook that we never had before and now it's a new vector
for energy use. So it's that second category of technology that dominates our global technology
portfolio, which ends up building more and more things that are a vector for more energy use next
year. Now, Jevin's Paradox means that if something gets more efficient, the people will buy more of
it or the savings that they have from saving money on that thing will be spent at Walmart on
some things that they bought from China. So what ends up happening is efficiency is in service of
the super organism to a large extent. So efficiency as long as we have GDP as our cultural goal,
where the market system and individual and corporations and businesses optimize profits
via GDP, efficiency will just feed more money into that system in a positive feedback loop
and we'll use more energy in the future. Did that make sense?
Yeah, I want to go a little bit deeper here because I think people really having an intuition
for this paradox is so important. The idea that there's stuff that we do that mediates our current
quality of life and we can make it more efficient, like it seems like that is a way to be able to
have less impact on the planet. We can do shit more efficiently so we can use less stuff and still
have the same quality of life, except that's never what happens. That would be true if the scale was
capped. Right. And so the Jevin's Paradox says you were kind of mentioning from the demand side,
people buy more shit at Walmart, but also from the supply side, there are certain
products and services that are just not profitable to make yet. But if I drop the price of energy
enough as one of the inputs, whole new market sectors open up. There's whole new businesses and
industries that can now be profitable. And so what you're calling the fourth law of thermodynamics,
it's almost like an evolutionary theory. The idea that any niche that exists will get filled.
If there is some energy to extract in a place, something will evolve to extract that energy.
And we're saying now faster than biology can evolve to do it, humans will innovate to do it.
We will innovate how to extract the extra energy in a place. And so anytime you get an increase
in efficiency, you get whole new profitability potentials that weren't there. And we end up
going into those. So the idea that efficiency is a way of being able to become sustainable
doesn't work as long as there is either an embedded growth obligation or an incentive around
net growth. Exactly. Now there potentially could be ways around that if you had a
Jeven's paradox dividend or something like that where you had an invention and you created all
this efficiency gains which were monetized. But you had a rule that that bolus of new capital that
came from efficiency was devoted to some process or some future outside of the super organism,
like building a local ecological watershed with renewable energy or something that was full cycle.
Then you could short circuit the efficiency, the rebound effect of the efficiency profits going
into the global monetary energy hungry super organism. So the thing that you're saying right
now is so fucking consequential if people get it because you're saying we have to go to a post-growth
economic system that as long as the economy and dollars are coupled at all, whether it's one for
one or 99% or 80%, even if there's efficiency, if they're coupled at all in exponential growth
capital system, there just aren't an exponentially more amount of hydrocarbons.
And we're already at the point of diminishing return on the quality of hydrocarbons. Racking is
shittier oil than the first oil was. It's harder to get to. After fracking, there's nothing. That's
the source rock. There's nothing left after that. But go on. So we're at this place where there's
this pegging between GDP and energy. We're getting a diminishing return on our energy source
and there's an exponential requirement on capital simply because of interest. We have to have
more capital next year than we have the capital this year for the nature of how we set up the
financial system. So then there starts to become this larger delta of need to keep having more
capital, which means need to keep having more energy, have less and less easy to access energy.
So I have to technologically innovate offshore oil drilling and fracking and things, but eventually
you kind of run out of that. And then there's a great reckoning. So this is what you call it.
There's not yet a great reckoning because the intermediate step is you paper over that with
central bank guarantees and bailouts and things like that. But yes, eventually there's a great
reckoning, which I'm referring to as a great simplification. And yes, eventually by definition
we will have to have a post-growth economy. If just increased efficiency isn't the answer because
of the Jevons paradox, what about just move to renewables? Why is that not good enough? We
replace all the hydrocarbons with solar and wind in geothermal. That's a whole two-hour podcast
on its own, but let me give you some of the high points. You often use this phraseology,
the difference between potential and kinetic energy. Potential energy is unbelievably powerful
because it's sitting there untapped and you can move it, especially oil. Oil is akin to hemoglobin
in our arteries and veins of our global system because it's liquid at room temperature and we
can move oil everywhere, which is much different than wood or coal or human muscle for that matter
at that scale. Meaning oil can go up your pipelines a lot faster than coal can go over railroads.
Exactly. And its oil is incredibly energy dense, which is the amount of energy you get per unit
volume or unit mass. Renewables are like you have to go to the grocery store and buy a bunch of
ingredients to create a meal, whereas the fossil hydrocarbons, the meal is already created.
So that's a little bit of the difference between kinetic and potential. The energy return
is huge from the scale of the industrial infrastructure that's been built. If you think
about it, we have 500 billion human worker equivalents in the form of fossil hydrocarbons,
and so we can't just say those are going to go away and then replace it with renewables.
First of all, we need those fossil hydrocarbons to build the renewables. And renewables is not
even a good term because an oak tree is renewable. If there's an acorn, one of my chickens is renewable
as long as the rooster has a fertilized egg with the hen. But renewables require rebar steel and
complicated clean rooms to make the silicone wafers and things like that. At best, they're
rebuildable because every 20 years or so, we need to rebuild them. What they do is they are
rebuildable machines that can harness the renewable flows of the sun and the wind.
But from the superorganism vantage point, we are optimizing growth and growth requires more energy,
whether it's fossil hydrocarbons or renewables or some combination. So in 2019, we grew the amount
of electricity demand in the world of all kinds. Just the amount of growth and electricity demand
was more than all of the solar voltaic power generation capacity built since the dawn of time.
So far, all the renewables are growing very rapidly, especially in the last year.
But the amount of fossil fuels underpinning our society is around the same as it's been 50 years
ago, which is 83%. So we're just growing a bigger system. We switch from wood to coal and eventually
oil and gas 150 years ago. Even now today, we are now using more wood for human fuel,
etc., than we were 150 years ago. So we keep adding more energy to the system. So renewables,
I am in favor of renewables, but the current stories that are being told are that we're
going to continue to grow by plug and playing renewable technology for fossil fuels. That's
not going to happen. So I think renewables can power a great civilization. It's just going to
look very different than the one we have now. My understanding is that there's three primary
reasons that the current renewable tech path is insufficient. One is this topic of the hydrocarbon
energy it takes to make the solar cell in the batteries, the energy return on energy investment.
Calculus is not good, and I want you to get into that. The next is that the energy quality is not
comparable, whether we're talking energy density or transportability. And the third is that there's
stuff we do with hydrocarbons that isn't just energy that is hard to replace in terms of chemistry
and manufacturing. So when we start thinking about getting off of oil and coal, we have to think about
each of those factors. And if there are more, please let me know. Those seem like the primary
ones. And so it's like if we have diminishing return on hydrocarbons and we need them for
manufacturing ongoingly, then we have to get off of oil even before we run out of it for energy.
So if we were going to try to replace our current energy, including the exponential
growth of the energy with renewables or rebuildables, we just don't have what it takes to do that yet,
because since they're not easily transportable, we'd have to build them everywhere. What it
takes to do that requires more hydrocarbons now to build all of that.
Okay. So just like a cheetah chasing a gazelle, there's an energy payoff there.
All of our current energy technologies have an energy input versus an energy output. And
historically, we would get 100 to one ratio from oil. We would invest one barrel of oil to find
100 sort of things. That went down to- It's not obvious for anyone who's not used to thinking
about industrial capacity. To drill oil requires running a machine that runs on oil. So you've
got to use some oil to get the oil. And now what we're talking about is using some oil to make
the solar cells, which means mining the material and manufacturing and building the batteries and
all that stuff. Right. And there is no way right now of using purely electricity to go deep into
mines. It's diesel fuel and machines. So yeah, there's so much to unpack here, Daniel.
So first of all, the energy return on renewables is viable. It's a decent energy return. Let's
take some of the recent optimistic reports that say that solar and wind are 12 to one return.
And let's take the depleting coal is an eight to one return. So there's a lot of-
An expensive difference of what those numbers mean.
Well, that means that if you take the life of a solar panel and you use life cycle analysis
that people say, and this gets back to that boundary question, where do you draw the boundaries?
This is what I wrote my PhD thesis on back in the day, but that you will generate 10 times
more energy during the lifetime of a solar photovoltaic layout than the energy that went into it.
So that's a pretty good deal. Not as good as oil, but pretty good. Now, coal is bulky and dirty,
but you just throw it in a power plant and you burn it and it generates electricity.
So the story that is the optimistic renewable story is that on the surface, renewables have a
higher EROI than energy return, than for example coal. But what they're not taking into account
is the full system cost of the energy, because the wind doesn't always blow, as is evidenced
the last six months in Germany, which is one of the reasons that electricity prices are so high,
because their wind basically didn't blow for a month. So if you handicap for
intermittence and variability, the full system EROI or energy return on those renewable systems
is down to like four to one. And our economic system couldn't function at a four to one return.
Now, this is a really deep conversation, but we could overbuild wind and solar and use the extra
when it's really windy or really sunny. We generate way too much that we don't need,
and we put that into electrolysis and create ammonia or use that for other economic products.
So we could boost it back up to five to one or maybe six to one, but full system cost,
fossil fuels are completed meals, and we can't replace that with renewables.
Just to make sure that's clear for everyone, one way of thinking about that is that because of
the intermittence, you don't have that with oil or coal because you have the oil stored on site,
and you can just burn more of it for the coal stored on site, you can burn more as demand
goes up in real time. And so it is a storage mechanism, it's its own battery, right? It's
already stored energy. Well, it gets back to the has to also have the batteries. And so now we're
looking at the cost of the photovoltaic cell, the batteries, you know, in that whole storage
creation and distribution system. So natural gas is the perfect fuel for power plants because
no matter what happens, you just flick a switch and you burn it. And whether it's windy or sunny
or in the middle of the night or the middle of the day, whereas these other fuels have bells and
whistles that are required. And if you want to make sure that the grid is on, natural gas is
like the perfect fuel for that. Of course, there are emissions that come from it. And that's one
of the other stories embedded here. But let me tell you another big problem with renewables
is that around 20% of our energy used globally is electricity. And the vast majority of renewable
technology is used to generate electricity. There are tons of ways that humans use energy
that can't easily be easily be replaced by renewables generating electricity. For example,
the big bunker fuel ships that carry things around the ocean, you know, liquid fuels, heating,
things like that. Some of those things can be replaced, but at a cost. And remember, the whole
dynamic underpinning industrialization was this giant trade that we did, kind of a
Faustian bargain in retrospect, where we replaced things that humans used to do by adding thousands
of units of energy more than the humans did. And because it was nearly free, that was horribly
energy inefficient because we used tons more energy, but it was incredibly economically
efficient. So when we started that trade 200 years ago by adding huge amounts of energy to processes
that humans used to do manually, that raised our wages, it raised our profits, it reduced the price
of stuff, and it ended up being growing with more people. So from the year 1500 to now, if you
take the number of people and multiply that by the average goods and services per person,
the human economy is a thousand times bigger than it was 500 years ago.
Because of this adding energy to technology to grow the system. Now, you might, you have all
people, probably you the only people that would say this, is it is true back in the day, there were
things that we enjoyed in our lives a few hundred years ago that weren't counted by goods and services
in the economic system. So is it really a thousand times bigger? Yeah, there could be some wiggle
room there that we bartered and things like that that were not included in the economic system.
But by and large, it's three orders of magnitude, the scale difference.
So you're starting to mention that there are emissions associated with the natural gas that
would otherwise be perfect if there was an unlimited amount of it. So probably the
central environmental story of the world today is climate change. And climate change from
anthropogenic greenhouse gases, which is not only CO2, it's methane and some other things,
but mostly it's a CO2 story. So that's the other side of the energy story that you're talking about
is the CO2 comes from burning those hydrocarbons. And so the excessive CO2 equals changes in
planetary biosphere. And so everybody's very focused on the need to reduce carbon consumption
because of not wanting all the CO2. You're talking about this whole other side, which is we're
actually running out of the hydrocarbon stores. Also, of course, there's massive environmental
impact on the front side of the materials economy, whether we're talking about mountaintop removal,
mining to get the coal, or we're talking about oil spells associated with getting the oil,
or we're talking about wars over oil in a whole like geopolitically tense system based over
where the oil distribution is. That hydrocarbon system has environmental harm on the extraction,
plus environmental harm on the waste that's associated. But neither of those are factored
into the cost of the oil, which is your point. That when we're paying for the barrel of oil,
we're paying whatever it costs, some oil company, what does it cost them to get it out of the ground
plus whatever margin they put on top of it, which does not include what it would take to make more
hydrocarbons or to deal with the environmental impact, or certainly to deal with the wars in
geopolitical destabilization as a result of the location of it. So this topic of why the
cost of extraction is core to what's wrong with economic theory. Can you unpack that a little
bit more? Yeah. So we have underpaid for the main resource input to our economies for over a century,
and we've not paid for the cost of the pollution at all. So the prices of everything are wrong,
but they're not wrong from a sense of maximum power that we're trying to
get the evolutionary emotional states of our ancestors in the cheapest way possible to the
most amount of people. That's what our economic system is doing right now. The problem is, and
you know this very well, is a lot of our, you call it our attention seconds, or how we get dopamine
in these other things is mostly by frivolous means that don't give us long-term meaning or whatever.
So we're de facto turning billions of barrels of ancient sunlight into micro-leaders of dopamine
and calling that an economic success. But there's basically two broad categories of
environmental impact. One is, as you point out, the metabolism downstream of human energy use.
My friend Tim Garrett has a chart showing GDPs since the 1940s and CO2 and monoloa,
and they are like one-for-one tracked. So you can look at the CO2 in the atmosphere,
and without knowing anything about the size of our economy, you can interpolate the size of our
economy from that. So we are functioning as a heat engine, and the oceans and the atmosphere
are absorbing this excess CO2. The other big environmental category is what we do with the
energy, and that would be mountaintop removal or killing elephants for ivory or overfishing the
oceans or those two things. Neither of those categories do we pay for in the prices of things.
Part of that is a metabolic equation, and part of it is a value equation of what humans care
about and what we want to include. But our prices do not include the negative externalities.
If you were to include Daniel, the negative externalities, full wide boundary of our energy
use, there would not be a single industry on the planet earth that would be profitable.
Because for instance, there was a paper written that shows the full cost of coal if you include
climate and other things, and it was like 18 to 20 cents a kilowatt hour when we actually only pay
4 cents. So if you were to include all the negative externalities in our prices,
our economic system would be much smaller. And I think one way out of this, I personally
have decided we are not going to voluntarily degrow. It will never happen. There's too much
momentum in the system. There's too much inertia to political, geopolitical. I mean, look at what's
happened with COVID and the pandemic. We have to print money and bail people out to keep the
economy going. We're not going to voluntarily shrink. But I think we will eventually shrink
when we run out of the ability to paper over these biophysical phenomenon with debt and
central bank guarantees and too big to fail and artificially low interest rates and things like
that. And so this gets to your original premise. I think we have to anticipate what might happen
and try to have our system bend and not break. Because break gets into many of the categories
of the ex-risk that you're so fluent in. Bend means it gives humans another pathway forward
towards a saner, longer lasting, more meaningful culture. And one of the ways we could do that
is get the prices right on the main input to our economies. If we were able to
not only carbon, but all non-renewable inputs have attacks on anything that's non-renewable
on human timescale. So that would be natural gas or copper or fossil water aquifers or sand
or anything like that. And then simultaneous remove tax on humans. 95% of our taxes right now
are on human labor. So if we removed all those, you make $50,000 a year, you keep your $50,000,
you don't have to pay any taxes. But if you bought an iPhone, which has all kinds of
complicated, expensive machinery metals and minerals in there, it might cost two or $3,000
relative to just $500 today. So if we had the prices right, we would be better able to innovate
in a way that is aligned with our future. And we would probably conserve. We wouldn't just
fly to the Bahamas on a junket or Vegas or just buy shit from Amazon every day to give us a little
bit more dopamine. So I do think changing the prices is one avenue. But there's one area that
I think we skipped over that I think is important, is the material side. So I talked about the
linkage between energy and growth. There's also a linkage between material or atoms and growth.
So for the last 50 years, that relationship has almost been entirely one for one.
So every dollar of GDP requires about two pounds of non-renewable materials. So an American baby
born today will be expected to use 3.1 million pounds of non-renewable materials in his or her
lifetime, extrapolating the past forward. So this energy, it's not just energy, it's energy
combined with materials to develop technology. So even if we had abundant energy, there would be
material limits on earth with many of the, especially look at what's going on right now
with lithium and some of the inputs to electric cars. And by the way, I will tell our listeners
right now that because of your busy schedule, it is 9.05 pm right now when we're recording this.
So I might be getting a little slap happy with my comments. But here's another problem with
renewals Daniel. Every barrel of oil and natural gas is not just used for gasoline. Gasoline is
only 40% of a barrel of oil. The rest of it is heating oil and diesel and fractions that get
converted into naphtha and asphalt and tar and 6,000 other products like aspirin and football
helmets and plastics and fertilizers and condoms and tents. And it's unbelievable how many products
are made from these fossil hydrocarbons. So if we were just conceptually able to replace all the
internal combustion cars on the planet with electric cars in order to save climate change,
it wouldn't reduce our demand for oil at all. It would reduce our demand for gasoline. But we
would still have all the other products, the 60% of the barrel of oil that we would have an economic
system and requirement for. So what would we do with the gasoline then? Flare it or dump it in a
river? Yes, we could at some cost change the refineries to use some of that and divert it
towards those other products, but not all of it. So that's also something that gets glossed over in
this massive shift towards electric cars. So you mentioned mining a couple times and that getting
electricity down to do the mining is pretty difficult. So that's done in stored forms of
energy like diesel and whatever. And that you were mentioning that there's a correlation of
energy in dollars, but also a correlation of material in dollars.
From the point of view of waste, I think when most people who haven't studied the topic well
think about waste, they think about what they put in trash at their house, the municipal solid waste,
and they don't think about the total waste coming out of industry and just even mining, right? Like
just the toxic tailings coming out of the fact that the nice metals and all the things that we
use were a part of a rock and ore, where most of that was useless, but actually pretty toxic.
By the time you smelt it, you get tens or hundreds of parts of useless toxic mining tailings for each
part of the thing that is useful. And those just go in these massive, not landfills, but dumps that
then every once in a while break and go into rivers and oceans and mess things up at scale.
When people start to understand the waste management issue writ large of which CO2 going
into the air and ocean is one tiny little thing, which is all of climate change, and is literally
a tiny little thing. And microplastics going into the ocean is a tiny little thing. When people
start to think about that our materials economy is depleting unrenewably from the earth on one side
and turning it into waste on the other side, and that all the planetary boundaries, the result of
that, and the whole thing is using energy unrenewably, right? So we're using atoms unrenewably,
moving them by energy unrenewably. We have to move to a closed loop economic system where the
new stuff is made out of the old stuff. We don't require an exponential amount more stuff and all
of it is on renewable or rebuildable energy. The transition from here to there is fundamental
and it requires a totally new economic system because it can't be based on the same type of
embedded growth obligation. And there's the huge question of what does that new system look like
and then also how do we get there from here with the embedded growth obligations and the
competitions in the system? Because if we try to create a tax nationally and some other country
doesn't, they benefit relative to us in terms of their extraction capability, which will end up
meaning geopolitical and military capability, which means everyone says fuck it and it's just a race
to the bottom. So when you, I mean, first I just wanted to say, because you're a teacher, you probably
have already done this. Almost nobody has a sense of like the computer that I'm talking on right now,
what it took from a supply chain perspective to make this fucking thing. Like what I think every
high school class should be, every high school should have a class. It is what does it take to
make one of these cell phones from the oil to make the plastics to the materials refinement and the
lithography to make the chimps? No single human being knows how to make it. It's a collection
of processes and components. It's pretty much, could you imagine a thousand years ago you just
showing up with one of these things? They would have thought it was magic. Absolutely.
Taiwan has come into the center of public news recently and TSMC because of the
South China Sea's issue. But the fact that we are so dependent on Taiwan because making
computerships is so goddamn hard, the U.S. has not been able to do it, to be able to like reduce
its dependence on Taiwan yet. You get a sense of like the manufacturing that we take for granted
is mind-bogglingly complex and it really is like six continents worth of supply chains to
make anything. That's why I am an advocate for continuing open-ended globalization for
luxury things and things like that, but for very key ingredients and key things like food and shoes
and pharmaceutical inputs, how long can we have these six continent supply chains? Can we have
more regional local supply chains for some things? The market is giving us the signal
because of the financial response to the pandemic that globalization and profits and everything
will continue forward, but I do think that's a big risk. Getting back to your point, your question,
I have a couple of asterisks there. First of all, right now, yes, on the global level, we recycle
around 9% of the material input and that's actually gotten worse rather than better.
And ultimately, yes, we have to have a closed or more closed loop system, but how could that evolve?
Because I think a system away from economic growth and like you say, there's no way that in a system
right now that requires debt and central bank support and rule changes and deficit spending by
governments, they're not going to add a big tax on non-renewable inputs right now because that
would hurt the system. So I think we have to anticipate and this is what I'm working with
our colleague, Dick Gephardt on, the concept of advanced policy, which is interventions and plans
and blueprints that our society are going to need in the next decade, but that are politically or
socially impossible to happen now to do the research and build constituency into them. And
one of them is this untax project and we're doing research with Imperial College in London on looking
how this would actually manifest and it's really complicated. One of the long shots, but one of
the trajectories and destinations we should go for is, let's pay the right prices for the long
term to spur innovation in the right direction of the real futures we're facing and we're just
underpaying for all these things, which said differently is we're over-consuming based on the
long-term viability of this stuff, which is a one-time endowment that we're burning through 10
million times faster than it was sequestered. That is not a happy thing to say that as a culture
we're going to have to consume less and we're going to have to have some sort of redistribution
that accompanies that because attacks naturally would be regressive. Everyone is familiar with
what it means for the government to subsidize a corporation that's not profitable because it's
critical. What you're basically saying is the market as a whole is being subsidized by nature
on a savings account that's about to run out and the entire market for the most part is mostly
not profitable in a way that would be sustainable because of the total amount of costs that are
being externalized. As soon as we run out of the stored free cheap stuff and stop being able to
handle the consequences of the pollution, the cost of everything goes up so much that it forces a
restructure of the market and what we think is profitable and possible by multiples to orders
of magnitude what it currently is and that's the break scenario. The break scenario is that
the bend scenario is that we have a smaller economy and we change our cultural objectives
away from GDP towards well-being and social capital and community and other things rather than gadgets.
The break scenario is that this all happens without planning, without blueprints and airbags
and the global supply chains and or the geopolitical kinetic warfare is the response to these sorts of
crises. Well, it seems like bend is us trying to proactively avoid the break of fundamentally not
being able to have energy keep up with dollars and if energy can't keep up with dollars and we
keep making fake dollars at a certain point, the dollars will start to inflate so much and lose
buying power that faith in them will be lost and whether it's speculation against them or around
the banks or a downgrade of the bonds, when you start losing the dollars purchasing power,
then that can break a bunch of different ways. It can look like shutdown of supply chains,
it can look like wars over resources but they're all pretty ugly. Right, so we are growing our
monetary claims like this and the underlying energy and materials that we're going to need to
turn those claims into real wealth is going like this. So the delta between those two is widening
by the year and the game is the plan, the way to keep the system going, we're kicking the can
and we're not planning for five or ten years from now when that recouples.
So how do you see being able to realistically do a proactive bend model factoring what it would
take to come to global agreement between the major players to do so because there is a disadvantage
in the near term of anyone who bends relative to anyone who doesn't and so unless you can get
all the major players to do it, nobody's going to do it. This is why I'm talking to you, Daniel
and others. This is a really fricking serious moment for our civilization, for our nation,
for our culture. I know the problems and the constraints very well. I'm not as fluent in
the answers. I think the answers are a combination of top down that we have to have plans in place
for this sort of economic trajectory and bottom up that people have to start waking up,
realizing the time we're alive, how much energy we use, what really matters in life.
If you ask a bunch of your friends what are the five best experiences of their life,
it's unlikely to be huge exosomatic energy use. It's going to be something with their family
or in nature or their friends. We have to re-tether how we measure success in our lives
as individuals by more social capital and less tech-heavy stuff to be pilots of what's possible.
I don't think that's going to happen culture-wide, but it could happen with a good number of people
that act as a scout team towards a different way of humans using less energy. I think these things,
because of human behavior, that we are not good as a culture at deferring the second marshmallow.
I think we will largely sleepwalk into these moments, which is why working with you and others,
I want to educate and inspire individual humans to maybe simplify first and beat the rush and
act as examples in their community, in their family, in their neighborhood to start living
differently in a way that we're going to probably have to live regardless of what we choose in the
near future. As we go back to what you referenced in the very beginning of the model that a
civilization can be thought of in terms of its infrastructure, its social structures,
and its superstructure, the superstructure being how it defines what the good life is,
what is fundamentally desirable, what the coordinating values of it are.
Culture is a way of talking about that. You're saying right now, hey, we actually have to change
and deepen culture as the basis of what we're orienting the whole society to.
I would like, obviously you and I have talked about a number of these things, and then as we're
talking about the game theory between nations, where none of them want to do the thing that is
good long-term, that disadvantages them in the short term if everyone doesn't, because then
they lose to whoever wins in the short term. You get these just fucked up collective action
problems, these kind of race to the bottom scenarios. How do we solve those? It's so complex,
mostly people find one part that makes sense, give up on the rest, hope that the market of
place of ideas will solve it, meaning that other people solve other parts, they focus on their
part, but then how all the parts fit together, how the whole works, nobody's really paying attention
to. There are people who are just like, I'm just going to focus on making renewables better and
hope that they get there in time. Other people that are like, I'm just going to focus on turning
some waste streams into new materials, or I'm just going to focus on some aspect of culture.
I think one of the places that you and I identified shared agreement is that there is
critical stuff in our techno sphere, in our infrastructure, critical stuff in our social
structures, our economics governance law, and in our superstructure, our culture and our values
that all need to evolve together and that they all inter-influence each other. Each of those
can inter-influence each other. It's not a solution, it's a whole ecosystem of solutions that we have
to work on, but they all have to be informed by understanding the problems in the interconnection
of the whole well enough that you don't advantage one part while externalizing the cost to the other
areas. So I think we got to do, and I appreciate you being available late at night your time,
I think we got to do the beginning first part of this thing that is, I found meaningful in your
work and was valuable for me to make more central of the embedded growth obligation in finance being
coupled to diminishing returns in energy that are not easily overcomeable through the current
renewable technologies and process or the efficiencies in process and that being a major
fucking thing that we have to deal with and that being connected to so many of the other things.
I think we did a good job of starting that and maybe starting to get to what some of the transition
looks like, some of the cultural parts, some of the advanced policy parts can be our next conversation.
That sounds good. Let me queue up the next conversation because I know you well enough as
someone who deeply understands the human predicament and you also have what I refer to as wide
boundary empathy, but you're also incredibly productive, you're a good friend, you do things
for people even if it means more of your time and you just seem really balanced to me. So
one question, how do you manage to hold all this existential risk and the depth of the
implications of the conversation we just had in your head and still manage to defer the marshmallow
and stay sane, focused, present, and be a good human being to the people in your life?
Because I think whatever you do, that's a formula that a lot more people are hopefully going to be
able to find. Do you have a couple minute summary of that? And then we'll expand on that next call.
I read some of the books and watched so many of Krishnamurti's lectures as a kid.
And one of the things you would see him almost getting frustrated with when he'd be talking
to the audience so many times is like, let's really take this seriously. He was looking at
how do we live without conflict and what is the fundamental basis of conflict and can we overcome
it, especially as we're becoming a nuclear and then exponential tech empowered species where
the conflict gets more and more consequential? And why he's asking that, how can we take the
seriousness? Because he knows that people are sitting there in the audience listening and then
they go home and they just completely fucking forget because they got a mortgage to pay and they
got children to tend to and they got Joneses to compete with and they got whatever. And it's like,
wait, wait, are we actually taking seriously the fucking topics we're talking about? Because if we do,
we have to change our life to say it's like, it's like the Death Star is about to take the
planet out and you're on the planet and you realize the Death Star is going to take the planet out
and you're like, we're going to build a community garden and we're going to work on making a better
school after school program with the PT and he's like, wait, wait, like that's all cool stuff.
But the Death Star is about to take the planet out, like join the Rebel Alliance. We've got to
fucking do something about this. There's something to be able to take the scope, urgency, magnitude
of the thing seriously enough to be transformed by it. And then it's easy to just go into existential
angst and either want to kill yourself or just go into hedonism as a solution because hedonism
is actually a reasonable response to nihilism, right? We're all going to die, so fuck it, let's
have some fun. But to be like, that's just not an acceptable answer. Like I can die
failing, trying, but I can't not be applying myself to see if there is a way through.
And it does end up looking like threading a needle, right? That quote in the book of Roman,
something about the path to heaven is steep and narrow and the path to hell is wide and many.
So I was just exposed, might have been similar for you. I was exposed to these things young enough
that all the other ways of living that don't ensure that living gets to keep happening for
everybody just could just seem nonsensical. They couldn't even compute as a thing I could do.
No, I feel the same way. I feel now is a time on this planet that being alive and being aware of
these things, we can make a difference. And for me, the things that keep me going are conversations
like this. I have six or seven people like you in my network and it's like a shot of adrenaline,
of social adrenaline when I talk to you. That's what I want to try to scale is to make people
aware of how the big picture fits together. We use a hundred times more energy than we need.
In America, in Europe, it's 50 times more. I mean, this isn't a red line disaster. We have to
navigate a glide path that humanity and Earth's ecosystems make it through this. And for me,
is sharing this goal of an era with other humans is what makes me, allows me to cope
and be fired up to work on it the next day. I remember when I was a kid, there was this
famous saying in activism, I don't remember who it's attributed to originally, that if you aren't
outraged, you aren't paying attention. And it's true. Like if you go to a factory farm, or you go
to a sweatshop, or you go to an open pit mine or a landfill, like, fuck, you'd be pretty outraged.
And then it's like, how do you do your normal stuff in face of that? And then at the same time,
I would read Gibran or Hafez and the artist and the poet and the mystic would say,
if you aren't overwhelmed by the beauty of life, you aren't paying attention.
And I was like, how to hold both of those at the same time? Because it's only because life is
beautiful that I'm outraged that it's not being respected. But if I'm only outraged, I'm not
actually connected to what is deeper than the outrage, which is the love of life that that
other emotion is in relationship to. So then it's like, okay, if I'm outraged all the time,
I'm actually not honoring the thing itself. And yet the outrage serves a function. And so it's like,
how do I hold my connection to the beauty of life to just appreciate it right now? Because we might
all, we might all get taken out by a super volcano or an asteroid or a Carrington event tomorrow.
So how do we just like be with the beauty of it now in a way that's honoring and have that motivate
us working on how to ensure the highest quality of life for all life now and into perpetuity
simultaneously? Like that's part of the dialectic personally for me.
Perhaps because I'm a little bit older than you. I think you do that better than I do. I've been
outraged for over 20 years and the super organism has gotten stronger during that time.
But friends, dogs and nature are what keep me going. And let's try to change some hearts and
minds. Thank you for participating in this. Definitely to be continued, my friend. And I
hope to see you in California soon. I look forward to that. I'm so glad you started this podcast.
I think it's going to be fantastic and I'm glad we got to do this first talk.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
