Greetings. It is Sunday, July 28th. There's no way I would have predicted I was going to record a
frankly today because last night, Saturday night, I had 103 temperature. I thought I had COVID,
but tested negative. And I think what happened is I went for a three hour bike ride yesterday.
It was like in the early 80s, but really humid. Early 80s, low 80s. Early 80s was Duran Duran.
And I didn't drink anything. And I think I had like a miniature sunstroke. I'm feeling much better
now, but I toss and turned for 12 hours in bed. And of course, this podcast and running this NGO
aren't really a job anymore. They're my life. So I think about this stuff all the time. And
this popped into my head. So last week on the frankly on solutions, of course, these are all
riffs. I don't have scripts. And I often forget 10 to 30% of what I intend on saying. And I had two
circles of socially acceptable solutions and effective solutions. What I forgot to say was
that the effective solutions, the size of the circle declines over time because we're losing
the window to have interventions, preparation, governance, different technological responses to
what we face. And so the role of this podcast, the role of my work writ large is to expand
the Overton window of what is socially acceptable so that it increasingly overlaps with this shrinking
effective solutions. So with that in mind, I wanted to take a big step back
on the Overton window and talk about overshoot. And I've come up with seven
fundamental drivers of overshoot, which is the topic of today's frankly.
So what is overshoot? We don't hear about it that much, but it is when a species
grows and expands to beyond the carrying capacity of their environment. The carrying capacity is how
many of frogs or orangutans or reindeer, a certain ecosystem or a certain environment can sustain
based on the food supply and ecosystem services. Overshoot is when the population exceeds the
carrying capacity. And over time, that excess population and excess consumption of resources
actually degrades the carrying capacity. And then there is a reduction. And so the species gets back
into line on what's sustainable. Humans are in overshoot. We look at other animals and organisms
in ponds and on savannas and in forests and can label them as being an overshoot. But I think
there's no question that 8 billion humans living at one time, not over time, is unsustainable.
And I'd like to just give a brief recap of the seven fundamental drivers of overshoot. First of
all, as many of you will be aware, the carbon pulse where we have millions of years of stored
energy injected into an economic system versus 10,000 years ago, the amount of mammalian biomass,
which is humans, our livestock and all the wild mammals on earth is 700% what it used to be,
because we've injected this huge bolus of ancient productivity into our food supply.
The carbon pulse has exploded the overshoot and carrying capacity, not the carrying capacity,
the overshoot above carrying capacity. The second is our culture using monetary
alchemy to draw consumption forward in time. When we create money, it's a double entry into the
financial system. There's an asset and a liability, but our financial creation neglects the third and
the fourth book entries, which are the non-renewable energy and resources that it accelerates extraction
of and the ecosystem impacts of the biosphere and the environmental deterioration. The third
fundamental driver is the fact that we've outsourced our governance and our wisdom to the
financial market. This is the superorganism. The superorganism is based on power, which is energy
per unit time. Our entire society, our entire species with the exception of the cultures that
are still not part of the superorganism, which are very few, we continue to optimize for growth,
which is antagonistic to overshoot. I'm happy I'm recording this now because I make
flub ups. I can always say that I had 103 feet last night and you'll have to forgive me.
The other thing is that in our governance structures and our corporations, our leadership
structures, there's embedded self-reinforcing hierarchies because most institutions promote
the assertive, confident and optimistic employees, individuals, humans to senior roles within their
ranks. So there's embedded positive feedback of more of the same leading to more overshoot.
The fourth fundamental driver is a culture or species-wide lack of ecological education
and result in values. Yes, we are numerate, yes, we are literate, but very few of our species are
equalate or ecologically literate. The world's richest man this week said that earth can support
80 billion humans. He is very smart and I actually agree with some of his positions.
This is the most delusional statement I've ever heard. This would be a planet full of dead locusts
and smoking embers with 80 billion humans on it because of the environmental impact.
We wouldn't have a biosphere left. One of the drivers of overshoot is a lack of recognition
of overshoot. Another is the positive feedback of status and consumption and envy that our marketing
and what we view as socially acceptable and aspirational is more money, more stuff, more
conspicuous consumption. It's as if our culture puts this large, shiny, conspicuous carrot in
front of us and says this is your objective in life. This wasn't always the case. This is because
of this giant bolus of fossil sunlight. Another fundamental driver is the prevalent consumption
and technology have raised the baseline of our own dopamine superhighways and the neurotransmitter
cascades in our mind require us, at every decision tree, should I go on a campfire with my cousins
or should I play Candy Crush? Should I go to Vegas for a poker tournament or should I go canoeing
in the Northwoods? Should I have a salad or a hamburger? There's a zillion of these
micro choices and the more addicted we are, the more comfortable and convenient things are,
the more we choose the more overshoot laden choice, which uses more energy and resources.
This doesn't again, doesn't have to be that way. There could be maturity, wisdom, more right brain
thinking, but this also acts as a positive feedback.
Last but not least is overshoot creates the mother of all cognitive dissonances.
There's a lot of examples in the literature of cognitive dissonance. The one I use the most
is Jared Diamond in the book Collapse talked about people that lived downstream of a dam that
was about to burst and people that lived three miles downstream were just a little bit worried
about it. People that lived two miles downstream were quite worried about the implications of
that dam burst, but people living within a half mile of the dam bursting professed total
unconcern because for them to recognize that this dam would tear their houses down and go
downstream and upend everything of their lives was too painful for them to hold
both truths simultaneously, their own life and lifestyles, and the fact that this could be
disrupted. We have many examples of this cognitive dissonance in our lives. We have a tasty chicken
sandwich. At the same time, we actually like chickens. They're good animals. We have the
lights on in our room and we leave to go for an errand and we leave the lights on without
recognizing they're fired by a coal server somewhere, just burning electrons and emitting
some small amount of coal into the atmosphere. But writ large, we don't think about we are part
of a species in massive overshoot on this planet because the implications of what we have to do
in the future are very, very severe. That's another reason that this podcast, granted,
is getting more popular, but will never be really popular because most people don't want to hear
the gory details of the ecological, environmental, financial, geopolitical, social situation.
So I actually think cognitive dissonance is one of the seven fundamental drivers. Briefly,
since I don't want to leave on that note, what would be the seven antidotes to overshoot? Well,
obviously, one would be the peaking, declining, and eventual dissipation of the energy surplus.
Energy surplus is what enabled overshoot situation. And again, climate change isn't the
problem. Climate change is one of many problems downstream from overshoot. A lot of us in our
cultural narratives look at all that humans have achieved the last couple of hundred years in
technology and innovation and inventions. But we forget the fact that this is 85% powered by ancient
sunlight, which is finite. And we're treating it as if it were interest, but it's principle.
So reduction in the energy surplus would certainly mitigate the level of overshoot.
Another thing that would, of course, would be the planet itself reducing the carrying capacity.
And in the reduction of the carrying capacity, it would truncate the growth and overshoot and
cause a retracement. We're going to see this and we're seeing it already with higher standard
deviation of drought and floods, higher wet bulb temperature, heat stress, different implications
on crops. The biosphere will itself limit how far the overshoot of a certain species gets.
Another antidote potentially would be a desire by the species in overshoot itself to care about
and address overshoot. What I'm saying here is nothing new. Depending on the boundary,
we've been in overshoot for almost 400 years or 50 years, depending on where you draw the boundary.
Certainly what I'm saying in this video was true a year ago, five years ago, 10 years ago,
30 years ago. The only difference now is a lot more people are recognizing that this is happening
and therefore their brains are open and their hearts are open to learning about it. And it's
becoming undeniable in some senses. If such a culture were to care about these things,
what would some other antidotes be? One would be that we gradually change our cultural
conversations from a human-centered to an earth-centered world and all that that implies.
Another antidote would be instead of creating money with no reference to
ecosystem services or non-renewable energy and materials, we would create money with
some biophysical tether. It would have some relationship to productive capital, productive
capacity, and the ecosystem health. Additionally, we would have centropic technology. Instead of
technology that would just add to the overshoot, it would actually give us the human services,
basic needs that we want, but in synergy with ecosystems, with watersheds, with forests, with
soil, a more centropic earth-centered technology. And then lastly, and maybe firstly, it starts with
the micro-behavioral recognition and change at the level of the individual human where we
don't require this massive exosomatic consumption and huge amounts to live meaningful lives,
where you do find these decision trees of, do I want to go camping or on a roller coaster?
Do I want to eat this thing that's unhealthy but gives me great dopamine and comfort?
Or do I want to eat something more healthy and locally grown? I'm learning this and
experiencing it myself. I'm trying to have little Nate on my shoulder weigh in and observe on my
decisions and behaviors. And maybe if 1% or 3% or 6% of society starts living their choices
differently in a world of overshoot, in a world where we recognize that there are 10 million
other species that are living on this spinning orb in space and the only planet we know to harbor
life and complex life, then maybe things would change. So this is my brief, fever-induced
reflection on the seven drivers and maybe some antidotes to overshoot. Talk to you next week.
