Let's talk about the pornography thing.
Right.
Well, that was...
How did that go when you discussed it with Father Dave?
Well, you'll have to ask the people there.
I mean, I can only judge it from my perspective.
I thought it went terrific.
When I saw that clip of you on Exodus, I got the sense that you were a bit sidelined.
Or totally.
And if somebody who has a talk show, I wish that I could go back and rephrase things or
add some new ones to...
Well, that's correct.
That is exactly how I wrote a letter.
I hope you saw it.
It was the last thing I imagined being asked at an Exodus course with Jordan Peterson
and a bunch of scholars whom I adored, by the way.
Nevertheless, I should have...
I wish I had phrased it better.
It is what it is, and I phrased it better tonight without being untrue to myself.
And what I did not see, a big part of the problem, should I review this for your watchers,
listeners?
Review?
Review what happened so that they'll understand what we're talking about.
So I...
The Daily Wire asked me to join Jordan Peterson, or Jordan Peterson asked me to join, or both
of them ask, because he's doing the book of...
Did the book of Exodus?
They were, I believe, 16 sessions of 90 minutes each.
That's a lot, a lot of time, with no commercials.
How many days did you film this in?
Oh, eight days.
Eight days.
Yes, eight days each time in Miami.
And it was wonderful.
I loved it.
So what arose at one time, and I had even forgotten about this, it was five minutes out of, let's
see, what is 16 times an hour and a half, 24 hours.
So it was five minutes out of 24 hours.
And what happened was, I don't even remember how the issue arose, but I mentioned that
there is a Jewish-Christian difference with regard to Jesus' statement that a man who
lost after another woman has committed adultery with his heart.
That A, that phrase does not appear, obviously, in the Hebrew Bible, but B, that the general
Jewish view, and I say general because I can't speak for all Jews, even though I try to be
normative, is that you can only commit adultery with, and I said this in the video, and I
purposely said, I'm not trying at all to be cute in any way.
You can only commit adultery with one organ and it is not the heart.
Judaism is very behavior-based.
Christianity is more, it's not that it's not behavior-based, but it is equally, if
not more, thought, inner-self, heart-based.
So for example, there's a phrase in Hebrew that I learned very early in my Yeshiva education.
I'll say it in Hebrew so that people will know I didn't make it up.
Oh, ha'mah shavah ha'ikar el-ahma'ah said, is not the thought that counts, no, not that
counts.
That is the essence but the deed.
Judaism is very behavior-ist, and I am very behavior-ist.
So for example, and I mention this at Franciscan, I've said on the radio very often, I don't
care if you like Jews, I don't care if you dislike Jews.
I prefer you like Jews, but there are a lot of Jews I don't like, I mean, it's a little
silly to say I like a whole group, there's no whole group I like, there's no whole group
I dislike, but in any event, I don't care if you dislike Jews.
I care how you treat Jews.
And that is, it goes to the essence of what my belief is, I want to know how you act.
The left does this all the time, oh, you treat gays beautifully, like in my case, my wife
and I are godparents to a gay couple's children, but the fact that I'm against a same-sex marriage,
that makes me a hater.
So how I treat gays is irrelevant, it's what I think.
This bothers me that your thoughts can be regarded as a demerit.
But see, but your thoughts wouldn't be uncharitable towards people with same-sex attraction, you
would just think that the behavior is presumably sinful.
So they would be wrong in their thinking of you as a homophobe.
What bothers me the most is that we redefine marriage.
My Leviticus commentary comes out, that'll be the fifth of my five-volume commentary
on the Torah, I have already written 22,000 words on one verse, which of course I've never
done for any other verse, about a man shall not lie with a man as with a woman.
And so without even getting into that, the point I wanted to make was, for the left,
what I think renders me awful, not what I do.
So my treatment of gays is excellent, but the fact that I don't think marriage should
be redefined is enough to make me a hater, bigot, homophobe, and all the other terms
that they use.
Anyway, back to us.
Let me interject here.
So Aristotle in the Nicomachean Ethics has these four levels of the vicious to the virtuous
man.
The vicious man is the one who wants to do evil and does it, and he has the incontinent
man, the continent man, but he says the virtuous man is the one who wants to do the good and
does it.
And so to me, I have children.
If one of them held anti-Semitic views but treated you kindly, I would say, well, that's
better than holding anti-Semitic views and being bad toward you.
But I wouldn't.
I would think that's not where I would settle.
I would want him to...
That's fine.
That's fine.
I respect that.
And I also want to say that I think I agree with you that obviously adultery and lust
are different things.
If they weren't different things, we wouldn't have two separate words for them.
Right?
Yeah.
Which comes somewhat of a revelation to my Christian friends is there is no sin of the...
There are 613 laws in the Torah, none of them say do not lust.
You can't covet.
Covet is a very different concept than lust.
Covet means you want to take what belongs to another, and it is a very simple proof
that it doesn't mean lust.
Covet, you don't lust after a house or a donkey, one presumes.
And yet you're not allowed to covet those either.
Do you make a distinction between sexual desire and lust?
Do you see a distinction?
No, I don't.
Okay.
So therefore, if you don't see a distinction between those two things, I can see why you
would think it insane to tell somebody they shouldn't lust.
I don't know how you sexually desire your wife and have no lust for her.
Oh, I do.
Okay.
So I would think that...
That's interesting.
I would think that lust...
So you think so lust...
Okay, yeah, you're right.
This is interesting.
I've never confronted it quite this way.
So lust is...
Lust reduces the subject to an object.
It subordinates the dignity of the person to the good of a selfish pleasure.
It's also a distorted sexual act.
So it's an act which is contrary to human nature or to the end of the sexual act.
So if sexual desire and lust are different, can you sexually desire a woman you're not
married to and not lust for her?
Yes.
Oh, well, I would think so.
Okay, I haven't heard that from a Christian before.
Because I suppose there were like three stages if I would think of it.
If I board an airplane and I sit next to a beautiful woman and I'm attracted to her
sexually, how could I not be?
Okay.
That's beyond my control.
Now, the next step could be, now what do I do with that?
Do I sit here and fantasize about what I could do with her sexually?
At that point, the will is engaged and that is something within my control.
So I think it is important to make that distinction and I think that might be part of what drives
some Christians neurotic if they think, well, sexual desire is a sin, can't sexually desire
anybody who isn't my wife.
Well, I think not only Christians, but I think in some cases with Jews too that it does drive
people to be neurotic.
It's like if I said you don't think of a pink elephant.
Well, better, you're in a restaurant, don't think of food because that's a real life.
Very bad.
Stop it.
Yeah.
You'd go crazy.
The more you don't think about it, the more you think about it.
So there's that element too.
Agreed.
So I differ with you and I did with the father and by the way, I mentioned this is very important
to note.
What a credit it is to Franciscan University A having me, A as a religious Jew obviously
doesn't believe in Christ, not a Christian, and B that they discuss openly with me at
the university, what they heard me say on Daily Wire.
But he did raise this issue about sexual objectification and that reduces the human being as one created
God's image, et cetera, just what you said now.
And my, I have a different view of that.
Sure.
I think this, I suspect you may have not heard this before in one of your podcasts or many
of your guests.
I think that in the bedroom, if a loving husband and who is a loving husband and I have a word
to say about what a loving husband is, a loving husband who sees his wife in the bedroom as
a sexual object, I will be totally open with you.
I have said on the radio, if after X number of years married, your husband still sees you
as a sex object, you are both very lucky.
I would say it depends what you mean by sex object.
If what you mean is your husband continues to find you sexually desirable, I would agree
with you.
If what you mean is the man essentially treats his wife as a warm body to masturbate in, not
taking into account her feelings, her desires.
Oh, of course.
But that's not objectification as a dirty meme.
He said, the father said, one shouldn't even objectivize baseball players.
And it was an excellent analogy.
I had thought of that myself, but I do objectivize the baseball player.
I'm not sure if I agree with him, but it doesn't mean that you would automatically mistreat
the baseball player.
That's right.
That's right.
But I'm in a different relationship with the baseball player than I am.
Correct.
But there is a place in the totality of a relationship.
So here is my motto, because I talk about men and women every week for an hour on my
radio show and I have for about 20 years.
And that is you make love outside the bedroom and you have sex inside the bedroom.
I think it's a romanticization of the sex act to say that it's always making love.
It's okay to make lust.
It's okay to have some objectification.
That doesn't mean you're mistreating her.
Yeah, I think I'd want to know what you mean by objectification.
Because I had the sense that you're using language to convey something that I might agree
with.
I think you really might.
I agree with you.
It certainly doesn't mean mistreat.
It's not even implied.
But any more than with the baseball player.
And you'll say, well, I have a different relationship with the baseball player, but you're right.
Sex is its own world.
I don't like to romanticize sex.
Sex is many, many things.
Sometimes it's love.
Sometimes it's just pure sex.
Sometimes it's pure sex and not just love.
There is an element of objectification.
I'm crazy about her legs.
Is that a statement of love?
What do you mean?
You don't love legs.
What do you mean by love?
Right?
So I would say Aristotle and Aquinas would say that to love is to will the good of the
other for their sake.
So I don't will my wife's good for my sake.
It's not like I say, honey, I really need you to cross fit so I can lust after you.
But if I want her to get healthy for her sake, then this is love.
If she says to you, honey, there's a certain thing that you could do for me sexually that
will really turn me on.
And it may not really turn you on.
Are you being objectivized or are you doing it because you love her and because she wants
it?
Well, first of all, she's asked a question in which I presumably am free to decline.
Oh, if she's not free to decline, that's coercion and there's no room for that.
Right.
So there is a...
Objectification and coercion are not the same thing.
So if she's asking me a question, which I'm free to decline, she's not...
Right.
I'm going to get on this sexy outfit for me.
Are you okay with that?
Me?
Yeah.
Buddy, hell, that's a question I didn't expect you to ask me.
Well, you opened it up.
I would not be okay with that.
That's interesting.
I don't think.
Even in the bedroom.
It's not that I'd be morally opposed to it.
It's just that I'd feel uncomfortable with it.
Well, my view is that the more comfort the couple has, the better the relationship.
I think that's right, so long as comfort doesn't lead to what I would consider to be sexually
perverse acts.
Well, why is it sexually perverse to wear a sexy outfit?
It's not.
And that's why I said I'm not morally opposed to it.
But if you're saying that...
Okay, so your discomfort is personal.
That's fair.
That's not an area I need to get into.
One thing I would love you to get into, because you did say this in the email, is you think
that the widespread proliferation of pornography is destroying teenagers.
Help people hear this side of the word.
I gave an example tonight, so I'm very friendly with a young woman.
She's 23, very, very close to her.
People could guess who it is, because I do a podcast with her.
So she is so open, God bless her.
I don't think she would object to my telling this story.
In fact, maybe it was even discussed on one of our podcasts, we're very, very open.
So she was on a date, and they were both at trial, it was not the first date, and they
kissed.
And in the midst of the kiss, he grabbed her neck, like this.
And even me, Mr. Open, was taken aback.
And so was she.
To her credit, when she took his hand away, she said either then or later that evening,
or later another time, why did you do that?
And he, to his credit, was open enough to say, I thought you would like it.
That's what I see on the Internet.
That's a bad thing.
That's the number of young men who learn about women through porn and not real life is a
very scary thing that has developed.
So I am as worried as you are about the pornification of society.
When I answered the question that Jordan Peterson asked, which came out of nowhere, I'm not
blaming him in the least, it was a perfectly legit question, but it came out of nowhere.
I was thinking still in the way I have always defined it, it's Playboy Magazine.
That to me, that was porn.
The stuff that is out there now is not what I think of when I'm asked the question.
And so I did say this to the father tonight, and I'm sure it shocked everybody there.
Did you ask it?
No, King Kong.
I'd make a bad joke.
You'll get a charge out of this intellectually, it'll blow your mind, I think.
So my dad was an Orthodox Jew, a modern Orthodox admittedly, but Orthodox never drove on the
Sabbath, never ate a non-Cosher food, wore a yarmulke, and the house sent the kids to
Yeshiva.
I mean, he was the real deal.
He was the president of the Kingsway Jewish Center, still exists, an Orthodox synagogue
in Brooklyn, New York.
And he subscribed to Playboy, which shocks Jews as well as non-Jews, to be honest.
Good.
Yeah.
Good.
Glad that it does.
Yes, okay.
However, so I was raised in a very sexually open home that was also deeply religious, and
I never found them conflicting as he didn't.
And so he was an outlier, I acknowledge, and I am an outlier, I acknowledge.
However, I want people to understand, my parents were together 72 years, and they loved each
other crazy.
When she died at 89, he died at 96, he basically, his life ended.
His screensaver was, I love you, Hindi, that was his nickname for her, her name was Hilda.
And she knew he got Playboy.
She just did not, did not trouble my mother, oh, that's Mack, okay, I'm married to a live
wire who was faithful and who loved me, and she was crazy about him, and that was it.
What would be better?
For your father to love your mother and get Playboy, or for your father to say, even though
I'm tempted to look at pornography, my wife's body is enough for me, and I'm not going to
look at that even though I'm tempted to.
That's a very fair question.
I don't have an answer which will, I should give you the answer you want.
I think you should too.
Yes, that's a good point, you do.
I don't know what that means enough.
As I said, which bothers, it's funny, there were two groups that it bothers, the very
religious and the radical feminist.
When I say that men are variety built in, God made male sexual nature as variety oriented.
As one, I don't know who put it this way, but one wit put it, a woman loves a man and
men love women.
Now, I don't want men to go around loving women, I'm totally opposed to that, I am and
insist on my being, it's not even debatable that I am faithful to my wife, it's a given.
My wife knows that other women are a turn on.
She knows it, it does not bother her.
She is, to my luck, I am married to a woman who does not find male sexual nature frightening.
Most women do, and by the way, I understand that.
But again, I think we have to make the distinction between sexual arousal and sitting and fantasizing
or watching.
Actually, they looked at it together.
And if you, well, that's sad too, I think.
I don't, why is it sad?
Because I think pornography is a perversion of the sexual act, which is holy.
Let me finish, which is God's first commandment to humanity, be fruitful and multiply.
It is the most intimate thing two human beings can do together, not watch the office, not
go for a walk on the beach, it's the fundamental act that brings about the family, which brings
about society.
I move the opinion that if you pervert that fundamental act, you pervert the marriage.
Why is it perverted?
Why is it perversion?
Because it usurps the natural end of sexual intercourse.
If I eat food, I then force myself to throw up.
I'm usurping.
Okay, but I don't think that it's a fair analogy.
Let's say they looked at bathing suit ads, not at Playboy.
Just they looked at that other beautiful women together.
And it was okay with my mother.
Obviously, the assumption is it was okay with my mother.
If it wasn't, then it's not a good thing, clearly.
I am more worried about men having to hide their nature.
See, when you say God has built into their nature a desire for variety, it sounds like
you're saying that therefore it would be unnatural to not look at pornography.
Well forget the word pornography because it's so loaded, I'm anti-pornography.
But if pornography means anything that is arousing, then it could be a bra ad.
Right, well, I think I could define pornography like this.
I could say material which depicts erotic behavior that's in...
No, not behavior.
There's no behavior in Playboy.
Okay, well...
No, it's not behavior.
I think it is.
That's an important distinction.
I think when you say behavior, I think you're meaning video or acting out.
No, I didn't.
That's why I re-correct.
What do you mean by behavior then?
No, I don't...
I am not advocate of watching sexual behavior.
But I want to know what you mean by the word behavior because if I'm going to say...
Sexual activity between two people.
Okay, so even a photograph in Playboy of two people engaging in a...
But there weren't such...
So that's when you were opposed to that, but you're okay with a man looking at one naked
woman, let's say.
Yes, or they weren't even naked then.
They were covered in their privates.
But you're opposed to them looking at anything that might be arousing.
You're...
What if a woman is wearing a regular...
What if a man is turned on, whichever man is, by an attractive woman in a nice dress?
That's a turn-on.
So, no, no, no.
Please answer.
I will.
So, is that bad?
With his wife.
I'm not going to answer, but let me unfold this a little bit.
I think pornography can sometimes be a difficult thing to define.
I would say, and let me see if I can redefine it for you, material that depicts something
that's intended to sexually arouse or replace a prostitute.
I mean, the word pornography comes from two Greek words, porne graph pain, which means
the writing or the drawing of the prostitutes.
It's meant to serve an erotic function.
But what if the eroticism is then...
So, I'm okay looking at breasts and I'm okay looking at bums.
And if you go to the Sistine Chapel, you'll see that Catholics are perfectly comfortable
with nudity.
But I think that nudity can be presented in a way that upholds and expresses the dignity
of the person.
So, I could say, okay, I could look at that and marvel at God's creation and the beauty
of woman and the beauty of man.
But I think I could also look at a lingerie catalog and, in my mind, treat this person
as a mere object.
So, I would say that in one aspect, I'm okay looking at breasts, let's say, Sistine Chapel,
but in another sense, if I'm looking at a lingerie catalog with the intention of lusting
it, that wouldn't be okay.
What if I'm looking at the lingerie catalog with the intention of getting my wife lingerie?
I think the intention does matter, yeah.
Okay, all right.
Well, not that far.
I'm not advocating this.
I know you're not.
And I really want that to come through.
It's very important, but I'm so worried.
Remember, I come from the woman calling my show.
I saw pictures on my husband's computer.
I'm devastated.
So, what am I supposed to say?
You know what?
You're right to be devastated.
Your husband is a real sinner.
He treats you as an object.
What would you like me to say to her?
Here's what I'd like you to say.
I think you could, I don't think you have to say, I think I would begin by validating
her pain.
I wouldn't dismiss it by, and I'm not saying you did this because I haven't heard this
sort of phone call, but I wouldn't dismiss it by saying, you're wrong to be hurt.
I would say, there are many things out there that your husband, I'm sure, loves you very
much.
Well, that's my first question to her.
And you're right.
Does he love you?
And is he loving?
And do you have a good love life?
Yeah, and if the answers are all yes, go on.
So if the answers are all yes, I would say, well, since he loves you and since this bothers
you, there are some excellent resources that I'd love to tell you about that could help
him be free of pornography.
Because surely you would say, if a man is looking at pornography and his wife's heart
broken, you're not saying, well, she's wrong to be and he doesn't need to change.
If she's heartbroken, wouldn't you want to say to the man, here are some ways that you
could quit?
Yes.
And to both of them, I understand why you're heartbroken because you think that he loves
her more than you or as much as you.
And I want you to know that's not the case at all.
I don't know if that's the only reason she'd be heartbroken.
I don't think it's that she loves, I think that pornography trains us in selfishness.
Yes.
So it also legitimizes.
So what if he says to her, well, look, you saw lingerie ads and I'm dying to buy you
some really cute lingerie.
Would you be okay with that?
I would say that we're verging on what's sometimes called the fallacy of the beard.
You ever heard of this?
Just because you don't know when something begins, it doesn't mean you can't say what
a thing is.
This isn't a beard, but in three months, if I didn't shave, it would be.
And just because you don't know when it started doesn't mean you can't say what a beard is.
And I would say that there are blurry lines.
I would agree with you.
Like a Victoria's Secret fashion show.
Is that pornography?
I would say probably.
What about, but is it, is it less bad than other forms of pornography?
Yes.
Not all pornography is equal.
Some pornography can be far more ratchet than others.
We're really not that far apart.
I, my biggest, one of my biggest teachings is that there are levels of sin and there
are levels of good and that we should not listen.
I don't think this is, this is not a Catholic thing, but many Protestants who listen to
my show take issue with me when I say that God does not regard stealing a stapler from
the office as he does child molestation.
And they call me up and say, Dennis, love you, but I got to tell you a sin is a sin.
Yeah.
No, we would, we would part ways with our.
I know you would.
Yes, I know.
I said Catholics do not Catholics and Jews believe in gradations of sin.
Correct.
So there are gradations in that arena as well.
Yes.
But I would say that just because something is less bad than something else, it doesn't
make it good.
So if you're saying, I'm not arguing, it's good.
So if you say, I'm arguing, it's not as bad as people often make it out to be.
I am not arguing that it's good.
In an ideal marriage with my father, not have subscribed to Playboy, I'll be prepared to
say yes.
However, good job.
Yes.
Thank you.
It doesn't gain you as much as you think because I saw their relationship for seven.
I didn't see it for 72 years, obviously, but I saw it for the bulk of their life.
And I'm not making the claim with which he, which he treated her.
I'm sure he did.
I'm not making the claim that you have pure, pristine, holy marriage and haven of filth.
I'm not saying that.
Okay.
Right.
Okay.
So fine.
So there are degrees.
But if you're saying to the woman, better for him to look at porn than to commit adultery,
and what I would say there is it might be less bad, all things being equal, but less
bad doesn't make it good.
Right.
And if adultery can be analogized to shooting your marriage in the head, I would say pornography
is the slow poisoning of it and that there's a great deal of research that we go to back
that up.
Yes.
Well.
In fact, Dennis, I'm going to get your book on Exodus.
I promise to look at it.
This is my book on pornography.
It's a non-religious response to pro-porn arguments.
Oh, yeah.
I'll be very happy to read it.
So it'll be worth more in the garage sale one day, but there's no talk of sin.
There's no scripture verses.
It's all based on the 40 plus years of science that's coming out of academia from neuroscience.
So here's the question.
Okay.
So you see the reason I actually never talk about pornography.
He asked me.
You were asked me.
This is your news.
I never do.
I certainly don't advocate it.
I don't even discuss it, let alone advocate it, but it was asked and I sort of took a
vow many years ago, I won't avoid questions.
I wish I had known in advance it would be discussed.
I would have said how much I'm horrified by the pornification of society, et cetera.
But we, I want to, there's, we're on so many different, related, but different tracks.
And it's a very important subject.
The, oh yes.
I was influenced by my parents' marriage as we're all influenced by our parents' marriage.
If you see your father beat your mother, you think that's normal and you end up beating
your wife.
Because my father, I mean, the thought that he would ever lift it, he wouldn't, it's
so inconceivable to me.
All he did was tell his sons how much he loved their mother, I mean constantly.
So what I saw was a man got playboy and loved his wife for 72 years.
She knew he got playboy and loved her husband and knew he loved her for 72 years.
So that's what I saw.
And I'm not going to sit here as their child and say, this was really awful.
When I can't say it because I'd be, I would be lying.
But if you ask me, is there an ideal?
I will argue, okay, there is an ideal.
But the human condition is messy.
So back to our earlier question, where we differ on, can a loving husband in the bedroom
ever see his wife as a sex object?
And I said, that's good.
See, that's there, finally we have a real difference.
I actually think that is a positive.
I don't know if we do have a disagreement.
If by sex object you mean you find your wife sexually desirable.
I don't know what the difference is.
What's the difference?
I think this is what I would say, as a subject, like man is made and man makes his own ends.
Slavery is wrong because we take a man who makes his own ends and would like to fulfill
them.
When I talk about objectification, I guess I'm talking about a sort of evacuation of
the subject of the person.
I'm not concerned about her.
I'm not concerned about her.
No, you draw an inference that I'm not implying.
And that's why I say I don't know if we disagree.
We may not.
That would be great to resolve it.
I'm totally happy with that if that happens.
How you treat her is not that you will treat her badly.
The moment women don't say, I'm crazy about my husband's legs, okay?
But a man may not say it, well, that's true, fair enough.
I'll ask your wife.
But every man thinks that way if there's a part of her body that is particularly a turn
on to use the term do him.
That is objectification.
Women don't do that.
Women don't, very, I mean, young women do.
Oh, he's got a great butt.
By objectification, do you mean I find a part of my wife's body that I find attractive
sexually?
Yeah.
I suppose that for me, objectification means sort of subordinating the good of my wife
to a selfish pleasure.
You have drawn a behavioral inference from a thought, and I don't.
Yeah.
But I still am not convinced that this sharp distinction or the distinction, because I've
heard Ben Shapiro say something similar, and so I don't know if this is, as you say,
more of a behaviorist, kind of Jewish idea, because I think he said something like I don't
really care if you have racist thoughts.
I care about how you act.
That's right.
I said that to the group tonight.
I don't care if people dislike Jews.
I care how they treat us.
But if my son or daughter, I know you're right.
I would tell the saint to my child.
If my child said I don't like this group, but I think this is what our Lord Jesus Christ
is doing in which he's saying your righteousness has to has to pass out of the Pharisees.
It's not enough that you don't murder.
You should not want to.
It's not enough that you don't commit adultery.
You should not say fuel the flame that could lead to that.
I happen to think it's a good thing not to want to murder.
I subscribe to that.
But there's a very interesting Hebrew phrase translating from the Hebrew, so it will be
a bit awkward.
In the place that a penitent stands, the most righteous person doesn't stand.
And I extrapolate from that, that if you have bad thoughts and don't act on them, you're
on a higher moral plane than the guy who never has a bad thought.
I don't get any credit for not molesting children.
I'm as interested in children sexually as I am in bananas or peach trees.
So I get no credit for not molesting a child.
But the sick dude who does want to and doesn't, he gets a lot of credit.
Speaking of pedophilia, suppose a man says, I view animated child porn, so there's no
real victim in that sense of child pornography, which we both agree is horrendous.
And by viewing animated child porn, it prevents me from acting out sexually on a child.
Now I deny that.
I think that pornography inflames us to then want to act those fantasies out, and I think
there's good studies that back that up.
Surely you wouldn't say to the man who views animated child pornography, that's not bad
so long as you don't act it out.
Wouldn't you want to help this poor sick dude?
Yes, I would.
But I am thrilled that he's not acting it out.
I mean, okay.
Agreed.
Of course.
Well, that's big.
Yeah.
We're both thrilled that he might have a poor substitute, but it is a substitute.
If that were the case, no child is being used, it's all animated.
But would you use the word evil of animated child pornography, because I certainly would.
No, I would use evil only with behavior.
That's where we might differ from forgetting the sex issue.
You can't be evil.
You didn't do evil if you thought evil.
If I'm masturbating to animated pictures of pornography, I'm not doing something evil.
That's correct.
Yeah, I think that's despicable.
Yeah.
Really?
Yes, of course.
Who is being hurt?
You have to have a victim.
Oh, I'll tell you, there's at least two people being hurt.
There's the person who's poisoning himself by encouraging him to think, acting out on
children.
And there's also the animator.
Okay, wait a minute.
We both, we both are aching for him not to have those fantasies.
I agree with you, but I won't call it evil.
I won't call a fantasy evil.
There's too much real evil on earth for me to start being preoccupied with people's
thinking.
It's not just thinking, it's him masturbating to images of children.
Okay, so that, the real question about the whole pornography issue is not pornography,
it's masturbation.
There was a Catholic tradition.
I disagree.
I think it's both.
I think both masturbation is evil, but I think pornography is a greater evil.
Okay, so I don't think masturbation is evil.
Okay, that's, by the way, I admit that within Orthodox Judaism, there is, when I was a counselor
at Orthodox Jewish camp, the kids were told by some of their rabbis that masturbation is
like murder.
There is that, there is also that, there is a statement like that.
I certainly wouldn't make that statement.
Okay, I do believe that in Catholic theology, there is, there is no Catholic is saying that
murder is equivalent to masturbation.
Okay, all right, good.
You might say that both are grave sins, but you wouldn't say that masturbation is a graveston.
Even within murder, patricide would be a graveston and killing a stranger.
Since we both believe murder is always wrong, obviously self-defense is killing that murder.
So murder is always wrong.
Child molestation is always wrong.
Is masturbation always wrong?
What about a man whose wife, and I had this example, now you may say, well, if you take
an extreme example, it's not fair, but if you say always, I have to take a real life
example of a man I knew who adored his wife.
I knew them when they were both Welsh.
She got Alzheimer's at a very early age in her fifties, and he, he dressed her and bathed
her and cleaned her up for a decade.
If this man, with a wife who no longer recognized him, masturbated to get rid of his sexual
tension and stayed to take care of his wife, you would not, you would say that was evil?
I would, because I think that evil is the way things shouldn't be, and I think the sexual
act exists for union, and to masturbate is to thwart the end of that natural act.
I also think that what we haven't taken into account yet is an industry that brutalizes
women, that's often involved in trafficking women.
Oh, that's why I said I'm against all of that.
I, I, I'm, I'm on your side on that.
Yeah.
Yes.
I was talking about pictures, still pictures of models.
Yes.
Okay.
But I'm still saying that this brutalizes women.
I think it's like who, what woman would you like him to look at?
Like your wife, your daughter, my daughter, your, would you be comfortable with someone
you know and love being looked at like that?
I wouldn't.
No, but it's, it's, it, you're, you're using, um, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're
you're, you're bringing the emotional.
I would say you're doing that.
I think you're, you're doing that when you use the story.
So I would not deny that this is a virtuous man in many respects, laudable, who I could
learn a great deal from.
Right.
But no, no, you use the word evil.
That's right.
Okay.
You define evil in a way I don't.
The way things shouldn't be.
Yes.
And I would, I would refer to natural evil.
So if a man is born blind, this is a natural evil.
If a stone is blind, this is not a natural evil.
But I would also refer to moral evil as this is the way things shouldn't be.
So we disagree on that.
Yes.
So, um, I'm, I'm trying to think of, okay, is it, it shouldn't be that kids spend as
much time as they do on, on, on social media.
Do we both agree with that?
That they spend too much time?
Yes.
Would you call it evil if they did spend too much time?
Probably yes.
Okay.
I wouldn't, I would say it was wrong, but I wouldn't say it was evil.
Yeah.
So how, so I've shared with you how I define evil.
How do you define it?
The deliberate infliction of hurt on another human being.
So I would say that pornography involves the deliberate infliction of hurt on another
human being through the photo, photographing of a, a person.
So that, and that would, and that would include lingerie models again.
I'm not sure.
I don't have a, I, I don't know where to draw that line of masturbating to lingerie models
as they are too awful stuff.
Right.
The goal should be is to line up the goal of the artist or the photographer and the goal
and the intention of the viewer with the dignity of the human person.
Because I can view something non pornographic and say masturbate to it.
Right.
The problem isn't with the thing I'm looking at.
Right.
The problem is with me.
Likewise.
Right.
Likewise, I could look through a pornographic magazine and feel nothing but pity for these
women who don't know their dignity.
In that case, objectively it's photography, but subjectively it isn't for me.
Right.
I want to line up with the dignity of the human person created in the image possible.
Wanting to line up with dignity is totally admirable.
Calling the non lining up is a lingerie model losing her dignity.
And you may say yes.
Yeah.
I think I would say yes.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
But again, I want to make a huge distinction between these gradations.
Well, and so do I.
Something can be far less bad than synchronous.
That's why it's not, that's why I don't want to, I, I, when people say pornography, they're
thinking of the most awful behaviors.
Well, let me ask you this then, because it sounded like you were saying that if a man
views pornography and thereby doesn't commit adultery, it's okay.
No, I didn't say okay.
I said it wasn't awful.
Not horrible.
Fair enough.
Right.
Thank you for the correction.
Yeah.
But you've also said that you're very much opposed to violent pornography, obviously.
If a man says, I need to watch violent pornography so I don't commit adultery, do you say, well,
okay, that's, that's less bad too, or do you condemn that with a greater severity?
Right.
Because it's, the odds are that the people in it are being hurt.
What if they're willing to be hurt?
What if they enjoy being hurt?
Well, okay, so I, then I, I more or less subscribe to your, to your vision of the issue.
But again, I want to remind everybody watching or listening that my vision was of Playboy
of the 1960s when I was a teenager, which is, which would be regarded today as, as, as,
not even worthy of Netflix.
I mean, once called Hardcore, now called Softcore, once called Softcore, we now call Netflix.
But so, but I have to ask you and, and, and many others who feel as you do, and I respect
it, is, is everything, well, well, I did ask you, I mean, once you say masturbation under
all circumstances is evil, that's, that I will admit we, we part company.
And that's fine.
I mean, this is, we knew we would disagree.
Yes, that's fine.
And there's also a lot of things we agree about.
By the way, there was one, I don't want to say his name because I may be wrong, but
I believe there was one major evangelical leader, I mean, major.
He was a household name for a while.
Dobson, I think.
Oh, so you do know what I'm referring to.
I don't want to misspeak here.
Yeah.
Maybe Thursday you can look this up, but I believe Dobson at one point justified
masturbation in certain circumstances.
Yeah.
See, what I respect about you and what I respect about Jordan Peterson is that
very often you tell us to take the hard road.
You're like, yes, it's bloody hard, but be a man, like rise up, choose the harder
path, choose the more virtuous path.
I just wish that you, you or Peterson would be more emphatic when it comes to
sexual sins, that of course you're tempted to it.
Of course you want to do it.
What's interesting isn't why people masturbate to pornography.
That's obvious.
What's interesting is why people decide they don't want to.
Well, again, why not encourage them?
Don't throw in the word pornography.
You masturbate alone is a sin to you and evil.
That's correct.
What if he's masturbating to an image he makes up in his brain?
If he's masturbating to nothing, I would consider it an evil.
Okay, fair.
Okay.
Yeah.
It's a Dobson.
James, Dr.
James Dobson in about 1987, the quote appears to be, is my opinion that
masturbation is not much of an issue with God.
It's a normal part of adolescence.
Indeed, Jesus did not mention it.
Jesus didn't mention a lot of things.
Well, yeah, but well, it's not insignificant, nor does the Hebrew
Bible talk about it.
The spilling of seed with Onan, from which we get Onanism.
The sin was not that he spilled the seed.
The sin was that he didn't have intercourse with his brothers, a widow.
So, I mean, the Catholic would say that reason would show us that
masturbation is disordered, that pornography is disordered, because it
takes a natural act, which is good, and it thwarts the end of it.
That's why I use the example of...
What about a man, what about a man who can't attract a woman?
He, he, he should spend his life, obviously, then.
Yes, because masturbation is not like urination.
It's not something you need to do or else you're going to become
neurotic and die somehow.
You're not going to find anybody in the morgue with a tag on their
toe that says virgin or something.
All right.
And I think, I think it's, I think it's, it's a
pornified culture that's given us this idea.
The ideal life would involve none of this.
I am not preoccupied with the ideal life.
I am preoccupied with a good life.
As I often say, I am not interested in making saints.
I am interested in making good people.
And it is so hard to make good people in a post-communist, post-Nazi
world, post-Islamic, it's not post yet, Islamic terrorist world.
I admit, I am preoccupied with real evil rather than non-idyllic behavior.
I admit it.
That, that's where I, I am clarifying my thought, which might
make it more acceptable to you.
I would say that there are circumstances in which masturbating
or even looking at pornography could be a less grave sin due to
habit, due to immaturity.
But even in secular culture, we make fun of masturbation.
We don't seem to be proud of masturbation.
Even atheists, there's this big move to, to stop being a cream puff
and masturbating into a sock.
And instead of, instead of that, control your sexual desire.
You're not a dog to be neutered.
You're someone who has mastery over your lower passions.
So I have a desire for food.
But if I eat like a pig, then this is going to be bad for my health.
And this would be the sin of gluttony.
I could have the desire to masturbate.
But the difference is you can eat.
The man who cannot have any sex.
No, you're equating orgasm with eating and it's not the same thing.
You did.
No, you're saying that I'm equating them to show that they're dissimilar in
that if I don't eat, I die.
But it sounds like what you're saying is, well, but the man who never has a
woman, surely he should masturbate or else what?
And I'm saying he's not going to die.
He's not going to die.
Right. And so I think the man should have mastery over that passion and use it
appropriately. That's what I would say.
Okay. Ideally, I agree with you.
So one way that's important that I said that ideally, ideally, ideally.
But as I said, like in the case of marriages, I want them to love each other.
And, and by the way, let me just, this is not utterly germane to our, our
debate here, but.
Having spoken to so many couples for so many years, I have a phrase which is
relatively related to this, but not exactly this, but related.
You should make love outside the bedroom and have sex inside the bedroom.
I love it. But I think I know what you mean.
Oh, you love it.
Well, it's if I'm ignoring my wife, if I'm not doing acts of kindness towards her
throughout the day, then you can expect to come together and be intimate in that
most intimate of embraces is selfish.
But I want to love my bride throughout the day, sacrifice for her.
Right. But what I'm saying more than that.
Okay. That of course I'm saying that, but I am saying more than that.
I'm also saying that the bedroom might be a place for the non-holy to express
itself because we, I believe were created in God's image and animals' image.
And if we, sex allows the animal under holy circumstances, which is matrimony,
for both Jews and Catholics, that the word for, for marriage in Hebrew,
Kedushin, means holy.
I mean, that is the whole Talmudic volumes on marriage and sex is called Kedushin,
which means many Catholics know, means holy.
So I, Shmueli Boteath is a bearded Orthodox rabbi.
I don't know if you're familiar with him.
And he wrote a book called Kosher Sex.
His argument is as follows, and he's very anti-porn, very.
His argument is anything that the couple, the married couple, agrees to in the bedroom,
they should do, that that's the place.
And that's why he calls it Kosher Sex.
It wasn't, by the way, universally received well among, among some religious Jews.
I, your views are not all that different from many Orthodox Jews.
Why was he opposed to pornography?
For the same reasons you are.
Thank you so much for watching that clip.
If you want to watch the entire thing, go over to matfraad.locals.com.
Locals is like a non-woke Patreon.
So if you want to support the work of Pints with Aquinas, you can do that over there,
matfraad.locals.com.
And when you do, you get a ton of things in return.
You get bonus podcasts, you get bonus episodes of things.
You get monthly spiritual direction with Father Gregory Pine.
You get monthly audio books.
You get our print newspaper sent to your door quarterly.
And we even pay for shipping.
There's a ton of things you get.
And you also get the satisfaction of knowing that you're supporting the work of Pints with Aquinas.
Matfraad.locals.com, thanks.
Pay Thursday's salary.
