What if there was an idea, a new theory of gravity that could bridge the gap between
our predictions and observations of the most mysterious substance in the universe, dark
energy?
Everything connects with gravity.
Everything lives in your space time.
Dark energy is a force that scientists believe is causing the expansion of the universe to
not only increase, but to do so at an accelerating rate.
But there are discrepancies between the predicted amounts of dark energy in the universe and
our theoretical calculations based on the properties of the fundamental particles that
we know and love.
We're trying to get to the bottom of this for years, almost 30 years without success.
That is, until today's guest, Professor Claudia Duran, proposed a new theory of massive gravity
that could explain why the universe is accelerating and also solve the impossible dark energy
puzzle.
It's really in asking ourselves provocative questions just like you do that we make progress.
And Claudia and me, as we fall head first into the dark side of the universe to uncover
its most seemingly impossible mysteries and turn the impossible into the inevitable.
Let's go.
Claudia, how are you doing today?
I'm great.
Thank you.
How are you, Brian?
I'm excellent now that I get a chance to talk to you.
We have a lot in common, but I'm going to start first with a rather provocative question
if you'll indulge me.
A lot of this book and a lot of your work corresponds to the desire to find a solution
to the so-called mass of the graviton.
I want to start by asking you, why should we care about finding the mass or attributing
mass to a particle whose existence we don't even know for sure about?
So that's many, many different reasons.
The first one, I would say, which is going to convince the few people, but is the truth,
is because we as human care about understanding nature at the most fundamental level.
And so we should really always dive deeper and deeper.
That's how we make progress.
Sometimes it's really in asking ourselves provocative questions just like you do that
we make progress.
And questions that may not have a specific outcome for tomorrow, but it typically has
shaped us, shaped the future of humanity, that is really the real reason.
But then there's many other reasons I can tell you why I went into that specific question.
First let me just say that it's about understanding whether a fundamental particle, which we may
never detect per se, has a mass, but it has an implication also on gravitational waves,
which we do have.
We have observed and actually from the very first detection of direct detection of gravitational
waves here on Earth in 2015, the very one thing, the first thing that they were able
to do is put an upper limit on how massive the graviton was because it has an effect
on the propagation of gravitational waves.
So now that limit is still quite high as compared to what we ideally would like it to be for
the reasons I'll explain, but still in principle it has some real consequences that we can
observe here on Earth through gravitational waves and through many different tests of
gravity, tests of the universe, tests of why we're here, where we're going, our origin
and all of those questions.
Why I am interested, why I spend my time looking at that as opposed to all sorts of other fundamental
questions, is because I think it has a potential to tackle the most challenging question of
fundamental physics, the biggest discrepancy of the whole history of science, which is
the cosmological constant problem.
In other words, why are we living in an universe that looks the way it does and is not actually
expanding at an accelerated rate which is way faster by at least 56 orders of magnitude,
if not 120 orders of magnitude, as should be the case if the quantum fluctuations from
all the fields that we know exist, like the electrons and the Higgs and all of those fields,
all of those other fundamental particles that made us so really exist, we would expect them
to lead to what we call an energy in the vacuum, an energy of nothingness that fills the whole
universe itself and should lead to a hugely faster accelerated rate of expansion of the
universe.
The discrepancy is simply the biggest discrepancy in the whole history of science and that is
at the interface of the two pillars of modern theoretical physics and modern science, which
on one side is gravity, on the other side is quantum field theory, putting the two together,
which is really the foundation of the standard model of particle physics as we know it today.
So it's very much at the interface between the two of them that we have the biggest discrepancy
we can ever imagine and so it seems natural that the resolution is very much at the interface
between the two of them, thinking of gravity, thinking of gravity as well as a quantum field
theory and understanding what are the properties of gravity more fundamentally.
So recently the DESI collaboration made an announcement that there seems to be evidence
for the variation of the cosmological constant from constant to perhaps a contestant like
behavior.
Can you tell me how would that impact the statement you just made?
Would it affect the search or the motivation to look for a massive graviton?
So it is within the same framework that something has to be slightly different as compared to
the standard I'll call lambda CDM or vanilla model for the cosmological paradigm, which
we would just think until now everything seemed to fit beautifully with having called
dark matter and a simple cosmological constant.
So very natural in that evolution sense.
In a parameter sense it's very simple in that sense but actually in understanding how
that fits in in the bigger picture is that's where the real naturalist question is coming.
And so if there's any departure from this lambda CDM it really opens up the opportunity
for there to be something else out there and any modification of gravity could feed into
that any dynamical dark energy could feed into that and sometimes there's a little bit
of a mention of how much you consider modified gravity and dark energy.
Some models of modification of gravity can be recaptured in effectively looking for
cosmological purposes as a dynamical cosmological constant or dynamical dark energy.
So for instance if you're in a theory of massive gravity and you want to tackle the
cosmological constant problem with that you would want to accept that the universe is
filled with vacuum energy as expected from particle physics but this huge level of vacuum
energy doesn't lead to a huge accelerated rate of the universe today.
It did in the past but then through the weakening of gravity due to the mass of the graviton
through the evolution of the universe you would have a relaxation of the effect of this
vacuum energy on the evolution of the universe.
So in some sense it does look like a dynamical cosmological constant and that seems paradoxal
but the source would be constant in some sense.
It would be vacuum energy, it would be a cosmological constant but then its effect on gravity, its
effect on the evolution of the universe would be dynamical, it would be diluted, relaxed
away through the evolution of the universe.
And so we would expect in this type of departure from the standard lambda CD and the standard
cosmological constant.
So some of your work in this book which we will now play my favorite game about called
Judging Books by Their Cover is about a topic near and dear to my heart, the cosmic microwave
background and the subject of polarization.
But before we get there I want us to indulge ourselves in this game that I call Judging
Books by Their Cover.
So Claudia please, if you would take us through the beautiful artwork, the title and the subtitle
of this wonderful book.
Okay, so the title is The Beauty of Falling and the subtitle A Life in Pursuit of Gravity
and I'm really happy to guess what I mean by all of those things which is a lot.
But I'm very happy with The Cover actually because it's very symbolic of the story, there
is a real story in the book.
So on The Cover you start seeing on the top an astronaut, an astronaut floating in mid-air
experiencing some level of free falling and some freedom, very much some freedom in that.
And then in the middle you see the same person I think, Ali each falling now, you can imagine
she's falling, she's falling on earth, she's really embracing some level of free fall
and there's probably some friction from the air because she's falling on earth but she's
enjoying it.
There's a beauty in the fall itself.
The fall itself is beautiful, maybe what comes next is what was a bit more worrying.
But luckily for her, the last picture, the bottom is her diving in the sea and really
enjoying this last part of the free fall and seeing how this falling has been channeling
through a different perspective now enjoying playing with gravity as she dives in the ocean
and enjoying this new environment.
The Subtiles are beautiful and of course a lot of these things on The Cover that this
character is experiencing are relevant to you.
The first one being astronaut which you have attempted to be from the European Space Agency
sign.
The middle one is you flying maybe doing a dive but there's an airplane in the back,
you and I are both pilots.
I don't know how much you fly nowadays but I have flown a Diamond Katana before.
Yeah, that's amazing.
I know that.
I have a picture of it there, I'm not going to tell the screen right now but it just wants
to fly, it's amazing, it just pulls the nose up and it wants to fly, it's incredible.
And then there's the woman ends up underwater wearing a scuba diving suit and that takes
me to my first question from my guest, not a guest, an audience member who is a very
special person to both of us.
His name is Professor Greg Gabadadze who is not only a friend and a brilliant scientist
and innovator, truly just one of my heroes in science.
He's also an administrator at NYU, a dean, I don't know what masochistic desire he had
to do that.
Georgia, not the state but the country of Georgia, they make tough, tough people there, brilliant
and tough.
But Greg asked me to ask you when I solicited a question, he said, thanks for reaching out,
Claudia wrote a wonderful book with a clear and modern perspective on physics and also
connected to remarkable personal experiences.
And I have a fun question for Claudia, I'd ask her if there might be any advantage to
thinking about physics while floating in the cosmos or underwater.
And I want to get your answer to that, Gregory's question.
In both ways, I think, being a theoretical physicist and thinking about quite abstract
concepts, I think there is a beauty in doing that when you fly, when you dive, you float
in the cosmos, in embracing this understanding of nature at a deeper level, there is a deep
connection that gets there.
But also the other way around, of course, I would like to tell you that I'm an astronaut
and I'm doing experiences about gravity in the microgravity on free fall and orbit around
the earth.
It hasn't happened and I'm not doing that when I'm scuba diving, I'm not doing some
explicit state of the art test of gravity when I do that, but I do it with my body.
And I think there is, as you say, Greg is a very, he's a great talk guy.
And I'm not saying that we should all be very tough, but there is some level in which learning
to have this balance between judging your instinct, you're judging your intuition in
very challenging situations, but also seeing how much you can judge intuition and how much
you have to rely on your confidence to follow a pattern, to follow the logic, to follow
scientific rules in situations where actually your instinct, naively, would tell you to
do something which would be quite catastrophic.
And you're kind of, you know that, for instance, if you're flying and you're stalling, naturally,
if you hadn't had any training, the first thing you would try to do is pull the nose
up because you say you're going down, you're going to pull the nose up so that you pick
up altitude, but actually that decreases the lift and so the plane sinks much more and that can
actually lead to an accident. So following too much instinct in these situations can lead to
catastrophic outcomes. So if you learn to put yourself in uncomfortable situations and have
this balance between knowing what to do, there's a level of instinct that you learn
after having practiced it for hundreds of times, but also it's very much based on
scientific understanding. You understand what you have to do logically, that makes complete sense,
and then you train yourself to learn the process in that. With your body, your situation,
where your life depends on it, then you can do that on the blackboard, it's so much easier.
Hey there, while Dark Energy is one of the most mysterious concepts in the known universe,
another mystery I'm trying to solve is why only 50% of you out there are subscribed to my
YouTube channel or following the podcast on your favorite podcast app. Are you one of them? Please
don't be in the silent majority. Do me a favor, subscribe, follow, and leave a comment or review,
it really helps me out and I respond to every single one. And when you do it, it helps me get
great guests like Claudia, Dan Dennett, Sam Harris. It's all a numbers game, unfortunately,
and we have to make sure the algorithm respects the matter that matters that we discuss on the
Into the Impossible podcast. So before we get back to the episode, just take a second and hit
that subscribe button, leave a comment or a thumbs up, anything will help out. Appreciate it. Now
back to the episode. And that brings me to my next question, which is related to this gentleman who
features very prominently in this book, Albert Einstein.
You do? Okay, we can have a dueling one. So I'm going to do something mean to, which looks cruel,
but actually was one of his most exciting breakthroughs. In fact, he called this the
happiest thought of his life, which was that if he was falling, he would experience no gravitational
force. And that led to the Einstein Equivalence Principle. And I want to ask this as a first
detour into your life as a professor and say that nowadays we hear a lot about artificial
intelligence and machine learning and all sorts of things. I think they're very powerful. But as
a professor, I think about, well, how could these things aid us? How could they be better researchers?
Could such an entity, artificial, made of silicon and glass and steel and whatever else,
could it experience the joy of falling? Could it experience this most exhilarating feeling of
Albert Einstein? And then if it could experience that viscerally with a body, or if it could not,
rather, experience because it doesn't have a body, how could it make a breakthrough equivalent to
what Einstein, the greatest scientist of the last hundred years, perhaps, how could it even be
considered to be intelligent if it can't even do what Einstein did? I mean, it's a high bar. But
do you think that physicists can be replaced or mimicked even by artificial intelligence?
I think there's no replacement. I think we've done so well at using things to our advantage.
And there's clear advantages to using national learning. It can speed up a lot of the things.
Now, when it comes to can it feel for us? That's a deep question. I can't do. Do I really feel
something or am I in a matrix and believe that I feel something? And how will I know the difference?
I don't know. I think related to your question is also how we model the world all around us.
If a computer is able to model the world, the universe and nature all around itself to
incredible precision, does it make it that this model is the reality or not? And there's a thin
line there sometimes. So your question makes me reminded of that. If a computer can reproduce all
the signs of what it means to feel something, does it make it feel it or not? You'd think not
because we are experiencing something deeper than that. But how can you tell? I don't know.
But I do think that there is a difference between spinning things up and reproducing,
relying on past understood patterns or past patterns that haven't necessarily been understood,
but have been identified and seeing them and being able to get some sense and logic and
organizing all of that, particularly when it comes to huge level of data, to speed up some
connection between some patterns and some model and some values that you want to take out of these
patterns or these data. There's a huge difference between doing that and actually coming up with
a breakthrough in itself which requires a huge level of creativity. It's like all of a sudden
thinking you're going to paint the world but not with pencils and paint but using another dimension
and it's something I can't even capture in words. And so if you haven't taught the machine
to think in that language, to use tools that will rely on the extra dimension, let me just be
crazy out there, how could it? I don't think you will out of the blue come up with things we haven't
ourselves yet invented with a completely new language. And so that level of creativity,
I think we will always have. And it's a little bit different. I should say that the response
to that, some people say that computers through machine learning, they can come up with new songs
and so that shows some level of creativity. But those new songs are still within the same
remit of previous songs, still with music and notes, still within the same sense of that.
It will be quite different to all of a sudden think of a new channel of communication which is
not through sound, it's not through light, it's not even through gravitational waves.
That would be something yet completely different. And that's what we,
scientists are very good at, to think about new ways to connect with the world.
And in a 2020 paper published in PRD, you described the speed of gravity. I always tell my students
to their great horror, you know, the sun could disappear right now. And God forbid that happens,
but we wouldn't know for eight minutes. But is that really true? I mean, how do we know if that's
actually true? So your paper, The Speed of Gravity with Andrew Tolly at Imperial as well,
makes a prediction that the speed of gravity could differ from lowercase c. And I'm surprised,
why isn't this made a bigger impact? Or if you're even more famous than you are.
Yeah, you need to do that. You can imagine gravitational rainbows where the speed of gravity
does depend on the frequency, just like light depends on the frequency. So not in the vacuum,
not in empty space per se. For light, we can sort of conceive what empty space is,
is the absence of interactions between light and anything else. So we are used to the fact that
light in space travels at the speed of light. But if you shine light through water, for instance,
then light will start interacting slightly differently with the medium, with the water,
with the water molecules, depending on the frequency of light. And so you see that. And
because of this interaction, light doesn't travel at the speed of light in the vacuum
in water. And the way it travels, the speed at which it travels depends on its color.
So we're all used to that phenomenon. We all see rainbows. And that's the proof that light
doesn't always travel at the speed of light. So you can ask yourself the same question for gravity.
And that's, you know, it's quite subtle because now, what does it mean in empty space when
actually everything connects with gravity? Everything lives in your space time. And if a
universe is filled with dark energy, then is there such a thing as empty space? I don't know. And
it could be that gravitational waves do interact ever so slightly with anything living in that
space time, including dark energy. And if that were the case, then it would modify the speed
of gravitational waves. It would do so at very, very low frequencies. So if all of a sudden you
were to take off the sun, that would be kind of a high frequency, a high frequency thing.
And so the propagation of this information, well, you would expect it to take very close to
eight minutes to reach to us because at those frequencies, you would expect the speed of
gravitational waves to be very, very close to that of light. And another thing that would come
concomitantly with such a phenomenon would be additional polarization modes in addition to the
so-called plus and cross modes that my colleagues and I are trying to study in the cosmic microwave
background. Can you explain these types of new polarization states? There's a beautiful illustration
in the book about them, the so-called breathing one. That's very evocative. Can you explain what
these polarizations would do and why you manifest, you have to have new polarization states of gravity
if gravitational waves, or you call it glite, that will maybe catch on and supplement your
salary there. I hope so. I hope you get the trademark on that. But how would they manifest
themselves? How would a breathing mode manifest itself? And what would it look like in the power
spectrum of the CMB that my colleagues and I and the Simons Foundation have supported to the tune
of over $110 million so far? First of all, I think we all sort of accepted that, for instance,
light itself comes in two polarizations and you put some very cool sunglasses and then you see
maybe one polarization and the other one gets filtered out. Then we can ask the question already
for gravitational waves. Can you put some cool sunglasses for gravitational waves and only see
one polarization or the other one? That would be a bit more challenging. But already, yes,
gravitational waves, or what I like to call glite, because in some level it's quite similar to light,
comes already into different flavors. And that's imposed by symmetry according to Einstein's
theory of general relativity. Now imagine that the gravitational waves weren't traveling at the
speed of light, very close to the speed of light, but not necessarily weren't forced anymore to travel
at the speed of light. Then you could, in principle, imagine some sort of analog to sand waves,
some longitudinal waves, where you could have some gravitational waves speeding up a little bit
and slowing down a little bit. So these would be modes which would not look like the standard
gravitational waves, the cross and the plus, which are transfers to the line of propagation
of the gravitational waves. They would actually be along the line of propagation of the gravitational
waves. So that mode, we typically don't like it, but that's a different story, is just to
illustrate the fact that you open up a whole set of other possibilities once you align yourself
to sink beyond the box, beyond not that I want to put Einstein's inner box, but beyond the
theory of Einstein's theory of general relativity. And so in addition to this longitudinal modes,
you also have some modes which are in between. So they are a little bit half through the transverse
direction and half through the longitudinal direction. And also related to that, you could have,
you can now start imagining quite different things where rather than just have the plus and the
cross mode transfers to the propagation, you could have a breathing mode, really just think
about breathing. And if you think of some beads distributed along a circle, as the mode, that
mode goes through, they would sort of become similar to a bigger circle and come to a smaller
circle and bigger circle and smaller circle. There's something quite pacific about that.
I like this picture, it makes me feel meditating as that mode goes through. That mode is actually
very important in any theory of gravity beyond Einstein's theory of gravity, because that is
typically expected to be the smoking gun signature for a theory beyond Einstein's theory of general
relativity. That mode, the real question is why isn't it there, not some theory of general
relativity? You could expect it to be there in principle. And it's not because of symmetry.
Einstein's theory of general relativity was based on the equivalence principle and on some
other principles that nowadays we understand them as being symmetry driven and that symmetry
simply prevents this conformal breathing mode from appearing. Now you can think if the graviton
had a mass, you can always make that mass sufficiently small so that you don't see any
departure. And that is true. That is true in principle. However, because now there are additional
polarization for gravitational waves, you can think about having different ways to communicate
through gravity. There's different channels of communication through gravity. And that has a
big impact in how we're testing gravity. As you say, that could mean for instance,
that at the very beginning of the universe, you could have production of not only primordial
gravitational waves as the one you're thinking about, which would lead to polarizations in the CMB,
but you could also think of production of primordial gravitational waves in this breathing mode.
Now this breathing mode in itself, from a cosmological perspective,
it wouldn't be during inflation, it wouldn't necessarily look so dissimilar to the inflaton
itself or to the other field that are already present and whose effect has already been seen
imprinted in the CMB through the temperature fluctuations. So actually there are models out
there of massive gravity for the very beginning of the universe where this additional polarization
of gravitational waves do act potentially as a substitute for the inflaton. And for the fluctuations
in those, those primordial breathing mode polarizations would lead to the temperature
fluctuations that we do see in the cosmic microwave background, for instance.
So would there be a modification to the BB mode power spectrum, the autocorrelation,
or would it induce new forbidden correlations, EB correlations? Would it change the shape of the
autocorrelation? Is there some way to detect it? Because this is all you have, right? You make the
case in the book that beyond the realm of the galaxy or even clusters, there's no hope of
discovering physics of gravity at the Planck scale other than inflation, if inflation did take
place. We don't know that it did. Some of us hope that it did, but we've had that dream before.
But the question is, are there new observable signatures that we can use to detect the presence
or absence of a massive graviton or and the concomitant breathing modes that would also be
induced in novel polarization states? Yeah, so that's a great question. One of the things that
would happen is if the mass of a graviton is a little bit too large, if you imagine you have
graviton being too massive, then it would prevent the production of primordial gravitational waves
whose frequency are comparable as the mass of the graviton during the period where they should
have been produced. So in effect, what you would expect in the power spectrum of primordial
polarization or primordial gravitational waves, let me say, of b-mode polarization,
you would expect a plateau. You wouldn't expect any production of primordial gravitational waves
at very low L because those would be forbidden by the fact that the graviton
prevents the production of primordial gravitational waves within those scales.
So seeing actually the production of primordial gravitational waves or CMB polarization, b-mode
spectrum at very low L, that would be assigned against massive gravity, against a massive
graviton, against massive polarizations during the period of inflation.
One thing that people don't talk about is, I mean, people don't talk about this
massive gravitons very much either, but comparatively, even if you can imagine, even less
attention is paid to the existence of spin three halves particles. We have a spin zero
particles. We have abundance of those. We have a lot of spin one halves. Thank God, or you and I
wouldn't be here talking. We have plenty of light with an L and no G in front of it. We even have
hopes of glite, but the so-called black sheep, maybe the missing term, missing spin
statistic term, is spin three halves. Why? What did nature do to so alienate one of the
most prominent types of fundamental intrinsic spin modes that could possibly exist?
Yeah, it's a good question. I don't know. I don't know. I mean, those particles,
not at the fundamental level, but at composite level, they do exist, so we know they can be
represented to some level in nature, but having them as fundamental particle, we know that then
their interactions with other fields is very difficult, and the implementation within a theory
of gravity is also very challenging. I know that for spin two, and this is the same case for spin
three-half as well, the framework in which you construct the nonlinearities, the interactions
for spin up to one is relatively straightforward, I would say, and the connection with gravity
as well is relatively straightforward, but when you go beyond that, it becomes extremely complicated,
and Annie, you have to be very subtle in how you try to connect those modes with others,
how they communicate with others. You very easily open new channels of instabilities,
so it's not typically, you can just add some level of interactions, and you're okay with that.
As soon as you open up a smallest level of interaction, you need to reinvent the wheel,
if so says reinvent a whole framework to see how they embed into a deeper one, so that we see
from the theoretical perspective how challenging it is, and so maybe because of everything that
comes along with it, it's much harder for them to manifest themselves in nature.
Hey there, dark matter is mysterious, but ordinary matter can be had in the form of a meteorite.
If you just do me the favor of joining my free Monday Magic mailing list, where I send out the
coolest, most interesting information in all the known universe. I don't sell anything,
nothing else to do, just share my passion with the cosmos, and all my guests also subscribe to
this newsletter, so you're a great company. Go to BrianKeating.com. And you'll be entered to win
an actual piece of space dust, a meteorite from the early solar system. And if you have a .edu
email address, you automatically win. Go to BrianKeating.com. Or BrianKeating.com. If you have
an .edu email address, now let's get back to the dark side of the universe with Claudia Durham.
Very interesting. I think another question that my listeners and viewers might have
is this concept of extra dimensions, which plays a big role in your research. Is there any
difference between when you speak about extra dimensions and when string theorists or fundamental
particle physicists speak about it? They both require or mandate the existence of these things,
which are as yet undetected, as you say in the book. So what is it? Are these extra dimensions
related to the extra dimensions of string theory? And if not, what are they?
The way I think about them doesn't preclude them from coming from string theory.
But actually, the concept of extra dimension is a very, very old one. And within the framework of
general relativity, the same modern framework as in which we understand them today, they were
already proposed by Kalutza and Klein very, very shortly after the proposal of general
relativity. They have a very natural extension of general relativity. They have sort of taken
a comeback since string theory, because string theory needs them. If you don't think of string
theory, you can ask yourself as to why we live in a world where there is three dimensional space
and one of time, you can ask yourself, why is that the case? But you don't necessarily believe
that there needs to be an additional one, extra one. But in string theory, there needs to be
extra one. There's no choice on the matter. And then they are typically expected to be confined
around themselves, compactified, very small, very, very small extra dimensions,
or there could be some larger ones. And there we would be confined on a membrane and a brain,
deep brain, in those extra dimensions. But a lot of my research in the way I've been
thinking about it and looking at implications for gravity and for cosmology, that was very much
some of those ideas were motivated by string theory. I don't necessarily need to have string
theory to think about them. But a lot of them nowadays, they are motivated again for one another.
In themselves, actually, very natural. One of the questions, I think to me, one of the most
fundamental questions there is why three dimension. You mentioned Robert Brunnenberger earlier.
He's an incredible physicist, but he's one of the physicists that has come up with the most
ideas on why it is that we are experiencing three dimensions. Even in string theory,
we understand there are extra dimensions, but precisely what is the mechanism that led to us
living in a universe that experiences three dimensions is something quite challenging. And
it's not natural at all in string theory. It's very hard to make that work. There's no natural
process. He and collaborators of him, also, and Davis, and with Durer have been people have been
exploring the idea of how dynamically you can have a sort of a selection mechanism that either picks
out membranes in extra dimensions, which are three plus one dimensional. It's almost an evolution
selection mechanism where those are the ones we end up living in or some other types of mechanisms
in why the other dimension would be confined, compactified to be very small. We only experience
the ones we do. But even in both case scenarios, assumes the existence of other dimensions and
that could have consequences on us. To see the consequences of that, typically,
you expect you have to go to very high energy scale to be able to probe those extra dimensions,
and that corresponds to going, again, back to the very early universe, again, to the type of
research that you're doing. And it is possible, and I would hope very much so, that it could be
imprints on the very early universe of those extra dimensions. And that could be imprints on
the power spectrum of the CMB and B mode polarization, possibly. That's for you to tell me,
actually, they can be in some other models of extra dimensions. They can be some effect, actually,
not at very high energy, but at very low energy, that things will look very similar to,
look four dimensional, three plus one, four dimensional, I mean, three of space and one of time
dimension for everyday life. But as you go to larger and larger distances, some cosmological
distances, then you're able to start probing the extra dimension. And that's why the universe,
the evolution of the universe nowadays seems kind of counterintuitive. And that's because we're
starting possibly to probe the extra dimension, the extra dimensional space.
So it's sort of a relic or a shadow of the higher dimensions that we perceive.
Yeah, there's a lot of models out there where our cosmological evolution, what we leave as a
universe is really, as you say, reminiscent of our shadow, a consequence of our motion
through time, yes, but really through the extra dimensional space. We are traveling through
this extra dimensional space, and that has an effect on our universe as a whole, with just a
consequence of that. Question I have for you, perhaps to elucidate, and I've asked it to many
scientists, but I never really get an answer that I can try. And I've asked even, you know,
Roger Penrose and his multiple occasions of being on the podcast. And then you hope I have an answer.
I hear what he says, but I don't know if I understand what he says, although that might be
due to my failure to have consciousness, according to him. But my question for you is, first, do we
need a quantum theory of gravity? I mean, the only two scenarios where quantum gravity seems to
pertain in any kind of important, impactful, relevant role is not in our daily lives, but are
at the singularities of black holes, and perhaps the origin of time, if indeed time had an origin,
and many people don't believe that it did, or it was a classical bounce, or different cosmological
models, past guests, Paul Steinhart, Anna Eges, Neil Turrock, many others, don't believe in the
singular quantum gravity necessity. So why do we need a theory of quantum gravity? If these
only two realms that we know about are shielded by event horizons, what's the point? We'll never
be able to witness this anyway. So actually, I am working on some understanding how to make that
connection. So you probably want concretely to understand how to compute those things in
situations that we will likely never experience ourselves. That is true. But at the same time,
we want to understand why we live in the world we are living in. I think we all ask ourselves those
questions. It's all part of the origin. Why are we here? Why is life here? Why are universities here?
Even more fundamentally, why is a representation of nature, a representation of spacetime here,
and that the answer is, I think, seated in a theory, a more fundamental theory, a more fundamental
theory of something that unifies, again, not only the fundamental forces of nature, as we know them
with the weak and strong forces and electromagnetism, but also gravity and this unification could have
some consequences. What is our deep down origin in terms of what is the origin of spacetime itself?
I think we talked about that at the beginning already. Why are we pursuing some such fundamental
questions that will never be able to really experience the consequences of that? History
has told us that often we think that would be the case. We saw Einstein thought that
gravitational waves will never have any consequences to allow. No, no, no connections
to reality. We do use them now to communicate in some sense, maybe communicate is a big word,
because that incinerates a two-way communication, which is not the case so far, but we do communicate
with them with the universe. We use them as a new window, as a new way to see our universe,
see gravitational waves. That's an example where 100 years ago we thought there's never any use to
it, and yet we're here. They are real. We have detected them. The fact that I can't tell you
right now whether we'll ever be able to experience a situation where quantum gravity is needed to
predict what happens precisely doesn't mean that there wouldn't be one, but who is to answer that?
If we don't know what it is, we'll never be able to even answer that. I think we need to explore
beyond what we know to be able to see how much more there is out there and make sense of all of
those things. Let me go back to that point, because we do say, for instance, I'm not a strength
theorist, so I can say that. I'm not a strength theorist. Nobody's perfect, Claudia. Nobody's
perfect. I'm not a strength theorist. I'm quite agnostic on whatever is going on at very high
energy, and some of my colleagues would not talk to me anymore. By the way, I have to interrupt you,
and pardon my interruption, but part of the mission of this podcast is to educate young
scientists and how to be a good scientist. I just want to highlight what Claudia just said,
that it's her job, and my job as an experimentalist, her job as a theorist to be agnostic. I was asked
by The New York Times recently, what do I hope for? What do I really want to find with the
Simon's Observatory? I said, our job is not to prove things. My job is to prove people like
you wrong, and your job is to keep refining what you know about the universe so that eventually,
I can't prove you wrong, but that won't prove you right. What Claudia just did is incredibly
important, right? That's right. It's never about proving someone right or wrong in some sense.
It's more about deepening our understanding of nature. That's where we're going.
This is why the book is called The Beauty of Falling, because I will fall every day. I will
come up with things which are wrong every day. I will fall, and that is important. This is the
way we make progress. Right. At the end, you say, in fact, past these pictures, that that is part
of the beauty, is that not just that you fall and that that can be awesome, but part of the journey
is how you get back up and how you respond to these challenges. Again, just for my young
students and postdocs and young faculty and old faculty who might need to learn this lesson,
the concept of quantum gravity is a beautiful one because we have this innate need to quantize
everything we see. It's done so well. The question I have even goes, you talk about pie in the sky
and it reminded me of this past guest, Elon Musk, who I did talk to on the podcast tangentially.
You can find it on the videos and audio. He once said, the plank length sets this fundamental
limit beyond which we don't even need to know the digits of pie. In other words, there's some
minimum radius circle, which would be the plank length. I responded to him. He didn't
report right back, but that's sort of nonsensical. Nothing really happens at the plank length.
Am I wrong about that? It is a correspondence, a numerological coincidence, but nothing more.
Or am I wrong? What we know is that they come to mind. It's not about a distance. It's never
was about a distance in itself. It's about when the curvature, some measurable effect
of the curvature becomes big enough. That is not so much about what distance you can measure,
but for instance, going within regions of spacetime where you end up having for instance,
close to a black hole or at the big bang, as you were mentioning, that would seem to suggest that
the curvature there becomes very large. That is a physical region where these things can happen.
Understanding how we transition from the semi-classical model of gravity through
general relativity, which is embedded in an effective quantum field theory, how we transition
between that and something which takes over when this effective quantum field theory breaks down,
I think it is important to make communication between the two. A lot of the work I do at the
moment, which is not a massive gravity, is to understand what are the key ingredients that we
have to keep beyond our understanding of reality, beyond general relativity. You don't even think
of those concepts anymore. You don't think of spacetime anymore. You think of probabilities,
and you think of the notion of causality is extremely important. It's embedded not so much
into return to the future kind of cartoon line, but it's encoded in deep statements in how we
can think of probabilities and how we can think of also the notion of probabilities in a quantum
sense, whether they respect some notion of unitarity, where if you sum up the probabilities of
given outcome, whether they will sum up to one, or whether they will sum up to something imaginary
or negative, which would make no sense. These are very, very basic criteria that are satisfied
by string theory, for instance. You like to ask yourself, without necessarily even relying on
string theory, are those concepts even correct? And is it okay for me to rely on them when all
now the notions of reality have fallen apart? Is it okay for me to rely on those specific
just hang on onto them to see how these very basic principles cascade their way down to
something concrete at low energy, and something which is consistent with what we observe.
We can actually make connections. I can come up. I can give you a model today
that seems completely meaningful. I can come up with a model that can describe most of,
if not everything that I've observed today. And then I know that if I were to go back up and make
a connection with how it will be realized much more fundamentally, it will have to break some of
those assumptions. It will have to break some of this assumption of unitarity, or causality,
or some of the way I think about these much more basic amplitudes. And so I think it is
important in some sense to see what is it we're relying on at the end of the day? What are we
aiming for? And we know that the way we're going to end up describing things, nature,
once we no longer can rely on even the notion of space and time to describe them is going to be
very challenging. We're going to need to invent new tools, new way to thinking to represent them.
And I don't even know precisely what is the right question for me to ask to even be able to
express that. But I want to hang on on very basic principles. And I think it is a meaningful
question for me to ask myself, are those okay to rely on? Because if they're not, then I have to
give up even more than that. Yeah. And I guess the question I keep coming back to is what would
constitute a detection of a quantum nature of gravity? And how could we do it? In the case,
we have to be open to the prospect that the Simons Observatory and every other observatory may fail
to detect gravitational waves in primordial nature. But that doesn't mean we couldn't rule out
quantum gravity. And when I go back in another way, in addition to Robert Brandenberger,
in addition to being pilots, in addition to, I'm not interested in scuba diving, but we're both
at Case Western, where the very first Michelson interferometer was done. And I understand from
your book that, you know, Michelson got into a little bit of a palaver, as you Brits might say,
or you're not British. But the point being, they used a Michelson interferometer, and now we have
these LIGO machines. And my friend Eric Weinstein, you know, came up with a beautiful thought
experiment that I want to run by you as we wrap up. Imagine the double slit experiment. The double
slit experiment is the most quantum of all quantum mechanical experiments in terms of manifesting
truly irreproducible quantum behavior. Eric asked the question to me, and I couldn't answer it, so
I'll ask it to you. Hopefully you can answer it. But if you had a double slit experiment, you know,
the electron goes through, you know, these, you know, goes through both slits, the wave function
goes through both slits in some sense. But, but in a classical sense, could you not use
the gravitational effects of the electron, just as a thought experiment? And could you not probe the,
use the gravitational waves produced by this electron as it flies through, you know, presumably
one of the two slits, at least in Einstein's conception. So could you use these interferometers,
these Michelson interferometers of LIGO, just as a thought experiment, to reveal which, which
segment of the, or which slit the electron went through, and therefore, you know, kind of simultaneously
be able to localize its position and momentum in a sense. Both from the gravitational waves
produced by the electron itself? Yeah, you use the gravitational waves to then measure the,
the, the which slit the electron went through. Yeah. So you need to look at what is the magnitude
of a gravitational wave the electron would produce. I'm not saying you could do it. Yeah,
that was my thought. And that is very weak. That is going to be very, very weak in, in,
in amplitude. And the issue with that is that if you have a very weak gravitational wave that goes
through, then in, in the case of the interferometers here on earth, then they will move the position
of the mirrors, which will be below Heisenberg and Sergei de principal. Now I am a theorist,
so I have no problem saying and applying for a funding to say, let's build an interferometer,
which is of the size of the universe. Let's do that. But even if you get the funding,
you know, you write the proposal then. So let's do that. I'll talk to Greg. You,
you help me sweet talk Greg. Okay. I'm going to be blacklisted.
The issue is if you think, if you think about the gravitational wave produced by electron in
that process, it's, it's way too weak to being able to, to detect its effect. So, but there are
some experiments out there where I think one, one of the experiments you should try to think about
is having electrons absorbing a gravitational wave and a quantum of gravitational waves.
So absorb a graviton. That's really what you want to do to test the quantum nature
of gravity in a way which would be very similar to that of light. We know that electrons can absorb
or emit unique quanta, discrete quanta of light or photons and as they do that as a change energy
level around the atoms. So you want to do the same thing with gravitons. And in principle,
that would happen. The probability would be very, very small. But in principle, you can imagine
that would happen. The issue is always the reality of the world in which we live in. It's,
it's just so sad because it's not the process that is quite so, I mean, it is challenging in
itself. It's not, it's not just that. It's the fact that there's a lot of noise out there. There's a
lot of other things that would that lead to electrons changing energy levels, for instance.
And so if you want to shield your whole experiment from light and the trainers and all sorts of other
cosmic rays that would have the same effect on your electrons, you're in trouble. But that,
it's the reality of life in which we, which we live in. If we were living in a much simpler universe
where there was no, nothing other than electrons and, and, and gravitons and there was no cosmic rays
and even light or then it may be, it may have been easier to abstract yourself from any other noise
and proves maybe the quantum nature of gravity.
Well, I think that would be a wonderful place to wrap up. There's so many interesting things we
could explore in this wonderful new book. We'll have to do it perhaps in person someday. The
beauty of falling is a beautiful book, a life in pursuit of gravity and it's endorsed by some of
the past guests on the podcast, including Sarah Seeger and Sean Carroll, both, both of them give
it their most high incomium as do I. Claudia DeRome, I hope you have a great deal of success
with this wonderful book. And I think your students are lucky to have you and your colleagues are
lucky to have you. And it's wonderful to have an iconoclastic thinker that, that does can, can, can,
can operate as you do in the mainstream. You could talk to string theorists. You can talk to
people that study lukewarm gravity or causal set theory. And you're not afraid to, to kind of push
back respectfully as, as I think is so refreshing. So this, this book is a wonderful edition. It's
incredibly readable. I listened to it. Princeton University sent me the audio copy as well,
which is not read by you, but, but is a delightful voice, whoever the, the narrator is. So I cannot
recommend this highly enough. Thank you. Thank you, Brian. It was so much fun to talk to you. Thanks.
Hey there. I know if you watched all the way to the end, you're going to love this interview
with Lawrence Krauss, one of the progenitors of the notion of dark energy. And click here for
a playlist for the best episodes about cosmology and the origin of the universe. See you next time
on Into the Impossible.
