The fear that comes out of whatever is left
of the core community is you guys don't have a right
to go direct to a consumer.
You don't have a right to talk about the field.
That belongs to a tiny number of people
who do this morning, noon, and night
who are all possessed of common beliefs.
There have to be some standards.
On the other hand, the core group
that's been trying to gate this has failed.
We have graciously been joined with
two of the most prominent and two of my real heroes
in this field that are Maverick mathematicians
who are self-made mathematicians in a way.
And I wanna talk about how they view the current spirit
of the times as zeitgeist, as we say,
in terms of theories of everything
that are percolating around in the atmosphere.
And to begin with, I'll ask my guest, Eric,
to introduce yourself and say a little bit
about where people can find you.
We'll do that right up front.
And then we'll get started with our discussion topics.
We're gonna have a nice, clean fight.
We're going toe-to-toe.
No, there's not gonna be any fight.
It's gonna be very, very respectful.
So thank you both for joining.
Eric, can you introduce yourself?
And I'll buy me some time to tweet out this link.
Check my feed, Eric Weinstein.
I'm a managing director at Teal Capital.
I come from a mathematics background.
So I'm not a physicist.
And I have an eclectic podcast called The Portal,
which I hope to have, in fact,
I've got agreements from both of these gentlemen
to be my guests on The Portal.
So I'm really looking forward to that.
And happy to help blow up into the impossible, Brian.
You're doing a fantastic job.
I love it.
And it's all thanks to you guys.
You guys are actually my first guest
in what I call the pandemic podcast series,
which began back in April, actually late March with Stephen.
It was the first of the two of you to come on the podcast
and really kicked off this whole idea
of getting some of the world's most brilliant minds
to engage around this topic
of understanding the fundamental nature of the universe.
And at that time, because of the pandemic,
perhaps Stephen's schedule was amenable
to coming on my podcast.
So we chatted for a mere three hours or so.
And he's, as I said, gracious enough to come back.
Stephen, where are you joining us from today?
I'm in Concord, Massachusetts.
And do I introduce myself?
I'm Stephen Wolfram.
I do science and technology and things I've built.
Some technology things, lots of people use.
I've built some science, lots of people use.
And about 30 years ago,
well, I used to be a particle physicist long ago.
I did that when I was a kid.
And then I got interested in computation
and have kind of alternated between doing basic science
and doing technology.
And I've now done about five cycles of that.
And I think it's a very interesting process, actually,
alternating between basic science and technology
because they kind of build on each other.
And it's sort of a progressively spiral upwards,
so to speak.
But the big surprise for me was about
a bit more than a year ago now,
a bunch of things that I've been thinking about,
about how to make a fundamental theory of physics.
Actually thought, I think I actually have some way forward.
And a couple of young physicists were really enthusiastic
about working with me on it.
And so we're like, okay, let's try and really do something.
And the huge surprise is that it's worked.
And which I didn't expect.
I mean, it's, you know, we've been,
we're at a hundred years, roughly,
for general relativity and quantum mechanics,
which are the two sort of big achievements
of 20th century physics.
And they've taken us a great distance.
But I had a bunch of ideas that have been sort of based on
things that came out of the whole computational thinking
that I've done.
And anyway, the big surprise that's worked,
and not only that it seemed to have worked
when I last talked to you,
it's been going absolutely spectacularly since then.
And it's really, it's kind of like embarrassing
because there are a lot of things I should have been able
to figure out 20, 30 years ago,
which are now becoming obvious.
And I think one of the other things to say is that
one of the surprises to me is that I had thought
we were building this kind of prong
in the direction of kind of computation
that would be really different
from the mathematical physics and so on
that people had done before.
Turns out we basically built a sort of a low-level machine
code for how things work.
But it turns out an awful lot of the formalisms
that people worked on in mathematical physics
the last 50 years or so,
they actually fit beautifully
into the kinds of things that we're doing.
And they seem to kind of illuminate what we've done.
And hopefully what we've done illuminates what they're doing.
And I actually, my favorite analogy in recent times
for this is what happened in early days
of computation theory with things like Turing machines,
which was that people had come up with models
of computation, combinators, lambda calculus,
general recursive functions, things like this.
But it wasn't clear how they fit together
and they all seemed rather abstract
and people couldn't kind of tether them.
And then Turing machines came along
and in the usual way that science history is done,
we could say immediately everybody understood,
but actually it took, let's see how long, 40 years, 50 years.
So immediately it was actually 40 or 50 years,
but people understood from that kind of more concrete tethering
of these ideas about computation,
how all these different things fit together.
So that's been, I mean, it's both scientifically interesting
to me and I think also sociologically interesting
because often you come in with the big new theory,
so to speak, and it's like you're kind of gunning down
everything else, but that's not what's happening here.
I mean, what's happening here is that we've got something
which is sort of orthogonal
to what other people have thought about.
It's kind of a low level machine code
and we can kind of see how things fit together
at a higher level.
That's your elevator pitch that goes
to the space elevator stage docking station.
Thank you, Stephen.
And both of you guys are notable
as people are pointing out in the chat,
which I'm monitoring, so behave in there.
I am seeing a lot of questions from younger people
and I think the two of you in particular
have an ability that other scientists
have not yet really been able to achieve
which is to engage young people.
And Stephen, you just talked about engagement
by these young physics students
that we and I spoke about in our first conversation
back in April.
And with Eric, people are engaged on Discord,
on comments and people all over the internet
are really engaged with it.
What do you think it does?
This podcast, the Intini Impossible podcast,
I like to fashion myself as,
someday I'll be the Joe Rogan of physics.
There's already one Joe Rogan,
but I'd like to know what is it about
these theories of everything
that really engages young people?
And what I want to do is kind of translate.
It's fascinating that you have
this sort of bucket theories of everything.
Yeah.
I don't kind of view it as a bucket like that.
For me, I spent my life basically developing computation
and the fact that I happened to have discovered
that that relates to kind of fundamental theory of physics
is kind of a singular event as far as I'm concerned.
It's kind of the bucket of theories of everything
is not a bucket I particularly identify with.
Right, if I can agree with Stephen,
there can only be one.
That was what I said today.
There's a Highlander by Highlander.
One of the surprising things that we've discovered
is that really isn't true.
There can be many ways of approaching that theory.
Yes, but the thing that's interesting is
that you could say there's only,
fair enough, I mean, it depends what you mean by only one.
It's an interesting kind of ontological,
epistemological question.
But I mean, it's like, you could say about computation.
There could only be one theory of computation
and it's Turing machines and it's general recursive functions.
The thing that's surprising about physics
that has become increasingly clear
is that there's this notion of what are the possible,
what are the underlying rules
and then how do we observe those underlying rules?
And it's becoming clear that you can basically,
the only thing that is absolutely rigid
is the underlying rules are computational
and not hypercomputational.
That is, once you say that the underlying rules
are purely computational, it then follows,
it seems that the things we observe
from 20th century physics are inevitable consequences
of that and a few other kind of unspecific assumptions.
It's a hard thing to explain.
Actually, we're just, I think, okay,
so here's a remarkable connection
that's just been becoming clear.
So we have this notion of,
you have some underlying rules, you follow these rules,
you reproduce how the universe works.
But on the other side of that,
we are observing how these rules are working
and interpreting them to say this is how the universe works.
The thing that is surprising is that one can,
I mean, in the language of our kind of theory,
there's this thing called the Rulial Multiway System,
which is this kind of this branching system
that runs sort of all possible rules.
And this is, we're now jumping into the most abstract,
most complicated, but I just want to say one thing about it,
which is kind of interesting,
which is it's turning out that this incredibly abstract thing
that we have, this Rulial Multiway System,
appears to be the same as this thing
called the Infinity Groupoid,
which was developed by Grothendieke
in when I was at the 70s, I guess, 1970s,
which is kind of a pinnacle of abstraction
of category theory in other areas of mathematics.
And what is really quite remarkable to me
is that it seems like this thing that's coming out
of our theory kind of maps into
this incredibly abstract mathematical thing.
And the observations that we have of the universe
correspond to a particular, in mathematical terms,
kind of vibration of this Infinity Groupoid thing.
And that basically what we're,
our way of interpreting the universe
is kind of a slice of that mathematical object.
And so it's the statement, there's only one theory,
in a sense, all these theories are equivalent,
but the question is how we are observing them.
I was making a pop culture reference.
The intellectual spirit of it is that you can have a summit
and there are many faces that could be used
as assaults on that summit.
In the end, however we traverse,
Einstein, for example, came up with his
divergence-free equations after some rumbling around
in differential geometry.
Hilbert went immediately to a Lagrangian description.
They were describing something in common.
So I didn't mean to suggest that there was
a single description, but there can really only be
one underlying theory.
And we, all of us who are,
and I was trying to agree with you, Stephen,
that the most probable number for wrong guests
on this live stream is two.
But in all probability, if it is not two,
then one of us is wrong.
It strikes me that you have gained confidence
that what you are doing is actually not only capable
of producing a fundamental final theory.
And we can talk about what the right language is.
I'm not wedded to any particular description
if you have an objection.
But it sounds to me like you are increasingly convinced
that week by week, this is really the most promising
assault on our foundations.
First of all, if I'm wrong, I hope that you or Garrett Leasy
or one of these other crazy people turns out to be right.
It would be a pleasure to lose to you, sir.
The thing to understand is the kind of system that we've built,
it is very likely that I don't understand what you've done,
but I know a little bit of the mathematical background.
For example, understanding local gauge invariance
and understanding how fiber bundles work in our systems
as a student actually at our recent summer school,
mathematical physicist, who managed to make
great progress on that.
And it's actually very clever
and much simpler than I expected.
The way that essentially sort of fiber bundle type structures
and local gauge invariance arise in our theories.
Now, what you do with it once it's arisen
from this kind of low level machine code,
that's often running with much more traditional
mathematical physics.
And I don't think that there's a,
it's not an incompatible thing to say,
oh, there's some complicated structure to do with
high dimensional systems and fiber bundles and so on.
That's not like, there's no divide yet.
Let's try to state how you and I could both be fit
into the discussion that Brian is trying to conduct.
One thing I'd definitely agree that, you know,
conciliance is nice and it's wonderful
to have consonants what the viewers want as argumentation.
I'm just kidding, I don't care about that,
but what I do think-
Before she gets Sabina back on.
Exactly.
I think it would be really a great outcome
this discussion would be kind of the joining
of your two different approaches.
I don't know about Eric's stuff,
so I can't really comment on that.
The people out in that are watching that have,
as you just said, fiber bundles,
hop-fibration, gauge invariance,
but way of having sort of a Rosetta Stone,
if there are people out there and not asking
or tasking you guys, God forbid, with homework,
but people in the respective domain experts
in both of your two categories,
I think that would be an interesting kind of project
to see can these be reconciled because-
So maybe I should explain what we're doing.
Okay, because there's a fairly large effort at this point.
What's been happening,
you talk about engaging young people,
you know, what I've been trying to figure out
how to do this because there's been a lot of enthusiasm
for our project, a lot of people interested,
a lot of people say,
I want to contribute to this project, okay?
So right now we're just about to kind of roll out,
I think we have 30 research affiliates
and junior research affiliates who are mostly people
who came to the summer school
that we just spent a month having
and they're people who are sort of in motion,
sort of doing research along the lines of this project
and producing papers and so on.
And one of the important objectives there,
there's several important objectives,
but one of them is making these bridges
to other kind of mathematical physics approaches.
Another thing is just being able to check off the list.
There are these effects known in quantum mechanics,
there are these features of general relativity,
for example, can we go down the list and say, okay,
you know, we have destructive interference,
we have spin statistics connections,
we have this, we have that.
The thing that's just absolutely amazing
is every time I think one of these is going to be really hard,
it turns out to be much easier than I think.
And that's been a big surprise to me.
I mean, my expectations keep on being kind of exceeded.
And I think that the, I mean, the other question is,
for example, there's something like general relativity,
which I know, you know,
you have a lovely cosmic microwave background globe
and the back there, it's some, right, it's very cool.
It's weird that it's kind of the inversion of the sky,
so to speak.
Yeah, it's God's idea, right?
Yeah, right.
So for example, there's the, you know,
we have a sort of mathematical proof that in some limit,
we can reproduce general relativity,
but the question is, can you actualize that?
And so here's an interesting example of how sort of,
you know, a direction we're going in,
which is an interesting sort of way to validate theories.
It's the following thing.
So when people normally study gravitation theory,
they say, oh, we've got Einstein's equations from 1915,
they work great.
But if we actually want to find out how two black holes merge,
we don't get to kind of work out, you know,
with Mathematica or something,
the exact result for how this black hole merger will work,
we have to make numerical approximations
to the Einstein equations,
sort of break them down into something discreet,
solve them on a computer,
see what the implications for this process are.
But that kind of break down the Einstein equations
into something discreet that can be solved on a computer,
there's an alternative way to think about that,
which is start from our theory,
which is born as something that you can run on a computer,
and then go up from there to get to something
which can reproduce what happens in black holes and so on.
And so, you know, this is the kind of thing
I happened to do this years ago with fluid dynamics,
where you can start with these very simple,
in that case cellular automaton models of fluid dynamics,
and build up from those to actually reproduce fluid phenomena.
But anyway, so the thing is what I might call
proof by compilation, so to speak,
which is you're going from the kind of low level
structure of the model to actually do computations
that can then be compared with black hole dynamics,
even though you sort of know it has to work,
because you have a mathematical proof
that the two things are equivalent,
but it's very satisfying to see it actually work.
It hasn't, we haven't done that yet,
but we're in the process of doing it.
And more interestingly actually in quantum field theory,
where numerical methods have been much harder to apply,
it looks like we have a pretty good way
to do sort of numerical quantum field theory
in a different way than it's been done before.
Can you say it's easy, by what metric
or what measure function are you defining that?
Easy in terms of just easy for a brilliant grandmaster
of physics to unravel,
or easy in terms of computational efficiency in some sense?
No, I mean, for example, one of the things is,
do we have to know how electrons work?
To be able to, do we have to know what photons
in detail are before we can reproduce
effects in quantum mechanics?
The answer is a lot of these phenomena
seem to be more generic than I expected,
and more amenable to being kind of explained
without having that whole tower of features built.
So that's the main thing I mean by easier.
I think in terms of the technical difficulty
and the mathematical depth of what's going on,
we're doing what physicists often do,
which is we're skating over many
of the mathematical difficulties.
I mean, in some of these derivations,
they're like 12 different limits
that have to be taken of,
this thing is small compared to the size of the universe,
but large compared to this,
but small compared to the curvature of that,
but large compared to this and so on.
And each one of those limits
is a significant amount of mathematical work
to validate and so on.
And this is the typical thing that's been done
by physicists through the ages, I'm afraid,
that just skate right over those things.
Now, we have a big advantage,
which was you can do computer experiments.
So we kind of know it's going to work.
I mean, we know we're not going to be too far off
because we can actually check
a bunch of these things in actual experiments.
Although the experiments we do,
if the universe has 10 to the 400 atoms of space in it,
we certainly don't have that many in our computer.
So we're doing very small versions of this.
I want to say that I think it might be interesting
for us to talk a little bit about kind of the more
sort of societal and structural aspects
rather than getting too deep into the...
Sure.
Wait a minute, I was looking to get,
I wanted to get into the damn weeds.
Go for it, okay.
We will, we will, but yeah.
Small amount of weed whacking.
And then we can talk about the bigger picture
of science in the world and so on,
which I think we probably both have things to say about.
I think that segues nicely into a question
that I brought up with both of you separately
and then earlier today.
And that's kind of the structure of the way
that scientific revolutions take place.
And it's become a trope, you know,
nowadays to say there's a paradigm shift,
which is brought upon by some new idea, radical,
usually some lone genius, like you guys,
working almost in solitude, I'm just teasing, but...
You're just gonna get us into trouble with Reddit.
That's all you're doing.
You're just bathing Reddit.
Well, hopefully Dr. Reddit is not watching yet.
I guarantee she is.
What do you think about this notion of paradigm shifts?
Do you think it's really the way that science takes place
or is it just sort of a retrospective,
retradiction, historical narrative of what has taken place
that is just convenient as a hack for the human mind
to say, okay, in retrospect, the paradigm shifted
with Galileo's observation of the Jovian satellites.
What do you, Eric, think about this notion
of cunean paradigm shifting?
You have to have lived through stasis and stagnation
and through revolution and boom.
And even if the boom isn't the largest boom on record,
like the gold rush or something.
In science, I lived through one or two revolutions,
one of which was a Rosetta Stone
between differential geometry and quantum field theory,
or at least the structure underneath quantum field theory
that was figured out in the mid 1970s.
It doesn't have a historical,
like you can't go to a biopic about it, which is weird,
but your friend Jim Simons, Brian, and C. N. Yang,
arguably maybe the greatest of living physicists,
figured this out over lunch.
And that revolution is going on to this day
called the Wu Yang Dictionary.
There was another one having to do with the discovery
that quantum field theory was a mathematically natural
structure, not just a grab bag of techniques
and that it would have been discovered as an enhancement
of something in algebraic topology
since Dr. Wolfram brings up Alexander growth and deke.
In algebraic topology, we have a theory called boredism,
which is an extraordinary homology theory
and quantum field theory would be discovered
in enhancing boredism theory,
as Ed Whitten, Michael Atia, and Graham Siegel
and others taught us in the 1980s.
Having seen revolutions, yes, there are things
that you can tell people where they're never the same again.
They come to understand, as I've said before,
there should be a tattoo on all of our cecums.
If you can read this, you're too close.
When you pull your head out,
you can better understand the world after the revolution.
And what Dr. Wolfram is discussing
is that we've had a small number
of complete revolutions in our thinking
and many more minor elaborations in our thinking.
There was one around scale,
which might be called the first and second
renormalization revolutions,
originally a Feynman and Schwinger,
but then Ken Wilson really was probably
the big name in that area.
Having been through a few of these revolutions,
having been close enough to study them,
and also in a few different fields like biology
with, you know, CRISPR-Cas9 or optogenetics
or something like this, yeah, no, these things are real.
And they change everything.
And, you know, my resistance to Stephen's theory
will one day turn into, you know,
my saying, oh my God, I can't believe,
I didn't understand what you were saying.
It was too new to use Feynman's famous quote
from when he tried to introduce his path integral
or some over history's approach.
He said, my machines came from too far away
because he was derided.
And you see a lot of people,
we were talking before about Reddit,
just to close this out.
A lot of people are trying to figure out
what the hell is going on in these live streams
and why does one person get to be in them
and who's a crank and who isn't.
They're trying to use some sort of indisha,
which is does that person sound like they're wild-eyed?
Does that person sound sober?
And it's a really odd moment
because on the one hand, everybody sounds crazy
and some of the crazy people sound among the most sane.
And I think Dr. Wolfram, for example,
despite the fact that I think he's wrong,
I think that he is one of the sanest voices out here,
one of the most interesting for sure.
And part of the problem is the mainstream of the community
sounds mad as a hatter to me.
Dr. Wolfram sounds much more reasonable.
So let's comment on paradigm shifts and so on.
I've been fortunate to live through some myself,
even probably responsible for some.
The main process that seems to happen is
a methodological advance is made.
That opens up some new area.
There's a bunch of low-hanging fruit
to be picked in that area.
Lots of exciting stuff happens for five years,
10 years, maybe a little bit longer.
That area of science gets big.
It gets quite institutionalized.
It slows down.
There's 50 or 100 years of sort of stasis.
And then maybe there's some methodological advance
and it opens up again.
And typically, in terms of sort of the conceptualization
of these methodological advances,
it's usually a long process for the people involved in them.
And it's usually, you have to sort of think about things
in the right way.
And then maybe there's some moment when you realize,
yes, I can actually see how this works.
Now, for example, in my current activities in physics,
one of the embarrassments of that
is that the fundamental model, which is based on,
you can think of it as based on rewritings of hypergraphs
or very minimalist, very sort of abstract thing
about transformations for relations between elements.
And that idea you can also think of
as transformation rules for symbolic expressions.
Well, the idea of transformation rules
for symbolic expressions is what I've been using
technologically in building computational languages
for 40 years.
And it is super embarrassing in a sense
that the core idea, which seems to have unlocked
what we're doing now in physics,
is actually something that I've been working on for 40 years.
But I didn't see that connection.
I mean, what's happened is that normally
in using symbolic expressions and transformation rules
for symbolic expressions in computational languages,
those symbolic expressions actually immediately mean something.
They mean adding things together.
They mean, I don't know,
some other identifiable kind of operation.
Whereas in the way we're using them in physics,
it's just the infrastructure.
They mean nothing.
They get meaning because the things in them
turn into things like the atoms of space and so on.
But to begin with, they mean nothing.
So for me, that's sort of an interesting case
because it's something which has been
right under my nose for 40 years.
And it took that amount of time for me
to have the right sort of conceptual framework
to see how it could be applied in this particular case.
And I think that's...
I mean, this is a question of kind of how people,
how these paradigm shifts and so on kind of land in the world.
I mean, okay, so there's one big one
that I've been deeply involved in,
which is the whole idea of using computation and programs
as models of the world,
instead of using mathematical equations
as models of the world.
So you roll the clock back,
300 or so years, we get to Galileo and Newton and so on.
And they had the problem of explaining to people,
no, you can't just reason about how the world works.
You can write down a mathematical equation and solve it,
and that will tell you how the moon moves or something.
And at that time, it was a sort of complicated battle
to have people realize, yes, you can just solve
the mathematical equation,
it'll tell you how the world works.
It's not a question of reasoning about it.
Okay, 300 years go by.
And then we're at the point where,
oh, mathematical equations are the way the world works.
Is there some other way to describe how the world works?
No, no, no, they can't possibly be another way
to describe how the world works.
When I started thinking about kind of generalizing
sort of rules for how the world works
and thinking about simple programs and what they do
and kind of exploring the computational universe
of simple programs,
I would say actually looking back on it's interesting.
You know, I published this big book
called The New Kind of Science back in 2002.
I would say that many fields were really quite receptive
to what I had to say.
Fundamental physics was actually one of the only exceptions.
But what was interesting there was, you know,
some people said, oh, you know, programs,
we don't need programs to describe the world,
mathematical equations do just fine.
Okay, now you look just maybe 15 years later.
And if you look at new models
that people are inventing of things,
they are overwhelmingly based on programs,
not based on mathematical equations.
There's a dark story underneath this,
which is that as tech has been really the,
and by tech I really mean computation
because most of the rest of technology seems to have vanished.
As computation became the one bright spot
in a relatively stagnant world,
and I hate to say it that way and there are caveats,
but let's keep going.
It came to be that many people started to dress up
whatever they were doing in terms of computation, right?
Because it was possible to seek, you know,
funding from a Uri Milner or a Mark Zuckerberg,
or dare I say a Jeffrey Epstein, you know,
all of these sorts of things,
which had exotic funding sources or possible prizes
around them in computation.
It also became the case that funders were more eager
at the government level to hear a proposal
for something having a computational nature.
So the problem that we have is,
is that there were all of these old ideas
about, you know, von Neumann, of Schrodinger,
of Hawking, et cetera, et cetera,
touring about the world as a computer.
And at the moment, there's a system of selective pressures
that partially has to do with how difficult
it is to fund one's research.
So I don't want, I'm very worried about the event horizon
of the computational paradigm.
It's absolutely true, what Stephen is saying,
that this is torn through theoretical physics,
but I'm very dubious as I was.
No, it hasn't, no, it hasn't, not theoretical physics.
No, it hasn't.
The people aren't necessarily doing what you're saying,
but they are dressing things up
in terms of computational, yeah.
So I think your interesting points,
I think not quite right, okay?
So you're absolutely right that in theoretical physics,
for example, quantum computing has become this giant,
you know, fundable thing.
We can talk about that separately.
Or black hole information paradoxes,
or the idea of the universe as a computer
where John Wheeler had old points,
but that feel.
But that's not what I'm talking about.
That's not what I'm talking about.
What I'm talking about is,
there is a way of thinking about doing science
that says you write down an equation,
you can solve this equation,
and it will tell you how the world is going to work.
Computational scientific materialism.
Well, that's sort of the old line of reductionism,
which is if we can just solve these equations,
we get beautiful closed-form solutions.
The surprising thing that, you know,
I really got serious about in the 1980s
was this phenomenon where if what you think is going on
is that it's just following computational rules,
then that doesn't work anymore.
There's this phenomenon of computational irreducibility
where the system is doing what it does,
and it's doing a computation,
and we're trying to figure out what the system does.
And we're also doing a computation,
and there's this thing I call the principle
of computational equivalence,
which is basically the statement or the claim,
which we're getting more and more evidence for,
that our ability to think through what a system does
is of the same level of computational sophistication
as what the system itself does.
So we never get to outrun the system.
We don't get to do what has been the kind of banner story
of a lot of traditional mathematical science,
which is find this reduction, this reducible computation,
where we can just say, and the system is going to do this.
We're kind of stuck.
There's the issue about whether we can compute it out
once we find the rules.
So the idea is that you could imagine a world
in which Maxwell's equations are perfect all the way down,
and you still might not be able to compute
the consequences of Maxwell's equations
in the very complicated way.
Like the Einstein equations, like Navier-Stokes.
It happens, but it's very obscure in those equations,
because when you look at the Navier-Stokes equations,
the standard equations for fluid flow,
one of the most notable features of fluid flow
is fluid turbulence.
Fluid flows quickly, it looks kind of random.
You say to people who study the Navier-Stokes equations,
can you reproduce that from the underlying equations?
Is that something that's in the underlying equations,
or is it maybe a sign of some smaller scale molecular
processes that are getting amplified, et cetera, et cetera?
So they'll typically get, I mean, these days,
they have a lot of empirical ways to do it,
but if you really push on the fundamental question,
they'll get kind of embarrassed,
because they just don't know.
It's like quark confinement.
If you know the rules of quarks,
can you prove that they're not never going to be found
in isolation and only going to be found typically in hadrons
and protons and neutrons?
That's a similar thing, which actually has,
that particular one actually has a more direct story of...
Let's all agree that we're modern people
and we don't have the old reductionist dream.
That's a non-trivial point,
because in theoretical physics,
that point has not yet been understood.
Well, I think it has.
I think that the extent to which we talk about
what is emergent, what is not, what is anthropic,
what is not, we now have many concepts,
including galois sorts of...
Not galois, girdle sorts of concerns
that are cropping up in theoretical physics.
Finally, yes, I wrote the paper
about undersideability in theoretical physics
back in the early 1980s.
No, I think it needs to be said, again,
by somebody who hopes to be your competitor,
that you were very early on a lot of these topics.
You weren't doing it as part of a fad.
You were, in fact, the pioneer
coming out of the computational ability of mathematics
and all that you've set up.
And you've wrapped some beautiful libraries
with many more functions
than anybody ever thought we could have.
So kudos to you.
There was a huge resistance inside of theoretical physics
because it was a very closed, arrogant community.
It had many reasons to be arrogant.
It has fewer reasons to be arrogant now.
And so in part, I think that you were dismissed unfairly.
It's very important that you not be the one
to blow your own horn.
So I would be happy to say that I remember
when that book came out,
I remember the derision, the anger.
Didn't seem to come from anywhere in particular.
And it was not listened to properly,
even though I don't think that it actually is doing
what you say it's doing now,
but one, happy to be wrong.
And it was always a really important point
that you were making within that.
I just don't think that it really got hurt.
What do you make of that, Steven?
Hold on a second.
I wanted to just correct that impression
because the fact is, I was looking at this recently, right?
What sort of, insofar as there was a negativism
about that book, where did it actually come from?
Because there was tons of positivism.
I mean, the negativism, it turns out,
was specifically concentrated
in people who did fundamental physics.
And if you look outside of that area,
it was not negativism,
it was actually a lot of positivism.
It's a steel man, the critics, which I hate to do.
The critics have a feeling
that there's a tiny number of fields
where it's very difficult to check people.
It's very hard to say when a theoretical physicist
is bullshitting.
It's very hard to say when a theoretical,
very pure mathematician is speaking nonsense.
So there is this fear.
How do we know that what he's saying in some sense
is correct in any way?
Sorry, Eric, to interrupt,
you're correct enough to devote many precious hours
to unravel it.
That's the...
There's that, but there's not that much
to unravel at the moment.
So I'm not that sympathetic with that.
This is sort of Sabine.
I don't have time for this stuff.
My feeling is, to hell you don't have time.
There's almost nothing happening.
Now, with that said, what I think is,
is that there was a fear that quite honestly,
people like you and like myself are cheating.
I wanna be open about this.
The fear that comes out of whatever is left
of the core community is,
you guys don't have a right to go direct to a consumer.
You don't have a right to talk about the field.
That belongs to a tiny...
The privilege of a tiny number of people
who do this morning, noon, and night,
who are all possessed of common beliefs.
And that's something that both you and I have been fighting.
Now, I would also suggest that Steven and I probably
are not eager to open the door to every lunatic
with a red crayon who wants to scribble something
on a roll of paper towels
and say that they've got a unified theory.
So there have to be some standards.
On the other hand, the core group
that's been trying to gate this has failed.
It was historically interesting to me.
So I was, you know, I did particle physics
during its kind of golden age in the late 1970s,
when I was a late teenager, so to speak.
And I think I did pretty well.
You know, a bunch of I got, you know,
got was sort of pretty successful in the field.
And I wrote a bunch of papers that still get cited
because I lived in the sort of golden age
and not a lot came after that.
I mean, not because they were necessarily, you know,
there was a question of picking low hanging fruit.
And so that meant that I know a large fraction
of the kind of leading people in theoretical physics
above some age.
I was quite surprised by the level of kind of angst
when new kind of science came out.
But the typical thing that I heard was,
oh my gosh, if this is right,
what we've been doing for the last 50 years
all has to be thrown away.
And I kept on saying,
I don't think that's what's going to happen.
You know, and people would say to me, like, you know,
I was noticing, I think I made a, you know,
wrote a sort of historical piece about this
and I described it as Nobel Prize winners with pitchforks.
And so there was a, it was a quite a parade.
It was quite, it's quite kind of interesting looking back
on it.
I was going to send one of them an email actually,
just when my new thing came out
and then the person went and died.
So.
They die or they soften.
I think what was interesting to me was at that time,
20 years ago, there was a lot of kind of,
you know, we're going to make it.
String theory is going to do it.
We're almost there.
You know, we don't need anything else.
I think that's changed now.
That's about 1984 through 86
when the string mania was at its height.
No, I think that, you know, now,
you know, we've got a lot of mostly younger physicists
who are pretty seriously working on this stuff.
And I think, you know, it's going great.
Of the older crowd, you know,
I sort of been in contact with a large fraction of them.
And it's like, oh, this seems interesting.
And it's like, you should actually work on this.
I keep on telling them, you should actually work on it.
And some of them have, you know,
been on live streams, we've done and things like that.
And we certainly talked about things.
But I think, you know, a lot of people,
they do something for a living
and this isn't what they do for a living.
And I don't know whether they'll kind of make the effort
to kind of turn what the change, what they do for a living.
I don't know whether it matters.
I think that the concept that, you know,
it is probably, particularly 20 years ago,
it was still the case that the kind of institutional structure
of things like physics was very strong.
As in, it was like, we have this institutional structure
and this is how this field is going to work.
And we don't do anything from the outside.
My impression is that that's weakened
in the intervening years, but maybe I'm wrong.
The perception that I get from comments,
from people is almost like being candid
with both of you as friends.
On one hand, Eric is criticized for a complexity,
a technical, you know, sort of toolkit
that is beyond even many theoretical physicists.
So, you know, I disagree that, you know, they'll say,
I don't have enough time, but it is true
that there's, you know, general stock and trade
of a theoretical cosmologist is not necessarily
hop vibrations, fiber bundles, et cetera.
It might be perturbation theory.
It might be quantum field theory.
And on the other side of the coin,
Steven, I think sometimes the perception is,
it's too simplistic, not in the sense,
or it's too elementary.
It's too fundamental in the sense that you use
in your wonderful new book,
which you're kind enough to send to me.
And congratulations for writing a shorter book
than a new kind of science, I think by about 40 pages.
Brian gets a copy.
I think Steven will send you one.
I'll give you one when we get together.
I've got multiple copies.
So let me just start with you for a second.
Eric knows his critics.
He knows what people say.
And I think he brings up a good point.
Wait, I have critics?
This is the first I hear of this, Brian.
There's two.
One's named Pia something and the other one.
But Steven, in your case, I think it's absolutely correct
that, you know, people are blown away by the contributions.
I have people, you know, asking me to thank you
from the depths of their heart for Mathematica,
for new kind of science that in some ways it's amazing
that you guys, if I get comments, I'm reading them,
you save my life, you touch my life, you change my life.
It's so amazing.
But on the other hand, I think that that in, you know,
real scientific circles oftentimes breeds a class
of almost undermining and questioning.
Let me explain something which I think is interesting.
So I am, that people think what I've done is simplistic
is a great compliment because I've spent a huge amount
of effort trying to take the things
that I'm thinking about and make them simple enough
that both I can understand them well
and I can explain them well.
When I wrote New Kind of Science,
I even said this in the introduction.
I said, the fact that this appears to be very simple,
appears to be very straightforward will make people
who thought, you know, who work on technical science
think that, you know, they must really understand this
and this must be something simple and irrelevant.
It isn't true.
You know, the fact is it is much more difficult,
at least for me and maybe it isn't for everybody,
but I think it probably is for almost everybody,
to turn things into things that can be described simply
than it is to kind of, you know,
maybe there's a certain challenge to sort of building
up the tower of being able to talk about, you know,
fiber bundles and self-dual connections
and all this kind of thing.
But that's a, it's a well-defined tower you have to climb.
So for example, right now,
I happen to be working on kind of a very bizarre thing
that again, I never thought would come out,
which is a kind of a general theory of metamathematics.
So in mathematics, one thinks about, you know,
there's the particular mathematics people do,
the three million theorems of mathematics
that have been published in the literature
of mathematics and human history.
But then there's the kind of full metamathematics
of all possible theorems.
And the remarkable thing is that it looks like
we can actually derive kind of the analog of Einstein's
equations in metamathematical space, a very bizarre.
We keep coming to this point.
I want to just put a pin here just in case it's of interest.
I don't think that it's very difficult to imagine
recovering Einstein's equations given Hilbert's contribution
so that we know in a weird sense
that Einstein did something very, very difficult.
And I've compared it to Half Dome
where there's a sheer face that Einstein went up
and then there's this gentle face that Hilbert went up
after he knew that it could be climbed.
It seems to me that because we know that Einstein's equations
results from the simplest objective function
that you could have,
which is the scalar curvature in Rouhani in geometry,
that that's not a great target.
I mean, it's great that you can produce something
that looks like Einstein's theory out of computation rules.
The next one on the list would be Yang-Mills theory.
I mean, they're only really four basic equations.
Again, the objective function is as simple as it gets.
So to Steven's point,
what we know about the current physical world
is that two out of the four equations,
fundamental equations for the fields,
the things that dance in our world
and we call particles or waves,
both of those come from the simplest possible
curvature equations that one can have in geometry.
So if you think of the geometry is largely about curvature,
then the two simplest structures
that can generate equations called the Yang-Mills Lagrangian
or the Yang-Mills Maxwell Lagrangian,
which is just you take the size of the curvature
and you square it and that's it.
And the other one is you just take a piece of the curvature
without squaring it when you have a piece to take
called the scalar curvature and that's it.
The other two equations have a slightly different character.
I want to leave aside the Higgs field
and what we would call the Klein-Gordon equation
with the potential.
But I would say the next order of business is,
do you find the Dirac equation?
Because it's very difficult to find spinners.
Spinners, yes.
Arising from...
Computational rules.
Well, you can do it with...
So the answer is,
do we know how we managed to get
spinner representations in the rotation group?
We know how to construct these things.
There is a mystery about why they are there to construct.
Now, there are people who will go to their grave saying,
there is no mystery.
I know how to construct it.
Therefore, I know what it is, which is never true.
I mean, we only really understand something in mathematics
when we can walk all around it
and see it from many different angles.
I agree that we know how to construct spinners.
I know how to construct Dirac operators.
But this is a highly non-trivial question in our world.
It comes out of what I call the psychedelic of mathematics,
the square root construction,
where you ask a question like,
what is x squared equals minus one?
It has no solution in the reals.
You have to jump into another space
in order to answer the question, right?
So it has this different character,
which is the answer to the problem isn't found
in the space in which the problem was posed.
In the case of Einstein's equations
and in the Yang-Mills equations,
so the souped up version of Maxwell's equations,
non-linear Maxwell theory, if you will.
You have something which has a character
where I understand where it comes from.
In the case of the Dirac equation,
you've got much bigger problems.
I tried to bring this up in the last live stream.
It didn't work at all.
What do you do in quantum gravity
when you don't have an observation of the metric,
for example, and therefore,
you cannot construct the ocean
in which the electron is a wave?
Now, if you think about it very carefully,
in a weird way, electrons are basically functions
and photons are basically derivative operators, okay?
Bustles, which are-
It's a bizarre way to think about it.
I mean, that's-
It's not a bizarre way at all.
You can think about, I mean,
I know the mathematical physics,
so I understand what you're talking about,
but I think it's-
Well, then you wouldn't say
it's a bizarre way at all, I don't think.
In any event, what we're talking about
is we're talking about versions of the XY plane
and functions and derivatives, right?
And the idea of the XY plane,
that grows up to become something called fiber bundles,
which Stephen mentioned at the beginning.
The idea of functions grows up
to be something called sections,
and the idea of derivatives grows up
to be something called connections.
Now, these are the basic bread and butter
of what goes on before you get to the quantum.
And in that picture,
there's a big difference
between recovering the easiest bits
and recovering the hardest bits.
So I don't mean to put extra weight on Stephen's shoulders.
If he can do the first bits, that's great.
But there's a series of challenges
that are of escalating difficulty
in terms of recovery,
because of the simplicity of some portions of our model
and the Baroque complexity of other portions of the model.
For example, the internal quantum number assignments
that give the particles their personality,
the number of generations,
the chirality of the situation, it's very interesting.
Stephen's rules are going to have to pick a left or a right.
So it's very interesting
to how he's going to recover a chiral world.
This is silly.
Let me give you my point of view here, okay?
We can talk about details of mathematical physics.
It's quite interesting.
I know you know a bunch about it.
We can go deeply into, you know,
how you know,
half into just spin versus into just in particles work,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
I mean, what you're doing
is you're making the paradigm shift mistake.
You're talking about things
in terms of kind of existing mathematical physics ideas.
And yes, we, you know, you're saying,
oh my gosh, you'll never be able to get spinners.
No, I'm not saying-
No, no, no, I don't think you're saying that.
I'm saying, let me just make a few points about this.
Yeah, go ahead Stephen, yeah.
Okay, I mean, the fact is the, you know,
we're actually hot on the trail of understanding
how fermions versus bosons work.
It's quite interesting.
It has to do, it seems, with cases where in our,
and again, it's sort of a somewhat complicated story,
but it's a, you know, these, these branch pairs
and branch shield space,
whether they end up being things that merge
after a small number of steps or not,
seems to be the, what is the distinguishing feature
between bosons and fermions?
How that relates to half an inch of spin
we don't completely know.
It seems to be related to various features of homotopy
in the multi-way causal graph.
And, you know, it's quite possible
that some of the kinds of mathematical physics
that you like a lot are highly relevant
in understanding how that homotopy works
in the multi-way causal graph.
It looks like a limit of the multi-way causal graph
is quite possibly related to Twister theory.
And that one can understand some of the things
that happen there on the basis of Twister theory,
whether we can get, we're now understood,
we've understood quite a bit
about how rotational invariance works,
how angular momentum works,
but it's, it's kind of a weird business
because in a sense, we're trying to build
from the machine code up and, you know,
we can have a detailed mathematical physics conversation.
But where's the silliness?
That's what most people are interested in.
Oh, I disagree.
I think that people actually want to see
whether or not, you know,
both of us are saying outlandish things.
By the way, I don't think what I was saying was silly at all.
My guess is I've had a miscommunication.
It's still looking standard mathematical physics.
I think it's all standard mathematical physics.
And the fact is...
I'm going to invoke my referee.
I'm going to hold on, hold on one second.
I do want to point something out.
I think it's very important.
I've heard this from people
that I hold in high esteem, Paul Steinhardt.
One reason that Paul says he refuses
to ever get a Facebook or Twitter account
is because he would invariably be tempted
to propose an interesting idea,
which by necessity would be new,
novel, untested, unproven at some level.
And then immediately it would be attacked,
assailed, subjugated to constraints and concerns.
And I think you guys have both seen that
for the following reason
that you both are master explicators of what you do.
You both are obviously domain experts in what you know,
and you understand the other branches of physics
and mathematics that are pertinent to it.
However, neither one really knows the intimacy
of the other one's theories.
And I think it's important to realize that
just like people assailing your theories from without,
I think it's too soon to tell,
at least in the case of Stephen's work,
which is in some sense 20 years old
or coming up on 20 years old.
And in some sense, it's also brand new
because I think when you look at the successful applications,
I feel like we should just check those off, Stephen.
I mean, biological systems, crystallography,
you go down the list, finance, economics.
Where the Wolfram approach,
the new kind of science approach,
first outlined in 2003 or so,
that has already been proven, it doesn't need to be proven.
Where I think it's different is where we lay
on this extra layer of computability
as a fundamental nature of the universe,
which for my perception,
maybe Stephen correct me if I'm wrong,
has sort of a multiverse component to it.
You talk about different aspects of the universe.
Well, you talk in an essay that you wrote in 2017
about the space of all universes where these rules.
That was before I understood what I now understand.
Yeah, but we are barely coming up to where you were in 2017.
So can we take a step back?
We talked about the paradigm issue.
I want to talk a little bit more about
how these ideas get into the firmament
or get into the zeitgeist.
Before you do that, I want to just clear something up.
Stephen, I'm not trying to scuttle your theory.
I believe that your theory,
if you have an approach that works
and it's a face up the same mountain,
my belief is that you will get to answer these questions.
You may tell us for the first time spiritually
what a spinner is from a computational perspective.
I'm not saying you've only done the easy stuff
and the other stuff is really hard.
The stuff that you're talking about is really hard.
What's going to pick out the Riemann curvature tense?
How are we going to generate this?
Great, that one's fairly easy.
Well, I believe that because it's very natural.
There's a reason that in some sense it came first
before the Wu Yang dictionary.
I think spinners are going to come out as,
I mean, the latest thing, which is only a week old.
So it's still uncooked.
So we're tricking him to sharing this on the live stream.
It's an exclusive.
This is an exclusive here.
Well, we probably talked about it
on how working session live streams.
But first point is, in our models,
quantum mechanics is a very natural thing.
And when we think about traditional classical mechanics,
it's like you throw a ball, it goes in a definite direction.
In quantum mechanics, the idea is
that the ball tests out all possible paths
and then we only get to see various probabilities
about what happens.
In our models, there are these things
called multi-way systems, which basically
are enumerating all the possible paths.
And the whole sort of dynamics of how quantum mechanics works
comes out of these multi-way systems.
Now, what happens is when you look at one
of these multi-way systems at a particular time,
you take a slice through it and you get this thing
we call branch shield space.
Branch shield space is the analog
in the space of quantum states to physical space
in kind of ordinary position in the universe.
In physical space, you mean a space-like hyperspace?
These branch shield surfaces are the analog
they're branch-like hypersurfaces,
which are the analog of space-like hypersurfaces
in standard spacetime, okay?
So this branch-like hypersurface in branch shield space,
there's an extent in branch shield space,
which is where as you move through branch shield space,
you're moving through the space
of sort of quantum entanglements.
And so states that are further away in branch shield space
are less quantum entangled than states
which are close in branch shield space.
What is your notion of a distance?
Well, it's based on, if you look at the multi-way graph,
the nearest neighbors in branch shield space
are things which have a common ancestor one step back
in the multi-way graph.
So those are what we call branch pairs.
I mean, this is, unfortunately, it gets fairly...
I appreciate that, but the idea is you have some ordering
by number of steps.
Metric, yes.
Because it's metric-like.
Based on sort of common ancestry in the multi-way graph.
And essentially what happens is,
that thing on the left is a multi-way causal graph.
The thing on the right is a kind of play version
of a kind of mixture of branch shield space
and physical space.
Probably not the best visualization, but it's something.
But anyway, so the idea is there's physical space
that we're all familiar with.
There's this branch shield space,
which is the kind of space of quantum states,
just like there's a speed of light in physical space.
In our model, there's a maximum entanglement speed
in branch shield space, which is kind of the maximum speed
at which kind of you can maximum speed
of kind of entanglement in that space.
So, okay, why is any of this relevant?
Again, this is, I'm in the Einstein equations,
which have to do with physical space.
One is looking at, in one way to view the Einstein equations,
is to think about what happens to a GDC,
what happens to the path of a particle in spacetime.
Essentially, what's happening in the Einstein equations
is that energy momentum causes deflections
in GD6 in spacetime.
In a branch shield space, the exact same thing happens.
Essentially, energy momentum causes deflections
in GD6 in branch shield space.
And it turns out that that deflection process
gives one the Feynman-Path integral, which is really cool.
And it's one of the things that I sort of found
the most elegant in the things
that we've done so far in this theory,
that what in physical space is the Einstein equations
and branch shield space is the path integral.
Okay, why is this relevant to fermions and bosons?
The reason it's relevant is that-
Wait, wait, I just wanna take a moment
to think about what you just said.
You said that something in general relativity
that is Einstein's equations,
which are maximally resistant
of all of our structures to quantization,
is analogous in some ways to the Feynman-Path integral,
which I'm gonna disagree later with your characterization,
which is Feynman sort of characterization,
the linguistic description of what we claim is happening
when we're taking one of these integrals.
But the point is, is that you're just making a claim
en passant, which is astounding to begin with,
so if true, which is that the Einstein equations
are somehow intimately bound up
in the quintessential centerpiece of quantum field theory,
not even quantum mechanics.
Yep, yep, yep.
That's a great summary.
The Einstein equations, I mean, this is a remarkable thing,
which I certainly did not see coming,
that the path integral is the exact same thing
as the Einstein equations, but in a different kind of space.
Never heard this.
Right, so that's one of the things that we discovered
like six, seven months ago, that was like, wow.
And those two things meet up
when you think about black holes
and black hole information and so on.
There's sort of this, and in fact,
the ADS-CFT correspondence is almost certainly
taking this multi-way causal graph
and projecting it into space time
and projecting it into branchial space.
But it's the same graph projected in two different ways,
corresponds to the kind of general relativity ADS side
of ADS-CFT and the quantum field theory CFT side of it.
That's almost certainly what that is
and various people are working on
filling in the details of that.
It's pretty neat.
So then, okay, you asked about fermions and bosons
and I was gonna tell you this week's
kind of way of getting to that.
And these are complicated things,
so it takes a few steps.
Yeah.
Okay, so the next thing to realize is in quantum mechanics,
one of the things that emerged particularly
from von Neumann's work was this idea of,
there is an amplitude, it is a complex number,
it operates in Hilbert space, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
One of the things that was implicitly done
was something which I think turns out to be a mistake,
which is that the magnitude and the phase
of these quantum amplitudes were sort of all packaged together.
You mean the projectivization of a Hilbert space?
Yes, yes, I mean, the fact that,
well, the fact that the fact that you can think about it
as a magnitude and phase is just a complex number.
What in our models, what ends up happening
is the magnitude and the phase
come from completely different places.
And so what happens is the magnitude has to do
with accounting of paths going through this multi-way graph.
The phase has to do with essentially
where you land up in Braunschild space.
And actually one of the things that we figured out
about a week or two ago is it's just unbelievably easy
to get the double slit experiment to work.
And we get nice pictures.
I don't know what that means,
but the first point, if I understand-
Oh, no, it's interference in quantum mechanics.
Right?
I understand that.
It's not what-
You mean you don't understand how it comes out naturally
in some sense?
No, what he's saying, I mean, we have to go back
and unpack what the good doctor is saying.
He is talking about the fact that we claim
that we work in a Hilbert space.
We don't work in a Hilbert space.
We work in something called the projectivization
of a Hilbert space.
And effectively that destroys a certain amount of structure.
So we begin with something like a vector space.
We remove the origin.
We pluck it out like the seed out of a cherry.
And then we take, you know, all of the sort of meat
and we compress it in this particular way.
And what Stephen is saying is,
is that that is a loss of information
that we teach physicists with their mother's milk
and that this may be, in fact, throwing away information
that is actually experimentally much more important.
Well, I mean, I think that let's not get in,
let's not go off into a projectivized space for a minute.
The, let's, I mean, the point.
You guys never take me anywhere.
That's it.
Buy me to the Hilbert space.
All right.
The thing that ends up being interesting is the,
when you think about kind of these, these, again,
this is the kind of the sort of quantum gd6,
what ends up happening is the phase of the quantum amplitude
is essentially defined by its position in branchial space.
So you think about these, in general relativity,
you'd think about, you know, a gd6 is deflected
by the presence of mass that, you know,
it's attracted to some massive object, moves around it.
It changes the direction of the gd6
is changed by the presence of mass.
Okay.
In, in branchial space, it's the same story.
The gd6 is deflected by the presence of energy momentum.
That presence of energy momentum corresponds
to the Lagrangian and quantum field theory.
And what one is doing is deflecting that gd6.
The deflection of the gd6, the interpretation of that
is it's changing the phase of the quantum amplitude.
It's changing where that gd6 is going to land
in branchial space,
which changes the phase of the quantum amplitude.
And amusingly enough,
what appears in the Feynman-Path integral
is exactly e to the i over h bar times the action integral.
The action integral is the integral in our world
of the divergence of causal edges,
which corresponds to Lagrangian.
There seem to be multiple things going on here.
If I can just.
I do want to invoke my, my privilege here.
Oh, sure.
Being the moderator.
We've covered the first of our six or seven topics
in 40 and an hour and 15 minutes.
It's clear to me.
I just want to finish on bosons for a second.
Okay. Please. Yeah.
Please finish up bosons and let's move to our next,
which will be experimental testability.
The flavor of, of, of this is that what ends up happening
with bosons is this kind of collection in branchial space.
This, this kind of focusing in branchial space.
And what seems to happen with fermions
is a divergence in branchial space.
And it's, you know,
one of the things that I've been always been curious about
is why are there only fermions and bosons?
Why isn't there lots of, you know,
intermediate Paris statistics and so on?
And I think that the answer is that it's going to end up
being the case that basically in branchial space,
things either diverge or they don't diverge.
And that's going to, but, you know,
there's much mathematical physics packing
that has to go around this.
And if I could just take 15 seconds to riff off this.
Okay.
You have a situation in which the great thing
about general relativity, for example,
is that all you need is length and angle.
And length and angle turns out to amount
to a derivative operator,
which turns out to have mixed partials that don't commute.
You can measure their failure.
That's the curvature.
You knock it down with linear algebra
and you create graph.
It's a miracle. It's fantastic.
On the other hand, it's not that surprising
that if you have a situation in which you have some notion
of like size and perpendicularity
that you can create something like that.
For example, you do have something called
malinobus distance that you can get out of data.
You can treat a covariance matrix
like a Ramanian metric, if you will.
So there are all sorts of ways in which
we already know that the discrete,
that anything that leads to length and angle
becomes geometric.
I think that that's both very good for Dr. Wolfram
and it is also just a bit of caution for the rest of us
that the early part may lead you on
because it's a different way of describing
length and angle and the consequences,
which thanks to both Einstein and Grossman
and I guess Hilbert, we know that all we're looking for
in some sense is the most basic consequence of that.
It'll be cool to see it come out.
And I do believe that you may likely get fermions
out of a question.
You may have to ask the question
about how to take the square root of something.
I'll be astounded if you have fermions
without taking a square root.
But the key feature is that you're not that far away
from geometry as soon as you're talking about
malinobus distance and covariance matrix and data.
Okay, so one cool thing is that the uncertainty principle
in our theory is basically the analog of Riemann Coverture
in branchial space.
So the non-commuting of variables
is just like a non-commuting.
And in geometric quantization,
it is literally the curvature tensor
on in the Hamiltonian picture.
Absolutely.
By the way, in terms of the square root thing,
I have the following guess, okay?
That what basically happens in branchial spaces,
you have these branch pairs and they converge, okay?
Branch pairs, next step, they converge.
I think that the Boson case is they diverge
and they converge.
The fermion cases, they diverge and they don't converge.
And so in some sense, the square root is being taken
by the fact that you're having the beginning of that diamond,
but not the end of the diamond.
Sounds like the difference
between commutators and anti-commutators.
Yeah, yeah, it's my first guess about how that works.
And it'll, I mean, the thing that, again,
I thought we were going to have to find actual electrons
to be able to distinguish fermions and bosons.
It's seeming increasingly likely
that we can basically understand fermions in bulk
without having to know exactly how particles work.
What I want to do now is sort of compare
and contrast different approaches,
not necessarily only from the two of you,
but in the context that I often get,
well, first of all, the common thing that I get
from all my friends on Reddit
or wherever else this gets posted is,
how come these things aren't being peer reviewed
and what kinds of falsifiable predictions are they making?
Let's start with the latter.
Steven, you and I talked back in April
and you made it clear that things
such as the fundamental constants of nature,
the speed of light are emergent
or embedded, encoded, encrypted within your new findings.
I want to know, are there new predictions
that could be used instead of retradictions?
Not that they don't have validity,
not that they don't have a value.
After all, Einstein, in some sense,
validated his theory on a retradiction,
which was known for millions of years.
It was known for years,
the perihelion advance of the planet Mercury,
and it had to be reconciled with Einstein's predictions
and through observations, it was found to be true.
I want to know, Steven, are there new fundamental predictions
that you can point to that have at least in principle
a chance of being detected?
And then I'll have a similar question for Eric.
Well, let's see, I don't do the dueling theories theory,
but-
I'm not gonna, yeah, I'm not gonna do all of that.
Falsifiability is a weird concept
that has all kinds of problems.
But the fact is, first thing is,
the number one thing that we're building is a framework,
like calculus.
Calculus is not something that's falsifiable.
Calculus is a framework for doing things.
Second question is, does calculus
usefully apply to the universe?
That's something we can validly ask.
And that's something that we can,
there are things which are sort of generic predictions
from the framework.
So the thing we're trying to do right now
is what people should do when they first introduce
some new set of ideas, which is,
can we actually reproduce, can we make theoretical predictions?
Can we reproduce what has been known before?
And can we get out vastly more than we put in?
We put very little in.
And the question is, do we get all these things out?
Or do we have to add some special clues to get fermions?
Or do fermions come out naturally
as soon as we understand how to get there?
And the thing which has been remarkable so far
is we've been checking off, do we get this,
do we get that, do we get that?
So far, touch wood, no clues.
I mean, so far, it's been hard work,
but nothing has been like, oh my gosh,
the universe, the theory predicts the universe
should be 26 dimensional.
We have to explain why it's not type thing.
We haven't had any of those kind of
clues barriers, so to speak.
So that's encouraging.
Now, in terms of actually making
specific measurable predictions,
there are a couple of issues.
First issue is going from the raw theory,
the low level machine code,
to something where you turn a telescope in that direction
and you see a particular thing,
there's lots of hard work and lots of astrophysics
and so on to be done in going from one place to another.
At first point, the second point is that
to actually make one of the things in our theory is
there is one scale.
Same happened with Einstein's theory, actually,
although for various reasons that,
well, we can talk about that,
but there's one scale which is
this maximum entanglement speed.
We don't know what the value of that is.
We have some guesses, but we don't know its value.
If we knew its value,
we would have a whole bunch of predictions immediately,
but we don't know its value.
Einstein had the same problem.
He had the cosmological constant.
He didn't know its value.
It's a lot of predictions he might have liked to make.
He couldn't make,
because he didn't know the value
of the cosmological constant.
He had one meta prediction was
that the universe wasn't expanding, he thought,
which is why he added his cosmological constant
in the first place, but that's his scale.
So then he had a few scale-independent predictions,
in particular, the bending of light around the sun
being a factor of two larger
than had been predicted in the previous theory,
things like that.
So one thing that we've been interested in
is what scale-independent predictions can we make?
That's question one.
And question two, what predictions can we make
that are, as soon as we know this one scale,
we immediately have predictions.
And then which predictions can we make
that have the shortest distance
in terms of the tower of astrophysics
or particle physics or whatever that have to be done?
It's a cautionary tale that like Newton, for example,
he goes through his whole, you know,
the Principia, and he works out lots of things
about his law of gravity,
and he has a section about the moon,
and the section about the moon ends with the sentence,
I think, but the abs of the moon is twice as great.
In other words, he got the wrong answer.
And, you know, one might have said,
oh my gosh, he got the wrong answer.
He better abandon the whole theory and run away,
so to speak.
Turns out it was just hard to do those calculations.
It took another 150 years to get them nailed down.
So that wasn't, you know, so one has to be a little bit,
and Einstein also, you know, the first time he computed
the bending of light around the sun, he got it wrong.
And it was, you know, fortunate that the first,
you know, experiment that was going to be done on that
didn't end up getting done, because of World War I.
And so, you know, by the time an experiment did get done,
he'd managed to get the right answer,
whether the experiment was right as a different story,
but that's another thing.
But I think that the, so the question of, you know,
do we have kind of scale independent predictions?
The answer is quite possibly.
I think there's one quite likely one that has to do with
two photon correlations for photons in orbit
around rotating black holes, which is a slightly obscure thing,
but it's not completely out of the range
of what's experimentally accessible.
Other, I mean, it's kind of amusing that that's so bizarrely
similar, it's kind of a quantum analog of Einstein's,
you know, bending of light around the sun type thing.
But, you know, that's one kind of thing.
Another thing is a suggestion, at least from the theory,
about the existence of particles much lighter than the electron,
maybe 10 to the 20th times lighter than the electron.
That number depends on the scale parameter that we don't know.
The existence of such particles probably has a bunch
of implications for dark matter,
which are things that we're planning to work out.
There are a bunch of implications for cosmology.
I mean, there's an expectation, not a necessary feature,
but a suggestion, at least from the model,
that the universe starts kind of infinite dimensional
and only gradually kind of decay down
to the sort of modest three dimensions that we have now.
That has a bunch of implications for inflationary scenarios
for the universe and so on.
You know, I think the most outlandish possibility,
which I don't think will actually happen,
is that still at the time of recombination,
you know, when your cosmic microwave background globe
was minted, so to speak,
that there would still be a trace
of some of the early discrete processes
that happened in the very early stages of the universe.
I really doubt that it would have survived that long.
But if it did, the absolutely outlandish possibility
is that the kind of the rule for the universe
might be painted in the microwave background radiation,
which would be truly wrong.
But I don't think that would happen.
I think it's very unlikely.
But, you know, early density perturbations,
there might be some things that would be a result
of this changing dimensional scenario
that's rather different from the traditional exponential
expansion and four-dimensional space,
time of inflationary cosmology.
That's on the one side.
On the particle physics side,
and well, one of the things is that it's looking very much
as if quantum computing at some fundamental level
can't work.
However, seeing that and seeing the actual effects
of our theory for decoherence and things like that,
it's not at all clear that the can't work point
is something experimentally accessible.
And I think that the, you know, it's a question.
There's some clever experiment that can be done
in quantum computing that could see
this maximum entanglement speed.
That's basically the, and we don't know
what the value of that speed is, so we can't really tell.
What estimate that we have of that speed
is 10 to the five solar masses per second.
If that estimate is correct, then it is possible
that in black hole, well, it's possible
that we'll make small effect in a black hole merger
of, you know, one and a half solar mass type size
would have a bigger effect if, you know,
two sort of central black holes of two galaxies
happen to collide and merge,
then there would be a bigger effect.
It's also conceivable that there might be an effect
when black holes initially form.
And this is an astrophysics question for you, Brian.
How long does it take a black hole to actually form?
Once you have in falling matter,
the question is what the actual weather
in 10 to the minus five seconds something,
whether one can tell what's happening
in the last 10 to the minus five seconds
of the formation of a black hole.
If one can, and if our estimate
of the maximum entanglement speed is right,
then there will probably be differences
from the predictions of general activity for that case.
This is a big question, primordial black hole formation,
the end of inflation.
These are really important questions that, you know,
it's good to hear especially that you're, you know,
providing potential full employment
for my graduate students down the line.
Yes, there will be lots of work to do
in figuring out the consequences of these things.
I mean, it's a, particularly when we get this kind of way
of actually doing computations in general relativity
from our model set up as a piece
of practical numerical relativity,
and that will probably happen fairly quickly.
We'll actually be able to see a bunch of these effects
directly in the computations that we do,
but there'll be, you know, just layers of astrophysics
to do and actually compare.
And Eric, I want you to sort of opine
this provocative question that I'm being asked
in the chat room, and that is, you know,
what, of what value is a theory
if it is not to be testable?
You know, that which can be claimed without evidence
can be dismissed without evidence,
as our friend Christopher Hitchens used to say, I believe.
So in the context of geometric unity,
I'm not asking you to talk about somebody else's book,
but talk your own book for a second.
Are there things that are testable by graduate students
in my group or other brilliant students
around the world?
Are there predictions?
Are there retrodictions that are crisp enough
to satisfy popper A, and do you think we
should continue to feed popper as he had enough
pop pop pop pop pop pop pop pop pop pop pop pop
Stephen notwithstanding is that we come up with a classical model in the form of some
sort of geometry. Hopefully it quantizes itself or something like geometric quantization.
And then we try to figure out what the testable consequences are at any given energy level
through a bunch of phenomenologists, experimentalists and pure quantum field theorists working hand
in hand in our harmonious fashion. At least that's the theory.
Given that we have a missing layer, there's tons I can say about what's new, what's different
and what my theory says and effectively what would make it wrong. So I'm happy to get into
that because it effectively says that a lot of our standard verbiage around what we found
is in fact wrong. So for example, standard thing is the world is chiral. The weak force
sees a difference between our left hand and our right hand, spiritually speaking. My claim
is that the world is not fundamentally chiral. It is emergently chiral. And that in fact,
it begins in a non-chiral fashion which solves the problem that Sabina does not see, which
is what chooses whether it's going to be the left half or the right half effectively that
makes up us in some sense.
Can we already know from neutrino masses that we're not seeing a completely chiral situation?
We can get into the issue of how to interpret neutrino masses. What my claim would be that
we have entire sectors that we're not seeing. So for example, unadorned spin one half bundles
that would be tensored with, if you will, the conjugate of the 16 dimensional representation
which imparts the particles, their personalities. So that is not something that's seen. And
I've analogized it for those of you watching at home rather than listening, where you have
a hand and you see with three fingers in the middle that you think there's a symmetry in
the hand. And then you have this problem about how do I make my pinky look like my thumb?
You don't realize that there's an entire other hand and that it's thumb to thumb and pinky
to pinky, not pinky to thumb, it's the symmetry.
So there is a non-chiral world that is emergently chiral, which is fooling us into thinking it's
fundamentally chiral. There are only two generations, not three generations. People will immediately
say, well, how do you explain the fact that we've seen the tau particle in the top and
bottom works? And the claim is that is not a generation because it will not unify as
you heat the soup up in the same way as the first two generations will unify. In fact,
it will unify with another collection of particles, also spin one half, which I believe, if I
recall correctly, the thing that will be misinterpreted as an internal representation, I think will
be like 112 dimensional rather than 16. There will be no internal representations. There
will be no internal symmetries. This has been a huge trip up for things like supersymmetry
where we keep looking for these super partners, which I've analogized a little bit to what
happens if you're convinced that Spiderman should be, in fact, Clark Kent, you know,
should be accompanied by Clark Kent and Peter Parker should be accompanied by Superman.
We have this wrong. There is no internal symmetry, nor should you expect internal symmetry because
this comes out of two fundamental origin stories, one for the spacetime manifold, another for
effectively the y-axis above that as the x-axis. So we decide that somehow we have spacetime
in Einstein, and then somehow we get this thing called SU3 plus SU2 plus U1 that falls
out of the sky, which is the second origin story. There is not two origin stories, there
is one. Einstein, I believe, one of the problems, Stephen, I'm going to say, is that we have
been in a very difficult position relative to Einstein, because unlike anyone else,
because of the thought experiments, we have a reverence for not only what he gave us in terms
of equations, how he thought in the beautiful humanity that he imparted to everyone, so we don't
harm him in any way. It's also the fact that he was wrong, and he was wrong in an interesting way,
in the same way I believe that Newton was wrong, and we souped up Newton with Einstein,
but that physics is taking place, in my opinion, on two separate spaces.
You can call x and y, or Brian, I've joked with you, calling it Haaretz and Hashemite,
the heaven and the earth. In these two spaces, there is a map between, and that is the map that,
in fact, Einstein started playing with, but he did not think to pull back the information from
space two onto space one from space x to space y. I believe that there is a deformation complex
which in Euclidean signature is elliptic, which, in fact, tells us why the self-dual equations
and the Tren Simons-Gabe's theory that were studied in the late 70s, early 80s, are so important.
In fact, it was a special example of a much more general structure, comes out of geometric unity,
that there is not two kinds of geometry in this situation. One, Riemannian geometry underlying
general relativity, and Erismanian geometry of fiber bundles underlying the standard model.
There is, in fact, one geometry, and that one geometry is why it's called geometric unity,
and it has to do with the difficulty of a lie that we tell in general relativity, which is that we
say that it is a so-called gauge theory, where we try to get the gauge group to be something called
the diffeomorphism group, or general coordinate variance. We allow it to act on the space of
metrics, whereas in the case of the standard model, we have a space not of metrics, but of
derivative operators from calculus called connections, and the group we have is the gauge
group, and the gauge group is an infinite dimensional beast that acts on the space of connection.
We do not understand, in fact, that telling this lie to make general relativity look like
a gauge theory, in fact, block progress, and that we should treat it as an honest gauge theory.
We are going to have to recognize that the cosmological constant is not constant. It is a
field which requires a BEV, or a vacuum expectation value, as it is lured away by topological mechanisms.
We are going to see that we got the Lorentz group wrong. We focused on the Lorentz group when we
meant to be focusing on the gauge group. We formed its inhomogeneous extension called the
Pankar group. In fact, you're supposed to extend it by something called add-valued one-forms
to create, effectively, the inhomogeneous gauge group. That is the object on which you're supposed
to do supersymmetric analysis. Our concept of supersymmetry is wrong. In effect, we're acting
on the wrong group. We've chosen Minkowski space as the naturally occurring affine space. It is
not the right place to be playing. The right place to be playing is the space of connection.
There's a huge number of things I can tell you about the missing matter. In our sector,
its SU3 cross SU2 cross U1 internal quantum numbers will be 16 new particles that are
spin 3 halves with conjugate internal quantum numbers. The same thing as our usual 16-dimensional
representation, but the complex conjugate thereof, which we have not seen yet.
Explaining why the illusion of three generations is generated by what would be called branching
rules with respect to Lie algebra and Lie group representation in composition. Yes,
I can tell you a bunch of new particles. I can tell you about non-chirality, the number of
generations, how Einstein is wrong, what spaces we're supposed to be doing this on. Then there's
the question about, okay, well, what can you tell us about the accelerators? By the way,
this is all subject to if my theory is correct, but it gets boring to say if my theory is correct
over and over again. So there should just be a general caveat that all of this assumes geometric
unity is in fact correct. So yes, there's a ton of specificity. And Brian, I'm looking forward to
coming down to UCSD and actually doing, but let me just say something. I've been very pissed off
about this claim that what I'm talking about, different from what Dr. Wolfram is talking about,
is so impenetrable and difficult. It really has to do with the sickness in our field that our
field just isn't interested in some sense because it doesn't believe. We all know that the problems
have gotten so difficult and so hard and so many smart people have been over them that a sense
of learned helplessness has invaded the field, which we have to talk about. People no longer
feel like they're actual physicists that can connect to Schrdinger or Heisenberg or Dirac
or Einstein or Planck. People don't even feel like Weinberg and Yang were still with us or in some
sense, nobody's gone to, I see, losing the Nobel Prize at Hubein and Scholder. Nobody's gone to
Stockholm for advances in fundamental physical theory since the theories put forward since the
early 1970s. I think that's a correct statement. So all the people who've contributed to the fundamental
canon are either dead or septuagenarians or higher, I think. Maybe Frank Wilczek was born in 1951
as at the end of the 60s. We have to recognize that this sense that it is impossible has caused
lots of us to start faking it and to start calculating what we need to do for our careers
rather than how to actually advance the science, which is one reason that both Stephen and I are
viewed as incredibly brash, effectively too brusque, maybe too arrogant. And the answer, I believe,
is that we have to drive this field out of its sense that it's playing at physics rather than
doing physics, it's talking around physics. And one of the things I want to do on these live streams
is I want to actually talk about the meat of the theories and let people scurry to Wikipedia or
help each other out to try to understand what is said rather than make it an enjoyable product.
I agree. I agree. But Stephen has said earlier, this is simple. It's not easy. It's not trivial.
My nine-year-old, who you'll meet someday, hopefully both of you guys, he can play around
with rule 30. He can get stimulated. He can engage with it. So when you say that it's not difficult,
I don't agree that there's a character class that differentiates, and I'm not pitting it one
against another. For certain, there are more complicated models than even Erics, in my opinion.
Wait, wait. How is my model complicated? I'm just a simple experimentalist. Fourteen-dimensional,
dual spaces. And look, if it's too complicated for Sabina to understand, I think our general...
This is just unfair, and I want to be very clear about it. If you talk about general
relativity, which Stephen has been talking about throughout our live stream, he's talking about
the idea that you have a space, call it X, and it has a metric on it. And that metric is a map
into the space of all possible metrics, called that Y. That X and that Y are where geometric
unity lives. So with all due respect to Sabina and her, I can't understand anything. It's also
complicated. Cut the crap. You've got a map between a frontal space time and a space of metrics,
that Romani metric is simply a map between two topological spaces. It's not that complicated.
Brian, it's just not true. Okay. Let's move on, actually. I want to make a few comments about...
Okay, Stephen, go ahead.
So maybe people will find interesting. So maps between topological spaces,
diffeomorphisms, these kinds of ideas. I happen to learn these ideas when I was a kid.
Most people don't. Most people learn those ideas in mid math college, if they go to a
fancy college, maybe math, graduate school, those kinds of things. They happen to be fairly
complicated. There are fields of science where people can contribute without having gone to
graduate school. There are other fields where they can't contribute very much. We see that in
one of the great things about some of these computational areas of science is that because
it's very new territory, it's possible for people to contribute without having gone to graduate
school and learned a whole big stack of concepts. One of the things I get pretty much every day,
a theory of physics from somebody. Eric's version is he went to Harvard and got a PhD in
mathematical physics. So his version is much better dressed than most of the versions that I see.
And most of the versions that I see are... I find it disappointing because it feels like people
writing poetry that nobody's going to read and they're doing it using kind of high school level
physics knowledge. It's mostly cranks. People who may be well-meaning, but they don't realize that
they're way out of their depth. Yeah, right. But the main thing is that they don't know what got
done in the 20th century in physics. What got done in the 20th century in physics requires
kind of graduate school level knowledge to understand. And we can say it isn't true, but it is true.
I mean, it's general relativity and quantum field theory. Eric may say they're simple theories. I
think they're kind of simple theories, but that's because I learned about them when I was, I don't
know, 12, 13 years old and find how they seem like simple theories. And if it's simple to you or if
it's even marginally complex to Stephen, what helped? But also just the whole language of talking
about things. You know, this is kind of math, graduate school type language. And that's... Now,
is there a way to state these things about fiber bundles and so on without sort of super fancy
language? Quite possibly. Maybe some of the things we're trying to do will give away to do that.
And that's part of the hope of just bringing your communities together. Let me move on just
because we don't have much time. You guys are very gracious with your time. I want to respect it,
and I have kids to put to bed. But I do want to ask the following question that my audience is asking.
When we think about the power of these different approaches, let's take a step away from either
one of yours. There's been a lot made about artificial intelligence and the prospects for,
as Max Tagmark has put it, you know, an artificial physicist, an artificial Galileo.
What role do you guys see artificial intelligence playing? And then you know where I'm going next.
I know that you guys know I'm going to the simulation hypothesis. And I've talked to you
guys individually, maybe offline about this, but the audience is very keen to know your two esteemed
gentlemen, what you think about the prospects for AI and as a benefit to physics. And then later,
we'll ask about the simulation hypothesis. Let me start with Steven, please.
I mean, I've worked on what is now called AI for about 40 something years. So I know a tiny bit
about it. A lot of, I don't know, I don't know where to start. I mean, if you're talking about
machine learning, if you're talking about, oh, let's sort of throw everything we know about
physics into a machine learning system and see whether it can figure out the laws of physics.
That's one level. Yeah, that's one level. Noam Chomsky, who was on my show and said,
you know, he has, he's sanguine about what you just described, perhaps, as is Max Tagmark. But
the true creative stroke, he has no, you know, the kind of it's a little bit complicated because
in, you know, computational irreducibility tells us that we can know the rules for something
but have no way to kind of have a large scale narrative for how the thing happens. So in other
words, we might say, yes, we've succeeded. We found rules that reproduce physics. You say, well,
tell me how they work. You say, well, here are the rules. But you say, well, tell me a story
about how they work. Tell me a high level, you know, version of how they work. That may not be
possible. I mean, for example, in linguistics, picking on Noam Chomsky's area, like, you know,
we may have a description of how brains work and how brains process language
at a sort of microscopic computational level. And we may still, and it may be completely accurate.
And we may still not have anything we would call a satisfactory science of linguistics.
So in other words, it's a, it's a, it's a slightly complicated thing. And the question of
whether, you know, whether we can get a current, you know, machine learning system to reverse
engineer the laws of physics, you know, to some extent, you can do that to a fantastic extent of,
of figuring out everything you won't be able to do that, I don't think. And, and, you know,
the challenge, again, we keep on coming at things at really weird angles. But there's a, you know,
okay, the way I see it, there's kind of what's possible in the computational universe, what
simple programs can do. There's this kind of ocean of computational possibility. There's what we
humans understand. That's another kind of piece. And there's also what the physical universe does.
And, you know, I've spent a large part of my life trying to bridge between the sort of ocean of
computational possibility. And what we humans understand, that's the whole sort of point
of the computational language I built, is to have a way to have humans be able to think about
things computationally, and be able to communicate what they want in a computational fashion.
Now we have the sort of third piece of physics. And the question is how we describe, you know,
how we make this bridge between sort of the physical universe, doing what it does, our ability to
tell a narrative about what's going on, and this kind of computation in the middle, as this kind
of mediator of those two things. But I mean, this is, it's a mess. I would say that there's a,
there's a, I mean, this is a longer discussion. And I think there's probably the wrong angle to
come at it with, if you say, are we going to have a, you know, a magic thing that we can throw
stuff into and get out the theory of physics? Well, I doubt it. You know, you talked about the
simulation argument, I might, I always find it kind of charming that people say, you know, I'm an
atheist. I believe in science. You know, what I believe is that, you know, there's this, we're
in this universe, and this universe is actually a simulation operated by, operated by a deity on
the universe. That I'm an atheist. Exactly, right. And then all the morality that entails therein.
Yes, go ahead. Right. But I think that the more seriously, I think that that sort of argument
is kind of philosophically doomed, because by the time you have definite laws for physics,
there isn't much for the God to do, so to speak. Now, the only thing you might say is,
but the God gets to pick the laws of physics, except that we now seem to have found that it
actually doesn't matter what the laws of physics are, that in some sense, in this kind of, again,
for reasons that again, this is a slightly longer story. But what matters is that we are observing
physics in a certain way. And that's what gives us the laws that we believe to be laws of physics.
And there really isn't, in a sense, there's nothing for the, for the God to do other than to
decide that our universe is going to be computational, not hypercomputational, not below
computational. And even if those other sort of kind of conceptual universes exist, we,
you know, again, it's a matter of science to be able to say that we simply can't communicate
with them. They're simply, they're just not things which are in any way connected to what we
can perceive. So I think it's a, it's a, I do like the idea, though, that there's a connection
between sort of AI physics and the simulation argument. I think that's a, that's a, that's
an interesting and bizarre connection, which I think would be fun to unpack some more.
And Eric, you want to opine on this? Or would you, yeah, go ahead.
I don't really know whether it even requires AI and, or AGI. There's a particular kind of move
that we haven't programmed into computers yet so far as I'm aware. Now, Steven probably knows
this much better than I do, but there's a weird move that comes up over and over again, which
has to do with reaching for something outside of your model and knowing what to reach for.
So for example, you have a problem with the weak interactions that a new neutron when it decays
into a proton and an electron called beta decay doesn't seem to have enough energy in the final
products to conserve energy from the initial products. So Pauli had to. Oh, okay. You're
explaining how new tree knows come to be. Yeah. Okay. Fine. Yes. Right. Because it's like one of
the most important stories we have. Not everybody knows it. You have a problem that you've got three
lines coming into a point and there's a failure of conservation of momentum. And so you have to
hypothesize a fourth line. You had a different problem when Dirac came out with his theory,
which is, is that he only had the electron and the proton, they were oppositely charged. So we
decided that one was the antiparticle of the other. Instead, this is the part, you know,
some similar to the Peter Parker Clark Kent issue, he should have hypothesized a positron to be the
to be the antielectron and an antiproton to be the antiparticle of the familiar proton.
That move was too much. And in fact, Heisenberg chastised. There's an issue about understanding
how spin comes about. So effectively, when I've said that the square root is the psychedelic
of mathematics, you have to give your computer program psychedelics effectively so that it can
invent new stuff. That is, I can join something called I or I J and K to solve a problem that was
posed in the real numbers. And then I get the quaternions or the complex numbers or even the
actonians. I'm going to augment my theory of something called differential forms to something
called the theory of spinners. Can you discover something called the fofian, which is the square
root of the determinant for a particular class of matrices? Can you discover that the Euler class
is in a certain sense the square root of something called the Pontriagin class? All of these things
are these non-trivial moves where something that is not present in the initial formulation is
guessable as the thing that would be needed to complete the stuff that we can see with stuff
that we can't to get a consistent system. If you can teach a computer about primitives and give it
the ability to guess outside of the system that you've taught it so that it can self-adjoin,
and I don't see any impediment to this currently, you would have a system that would be potent enough
to explore not only the theory that you feed it, but the theories that it can build from that theory.
In essence, the computer program is being asked to do something similar than what we're asking
theoretical physics to do. Again, everybody complains about how complicated this is and I'm sick and
tired and bored of hearing it. Steven's correct. You do have to learn some level of mathematics.
Typically, this would be somewhat like learning the French language before exploring French
literature. Yeah, it's expensive. If you want to learn a foreign language, it costs money.
In time, same thing for learning differential geometry in quantum field theory. The situation
that we're facing is that your computer program has to be capable of building larger worlds by
adjoining things that would make puzzles in the worlds that it knows about make sense. That process
of inferential guessing outside of anything that's been taught is a different problem than the problem
of finding, let's say, chess moves or Go moves by being able to search a larger space where the
search space is implicit in the rules. Do I believe that it requires AGI? Now, one of the stories that
I don't think we talk that much about is how much we thought AGI or artificial general intelligence
would be needed to do all sorts of things. And the great surprise is we don't need anything like
artificial general intelligence to do most of the things that supposedly intelligence systems now do.
We thought that AGI and our consciousness and our intelligence was necessary. It turns out that
much less is usually necessary. It is entirely possible that we don't need to wait around and
we can have the computers guess it. And to the issue of atheism and the simulators and the simulated,
we have two separate stories. One story in which we are going to build the intelligence, the AGI
fear, which it's going to be smarter than us. We have another one in which we are the simulated
and there's the simulated tour somewhere else. If you put the two stories together, you see that
in a weird way, God should be scared about us becoming intelligent when we finally learn what
our source code is. This is the moment where Skynet becomes self-aware. And the thing that
nobody sees coming is that we are the AI. We are the AGI that emerged in somebody else's system.
And whether or not that somebody else was sentient or not is a different question. But Einstein asked
this thing. He said, I don't care about the spectrum or this or that element. What really
bothers me is whether or not the creator had any choice or what interests me is whether the
creator had any choice in the way the world was made. This is an interesting concept of not being
all powerful, but being all constrained. And perhaps the creator's sole function, if you will,
is to turn on the lights. And everything else follows from that. This is sort of a Leibnizian
monad construction where the idea is that the rules effectively tell us what is going to happen.
And there's very little room for anything else. But I think that part of the reason we keep asking
these questions is to be blunt pessimism, rather than working on the actually hard stuff,
either in Stephen's case of trying to do it through computation or my case of trying to
remain within the standard mathematical toolkit. People are so frustrated that we waste our lives
talking about the mathematical universe hypothesis, the simulation hypothesis. We do all sorts of
nonsensical work on theories that have nothing to do with physical reality. And I just think
it would be better if we stopped wasting our time talking around physics and started talking
about physics itself. Well, guys, I have to go. You guys have been so generous with your time.
You've answered a lot of questions that the audience had. And for that, I'm very thankful
from both coasts. Any final words, Stephen? I did think there was going to be one question
you wanted to ask us about peer review and our attitudes towards it, which I think people are
going to want to know. I think we should wrap it up. Maybe we'll take that up on a future podcast
with you guys individually. The time has really come to go, or I'll be in a lot of trouble with
a multiverse of children screaming at me. Stephen, anything you'd like to leave the
audience with, any way that they can engage and perhaps participate in the exciting work
of Wolfram Research? Use Wolfram Language, use Wolfram Alpha. You can come to live streams we
do frequently about the physics project. You can look at the physics website. You'll find all of the
programs and things there. It seems like people are finding this stuff, which is great.
And we'll put a link to the YouTube channel where folks can find your many, many live streams
and presentations as well. Eric, something for closeout, where can people find you and engage
with you? Come find us at the portal. I think there's also an Eric Weinstein.org. Look for the
Geometric Unity presentation, which was a special presentation within the Portal series. I am looking
forward to hosting Stephen getting into the thick of his theory and how it works. I think
that one of the things that people should get engaged with is both why people are so pessimistic
and negative about every new emergence. You should learn about the no-go theorems and all of the
things that a theory would have to fit. I don't think people are particularly negative. I mean,
honestly, we've been playing up the negativism, but honestly, what I'm seeing is people being
very enthusiastic about what we're doing. So far, I haven't seen anybody. I'd be interested to hear
from somebody credible who says, I mean, you've said, I don't believe your theory. Wait a second.
No, I believe that your theory is either going to reproduce a lot of what it is that we already
know and then tell us something new potentially. I'm not disagreeing with it. I've said that it
might be a face up to some common sub-end. It's certainly not the face that I'm taking,
but I don't think that's a character. We should hash that out when we do each other's podcasts.
The issue that I wanted to get to, though, is, yeah, there is a lot of negativity. You can read
about it in the Reddit comments. You can read about it very often left in the YouTube comments.
Some people in the field are very disgruntled. Very few people have wanted to say, I've waited
in. I've tried to look at it. I've really kind of to understand it, and I still think these
guys are talking crap. I think Stephen's exactly right that the coincidence of his
work and my work being on the same show, I don't see any need to fit them together.
I think that if they're both right, then they would have to be fit together. Most probably,
of course, they're both wrong because we have to say these words. With that said, get excited
about people who are trying to find ways out of the learned helplessness that comes out of the
no-go theorems, the pessimism that came out of the LHC. I disagree with Stephen. I still think
that there is a core community that's angry that people outside are speaking to the world through
this direction. They may be angry about you. I don't think they're very angry about me.
There is pessimism. I think Eric's talking specifically. I guarantee you there are people
angry about you too, Stephen. It's not just about me. It's in general that we're all up against
the question where nobody has any precedent. One thing that I think is the case is that what
I've noticed, for example, about peer review, which we're not going to talk about here in detail,
it's the people who say peer review is amazing. We need peer review on not people inside science.
They're not people who actually know it up close because up close, it's actually people.
In fact, one thing's kind of amusing. We set up a peer review system for our project. To date,
not a single person has submitted a peer review. Not a single person. It's been several months
now. Can you do that? How can people submit reviews of it? There's just a link that says peer
review. It's next to each one of our documents. It's open source. Honestly, I'm disappointed.
I thought at least a few people would do it, even if they were like, I didn't really read this,
but it's all nonsense anyway. What we actually asked for, more specifically, which I think is
useful, is somebody to say, I read section 3.7, and I think it's correct, or I think there's this
mistake in it or whatever else. We have had people like Sabine Hossenfeldt, an eminent scientist,
and she's written a video, which is the first time you guys appear together, where she criticizes
these theories. She's an eminent fundamental theorist. We've been an email correspondence
with her, and she asked a bunch of questions, which were very valid questions. People are engaging.
We gave her answers, and she disappeared. If she's still saying, you don't know what's going on,
then there's a problem. Well, the fact is, is that you've answered her questions. She had
questions that were reasonable, and that's the beginning of the process. Then if she continues
to say, well, he hasn't answered my questions after he's answered the questions, and she hasn't
responded, then we're in a different situation. Sabine can be kind of gruff and unpleasant,
but I know her to be reasonably fair in most circumstances.
Very good. Thank you guys. You guys are really spectacular. It's so generous of you to spend
your time. We got to see different sides of your ideas and try to reach some sense of
different approaches that are radically different, and perhaps, but they have the same common goal,
which is to really introduce the world to concepts that take us out of our quotidian
existence of politics, sports, and whatever, the grandest concepts. I think we should have
talked about those here. That would have been more interesting for me. Let's do more where we
actually treat the people who want to get into the meat of it, because I think that... No, no,
I was saying less meat, because I don't think this was so useful, because I think I felt like...
I think we would have done better talking about kind of the culture of science and so on.
I'm sorry. I take all the blame. Yes, I know. I'm sorry. It's my fault for not getting to that.
Thank you, Steven. Thank you, Eric. I love your work. Bye, guys.
