Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.
A legendary figure in my life, in physics, in cosmology, in philosophy, in mathematics,
and that is Professor Lee Smolin joining us from the Perimeter Institute, our neighbor
to the north.
Lee Smolin, how are you today, my friend?
I'm very well, thank you, and thank you very much for the kind words and the invitation.
Lee, you've made fundamental contributions in many different aspects of cosmology, of
physics, philosophy, but what I first want to turn to is the influence that you had on
me as a younger physicist, as a beginning professor back in 2006, when you're really
a puckle book called The Trouble with Physics came out.
This book influenced me and a whole generation of physicists, both theoreticians and experimentalists
like myself, and there are very few books in physics that are relevant 14, 15, 16, 4 years,
3 years, 2 years after they're written, let alone 15 years after, and in this book, which
I reread, re-listened to recently in preparation for this interview, I noted that you were talking
about the stagnation in physics in the previous 25 years, so if I add, I'm not as good at
math as you are, but if I add 25 to 15, I get 40.
Yes, wow, I just do.
Do you still stand by that, or do you still observe that same stagnation to some extent
in physics, at least in theoretical physics?
Obviously, experimental physics is completely different.
There are certainly areas which are doing very well, there are areas of quantum materials
where the theory is really interesting, and I love thinking about it.
I think it's still true that we have not made a fundamental discovery experimentally that
we explained theoretically, or theoretically posited something that was discovered experimentally,
and we still don't know the why questions about the standing model, why though, we're
now something like 30 parameters, including the, now that the neutrino has mass, including
the masses and the mixing angles of the neutrino, and we have no explanation for what the values
of those dimensions are, nor for the strength of the gravitational constant, nor for the
dark energy or the cosmological constant, that's what it is.
And I went into physics to understand why the universe was the way it is, and there's
lots about that we can get into.
The universe is not just some random set of numbers out there, the universe is enormously
structured and self-organized, and that seems to be at least partly due to those constants
being in certain narrow windows, where there are lots of chemical and nuclear reactions
that can take place.
So I think I stand by that, we don't have, we have ideas about quantum gravity, and we
have more ideas than we did 15 years ago, none of them have, some of them make experiment
predictions, but none of those predictions have a lot to help.
There's always the default, as you would know, we've looked for the rent symmetry breaking,
not the clock scale, and around the clock scale, using astrophysical experiments, and
the evidence is that it's not there, and there's a number of other anomalies that we've looked
for, and they're not there.
So it's a very frustrating period.
When we look at alternatives to string theory, which has become and still remains a dominant
paradigm, I've had conversations with Carla Revelli, who's become a dear friend, and actually
we are collaborating together, and he is another person I thank you for putting me in touch
with many years ago, and we are collaborating in the first ever audiobook version of Galileo
Galilei's dialogue on two chief world systems, the first physicist to work on, yeah, it's
going to be amazing with another Italian physicist, along with Jim Gates reading a forward from
Galileo, Fabiola Gianate, and others, stay tuned for more information about that, you
can get more if you subscribe to my newsletter at bryankeating.com, but I want to turn our
attention to some surprising developments that I had talking with a string theory proponent,
and that was Michio Kaku, who came on my podcast recently in promotion of his new book, The
God Equation, which he claims string theory is responsible for a series of successes,
not stagnations.
Even such things like the G-2 anomaly and the LHC beauty experiment anomaly, that these
things are hints, tantalizing hints of the efficacy of string theory, and I push back,
Lee, you know, I'm only a simple experimentalist I said, but I said to my knowledge, and you
Lee can correct me if I'm wrong, nobody looked at string theory and said, hmm, let's predict
this correction to the G-2 from string theory, and he pushed back on me and said, well, nobody
did that from loop quantum gravity, because loop quantum gravity is so simplistic, it doesn't
even have fermions in it, and I said, because I'm just a fool, I didn't know how to answer
them, you know, and then we say in Judaism, know how to answer a heretic.
So I didn't know how to answer him.
How would you have answered him, Michio Kaku, when he says loop quantum gravity, which you
are one of its foremost exponents, along with Abe Ashdekar, and Carlo and others, but Lee,
how should I have answered him?
I'm sorry I let you down, but how should I have answered him?
No, the way to end there, first of all, loop quantum gravity is a method, it's not in my
understanding a theory, it's a method of studying systems whose forces are described
by gauge fields, and we can talk about what that means, like the standard model of generality.
And that method applied to generality yields some very interesting descriptions of what
the geometry of the world might be on very small scales, that is 10 to the minus 30 something
of a centimeter.
That method can be applied to theories with fermions, and there are fermions behave like
fermions.
So there's no problem including fermions, there's no problem coupling to gauge fields
and coupling to the scalar and the fermions of the standard model.
There is a very interesting issue around chirality, which I know is an issue in cosmology and
astronomy, if you've worked on it a lot and talked about.
So we have some issues about chirality, which I'm happy to admit.
My feeling, and I hope I can say this without sounding egotistical or something, the people
you mentioned, Abhay and Karla and I, are thought of often as the founders of loop quantum
gravity, the inventors.
But let's break it, if it's interesting, let's break that down.
Abhay brought into being an approach to generality based on seeing the geometry of space and
time like a gauge field, and I can tell you what that means or something.
It means we care more about measuring how things like fingers or spins move around when
you move around space, that's called the connection, the connection tells things how to move.
And my first role, I guess I had many, but my first role was that there was a whole bunch
of beautiful ideas and technology, theoretical technology that had been developed about QCD,
mainly by a Russian school, Sasha Pavlikov, Gribar, McDowell, and there were also some
Americans principally, Ken Wilson.
And they had a beautiful picture in which, well, do you know or do your listeners know
that if you pass a magnetic field through a superconductor, it becomes discreet, there's
a unit of magnetic flux that that flux line will take on in this organization.
And their hypothesis, going, well, it was also due to Hogan Nielsen and a number of
other people, was that in QCD, which is sort of like a complicated version of electromagnetism
with three photons, the electric field flux would be quantized and discreet.
And there was a picture of strings made out of that flux holding quarks together.
And I basically stole that, I mean, it's legitimate, that's what we're doing science,
all that picture and technology, and said, what if instead of QCD, I plug in the vines
theory about seeing gravity and connection here, and use all those beautiful ideas and
tools that probably Carl and Ken Wilson.
And that was, that was, I got lucky, in some sense, because where and when I went to graduate
school, it was immersed in that, those ideas and those technologies.
And I was the first to try to apply them to quantum gravity.
And I had a picture in my head of loops and areas being quantized and so forth.
And that picture, with a lot of input from other people, became quantum gravity.
And particularly, Carlos brought a very important picture of how to think of the quantum mechanics
of all that.
But now, but now it's, that was the middle 80s, I want to count, that's a long time ago.
I love loop quantum gravity, it's been a family, it's been an adventure of friends, but it
has problems too.
And I'm happy to talk about them.
I would not think of myself as a proponent in the sense of somebody who ignores the issues.
I think there are issues, and when I set up a research center, Perimeter, I used a philosophy,
which is part of the book, you want to talk about the trouble with physics, which I gained
from the philosopher Paul Feierabend, which was to get good people from diverse points
of view and don't privilege one point of view just because I have a legacy with that theory.
Get good people who think of quantum gravity from several points of view and have the conflict,
which is what the trouble with physics was about.
So there are people in the loop quantum gravity world who think that I abandoned them, and
there are people in the rest of the world who think that I'm a loop quantum gravity guy,
and I'm neither.
I really love the way you say that.
And when I think about things, I often wonder, are we putting the gut before the toe or the
toe before the gut?
By that, I mean, we don't have a good, grand unified theory yet, in my opinion or my understanding,
and yet people want to look for a theory of everything.
First of all, I think a theory of everything, and I think Michio does a disservice, to be
honest, by saying that this one-inch-long God equation will describe everything, it'll
give you soup and nuts, and it'll give you aliens, it'll give you avatars, traveling
at the speed of light, cruising around the galaxy, and it will win you a Nobel Prize
that Einstein couldn't win, and you know how I feel about the Nobel Prize is hegeographic,
kind of idol worship, onanistic idol worship.
Nevertheless, it's important to consider what is the importance of a theory of everything,
and I want to ask you, are we putting the toe before the gut?
Should we, in your opinion, spend more time thinking about how do we unify the theories
that we have very strong evidence to believe that are unified?
I personally don't believe that we should demand that gravity be unified with quantum mechanics.
I hope we can get into that.
But what do you think?
Should we focus first on guts before we get to toes?
Well, long before that, let's open up, can we open up to the whole universe?
It seems to me there are two kinds of phenomena.
Loosely speaking, there are phenomena, I mean, we believe you and I and most of our
colleagues believe some version of the laws are pretty stable, and they're fundamental
laws, and we're trying to find out what they are, and they're pretty stable.
I actually probably disagree with you, or at least with most of our colleagues.
I think those laws are changeable, and I think they do change, and I think they have changed,
and I think that because that's the only way we're going to explain the question of why
they have the form that they have.
So I'm on the lookout for principles by which the laws can change.
That is, I'm no longer hopeful that there's going to be some magic formula that's going
to tell us what the values of all those elements are.
I think it evolved that way because there are consequences for the natural world, for
the physical world, which we can come to.
Thinking about it that way, you have to invoke functional explanation.
A functional explanation is an explanation of something where you use some consequence
of what it does in the world.
So there are 20 to the thousand different kinds of proteins, roughly.
20 different amino acids in a thousand places is a typical protein.
That's a whole lot more than the kinds of proteins that exist on the biosphere that
are coded for in the DNA or the RNA of the various creatures, which are like a million.
So any protein that exists is lucky because most of the other alternative proteins don't
exist.
And why did it get lucky?
It got lucky because, for example, my code for hemoglobin, which is a fundamental way
to move oxygen around within a creature, and which there's a lot of, along with various
variants and so forth.
So if you ask, why does hemoglobin exist, sure, you've got to be able to analyze and
see the laws of electromagnetism and so forth, acting inside that crazy, wound up, folded
up thing.
But there's also functional explanations, and both of them have got to work.
So I think that's going to apply to everything.
And I also don't take the mathematics as dogma, as religion, if I can use that.
I was at one time, but I am no longer looking for that mathematical object, which has all
the truth of that nature, to somehow transcend our existence and give our life meaning.
I think we give life meaning through friendship and families and what we believe in and who
we love.
And the universe kind of, thus, is doing the same thing.
So I'm not, many of our colleagues are looking for something transcendent when they want
to know what the laws are, what the standard model, what the two unified theories are.
I would love to see some explanation of the structure of the standard model.
I've been attending, we have weird conferences, of course, as you know, some conferences
are every week or somewhere every month.
So there's a conference about an idea that used to get you kicked out of the archive,
but it turns out to be solid enough that there are a lot of interesting people doing it,
which is that the standard model has something to do with the number system of actonians.
And that would be cool.
But I'd certainly like some explanation, where does the SU3, of course, SU2 come from?
Where does the three generations come from?
We all want some kind of answer to that.
And my, I'm willing, I'm in fact, eager to have a functional kind of example.
For example, this might come up later.
If you want the universe to reproduce itself through black holes, which is an idea that
I had, you want the upper mass limit of neutron stars to be as low as possible so that it's
many supernovas lead to black holes as opposed to neutron stars.
And from that, you can get a prediction that the heaviest stable neutron star can't be
more than two solar masses.
And there's, and the reason is some complicated thing about the strange dwarf I won't bore
you with unless you really, really want.
But the thing is that recently there's better and better evidence that there are some neutron
stars up in 20, I'm sorry, two solar masses, 2.2, and so forth.
And if those hold up, then my theory or my hypothesis is falsified and I will probably
sense it.
Yeah.
You talk about that a lot in the book.
You talk about different gamma ray burst signatures that could be falsified as of 2006.
You have other tests that could be, you describe them as very exciting variation in the fine
structure constant you point out as very exciting.
And I know that you have extreme integrity in all ways, not only personally, but because
you, because I know you personally, but also because publicly you've talked about how this
has gone away, that there's no, you've stated that you kind of abandoned that hope and you
admit that it was a hope back in the early part of the, of the, you know, of the 2000s
that these fine structure constant could be revelatory of new physics, but now it's ruled
out and you accept that and you move on.
I wonder, you know, when I first started hearing about you from my best friend, Stefan, you
know, I always thought that, you know, when I first learned about you, it was like what
Stephen Hawking reputedly said about Jacob Zeldovich when he met him.
He thought that Zeldovich was like Burbaki, like a collective, a set of people.
And I thought that about Smolin.
I thought Smolin was like Satoshi Nakamura or whoever that guy is who supposedly or collective
came up with Bitcoin or blockchain.
I want to ask you, you put out three or four papers recently and some of them with Stefan,
some of them solo papers, this voluminous effort, I think you're writing a paper right
now.
I'd like to see your hands, Lee, could you put your hands up so I know that you're not
typing out a paper as we're having this lovely interview.
But I want to ask you, what would a theory of everything look like?
Would it be the semi-classical Wheeler-DeWitt equation that would be fundamental?
Would it be the Schrodinger equation if gravity is fundamental?
Some say the Schrodinger equation, if gravity is emergent, some say it's the latter.
Your recent paper is so fascinating, you have one called the Quantum Mechanics of the Present
written with Clea Verde.
And the other one, the Symbiotic Emergence of Space and the Quantum.
That one is a solo paper.
Let's talk about that firstly, please.
What does it mean for space to become emergent?
What does that even mean?
What it means is that the organization of space, of things moving in space, is not fundamental.
It's real, for sure.
Of course, we see it.
But it's not fundamental.
What I mean is that I'm looking, like many of our colleagues, for a formulation of theory
that is a story about the world and how it's made, that will explain the mysteries of quantum
mechanics.
So I'm a little ambitious, for better or worse, to explain the mysteries of quantum mechanics
and resolve those issues like the measurement problem.
I want that same structure to explain general relativity, so to be the quantum theory of
gravity, although the fundamental theory that it's coming from is neither quantum mechanics
nor gravity.
And after a lot of thinking and talking, here I've been influenced by a number of people,
and it's always important.
I mean, we never do these things alone.
So Fortuny Marco Pulo was the first person who said to me, space does not exist so time
can.
Space is not in the fundamental list of things that are there all the way down, but time is.
For example, space-time is in some fundamental way a different thing than matter.
And if space-time is an emergent concept, then it's not really clear what you would
mean by unification.
Surely, it would not be the unification of matter with gravity.
It might be a way to get gravity out of matter.
That would be a different sort of, I guess you could think of it as a unification scenario,
but it's a bit different than what people are considering now.
And Roberto Mangibar-Hunger, who is a Brazilian philosopher, was interested in the same kind
of things, and we wrote it, it was hard, but we wrote a very interesting book together.
That book is called The Singular Universe.
And the basic idea of that theory, that theory is now called The Causal Theory of Views.
The basic idea of that theory comes from Leibniz, the philosopher, and it's going to sound a
little weird.
It's that the universe is composed of partial views of itself.
What I mean is that at every event, and this is a theory of events and the causes between
events.
There might be two events here, which in some sense are the cause of a third event, which
is a cause of the fourth event.
And each event has a past, has the things that led up to causing it.
And I call that the view that's borrowed from Leibniz.
And I take the set of all the views from all the events in the universe to be what the
universe is.
And then I apply laws to those, and the main idea there came from work in common with Julian
Barber a long time ago, which is to measure the complexity of some complex system, whether
it's a city or an economy, or a piece of quantum space and time.
By making the views from different events or different situations, may it be as diverse
as possible.
And you can write down a numerical measure of that, and that we take as the quantity
that gets extremized to give you the equations of motion.
Space is often organized in such a way that it's an equanimity that gets extremized and
minimized.
That's called the action.
And so the theory has an action which is related to what we call the dream and the
variety.
Now, the one last thing I have to say about how this goes together is that if you don't
have space, you don't have distances between things, you don't have functions, you don't
have fields, you don't have derivatives, so how are you going to write down dynamics?
Well, all the things that we'll go into are writing down some law of a field or a particle
involved with distances or derivatives or fields.
And so we don't have any of that, but what we can do is compare the views.
We can ask, you look around where you are, I look around where I am, and that there's
a mathematical language to record that view, and then they can be compared.
And so the whole dynamics that I develop is based on those comparisons.
So that's the basic idea.
And what happens in that paper, with unfortunately too many technicalities and so forth, is I
derive quantum mechanics from those ideas.
Interesting.
Now, you mentioned Julian Barbour, he's an upcoming guest on the Into the Impossible
podcast, and I asked him to ask a question of you, and he responded, and then I will
ask you to ask him a question that I will convey through me to him.
So his question to you, if you're willing to play this game of time traveling questions,
this is a very inefficient way to use the internet, Lee.
I hope you appreciate how time inefficient this is to talk about time in this way.
But anyway, Lee, Julian asks you with warm regards he sends to you, if time is fundamentally,
what is it like?
What are its attributes?
Very good.
So what we say, and this is in the work we did with Marina Cortes, developing a prior
structure to the theory that was based on slamming, what we say is that the business
of time, so I'm not going to define, I'm going to duck it, I'm going to say that the business
or the work of time is to continually make new events which make up, so what I want to
say, what time is like is what we experience.
That is, we experience the momentary present and the passage of those moments when new
things happen and new things happen, and that's the business or the mechanism of time to keep
choosing what new things get made and what they, and therefore that chooses what their
costs look like.
I talked to Frank Wilczak about time and his basic thesis is that time and entropy are
somehow fundamentally linked.
Carlo feels this way as well that the Clausius equation of delta S is greater than or equal
to zero entropy, and that things change, and that Frank then supplements that equation
with the fact that a clock measures something that is changing, and time is what we call
the change in something.
So it's sort of a tautology, but it's almost the best that we can do.
So clocks measure time, and time is what measure, clocks measure changing time, and time is
what clocks measure.
And so, but to my opinion, because microscopic physics is reversible, except at the moment
of quantum measurement, it may be just like with the twin paradox, and I have twins, and
I get to do experiments on twins all the time, something I share with a lot of physicists,
David Kaiser, Sabina Hossenfelder, Peter Diamandes, we all have twins.
Some of us have boy-girl twins, and that makes it even more fun.
But anyway, the classic twin paradox, which you talk about in your book on Einstein, an
unfinished revolution at some level, the question is, two twins set out, one sets out at close
to the speed of light, turns around after a rocket voyage, and comes back to Earth.
The other twin seems to have aged a lot on Earth, even though they seem to be moving
at relativistic speeds, each one experiences the other one moving relativistically, but
it's the one that undergoes the acceleration when he or she turns back and comes back.
So at that moment, that instantaneous moment, it's almost as if all the acceleration of
time takes place.
And I wonder, is that not possible on the microscale, in other words, yes, the microscopic
laws of physics are immutable, they're time irreversible, until you do a measurement,
and then that measurement, that's where all the time, you know, directionality of time
takes place.
Here's how I've been thinking about it lately, and which is, some of which comes from that
last book, Einstein's Unfinished Revolution, and some of it is recent work with another
collaborator, he's clearly over there, and it was basically her idea.
So she came to me and she said, so I start, I think, I worry about the distinction between
the past, the present, and the future.
And so my friend, Carlo, and lots of people believe that there's no objective distinction
between the past, present, and the future.
And I do, I think that the time is now, now is real, and that that matters to stating
the laws of physics.
And the question is, certainly the present is real, but is the past, is the future,
and how does this relate to quantum mechanics?
So Clalé's idea, which turned out, when we looked into it, to have quite a legacy,
which I'll come to, is that the future realm is indefinite, and everything that, from quantum
physics, is indefinite, that is a part of the superposition, click go this way, click
go this way, is part of the future, that is the wave function, the quantum state is a
description of the future.
And what the present is, is the resolution of indefiniteness and ambiguities to definitenesses,
because the past is always only definite.
And I was really interested in that, and shook up by that, and then I started to ask some
friends, and it turns out that Heisenberg said this quite precisely, it's not, it's
hard to find, but Heisenberg said this in Schrodinger and Freeman Dyson, quite at length
in one quote you can find, which of course we put in the paper.
So that's, and this is a new idea, so it could be wrong, but I'm kind of, I find it very
interesting, this idea that, that what the present is, is the resolution of indefiniteness
and ambiguities.
And so let's play, let's think about that more.
Yeah, I wonder if, you know, some of the most interesting things in physics come about because
of anomalies, and those anomalies are really the things that make you sit up and notice,
because you know I'm a pilot, and an anomaly in the cockpit is a flashing red light, and
you ignore that at your peril, and I think those are some of the greatest gifts that
physicists have, and one of the greatest gifts that we got was in the 1950s, when we noticed
the parody and chirality of nature was not a perfectly obeyed symmetry, but we do think,
correct me if I'm wrong, that the combination of discrete symmetries, charge, parody, and
time reversal is respected, but I wonder, this is work you did with Joao Magaizio and others
on chiral gravitational waves in 2008 that had some startling predictions, but I remember
one line in particular that Stefan really drove home to me was that you make the claim
that if the laws of physics are unified, and if the electro-weak sector violates parody
as we know it does, then if gravity becomes unified with the electro-weak sector, then
it's almost unavoidable, that gravity will have some chirality, and I guess this is characterized
by this Emiritese parameter, etc. Can you say more as you're thinking on that, Eval?
That was one of the most earth-shattering bombshells that I ever heard because it meant
that in my field, we might see bigger chiral anomalies in the cosmic microwave background
that might illuminate physics beyond the standard model indicative of Lorentz invariance violation,
which is more startling to me than inflation.
Yeah, me too. I don't know if I have anything new to say. I'm very grateful for your interest
and other observers who have taken these things seriously enough to really look for them.
Let me, here's something which fascinates me, generalitity, and I'm not assuming that
our listeners, your listeners are experts in physics, but generalitity has a reputation
of being difficult, partly because the Einstein equation is really complicated, and it's a
function of this thing, the metric that measures distances, but you've got the inverse of the
metric and the determinant of the metric and the square root, and the metric and the square
root, the determinant of the metric, and it's a mess to compute with, and it's sure a mess
to make quantum mechanical. So what Abai used turned out, he didn't know that, we didn't
know that at the time, but a Polish physicist who was a refugee to Mexico named Plobanski
had discovered something wonderful, which is that you can look at the Einstein equations
from a kind of different point of view, which is chiral, that is where you only focus on
how the left-handed neutrinos react to a gravitational wave, and not the right-handed neutrinos. And
if you do that, you get equations which are just quadratic equations, period. There's
no determinants, there's no square roots, there's no inverses, there's just quadratic
equations, and if something were simpler than that, it would be linear, and then we'd
get all the linear equations we can solve. So it's as simple as it can get while still
being non-trivial. And loop quantum gravity, the reason why all those ideas worked is because
Abai rediscovered Plobanski's formulation. So that makes me wonder, does nature know
about this? And so for example, Roger Penrose's great construction, I mean he's done so many
great things, but to grab it, in my opinion, is Twister theory. It just found a lot of
use in particle physics and string theory and loop quantum gravity. But Abai's own
is a very radical idea, and Twister theory has this chirality built into it. The left-handed
gravitational waves are described in a way that's different than the right-handed gravitational
waves.
Interesting. So that, it was an earlier, yes, and you do speak about that in the book, and
also Roger's been a guest four times on the show as well, and his 90th birthday is coming
up, and I'm delighted to be asked to speak on behalf of that wonderful arcade.
And that'll be something to celebrate in August, I believe, is his 90th birthday. It's quite
amazing. And thinking about his late-grade colleague, Stephen Hawking, who passed away
three years ago, it's hard to believe. This notion that he kind of died without having
unified quantum mechanics with gravity, I've been having this provocative statement, Lee,
at the risk of insulting my mentor, Lee Smolin and friend, I don't know that gravity has
to be unified with quantum mechanics. I mean, after all, there are only two situations to
my knowledge at which the quantization of gravity, the failure of gravity to play nice
with quantum mechanics becomes important. And that's near a singularity in a black hole
and near the origin of the universe, if indeed it began with a singularity, which Sir Roger,
as you know, does not believe it did. And Paul Steinhart does not believe it did. And
many others do not believe it did. Neil Turok, your colleague, does not believe it did. And
so there's one very questionable scenario that could get ticked off that we don't have
to worry about quantum gravity in that scenario. And a black hole once below the event horizon,
as you know, better than almost anybody else, we cannot observe the details, what happens
in the singularity inside the event horizon stays inside the event horizon. So why do we care?
I mean, would there be any signature of quantum gravity outside the event horizon? And that
would be the own or are there other scenarios in addition to physics beyond the event horizon
that is relevant to the mandate that we must quantize gravity?
Very good. So I'm going to give you another reason. I mean, I'm very interested in the idea
of quantum gravity. I don't think there's an open and shut case that we shouldn't quantify.
But here's something I've been fascinated by since graduate school days.
And in I'll tell the background, in graduate school days, I got interested in Einstein,
I was always interested in Einstein. And I had a friend who was a historian of physics,
Amelia Michelle Cohn. And she made a proposal to me. She said, why don't we read all of Einstein's
papers from the beginning, at least the first 10 years or so. And very few of them were in English,
except the three or four classes. Why don't we start with his very first paper, which was on
thermodynamics in life, and read with her translator and read forward. And so we did that.
And there was a thing that was very apparent as we did that, which is that he was enormously
interested in the consequences of applying thermodynamic ideas to life. And therefore,
he was very interested in the situation, which is called the ultraviolet catastrophe,
where if you make a box with conductors, and you must, you must actually know how to do this.
And you put some light, you have a little hole, and you put some light in, and you
close the hole, the light bounces around. It doesn't interact with itself as it interacts
with your walls, where the conductors are, and it thermalizes itself. It bounces and bounces and
bounces and bounces and thermalizes itself. And then you open a little hole, and you put a spectrograph
there, and it comes out the black body spectrum. And that was really interesting for Einstein,
because the black body spectrum, without even having the form of the spectrum, although he did
actually, of course, this was after Planck, so he knew Planck's guess. And it was obvious that
classical physics couldn't explain the fall off at the high frequency, either the minus
h bar omega over the temperature, basically. And this was a reason why you had to quantize
electromagnetism, was to prevent that spectrum from just going out unstably to infinity.
And so we read that in several different versions, and I thought, I wonder if you can make gravity
waves to that. That is, if you make gravity waves, put them in a box, and force them into
a catastrophe, which you had to save by saying there were gravitons. And then h bar omega was the
energy applied to gravity as well, to gravitational waves as well. And you know what? You can't do it.
You can't make the analog of conducting planes, which reflect and keep
confined gravitational waves. You can show. And I managed, I'm not that good at this kind of stuff,
but I managed a derivation of the efficiency of reflection of gravitational waves off a wall
made of any material. And as long as the speed of sound of that material is less than the speed of
light, and the thing is not a black hole in the energy, the positivity of energy, the conditions
are met, then you can show that the efficiency is bound to the way, way, way away from one.
And the gravitational wave just sorters outside the box. Never is forced to come to equilibrium.
And you can even build on that and show that in the history of the universe, a gravitational wave
will never come to equilibrium. That is, at any time since the Big Bang and the Big Bang picture,
the mean free time of gravitational waves is longer than the cosmic time. And you can show
it in the quality. So I think that's a little, that's an interesting bit of physics that supports you.
Interesting. And if you, if you look, you know, out at kind of other tests that one could,
you know, devise, it's natural to kind of look at, you know, look, look for tests that could
potentially be crisp or decisive tests as there's a word for this, this in Latin, this, you know,
critical tests that could not, the theory could not survive otherwise, but to pass this test,
the bending of light by massive objects, the Eddington experiment is often cited as such an
example, even though many experimentalists doubt that it was really truly feasible in the technology
back in 1919 to truly verify the level of precision that Einstein achieved. But nevertheless,
we won't get into that. People can read your book and Jim Gates's books and other books about
Einstein, of which there are many. But I want to turn to the other aspect, which kind of fascinates
me and also dismays me about string theory, but about, you know, kind of all theories of everything
and our mutual friend Max Tagmark has written about these. And that's really the multiverse.
And this is quite disturbing in some ways, especially not the least of which are the,
you know, the multi multiverses that Max speaks about, you know, the kind of four
levels of multiverses that can exist, including a multiverse in which, you know, the laws of
nature can vary from string vacuum to string vacuum. And this is part of the fight I had with
Michio Kaku. Of course, you know, he was a gentleman, even if I wasn't. But the argument was, you know,
I said to him, you know, you say it's not fair to test string theory, because I have to tell you
which of the 10 to the 500th or more vacua we live in. And he said, that's just like solving
Newton's equations. How many solutions are there in a Newton's equation? I said, there's an infinite
number of solutions to Newton's equation. How many solutions to Maxwell's equation? There's an
infinite number. What do you need to solve them? He asked me, I said boundary conditions, initial
conditions. But I said the situation seems hopeless in string theory, and even more hopeless maybe
than Max Tagmark would admit. And I think I've discovered a fifth level of the multiverse,
Lee, if you'll indulge me and forgive me, because as I think Rabbi used to say, the Nobel prize should
go to someone who doesn't discover a new particle back in the 30s. But in this case, I think the
Nobel prize should go to someone who doesn't discover a new multiverse. I'm worried that
there could be a type of multiverse where not only the laws of physics change, but the laws of
logic change. In other words, why should it be that modus Tolens holds in some universe where
or two plus two equals four in another universe? And he claims, no, no, no, that's that was a
foolish question. But if, you know, if there are 10 to the 500 different laws of physics,
why should there not be 10 to the 500 different laws of mathematics?
So first of all, of course, there are different, I don't know how many there are, but there are
different versions of set theory and logic and mathematics, depending on how you
answer questions like the continuum hypothesis and the exclusive middle.
And there's a whole bunch of different logics and different worlds of mathematics. And that,
I find that fascinating. Since I'm not a Platonist, I don't believe, I don't have to believe that
they're real and any of them are real. But they're, they're, they're, they're structures by which we
reason. And it's what you say is interesting. And I don't know if it's worrying, but
it's interesting. And I could come back to that because I would think a lot about mathematics
and I wanted to know, especially since I'm not a Platonist.
Right. So I do want to talk about this, this third paper that you wrote,
co-author with Stefan and six other authors, Geron Lanier, Geron Lanier. Can you say something
about him? He is an interesting character. He's, his, his, his affiliation is listed as Microsoft
Research in Redmond, Washington. I once met him in Berkeley, California. Can you say something
about Geron? I know he's a friend of yours and Stefan's, but he's an interesting character. Is
he not? He is a very interesting person. And I, I feel very lucky to have him as a friend.
We're very good friends. Geron is speaking about autodidactis. Geron is almost entirely
self-educated. He went to a few schools a few times. He is
um wonderfully imaginative, wonderfully. He's really quick. He's, he's a great communicator.
He's a great writer. He's one of the few people I think of as, you know, this class of people who
are endlessly original and have endlessly important things to say. And he does have a lot that's very
important to say, whether it's about thinking about artificial intelligence or the role in the
economy of the internet companies and so, and lots and lots of other things besides we were talking
anything yesterday about a whole lot of these things. So this paper, yeah, yeah, go ahead. So
here's how that came, came to be. So first of all, I have been interested, as we mentioned,
in the idea that the laws of physics could change for a long time. And there was cosmological natural
selection, if we discuss, that I had another approach or have another approach called the
principle of precedence. And Jan is interested in that idea. And over several, maybe to many years,
Jaren and Stefan are also friends, and they're both musicians. One thing, Jaren plays an incredible
variety of music, of music instruments from all over the world. And there are so many stories to tell
that I'll skip doing that. I'll skip doing that now. Well, there's one, let me just bracket this.
There's the time Jaren took Stefan and I to meet on that call. And let me just just make
a week and you speak a little closer to the microphone. Who would you meet? There's the
time that Jaren took Stefan and I to meet on that call. Oh, that's right. Which stands out in my,
is one of the very fortunate experiences I've had. Jaren has, Jaren is among other things,
a computer scientist. So we didn't even get to that. He is credited with inventing virtual reality.
He is, and his position in Microsoft, I don't really understand it, but it seems to allow him
complete freedom to do whatever he wants and think about whatever he wants. But he's also involved
in projects there. And so anyway, over years, he and Stefan and I talked about a variety of
different ideas. And I don't know where the key idea in the paper comes from. I try to think of it.
The key idea in the paper is that we can talk about the laws of nature
learning and learning the laws and finding the its way around those
vacuums that you're worried about to one that is somehow benefits the universe best.
And this sounds crazy. And what we're going to argue is the following.
There's a lot in that paper that's an 80 page paper about what learning is because we had to
do it because we couldn't find it anywhere. But let me skip that and say that people are interested
in these machine learning algorithms. And let's just give me that what they do is to learn.
They learn facial recognition, they learn pattern recognition, they learn bunches of other things.
And let's not get into the epistemology of what it means to say that one of those machines or
algorithms learn something. You just give it to me that they learn. And I'm going to take
your favorite candidate for the laws of nature as long as they're of the form of something like
general relativity and something like gauge fields and fermions and scanners. And we're going to map
that theory into the learning machines and machine learning algorithms. And we discovered that map.
I don't I don't remember why we're looking for it. But at some point it's clear that there was a map.
And the map uses a technical result, which I knew, which has to do with a class of models
called matrix models. And that's that's just the technicality that was used. So we demonstrated
that result. And then we have thought about what devices you could make that could be mapped to
the laws of nature to investigate this idea. There were seven people on the paper. Everyone was
essential. And, and they range from a senior Microsoft computer scientist who was kind of
bringing in all of the knowledge about machine learning. Will Cunningham, who's a very talented young
theoretical physicist who unfortunately would learn it, were losing a little bit to the world of
startups. And it was a lot of fun. It was really hard. I haven't worked on anything. You work in
collaborations all the time. Yeah. And for me, it was kind of a new experience to work in a
collaboration at large. And it really did work. And it came together, but it took a year. That's a
full year of meeting together three times a week. That's great. And you don't know what's in the
Cunningham floor. There's a whole bunch of stuff on it. Yeah, I believe it. Yeah. So I'll try to get
Geron and Stefan on the podcast at some point too. Stefan's been on three or four times already,
but I've never met, I've never had Geron on. I'm going to have Nathan Mirwald on who was
director of research at Microsoft for a while and is kind of an auto-didact. And maybe that'll
segue to my final question for this interview. I hope you'll give us the opportunity to talk more
about physics and in the intervening month or so before we can talk again about maybe
we'll do a dedicated cosmology talk next time. You'll probably write 10 other papers
and three books. But I do want to talk just once about you are, I see you as an auto-didact,
you've written papers in economics, you've written papers in, as you say, set theory and physics and
cosmology, you've written six books to date. And speaking of learning, as we just did with
computer learning, do you think you can teach creativity, Lee? Can you teach someone to be
imaginative, to be creative? Is there a nature-nurture thing? You just have to be born with it.
That's a very good question and I don't know. I certainly believed that it was teachable most
of my life and I would hope that that's true because being creative is a great thing and I would
hope that everybody, however their life was organized, had access to that. And it doesn't
mean that you're good at it. I'm not a good musician. Unlike Stefan, he is a good musician.
I got good enough to play with the people who are really good. And then it was like, okay,
that's not my genre. But I still have a few guitars and still play them sometimes.
And I'm working with two people now that are unusual people to be working with
and they're endlessly creative and smart. And I don't know where it comes from.
I, you know, Jaren, Stefan, Talia, so many people, I've been fortunate enough to know,
have their own ideas about everything. They look at the world, the same world I look at.
They read the same stuff. And they come up with stuff just, it's like turning on a faucet,
stuff that's worth thinking about and worth listening to. And I don't know, I don't know where
that comes from. There are certainly claims that you can't teach it. But I'm going to,
I'm going to take a left turn on you. Here's what I think is changeable. And I hope I don't sound
like, I don't know, I'm more listed. And people are going to look like he said,
but let me try it. I think character matters enormously. And being in this crisis that we've
been, I see it every day. And I think that the ability to see clearly what's going on around you
and take responsibility for it and think about it, the ability to follow your own compass,
to not care as fine and put it whatever people think. I think, and I have a friend I've learned
a lot from, St. Clair Samin, who's a sculptor, he's a great sculptor. And Saint, so I'm going to
leave it with a kind of quote of St. Clair. St. Clair used to tell me that you get sort of into
your 20s for free. And if you're going to go on and become useful and really make a contribution
with what you do, it really starts to matter what your character is and how much you're willing to
be on the edge and take risks and question yourself. And by 50 and 60, it really shows.
It really starts to show. He was probably 40 something. And I'm about 10 years younger than him.
And then I'll say something else. You don't have to keep this in the tape.
No, it's great. But this is, I'm saying this to you from him anyway. Unlike you,
we had children late and had to be and talked about it and thought about it.
And he had his daughter a few years before we had time and he said to me,
you have no idea what you're giving to the world by having a child. You're un-murdering somebody.
And you're giving this to a much higher degree than I am. But I am certainly fully involved.
And it is a great thing to do. You know, that's, it's wonderful that you say that,
Lee. And actually, I was going to close with this to give us some time between our next
conversation. But I did want to say that I once heard, you know, Sam Harris talking about,
you know, the impossibility of, you know, teleportation and, you know, time travel.
It's kind of this fantasy that human beings have. And I said, no, that's actually a lie.
I didn't say it to him because, you know, he won't pick up the phone when I call him. But anyway,
I said, actually, there is such a thing as teleportation. It's just you can't teleport
yourself. You teleport your values. You teleport your ethics. You teleport your character
into the future. And it's called children. And it doesn't even have to be your biological
children, Lee. It's your ideological children. And I count myself. And I don't blame you,
but I count myself as kind of one of your ideological children. So, you know, I have a great,
you know, friend, you know, her name is Melanie Notkin. She's known as the savvy auntie. She can't
have children. She didn't have children, whatever. She has influenced thousands of millions of people,
even though she didn't have biological children. So I am blessed to have biological children.
But even if someone is not, you can act like a parent. You can communicate and thereby doing
teleport yourself into the future. And what else is there, Lee? That's time travel. And you've
done that for me and you've done that for millions of people. I just want to thank you so much, Lee,
for being such a great human being and being an influence on me even long before you knew me.
And again, you don't get any of the blame for anything bad I do with your good influence.
Whoa, Brian, that's the, thank you. I have no words. Thank you.
Well, Lee, thank you so much for going into the impossible.
I hope you enjoyed this episode with Lee Smolen. If you did, you'll definitely want to check out
this episode with Lee and Eric Weinstein. You'll also want to check out other theories of everything,
including critics of string theory, just like Lee, featuring Sabina Hassanfelder
and Carlo Revelli. Click this playlist right here.
