pleasure to introduce our second speaker of this session, Max Arnott, who was originally an
undergraduate here in Lancaster and is now completing his second year as he said of his PhD
under my supervision. So Max is going to tell us about what that is of closed ideals of the
algebra of bounded operators on a direct sum of classical binary spaces and the incompressibility
of its quotients. So please, Max. Thank you for the introduction. Thank you for having me on to speak
and thanks, Benza, for a great talk as well. So it might be the title for the longest title
in the conference. So that's our honor as well. So start off with a few definitions. So closed ideal
is a subspace closed in the norm topology. So it's closed under addition and by multiplication
by arbitrary elements of the bank algebra that it's a subspace of. We're going to use b of x, y
for the space of bounded operators, and we're going to use b of x for b of x, x.
An operator ideal is an assignment sending each pair of binary spaces to a subspace of their
space of bounded operators. So for every pair x, y of binary spaces, there has to be,
there has to exist a non-trivial one for that assignment. And for any quadruple w, x, y, z
of binary spaces, any s from w to x, t from x to y, u from y to z, u, t, s has to be in i of w, z.
And we'll use i of x for i of x, x, which is quite natural. So examples of operator ideals,
which we are going to be using. So g of d is going to be the operator ideal of operators
factoring through d. And we're going to use the norm closure of that. So all of the operators
ideals that we're going to use today are closed operator ideals. It's actually an operator ideal
if and only if d is isomorphic to a square. But everything we use today will be isomorphic
to a square. So we don't need to concern ourselves with that. So we're going to use the kappa
compact operators as well. So it's a generalization of the compact operators. I think Matt Dawes came
up with these ones in the first place. And the Banach spaces of interest to us are c0 of gamma
for gamma sun cardinal and lp of gamma for gamma sun cardinal as well. We're also going to need the
finite dimensional versions of the LP space. So it's just n2, n tuples with the P norm.
We're going to use the c0 sum of the finite dimensional l2 spaces as well. So that is the
norm. So the elements of that are sequences of elements of Hilbert spaces. And for the norm you
take the supremum of the norms of those elements. An operator t factors through an operator s if
s is a factor of t. And an operator t factors through a Banach space y if we can express it as
a product of two operators, one going into y and the other one coming out of y. So now we
sort of give the outline and motivation of the talk. So it's all about classifying the lattice
of closed ideals of a space of bounded operators. So Matt Dawes found the lattice of closed ideals on
B of c0 gamma and B of lp gamma. So that's for P between 1 and infinity but not including infinity
and gamma infinite. Larsen, Loy and Reed found the lattice of closed ideals of B of the c0 sum
of the l2 spaces. And Larsen, Schlumprecht and Schach then found the lattice of closed ideals
on the bounded operators of the the dual of this space. So I will say now that within this talk
we're going to be working with the direct sum of c0 gamma and this c0 sum here. The results also
hold for the duals. So l1 of gamma plus this l1 sum here. But there are just a couple of things
you have to do ever so slightly differently. So I've done it in in in terms of this c0 sum.
But all of the results hold for this talk if you replace all instances of c0 with l1.
So for classical Banach spaces that's that's everything we've got. There are some more exotic
examples where we know all of the closed ideals. For example if you went to Niels's talk on Monday
at Garth's retirement session he explained about a C of k space which has a few operators
in the sense that its operators are sums of multiples of the identity and separable range
operators. And the space of bounded operators on that C of k space has exactly four closed ideals.
So what we're going to do is take the direct sum of the c0 gamma and this c0 sum of Hilbert spaces
and we're going to find a lattice of closed ideals of that. We'll then show that if we
quotient this Banach algebra by any of its closed ideals we get a uniformly incompressible
the uniform incompressible property which I will define when we when we come to that.
So what we need to do is sort of talk about operators on a direct sum of Banach spaces
in terms of matrices. So we can identify any operator by a matrix Tij and the ijth entry
goes from xj to xi. So addition is just entry-wise. Composition of operators is simply matrix
multiplication so there's nothing interesting going on now. I'm sure everyone's seen it before.
The action on a pair x1 plus x2 in this direct sum is just given as follows.
You can also recover any quadrant of the matrix just by using the inclusions and projections.
So if we let jj be an inclusion from xj to x1 plus x2 and qi be an equation from x1 plus x2 to xi
then we can say that Tij the ijth quadrant is equal to qitjj.
And then closed ideals are subspaces of the space of bounded operators so each quadrant has to be
a subspace of the bounded operators on that particular quadrant.
Now something that's quite easy to prove is that in any closed ideal on a direct sum
on the bounded operators of a direct sum of Banach spaces the first and fourth quadrants
have to be closed ideals of the respective space of Banach spaces.
So given that the spaces we're working with we know they're full lattices of closed ideals
and we know what the possibilities for i11 and i22 can be.
And for that reason we're mainly focusing on what can be in the off-diagonal quadrants.
So here are these lattices of closed ideals I was talking about.
So for the C0 sum of the finite dimensional L2 spaces you have four closed ideals.
So you've got the trivial ones being zero and the entire space of bounded operators
and then you've got the compact operators and the operators approximately factoring through
the where these C0 in our case but as I said it also works for L1.
And the lattice of closed ideals for C0 of gamma or LP of gamma is given by zero the
compact operators the LF1 compact operators all the way going up to the gamma plus compact
operators which are equal to the entire space of bounded operators. So the definition of these
an operator is kappa compact if for every epsilon greater than zero the closed unit ball of the domain
of the operator contains a subset x epsilon with cardinality strictly less than kappa
such that the infimum of the norm of t x minus y for y in this subset of the unit ball
is less than or equal to epsilon for every x in the unit ball.
So what you'll notice is because this is strictly less than if I set kappa to be gamma plus where
gamma is the cardinality here what you'll end up with is you can take x epsilon to be
the entire unit ball so that's why the gamma plus compact operators are equal to the entire space
it's true for any time you've got a space of density gamma gamma kappa gamma plus k gamma plus
of x is going to be the entire space of bounded operators.
So a closed ideal on this direct sum on the bounded operators of the direct sum
so we're going to write e for this c0 sum of the Hilbert spaces now.
We know that the possibilities for the first and fourth quadrants are going to be given for by
zero compact approximate factoring through c0 operators and the bounded operators in the first
quadrant and the fourth quadrant is going to either be zero or some kappa compact operators
in in that position. What we can do is you can quite simply prove that if i is the is an ideal
on the of the bounded operators on a direct sum of bounded spaces if any of its quadrants are
the compact operators then all of them must be and that goes with converse as well so the only
time the compact operators can appear as one of the quadrants is if all of them are and the same
goes for zero so what you can do using this is just pull out the first two ideals from these
quadrants as well. The direct sum has the approximation property meaning that the
compact operators are the closure of the finite rank operators which tells you that the smallest
non-zero ideal is the compact operators here and then what you do when you combine these results
is you can say if a closed ideal on this finite space of bounded operators
strictly contains the compact operators then it must be of the this form so it must have
first quadrant either approximately factoring through c0 or the entire space of bounded operators
and the fourth quadrant has to be kappa compacts where kappa is at least f1.
So the identity operator on c0 factors through non-compact operators on the operators going from
c0 gamma to e and from e to c0 gamma all of which factor through c0 themselves so I haven't
proved that here you do have to do a little work to prove it but it's not nothing crazy
um this implies that all of the operators are the operators factoring through c0
and it follows that for any closed ideal of this space of bounded operators strictly
containing the compact operators the quadrants 2 1 and 1 2 have to be the entire space of bounded
operators. So from factorizations given by Dawes and in Larsson-Loyen reed's paper
we know that the identity on c0 factors through every non-compact operator on c0 gamma and e respectively.
When we combine the results from these bullet points what we get is that if a closed ideal
strictly is not sorry a closed ideal of the space of bounded operators on e plus c0 gamma
is either contained within the compact operators or or contains the operators factoring through c0
and this gives us our first three inclusions in the lattice of closed ideals.
So yeah here we've got the lattice of closed ideals we know that the rest of them the off-diagonal
quadrants are the entire space of bounded operators on their respective product spaces
and the other quadrants are off the following forms so yeah and here.
So the cases for when i11 is the entire space of bounded operators well all of them operators are
going to be kappa compacts when kappa is bigger than or equal to f1 because the space e is a
separable space and what this tells us is that the ideals that are in this form are the kappa
compacts operators themselves.
So now we're able to paint this picture for what the lattice of closed ideals looks like
so the operator the ideals j these are of the form where the top quadrant is the
approximately factoring through c0 operators and the fourth one is the kappa compacts
and these ones are the kappa compact operators. There is a bit more work that needs to be done
to show that everything just falls into place nicely but we're going to gloss over that because
we want to get on to the next topic which is incompressibility.
So bionic algebras are incompressible if every continuous injected bionic algebra homomorphism
from them into another bionic algebra have to be bounded below. So this was talked about
in Matt Dawes' talk on Monday. It also was talked about by Bill Johnson in the Banach space webinar
back in January I think and that's available on YouTube I would recommend that talk.
So it's uniformly incompressible if the the Banach algebra homomorphisms
into another Banach algebra the lower bound of them depends only on the norm of the homomorphisms
themselves. So here's a proposition from that Bill Johnson talk a Banach algebra is incompressible
if and only if the norm is unique in the sense that every continuous algebra norm is equivalent
and this sort of gives another place where this was studied before the PhD thesis of
griff-griffware. So this is all about uniqueness of norm properties of calcine algebras. It explores
this line of research and that's what gives a lot of incompressibility results. So it gives
ones that are useful for us. He proved the quotients of b of c0 of gamma and lp of gamma
by any of their closed ideals. So these are called the kappa-calcine algebras because they're the
quotients of the bounded operators by the kappa-compact operators. So these all have
unique algebra norms and he also showed this for the calcine algebra of the c0 sum we've
been using. So from the the methods that he gives in his paper so he uses block basic sequences to
prove these kind of results and you can combine the results and prove that the calcine algebra
of this direct sum plus our c0 of gamma space that calcine algebra is incompressible.
So yeah this is sort of how we prove incompressibility results from here on and this is I'm not going to
prove it here because it was in Bill Johnson's talk again which I'm going to keep referring to.
So if there exists a non-zero element a in a binoc algebra capital a and some finite m less than
infinity such that for every norm one x in a there are b c and a with the norm of b times
a norm of c less than or equal to m and a equals b x c then a is incompressible. So when we can
select a to be an idempotent a is uniformly incompressible. So this is a very useful theorem
to have because these kind of factorizations exist. So an element of binoc algebras factoring
through all of the unit elements of the binoc algebra is really useful results when classifying
closed ideals. An example of it is when we take x to be our direct sum our c0 sum of the finite
dimensional Hilbert spaces every operator which doesn't approximately factor through c0 which is norm
one the identity on this space factors through it and this was used to classify the closed ideals
of this the bounded operators on b of x. So what we have to do to prove incompressibility then
is find the upper bound on the norm of u times the norm of v and I will add that this proposition
here gives us an easy way of showing that the entire space of bounded operators itself
has to be incompressible in fact uniformly incompressible or any sub algebra of it which
contains the finite rank operators and that's because you can just get everything to factor through
a norm one rank one operator and it's it's quite trivial to do that in a bounded way like this.
So for our example here we can actually always choose u and v for which the norm of u times the
norm of v is less than or equal to two. I'm going to do that right now so what we do is we take
x t to be an operator which is it bounded on x and for any operator of this form we can write
t as a matrix tij and the ij entry goes from l2j to l2i.
So importantly we can perturb t by an arbitrarily small compact operator
and then we can consider it with a matrix of finitely supported rows and columns.
So we define this m epsilon quantity so if s is from a finite direct sum of Hilbert spaces to x
finite sum of l2 spaces we set m epsilon of s to be the supremum number m for which s of the
projection of l2 to the one over g1 perpendicular plus dot dot dot plus p the projection from l2n
to the orthogonal complement of gn. So if s composed with this direct sum of operators has norm greater
than epsilon for any subspaces gj of sorry hj here should be l2 to the j of dimension at most m.
So the idea of this is m is the largest natural number for which if we remove
a space of dimension at most m from each of the Hilbert spaces in the domain of s
then we still have an operator which is larger than epsilon in size. I find this definition
is a bit easier in words than it is when you write it down like that. So because we have that t
is we can consider t as a matrix of finitely supported rows and columns when we take qn
projection onto the nth Hilbert space qn of t we can consider m epsilon on that.
So we do that just by ignoring the Hilbert spaces in the domain of t on which it acts trivially here
on which qn of t acts trivially I should say. So Larsen-Loyen-Reeds paper gives the factorization
the identity factorizes factors through t and from that paper from the proof what you can do
is prove that r can have norm at most one and s you can take to have norm less than or equal to
one over epsilon. Epsilon you can take to be any value for which the supremum of m epsilon qn t for
n natural is equal to infinity. What we showed more recently is that you can actually take epsilon
to be anything less than the equation norm of t and what that tells you is that when you take epsilon
less than or less than the equation norm of t you get that m epsilon qn t is equal to infinity
that's whenever that's true whenever t does not factor approximately through c0.
And this basically ties the results together so if you take any t in the quotient space
b of x over the operator's factoring approximately through c0 you have this
this factorization through the identity and you also know that it's bounded you just take
half epsilon to be halfway here. So we've already seen that every closed ideal of this bounded
this space of bounded operators on the direct sum strictly containing the compact operators
has that it's one two and two one quadrants are trivial there the entire space of bounded operators.
I just noticed here that these should say c0 gamma instead of c0 so apologies for that.
So quotienting this space of bounded operators by such an ideal you're going to get elements
of this form so in the two one and one two quadrants you're going to be adding the entire
space of bounded operators and what that means is you can you can identify anything which only
differs in these two quadrants so they get quotiented away basically.
And lastly I didn't prove this because there isn't going to be time but the uniform
incompressibility of the quotient spaces in such a case it follows directly from the uniform
incompressibility of the quotient of the bounded operators on c0 of gamma by its first quadrant
and the direct sum here by its fourth quadrant. So the important thing here is that once you
know that in these quotient spaces the off diagonal quadrants are going to get quotiented away
you end up with the incompressibility following from the uniform incompressibility of the
quotient spaces in the other two quadrants. So all of the ones where i is bigger than the
compact operators are of this form we know from Griff-Weier's results that the
calcine algebra of this direct sum is going to be uniformly incompressible
and the other cases are it's just a i equal to zero and in that case you've got an entire
space of bounded operators so it's trivial. So thank you all for listening and I'll take any questions.
Thank you very much Max for a very nice talk. Are there any questions please?
Can I have one question please? Sure. Have you thought about L infinity in terms of incompressibility?
I don't think we have. We've been looking at a couple of other spaces so there's some different
there's some different LP sums of different finite dimensional LP spaces
that we've been looking at because although they don't have their
lattices of bounded operators fully charted out you do have some of these factorization results
so i've been looking into a couple of those which have they proved quite difficult
and also we've been looking at the Cfk space that Neil's talked about on Monday with a few operators
and that one it seems like it's going to be incompressible but the questions of it by any
of its closed ideals will be but we haven't got there yet so anything could happen but no we
haven't looked at L infinity unfortunately. Thank you. We should probably add I mean there is this
graph paper the one that Bill Johnson spoke about in the Barnock Spaces webinar
back in January and where these incompressibility property was referred to as I had I think
but I understand they changed the terminology subsequently so this is a pre-print by Bill
and Gideon and Chris Phillips so I think they are looking at capital LP in particular
and I think is that right for the reflexive range? Right yes that's correct that was the main thing
so that yes so that was one of the cases that was left open I think by
Griff Ware but I don't know Bill did you look at L infinity? No we didn't
actually hadn't really thought about it at all. Okay are there any other questions?
If not I suggest we thank Max again and then we'll have a
