Ayn Rand is one of the most provocative voices of the 20th century.
Her novels The Fountainhead and Atlas Shrug have earned her fame for their popularity
and notoriety for their content.
In her many essays, public lectures, radio and television interviews, Ayn Rand offered
a unique perspective on a wide range of philosophical problems.
Yet academic philosophers, both in her time and hours, have responded to her work largely
with derision and dismissal.
What explains this attitude by professional philosophers?
Why do they routinely dismiss Ayn Rand?
Welcome to New Ideal Live, the podcast of the Ayn Rand Institute.
I'm Aaron Smith, a fellow instructor at ARI.
Joining me today is ARI associate fellow Mike Mazza.
Now, Mike, in your article, Why Can't Professional Philosophers Get Ayn Rand Right?
You address this question.
I wanted to spend some time talking with you about the article and about the case you
make in that article, because I think it's an important case.
And I want to just read a quote from that article.
You say, until professional philosophers engage with Rand's actual arguments, their
pat dismissal of her philosophy remains an unprofessional prejudice.
End quote.
For those who may not have read the article, can you give us some kind of an overview of
what that article is about and what you're arguing in it?
Yeah, thanks, Aaron.
So there are dozens of criticisms of Rand floating out there.
Dozens is probably an understatement.
And part of what we do at ARI and part of what I see myself as doing is advocating,
expanding on and teaching about Rand's philosophy.
So part of that means responding to criticisms.
And many of the criticisms that are floating out there have responses to them in the
Objectivist secondary literature in podcasts on websites.
What I wanted to do in the article was to draw attention to a thread or a through line
that characterizes most of these criticisms, particularly the ones that are coming from
professional philosophy.
If you have been in philosophy classes as an undergraduate and discussed on Rand with
your professors, you probably get some version of she's not serious.
She's not a philosopher.
Her arguments are lame, bad, weak.
If they even concede that she has arguments at all, there's more than a few who would
just say she doesn't even argue for her position.
She takes these controversial positions, but she won't give arguments for them.
What she'll do is she'll write a mean character who has a view that she doesn't like and make
them look stupid and then the view that she does like looks heroic in another character.
So why do they have this attitude?
Why do they have this such a strong and impassioned rejection of her?
It's a kind of puzzle that a lot of her fans have.
Why am I getting this hostility from my professors?
Because I like these ideas and also why can't my professors seem to criticize the views that
I think I agree with?
Because the accusation of straw manning Rand is a common kind of response to these criticisms.
So what I do in the article is go through some of the criticisms that are sort of viral
in the Rand fan world.
That's the Mike Cummers criticisms that I discuss have been floating around the internet
for decades.
And also criticisms from people in philosophy who are prominent, even if I don't think they're
good criticisms or even criticisms that have a lot of viewership, they're still notable
because of the stature of the people in the profession.
So what I did in the article is made the case that there's a feature that all of these arguments,
all of these criticisms have in common that fans of Rand and people who maybe aren't Rand
fans but are just kind of interested in objectivism as a cultural phenomenon haven't noticed
or aren't aware of.
So a lot of the responses to the criticisms that I discuss, for example, the responses
to Mike Hummer or the responses to Robert Nozick, take the criticisms as given and just you've
got in respond by saying, well, you haven't correctly characterized her in this way or
that way.
What I'm trying to do is not reply directly to these criticisms but show that these criticisms
stem from a wrong approach to the project of understanding and criticizing Rand.
And that's what I call a philosophical proclism.
One of the things that I noticed from your article is that you don't take the tack that
I think a lot of people take is they look at this some sort of mis-presentation of one
of Iron Man's arguments and they say, well, this is dishonest.
This is obviously dishonest.
And even if there is an element of dishonesty there sometimes, I think that's not the tack
you take in this article.
And so we're going to look at the issue of what you call philosophical parochialism
and sort of unpack that.
But just, I don't know, for motivations point, who cares what these academics think?
I mean, you mentioned people like Brian Leiter and many people in the audience might not
know who these people are, but these are all academic philosophers of mixed prominence.
Some are quite prominent, some are less like maybe semi-prominent.
But Brian Leiter, Masimo Piliucci, I've written about him before, James Rachel's, Robert Nozick
and you mentioned Michael Hummer.
Why do you think it's important to respond to these critics and I think in particular
the way you do?
Yeah, so one thing to say is that part of advocating a radical philosophy is you look
at the criticisms, you think them through, respond to them.
That's part of your job as an advocate of controversial ideas.
So it just so happens that as bad as I think some of these criticisms are, they're not
all terrible, but as bad as some of them are, they're about as good as you'll find anywhere.
So if you look at the kind of criticisms you see in more popular presentations, popular
books, not academics, but public intellectuals who aren't academics, you get the much more
cruder, she thinks Rand hates the poor, she wants to...
You're industrializing a moral hero.
Yeah, so if you're rich, that means you're great, like that kind of that level and even
the bad article or bad arguments from the professional philosophers do is try to, you
know, how is Rand reasoning about this and where is it wrong?
That's what they're at least attempting to do or claiming to do.
So they happen to be the best you find out there.
Now, the other reason to do that is most people who have an impact on the culture at
large go to college and some, you know, most people take some sort of philosophy class,
whether it's a introduction to philosophy or whether it's just like an ethics, business
ethics, and that's where you're introduced to different ways of thinking about philosophical
issues if you don't learn about them on your own.
And in those textbooks and in those classrooms, it's the professionals who get discussed.
And when Rand comes up, and I go through in the article some textbook presentations of
Rand, it's always or almost always a hatchet job, a misrepresentation, or just, you know,
that's attributing some motives to the people doing this.
It's just incompetence.
They just can't accurately portray her.
They won't quote her.
They'll say Rand says this, they won't give a quote, they won't give a citation, or they'll
say, go read James Rachel's on Iron Rand, you know, you don't have to read her.
Let me just interject for a second for the sake of the audience.
So you mentioned James Rachel's and they might not know who that is, but he wrote a book
called The Elements of Moral Philosophy, and it's one of the most popular and widely used
introductions to ethics, at least in the US, I don't know how broadly that sense, but at
least in the US, it's very slender, brief presentations, concise presentations of different
major ethical positions, and it's just used all over the place.
You know, when you address James Rachel's, you might not know who that is, but it's the
author of a widely used textbook that's just all over the place in philosophy departments.
And so if you get a treatment that mangles Iron Rand in such a popular and widely used
textbook, I mean, a lot of eyes are on that piece.
Yeah, it's also, so it's one of the most popular textbooks.
I think it's in its 14th edition, something like that.
It's been around for quite some time.
Even when it's not assigned, the other textbooks that cite Rand are clearly
taking their view of what Rand is saying from James Rachel's presentation of her.
Yeah, and I think also that, I mean, one of the major things is that what these mangled arguments,
these mis-presentations of Rand's arguments that you get lead people to dismiss Iron Rand
as a serious thinker. And I think the more that happens, the more this matters, I think, to us
who think that her philosophic thought is new, original, really important.
And to the extent to which they go to professional philosophers, they read treatments by these
people who are experts in the field. And their assessment, judging by their presentation, is,
yeah, this is a pretty bad argument. So she can't think straight and, you know, nothing to see here,
kids. And that, I think, is the overall impact of this.
Half the country goes to college. You think half of them take an ethics class?
Maybe three quarters of them encounter Rand in their ethics textbooks. She's discussed,
to some degree, in a lot of the ethics textbooks. And they think, this is it. Like,
they come in with no opinion. I've heard of her. She's, you know, whatever.
And this is it. This is all there is to it. This is nothing. And then, you know, you don't have
infinite time in your life to go explore everything. So you just dismiss her and then look back.
Yeah. So it's important to address these kind of criticisms, even though it's easy to dismiss
academics as often the ivory tower. I mean, they have an impact on each subsequent generation,
just through the fact that everyone goes to college. Yeah. Okay. So fair enough. So let's
get into the parochialism here. So this is your main sort of claim in the article that
one of the reasons why, a major reason why academic philosophers don't get her arguments right
is because there's something like a certain kind of parochialism going on. Can you say what
parochialism is and how it's, how do you think it's operating? I mean, for the full treatment,
you can read the article, but just what, what do you want to bring out here?
Right. So you're being parochial if you're assuming your own and projecting onto someone
else, your own sort of views on the subject, assuming they agree with you on, on, on what
you're discussing. And in philosophy, so if you're discussing a philosophical theory, it's assuming
concepts, definitions, views of what philosophy is and how it argues when you're approaching
a figure who's disputing them. So if you're reading Ayn Rand or if you're reading
Heidegger from the German tradition, and you're an American 20th, 21st century mainstream academic
and you read them and you're just assuming that they must be interested in the same problems,
20th century American academics are interested in, that they share the same definitions, that they
share the same methods and standards. That's a parochial approach to them. You have to
understand that people in different philosophical or historical contexts just have different,
different interests, different definitions, different standards of, for what they're doing.
And part of interpreting them objectively is not imposing on them your own parochial assumptions.
And my, my basic argument is that this is how Rand is being approached.
And I give an example in the article of a philosopher Massimo Piliucci, who's criticizing Rand
on, on, on her metaphysics. And he's, she, she defines a metaphysical concept axiom one way,
and he just says, no, that's not how we define it. And my response is, yeah, that's not how you
define it. Yeah, we, who's, yeah, who's we, that's how you define it in the philosophy you're familiar
with. But philosophical terms and definitions are, I mean, there are things people argue over,
what's the right way to define justice? What's the right way to define freedom? What's the
right way to define axiom is the concept in question. And to just assume, well, this is the
way my people define, yeah, that's what's in dispute. We're disputing. There's a,
there's a different way to think about it. And Rand saying hers is superior or correct. And
you're not gonna, you're not gonna decide who's right by just asserting your, your side. So that's
a pretty crude version of it. That's why I start with it just to familiarize the reader with what
it looks like. But there's more, as the article goes on, we go into more complex versions of this,
assuming that Rand must be arguing a certain way. Because, well, how else would you argue? That's
how we argue in 20th century academic philosophy, not being sensitive to act that she argues a
different way. Yeah, so I want to ask you about the sort of form of argument that they think is,
I don't know, the gold standard, like how you're supposed to properly argue as a philosopher.
But I want just to come back to Massimo Piliucci. I mean, just to read that, there's a real
unseriousness on his part toward Rand, a real contempt for his subject. So it's, you know,
he quotes, like, as you say in the article, he quotes some statement by Ein Rand, which says
something about an axiom, but it's not a definition of the axiom. So he leaves out the definition
of an axiom, leaves in the quote, whereas he just characterizes some aspect of it and says,
this is what she, how she defines an axiom, wrong, he says, oh, you know, without even
like doing a little mini minor due diligence and just kind of like, so where does she write about
this? How does she define this? It's just, there's none of that. This is obviously wrong. This is
obviously silly. And it just, that's not what it is. An axiom is what would he say, a premise where
you start a discussion or something like that. And it's like, something you take for granted in
a discussion. And like, there's no investigation, no thought. She have a different conception of
what an axiom and what is that? And what do I think of it? And there's just none of it.
We'll come, we'll come back to this, I'm sure, but one of the things that's so
frustrating about this is that, I mean, I put in the article and you just said,
these, a lot of these people writing about Rand obviously have contempt for her. And
it's actually possible to have contempt for a figure you're discussing and not misrepresent them.
This happens all the time in good philosophical, historical scholarship. You're discussing a
figure, you think, yeah, their views are really wrong and really bad, really evil. And I can write
a paper about it and not caricature them or misrepresent them. So there's, there's a lot of
things going on. And that, that case is especially a lot of things, a lot of the things that are
going on are especially obvious in that case. Yeah. And so part of it, I think is stemming from
this just, there's a contempt for the subject, which leads to a cavalier, unserious treatment of
the subject, which then leads to wide, just common errors, gross misrepresentations, things like
it's hard to take seriously. And I mean, speaking for myself, like, I want to respond to these
things. And at some point, it feels like, like you're flooding, swatting a fly, so to speak,
it's just sort of like, it's not worth the effort. And yet you want to respond. And yet the criticism
is so poor that it's, it's, it's kind of embarrassing to respond. But not all these criticisms that
you mentioned for sure, in your article are of that caliber, where it's just so silly, like it's,
it's going to be a bit embarrassing to respond to it. And you make the case that they're looking for
a certain kind of argument. They don't see it in Rand. And they try to reconstruct it, according to
what they think an argument should look like. And then something goes awry there. So maybe you can
tell, tell us a bit about that. I hope I'm not mischaracterizing that. No, that's, that's, that's
fair. So there's a standard that philosophy, or I should say, philosophers in the kind of Anglo
American, what's sometimes called analytic tradition, that they, they want their craft to
aspire to. And it's sort of like the standards of rigor in mathematics, where you can put down
certain propositions, and then prove as a matter of formal deductive necessity, that some controversial
conclusion follows from them, or some some important conclusion follows from them. And that's now
people in that tradition are aware that that's really hard to do, to find a knockdown argument
that just follows as a matter of pure formalism, like you think of, if you've taken a logic class,
and you write down like symbols, you turn an English sentence into a string of symbols and prove
something about it. That's really hard to do. It almost never happens. But that's a kind of
standard, we can try to approximate that. And if you have that view as a kind of, well, this is
what a good philosophical argument looks like. And it's not as bad as it used to be, but there was
a period of time where, you know, if you looked in a philosophy journal, this is 60s, 70s, 80s,
kind of, you'd see a lot of articles. Yeah, when Einren was writing, you'd see articles on,
you think it's an ethics article, okay, this is going to be very, you know, how to live your life,
what's a virtue, what's a vice, what's a good, and instead you get analyses of the logical structure
of sentences that have the word ought in it. And there's a whole bunch of symbolic logic,
is that what does this have to do with, but that's the way people were thinking and writing at the
time. And that still goes on to a lesser degree today. A lot of the criticisms that I'm responding
to originated in this time period, and kind of just have been repeated without any reflection
since then. And if that's your view of what good philosophy looks like, and that's your view of
not just that's what good philosophy looks like, but that's just what philosophy looks like. And
then you approach Rand, you read one of her articles, and she's not arguing that way at all,
like she rejects arguing that way, she thinks that's a bad way to argue, it's never going to get you
anywhere, it's not going to get you to the truth. There's a question of what do I make of this?
And if you went to graduate school during that period of time, you might not even know that
there are other ways people reason and argue, you might not have learned that. And you might not
see that major figures in the history of philosophy are arguing that way, because
it's hard to parse an interesting philosophical argument and see what its parts are.
So, my conclusion is that a lot of the more sophisticated criticisms are trying to take
something resembling what Rand says in her published essays, and like shoehorn them into this
premise, premise, conclusion structure of reasoning that the profession values. And that's
just not how she's arguing. And you make a case in the, I mean, I take it you don't have any problem
with putting together premises and conclusions. I mean, one of the things that you do when you
look in an article is, what are the points that are induced that are intended by the author to
support or give evidence for or plausibility for a conclusion? I think obviously we're not
saying anything negative against that, but there's a particular kind of
deductive structure that they're trying to, they don't find in Iran. So, part of it is they think,
well, she doesn't really have arguments, because they don't find that. And then part of it is, well,
she doesn't really have arguments, but let's see if we can put it in a deductive form. So, where
the conclusion follows necessarily from the premises. And then you're saying that's often
not what you find in Rand's work. And you give an argument in the piece. I don't know how much you
want to talk about this, but her argument. Just as a point of evidence in favor of this as an
interpretation of what they're doing, this is what Robert Nozick says he's doing. Like explicitly,
he starts his article saying, I'd like to reconstruct Rand's argument as a deductive
argument with premises and et cetera. And then he says, I don't know what that is. So, I'm going
to fill in the blanks for her. Yeah. And that was on the Randian argument? That's on the Randian
argument in 1971 or maybe 73. Yeah. And that gets referred to a lot. Yeah, just look at Nozick's
takedown in on the Randian argument. Again, that's the way these things function. So, it's not like
those arguments have been given. In this case, there were responses, contemporaneous responses to
Nozick's on the Randian argument article. And maybe you can mention some of those, but
often it's just they stand as, yeah, just see Nozick or just see James Rachel's and that's
already been taken care of. And then that's part of the way. There's an amusing exchange on one of the
major professional philosophy blogs. Somebody writes in and asks, what are the best academic
criticisms of Iron Rand? Looking for like ammunition. And there's a whole bunch of threads or a whole
bunch of replies with recognizable names replying. And they come up with a whole lot of nothing
except Robert Nozick's article. And he starts the article saying, I don't really know how to
accurately represent Rand's argument. I'm going to give my own version of it. So that's the best
they can do when they're asked. So that's, I mean, you asked earlier, why is this worth responding
to? Yeah, that's another reason worth responding to. You'll go to your professors and ask them,
what do you think about Iron Rand? And you'll get hostility. And then really ask them,
like, what's a good response? And if that's, yeah. Yeah, I think one of the really valuable things,
I mean, about your article is that you take the time to show what's, how these arguments go wrong.
So it's Sidney Hook's famous criticism. Robert Nozick's now famous article on the Randian argument,
James Rachel's widely popular treatment of Iron Rand's egoism in his moral philosophy textbook.
And to show that they go wrong, that they don't match Rand's argument, and then go on to say
underlying why they, what's generating this, this, what's the mistreatment of the mishandling of
the argument, the mispresentation of the argument is they have a kind of parochial view about what
an argument looks like, what philosophy, what it means to practice philosophy. And they, as a result,
they don't find these kinds of arguments in her. What kind of arguments do you find if you're not
finding deductive arguments? I mean, she obviously, well, you have people that say she makes no arguments.
Again, for someone who reads that and thinks, like, what are you talking about? I think this also
helps to see, like, they're looking for a specific kind of thing when they're looking for an argument.
They don't find it. But does she make arguments, Mike?
Yeah. So read the article for the details. But in short summary, she does make arguments. They're
not the kind of arguments you find in math. They're more like the kind of arguments you find
in the sciences. They're explanatory arguments. She's looking to, she's looking at some phenomenon
so the example I give in the article is her argument for egoism. She's looking to explain
why we pursue values to begin with. And then she's using that explanation to go on and give
a further explanation. So if this is why we pursue values to begin with, why do we need to pursue
values under the guidance of a systematic code? So she gives a series of explanatory arguments.
It's more help, if you want to understand the form of the argument, like how she argues, it's,
it would be more helpful to learn about explanation in the history of biology or something
than it would be to look at how math structures its arguments. But it's, the pattern in philosophy
has been to look to math, not to the inductive sciences. So yeah, for the details, you have to
look at the article. Okay. So I think one of the, one of the values of the article, I mean, for
people who are interested in objectivism and frustrated by these kind of presentations of
Rand's work, I think this helps it go, go some distance in explaining what's behind it beyond,
well, beyond other than or in addition to some kind of dishonesty or hostility toward Rand,
because the hostility is real, whether or not that factors in the presentation of Rand or not.
I think it's sometimes it does, and sometimes it doesn't. Like, I think, like you mentioned,
Nozick wasn't hostile to Rand, and he was more sympathetic to her. And as far as you can tell,
trying to present, to fairly present her case, whereas, whereas other things are just kind of
smears. And it's not always like that, though it often is. Yeah. I mean, I don't think Nozick is
hostile. I don't consider Mike, Mike humor hostile. So if we're, if we're thinking about
my question is why do professional philosophers, why can't they get Rand right? I mean, I'm,
what I'm trying to do is give a major factor that people aren't aware of. So if you really
want the full explanation, answer to the question, it's a like a multi factor explanation. So
as we pointed out with Massimo Piliucci's criticism, yeah, there's just some intellectual dishonesty
here. He's quoting her out of context. He's kind of just crudely asserting his own view as if that
in and of itself is a response to anything. And, you know, the guy has three PhDs, like, he knows
what's wrong with that. So there's there, that's certainly you can't have a full understanding
of why some academics reject her so strongly. There's part of it is there's just some dishonesty.
But I mean, dishonesty doesn't exist in a vacuum. So other relevant factors are there's
hostility to her moral and political views are that's certainly relevant to understanding why
she's rejected. Most philosophers are very left wing. That's certainly relevant. They're all bought
into altruism, or just computer subjectivism as a moral, moral framework. So they're hostile to
the egoism just as a map as in so far as the content is concerned. And then you have to see
all of those things interacting with the prokulism. So there couldn't possibly be a better argument
for a good argument for capitalism. I mean, I've read, I've read Nozick, I've read Milton Friedman,
she just has to be saying some other version of that. And those arguments are dumb. So I can
just I don't need to bother taking her too seriously. That's a kind of prokulism in and of
itself. And then, you know, if, if, if you are deep into Rand's philosophy, you'll be familiar
with her claims that you can't defend capitalism without a radical revision of your moral and
epistemological views. So that interacts, that kind of factor interacts with the,
with the professor's rejection of the, the political views. So these are, these are all
relevant factors. And what I want to draw people's attention to is just this additional one that
you might not have noticed. Yeah, because I think it's really non-obvious,
particular to people who aren't in the field. And there is a sense in which, so in graduate
school, often we're taught to, so we both have PhDs in philosophy. So we spent time in, in academia,
but, and learning about what philosophic arguments are supposed to look like, at least as we're
taught. And you're often taught to sort of put things in standard form, you put them in terms
of premises in conclusion. And often you'll read a piece that it's hard to do that with. And it's
not just Ayn Rand. Like, so you read, so one of the most widely assigned pieces of reading in
introductory philosophy courses or introductory ethics courses is Plato's dialogue, Euthyphro,
where Plato, Socrates is talking to this guy named Euthyphro and
part of what happens in the dialogue is that he's questioning Euthyphro about his use of a
particular concept and his understanding of it. Because his grasp of that concept is going to
have an impact on how he functions in his life and on some important issue. And as they sort of go
around and in through the discussion, it turns out he doesn't really know what he's talking about.
He doesn't have a clear-headed notion of what kind of concept. It's in this case,
it's piety, but you could substitute it like in many of his other dialogues,
justice, it's knowledge, and so on, courage. And what he's pointing out is you don't have a clear
view of what you mean by this concept. And yet you're functioning with it. And it's part of your
operating system. And yet it's not, it's clearly unsatisfactory, like in a significant way.
And you need to pay more attention to that. Now, it's very hard to put that in some
port of standard form. And I've seen professors try to do it, like as a TA in, of course, in ethics,
I saw professors do that. And it was, it misses most of what the dialogue is about. It's like,
yeah, Socrates is making this argument. And if you put it in this form, clearly it doesn't,
the conclusion doesn't follow. And so, because there's all sorts of counter examples, and this
is silly, and what a dumb argument. And it's like, you miss the force of a really important
philosophical dialogue that has resonance today. Like, I mean, I assigned, even I teach
Objectivism, I assigned the youth of Rome, for its power and its impact and the point it makes.
And it's kind of Rand is making something of a similar point in philosophy who needs it.
And yet you miss it completely. And that's just another example of this. This is how
you're supposed to think about an argument. You don't find it in there, let's shoehorn it into
some kind of argument. The argument doesn't really work very well. It doesn't really
represent what's going on in that philosophical work. And then you say, and then the students
are, oh, yeah, well, Socrates is not much of a thinker. Well, I, I allude to this a little bit
in the, in the article where I, I make the point that the way Rand's arguing shouldn't, shouldn't be.
It's, it's not as if she's got a completely out of left field new way to give a philosophical
argument. Now, she's much better at it than the philosophers in the historical canon.
But other philosophers give explanatory arguments, including, including Plato,
I don't think they're good explanations, but that's how they're reasoning. And one of the
pieces of evidence to think that there's something unjust and, and dishonest about how Rand is
discussed by academic philosophers is, is if you really took the standards they're trying to apply
to her and apply them to somebody like Descartes or Plato, you'd have to say they're not good
philosophers either. They don't make the kind of rigorous deductive arguments that you're looking
that the 20th century figures are looking for. At least they don't always, they're the theories
they're most well remembered for are not argued for in that way. They're more arguably the forms
best explained certain things. Like I cite the Fido in my article. And if, and if you, you know,
if you really like held yourself to that, that standard they're, they're trying to impose on Rand,
then yeah, none of these people are serious thinkers either. And now they don't do that.
So why not? And that's where you have to factor in, yeah, what one is just, well, we're supposed,
it's like a little second handed, we're supposed to think Plato is a good philosopher. So, you know,
raise these objections to him. But also it's, you know, we'll put Rand's a right winger and we
hate her for that. And she's a capitalist. And she says it's good to be selfish. So we hate her views
too. And again, all these factors interact. But I mean, any, any time you see a kind of inconsistent
application of a standard, and it's really strong evidence at least raises a flag. Yeah,
least raises a flag that, yeah, there's, there's several things going on here, one of which is
just there's an injustice. And the other of which is, you know, you have to dig into understanding
that. And that's part of what bringing out the parochialism of the approach does.
Okay. So your article focuses mainly on the parochialism. And I think it's good that we did
mention, you know, there are other factors going on. It's not just this, but one of the things is
like, this is one factor that's not often seen or noticed. And I think it's like,
maybe this is a bit of a side point, but can you say why you think it's important to flag that,
the issue of parochialism? Because I think about graduate students now. So you take a standard
sort of fan of Ain Rand, they read out the shrug, they read the fountain head, they get inspired
by the novels. In some cases, it feels very quite liberating. It's, they, it gives them a framework
that is empowering and so on. And they read something like Ain Rand's not really a philosopher,
arguments are all bad. And it doesn't, it's harder for that to stick with them. But if you're
actually studying philosophy or intellectual fields, and you come across these things, I think
it's useful to note. I think your article is worth reading, I think in part, because I was just
talking to somebody who was in political science. And she was saying, I, you know, I want to, I want
to see Rand's argument in deductive form. And she wasn't critical. She wasn't, she wasn't a criticism,
a critic of Ain Rand, who's just sort of like, that's what I'm looking for. And it's like,
that's what we're seeing effect taught to look for. And then if you don't see those, you don't find
those, you start to think, well, maybe there's something to that criticism, maybe she just
doesn't really make arguments or her arguments are bad. If you try to put them in deductive form,
and then it sort of mangles the argument. Yeah, I mean, Rand is saying philosophy is not like that.
Yeah, say more about that. Because that's important, because she rejects that method of
argumentation, not just that she doesn't do things like professionals today do it.
And so there's some confusion. And she's saying, you guys don't know how to argue in philosophy.
And I mean, she thinks the field has collapsed. So the whole field of philosophy in fact, has
collapsed in a fundamental way. They're not, they're not forming systems anymore, predominantly.
And yeah, she thinks there's a kind of dereliction of the field.
That's not, you wouldn't, you wouldn't, so to just to just indicate that, that
there's more going on here. Like you wouldn't say that about
the origin of the species, or like Galileo's arguments for the, for the, for the sun being
the center of the solar system. You wouldn't say I can't put it in a deductive form.
So that means there's no arguments. You say, yeah, that's just not, the sciences just aren't like
that. And Rand's saying something similar about philosophy is not like that. It's not like math,
where maybe in math, you can do that sort of thing saying, no, it's more like the sciences. And
is she right about that? I mean, that is a philosophical question. What methods should
philosophy use? What kind of subject is it? And she's calling that into question. And she's,
she has her own way of thinking about it. And I mean, even it, she indicates that she's doing that
in most of the major texts, when she argues for egoism in the objectives, ethics, she starts the
essay by talking about how the science of ethics should look, how it should proceed,
what its questions are, and why people have not like been able to see that she gives a whole
argument that the first question of ethics is does man, what are values and does man need them?
That's not usually how you start ethics, when you take intro to ethics, that's not how it begins.
So she's got a different view as she's telling you she has a different view. And that's
one of the, you know, one of the just indications that these critics commentators are approaching
their, their subject with this populism is that she's literally telling you that she's doing
something different. And they just doesn't register, they don't even acknowledge that she
say they don't say, well, she says she's doing something different, which is really not. It's
like it's just goes in one ear at the other, like it's not even there. Yeah. And I think so one of
the things I appreciated the most in my own graduate school in philosophy, and I tried to emulate
because I thought like this is the right way to approach a particular philosopher.
Particularly when you disagree with him or don't understand him, but it was usually him,
is to understand the philosopher in his own terms, or on his own terms,
in the context of his times, addressing the kinds of issues that person does. So one of
the things that's standard. And I think it's interesting that the philosophers that you
mentioned in the article, predominantly are not historians of philosophy. So I studied in
departments where they had people and I tended to gravitate toward these people
that are historians in philosophy, whether in ancient Greek philosophy or typically early
modern, where it's like, if you take Dick Hart says this and this and you put some premises and
that's stupid, it's like, none of them approach it like that. They look at this and say, what Dick
Hart is doing is he's trying, they try to put it in a context. What are his own aims? How does he
think philosophy should properly function? How do you think you should argue? Why does he take
these premises, which seems strange to us for granted? Why doesn't he question these other
things which we think are obviously questionable? And it's taking the philosopher seriously. He's
like, yeah, no, there's a reason why he doesn't question these things. And it's not because
Dick Hart's stupid. He's brilliant. And yet he doesn't take these things. He doesn't seem to take
seriously whatever it is that we do. Or he takes this for granted and we certainly don't.
And they don't simply jump in as, yeah, but he's stupid and we dismiss that. They're like,
yeah, well, what's behind that? Why is that? And they approach their subject with a seriousness.
And I was really appreciated that you learn much, much more about the thinker. You learn how to think
about a given philosopher in context. And it gets you out of this parochial view where, you know,
I came from a small town and everybody's Christian and this is our background and everybody knows
there's a God and Jesus saved us. It's just like, as if you couldn't think outside that village
mentally. And I think a lot of what the good, good history of philosophy is getting you outside of
your mental village. And there's, yeah, and I think that's what has really expanded and enriched,
I think my understanding of Spinoza, of Plato, of Pirro of Alice, you know, take any of these
figures where you have really good professors that know the context and take their subject
seriously. Man, you learn an immense amount. I only wish that philosophers would take that
attitude to Ein Rand. I mean, some do. They're typically fans of Ein Rand, who are wind up
being the experts in her philosophy. But then if you're a fan of Ein Rand or a proponent or an
advocate in some sense, it's easy for others to dismiss all those are just the fans. And then,
you know, but it's like, so you take something like the companion to Ein Rand. It's kind of an
academic publication with a lot of serious content on Ein Rand, a lot of scholarly work on it. And,
you know, it's often ignored, sadly. I wish that was more of the approach.
You started reading, I think it's the, is it the last sentence of my article? I think it is. I should
know. I wrote it. That their dismissal is unprofessional. I mean, this is one of the things
that's actually praiseworthy about philosophy of the last 50 or so years, professional philosophy,
is that the history of philosophy is way better than it used to be for just the kind of reasons
you were just saying. They're richer. They're much more sensitive to the author's philosophical,
historical context, understanding on them on their own terms. And they have no patience for
people who would approach those figures in Plato in a parochial manner. That's why it doesn't happen
because there's good scholars. Talk about current dismissal. I've heard professors like, this guy
doesn't know anything. This is the stupidest presentation of Kant or Plato or whatever it is,
because these people take their subjects seriously. And it's like, you're just way off from the
historic. You could never do the kind of criticism that Sidney Hook or Massimo Piliucci did it,
that I go through in the beginning of my article, to a major canon figure. You just be,
like, laughed at, like, this is foolish. Like, why is a philosophy professor writing this way?
So that's why I say it's unprofessional of them, because there are good standards in,
there are some good standards in professional philosophy, and the kind of historical interpretive
standards are basically right on and well-functioning. And part of the issue is,
when they deal with Ein Rand. Yeah, when they deal with Ein Rand, I would imagine if there are
other parallel, controversial figures that professional philosophers hate, that we'd see
something similar in the way they approach them to. But I mean, Rand's a, but part of the reason
Rand gets such strong reactions is that she's not an obscure, an obscure figure that the profession
kind of looks down at. She's like a mainstream person to regular, to regular people. She's
popular. She's more popular than most, almost any, like, living philosopher today. So that's,
you know, what, another part of why she gets so much of this and other people do not.
Yeah, that's an important point to raise is that if other canonical figures in the history of philosophy
were afforded the treatment that the philosophers you mentioned talking about Ein Rand,
give Ein Rand, I mean, they probably wouldn't get published. They'd be sort of
laughed out of the journal, out of the journal, so to speak. Because I like, like in, I wrote a
piece called Why Massimo Piliuci Gets Ein Rand Wrong. And it had to do with, he wrote some
piece on Ein Rand and our relation to Aristotle. And I mean, it was largely just silly. And he
took two quotes, put them into one block quote, as if it's from the same thing, once by Ein Rand
from one source, one's actually by Leonard Peacoff from a book, and they attributes it to a wrong
source by some other article that Ein Rand wrote that he didn't know Ein Rand wrote. And it was
like, he said that this comes from some objectivist or something I get that objectivist is Ein Rand,
Massimo. And it's just so cavalier, which the way he treats it. But I like the way you definitely
choose to treat in the article, the people who take Ein Rand more seriously as well.
One of the points I make in the article is that, yeah, that you can laugh at how crude the foolish
Massimo Piliuci's jibes are. But it's basically the same thing as going on in the Rachel's textbook.
It's just, you know, more, it's more clever than what he does. And I don't want to put
Mike Hummer in this camp, I think, in fairness to him. He actually treats her
with the level of respect that professional philosophers treat each other when they're
criticizing each other. Like, it's a lot of times you get back and forth like, well, you didn't
really get me right. This isn't, but it's like, no, he gives the sites paragraphs that he's
getting drawing his points from. And there it's just more like you could have a series,
I like, I think he's, you could have a serious back and forth with him. I don't think you could
with Rachel's or Piliuci or Sidney Hook or some of the others I cite.
So we've been talking about the critics right now of INRAND. But my guess is there are ways in
which even fans of INRAND or could be parochial in their thinking as well. I mean, parochial
thinking isn't restricted to critics of INRAND. So it's a kind of general kind of phenomenon,
a way of approaching ideas from a kind of local limited perspective where you're not
fully aware that you're taking for granted a lot of things that are at issue. And then
are there ways in which you think even fans of INRAND can be parochial and ways in which,
if so, we can avoid that.
Well, you mentioned the value of the history of philosophy for breaking out of your parochial
habits. I mean, like I say in the article, this is kind of the default way. Where else would you
start, but with what you're already familiar with and comfortable with? Like, that's sure that
there's nothing wrong with starting that way. But then you also want to be self-conscious. Like,
yeah, there's a whole wider world out there that I'm not familiar with. There's different ways of
thinking about things. And part of, especially if you're into INRAND and you're like an undergrad,
one of the best things you can do is just seek out other philosophies and like think about,
okay, that Plato approaches it this way, INRAND approaches it that way. Like, try to understand
why there's a difference there and really think about who's right and what is Plato assuming
that I'm not or that INRAND's not and what is she back and forth. And you can do the same
thing with your professors, get criticisms from them. Can I really answer this? Do I know where
he's coming from? Is it just a, you know, is he just being more like Master of Peleucci, just
straight up misrepresenting things? Or is he being more thoughtful, like a more like a Nozick
or a bike humor? And do I have answers to these things? And if I don't, what does that mean?
That's that's the best thing you can do to train yourself to just question your own assumptions,
question your own premises, check your own premises is to have them challenged.
Yeah, I mean, a lot of times you're assuming straight out of INRAND's attitude toward a
proper methodology. A lot of times, a lot of times you don't know you're holding something
as an assumption, as a premise, until you encounter somebody who doesn't. And then it's
like, what, what, they seem stupid. And this is what I say in the, in the article about,
like the way Rand looks to some of these people who are criticizing her, like, she's disputing
assumptions so basic that they don't, that they have that they don't even, like,
bother debating about talking about, and then she doesn't share them. And it's like,
who is this weird person who doesn't know that everything is like math? Like,
who doesn't know that? Like, we all know this. And then what we're saying here is it goes the
other way too. Yeah, for a lot of people, including myself, reading INRAND as a young person was my
introduction to philosophy. I mean, I heard the word philosophy, but I hadn't studied any particular
philosopher before I read the fountain head, then out the shrugged and then everything. And it was
like, and of course, INRAND introduced me to the subject of philosophy, in part via her own
philosophy, but also her treatment of other philosophers. And so that's what I sort of took
for granted, sort of at the outset. Now, I went on to study philosophy and take other philosophers
quite seriously. And I benefited enormously from that. But there is that sense in which
many people get introduced to philosophy and to other philosophers via INRAND's philosophy and
what she thinks of those other philosophers. And then they can come in and spouting off things
about Kant and the never read Kant. It's that kind of thing, which must be just as irritating to a
Kant scholar. Yeah, this is his view. And it's like, if you ever read Kant, well, no, but INRAND,
I mean, that's would be just, that's the sort of analog of what's so irritating to us when people
treat INRAND that way, it goes both ways. And the solution goes both ways is applicable to both.
It's a good little, a good little test for yourself is just like, if you're super into
objectivism, and you're an under like your young philosophy student, want to make make the most
out of your time in college, just a little check for yourself is when you're making an argument
or a criticism of someone. So another figure, Kant or whoever, would, if somebody wrote what I
or said what I just said about RAND, how would I take that? Like, this is a complete representation,
you don't know what you've read, you haven't read anything. Yeah, if you're going into philosophy
class, you say, Oh, I know all about Hume. I didn't read Hume, I listened to Leonard Picoff
lecture about Hume once, now I know all about Hume, like, that's a good place to start, but
you don't know all about Hume. And you don't want to do the same thing that the critics are doing,
you want to aspire to a better approach that don't, don't take objectivism as if it's
self evident and unquestionable. I mean, that's, that's an aspect of objectivity.
Yeah. Yeah, so Mike's article is called, Why can't professional philosophers get RAND right?
That's the one we've been talking about today. And I also want to point people toward an article
I wrote called, Why Massimo Piliucci Gets RAND wrong? It's a prominent philosopher of science,
and it addresses a similar issue to the one Mike is addressing. I also want to point people
toward a companion to RAND. This is the book of scholarly work on RAND's thought, and particularly
toward chapter one, which is by Greg Salmiere, which is available online as a free PDF. So if you
click the link in the show notes, you can get that. It's particularly important reading, I think, in
this context, because it addresses RAND as a philosophical outsider and how to approach her
work in that vein. So that's it for resources for today. I think so stay tuned for next week's show,
and please send questions for future podcast or future Q&A episodes to experts at RAND.org.
If you appreciate our content, subscribe to our channel on YouTube, click the bell to be
notified for when we go live or we post new recordings. If you're watching on Facebook,
be sure to like, comment, or share the episode. It helps us reach new viewers.
And if you have questions or comments about today's episodes or suggestions for further
episodes, just email us at newideal at RAND.org. We read all of your emails, and we reply to
many of them. And with that, we'll see you next week.
