Welcome to The Integral Stage, and to another episode of Meta Models, our series on all
things Meta, Meta Theory, Meta Psychology, Meta Studies.
Today we're joined by Greg Henriquez, a professor at James Madison University, who has been
working on a problem close to all integralists' hearts, unifying the field of psychology both
within itself and with the broader human domains of science and spirituality or the
wisdom traditions.
He has presented details of his unified theory of knowledge and tree of knowledge systems
on integral stage before, but today we'd like to take time to dive a little bit deeper into
his work.
Lehmann, would you like to offer any introductory remarks before we get started?
I'd like to say that I admire Greg's conciseness.
I think his ability to be very comprehensive and inclusive with a very compact set of principles
and statements is wonderful.
I think maybe the reason I admire that is because it sort of duplicates and exemplifies
the process of conciliance and convergence itself.
Then often, imaginatively, I extrapolate that into the future and see a telos-like condition
of super integration hovering over the horizon of reality.
That's something you see too, Greg, or is that a step too far?
No.
That's exactly what I say.
If we do that well, the dream is to do that well, to unite the wisdom traditions, the
emerging digital age, reverse the metacrisis and figure out a way to be sustainable with
both soul and Mother Earth and science and all of that.
Absolutely.
How did you get started working in the area of metath theory and metapsychology?
Were there any indicators early on in your life of a talent for big picture thinking and
model building or anything like that?
No.
Not really.
Skip school.
I hung out.
I went to James Madison where I'm actually a professor now.
It was certainly not early.
I actually had a little trouble reading.
My oldest brother's valedictorian and I was in the shadow of that a little bit and was
not seen.
My talent, and actually it is a core talent, is that I could talk to people and very quickly
empathize with where people are.
That's good to be a psychologist.
I like talking about human nature.
I like talking about people's problems.
I like what was humanistically real.
What the hell really mattered to people?
I was always concerned about that.
I also thought that my high school training was basically BS.
I was in retrospect, I just wasn't engaged.
I did well enough to go to undergrad.
It was there.
I actually met still a deep friend of mine, my first mentor, Joe McColski, a sociologist.
He got me interested in feminism and sociology.
I was always oriented towards psychology.
But then I appreciated what would become the top-down version of the social context.
I was aware that our household was far more biased and masculine thinking and values and
the echoes or presence of sexism.
I could be woken to that from a feminist perspective, started a process of shift, a transformation
in my emerging adulthood.
That transformation took off when I got into my graduate program, master's degree program
in clinical community psychology at the University of North Carolina, Charlotte.
By that time, what was happening in retrospect, I didn't know this, but my intuition, I learned
to read well, so going from a slow reader to now a decent reader.
That was syncing up with my capacity for empathy.
Then I brought myself into the graduate training program, was super fortunate, excellent mentors
and fellow classmates, I think it was a real excellent three-year period of training.
I got interested in psychotherapy, of course I was a clinical psychologist and that's how
I'm trained.
When I got into the room and could empathize with what I call the best of the best, I was
really struck by how different the paradigms were, how valuable they were when they were
carried to with integrity and skill, and then why wasn't it the case that we just didn't
have a way of making sense out of the paradigms in the classic metaphor, the blind men and
the elephant.
My intuition, the second real skill that I have, empathy is one, it is coherent conciliance.
I'm very inclined towards zooming out and seeing from the noise music and I'm very driven
towards that way and I want to see an organismic world view that is in harmony and what I then
found in psychotherapy was a lot of good but paradigmatic mid-level insights that do not
have and so in retrospect, I didn't call it at the time, it was the problem of psychotherapy
and I was like, hey, why do I have to choose one of these or is it just an eclectic blend?
There's a movement called psychotherapy integration that I got interested in and that's where
the spark started to happen in my own transformation.
I was in 1994, so then I did something that no one else had done, which really is quite
interesting.
It was basically like, well, why aren't all of these unified on the science of psychology?
If you think about modern medicine, so modern biological therapy as physicians and modern
western medicine certainly is like, well, okay, there's human biology and if we look
at all the organ systems and all of that, that provides a basic relatively coherent
frame for that.
So then I turned afresh, looked back to my home discipline and said, well, why don't
we organize around that?
And with that new lens, I was like, oh my God, psychology is a shit shell at the science
level and I fell into that.
I was very interested then in evolutionary psychology for a little while and then I realized
that was a nightmare.
And that set the stage then for some key insights that I had late 1996 into 1997 and that point
on my frame and fascination and life purpose has all been pretty clear.
I've got two related questions and one is, yes, we can build these artifacts, these models
that unify things in a nice way and we can export those to other people and perhaps they
can be implemented by systems.
Same time it seems like that has to be backed up by individuals who have a skill set similar
to the one you're describing in yourself, like a capacity for empathy, for shifting
perspectives, for moving into paradigms, making sense of them and then zooming out and trying
to take that all together.
So to what degree are the models really useful apart from that skill?
And when we look at that skill, in you, like how much is temperament and how much could
be taught?
How much could be cultivated in other people who don't have that temperament?
Sure.
Okay, so I'll break those up into the two questions.
So one of the real dangers for metasystemic thinkers is that you fall in love with your
model, you find your home to conciliance and if you're sort of obsessed with that and its
precision, you then basically you have this ideal fantasy that this is your perfect true
knowledge and you see it as it and then if you're not grounded, you become a broadcaster.
Okay.
And you're like, this is true.
This is true.
This is true.
Okay.
Well, good luck then getting a bunch of broadcasts that have their own particular truth angle
and then just broadcast them together, but you can't actually synthesize or connect or
drop into the empathy of this.
So I absolutely am a integrative pluralist and what I mean by that is I think there are
lots of different ways to see the elephant.
I think we broke the damn elephant up, but there are a lot of angles to see the elephant.
Okay.
And there are many.
So if Ken Wilber climbs up one side of a mountain here and while I disagree with him some, he
is seeing parts of the same elephant I'm seeing and I'm climbing up in a different way.
In fact, I'm seeing lots of seers.
We're seeing aspects of it and you will always see aspects of it from different places.
Okay.
And what I worry about is a lot of people get metasystemic, people get obsessed with their
version of reality.
And then the question is how well does that connect and sync up with others?
And when it doesn't, then you have sort of a totalitarian infancy that this is the truth
rather than, that's a theory of reality, a reality.
Okay.
So that's a big, big deal.
The second question you asked is a great one in terms of my own.
You definitely need a particular talent to do what I did.
There's no doubt about that.
I have particular talents and if you aren't dispositionally inclined, both at a temperamental
level and at an ability level, there'd just be no way.
Okay.
And that's why, why do you think it's never really been addressed?
I mean, other people have tried to solve the problem of psychology in particular ways.
And every one of them that does a decent job has particular talents that the normal person,
and I don't mean that pejoratively, I just mean in relationship to time.
Now the question, the second question though is, is the system that I constructed a translatable
so that other people can then internalize it and then will it be generalized?
And then does it then have enough coherence integrity and arrangement so that the language
system holds as it grows and then distributes itself?
And that's all to be determined.
That's definitely to be determined.
I'm feeling like a lot of different things need to line up, although it feels more than
I would have said six years ago.
It feels like those things are actually starting to line up in a particular way.
Certainly one thing that clearly needs to happen is that the zeitgeist, the culture around
me needs to be at a particular place.
So I was inside the blue church of the Academy of Psychology and that's where I've been my
whole life.
And that damn culture was never interested at a zeitgeist level to actually try the task
of absorbing what it is that I'm offering.
So they at an individual level, I could always talk to people and everyone say, oh my gosh,
and I got hired for my, because I got very lucky in my position, there was this unique
program at James Madison, but I got super lucky, I got synced up with that, and then
I got hired for my theory, that was very unusual.
But we were unusual, and I was unusual.
The system itself had no interest really at an institutional level, in fact it was institutionally
defined against a lot of what I was saying.
So five years ago, I was just a little like, huh, you know, getting a little frustrated,
I can speak more about that.
And we're just really thinking this is not going to go.
I was also getting more alienated from where the institution was.
And then a whole interesting set of things happened, I think maybe happened to a lot
of people in the space, it actually does yoke into Jordan Peterson and his impact on the
culture.
I got sucked into the intellectual dark web and the deep web.
And then I basically launched my place outside of the academy.
I mean, I'm still a full professor, I'm keeping my job, thank you, but thankfully I'm now
a full professor, I can do what I want.
And so now I'm out here into the integral meta-modern space, right, that has a zeitgeist
of a number of people thinking, yeah, this modernist system of thinking, it's on its
last legs, we need an upgraded new operating system that's necessary.
When you're in that zeitgeist, that's one of the key things that if this thing's going
to be successful.
And then we'll see how people digest it and my ability to share it and all of that.
It's feeling exciting these days, but a lot of, you know, I'll let you know in a decade.
We just talked recently with Mark Edwards, I'm not sure if you know him, but he's a professor
in Sweden right now and one of the best known meta-theorists in the integral community besides
Ken Wilber.
And one of the things he talks about is the problem of methodology and meta-theory.
That meta-theory, more often than not, is the idiosyncratic product of an individual
thinker drawing from their creativity, predispositions, insights, and it then gets disseminated.
But if there's no methodology behind it, it's hard to generate a global community of inquiry
without it becoming basically just the application of a received system.
So he's looking at and wanting to explore what is the methodology that can support basically
the generation of meta-theory.
Is there a method behind the madness or after the madness spell, can method be generated
that can be reflexively applied to help refine and support and test the meta-theory so that
it can become a thriving community of inquiry?
Brilliant.
Yeah.
Yeah, the issue of method is huge.
Method of across multiple levels.
The institution needs a method to replicate itself.
And this has always been one of the real challenges that I've encountered at multiple levels.
So I appreciate Mark Edwards' point here.
And so here's what happened to me.
I'm not a huge fan of method per se, so that's just a dispositional kind of thing.
I want the method really to be in the life, world, life quest of individuals.
And I'm certainly actually, I have a love-hate relationship between them with empirical
methodology.
I'm trained as a behavioral and empirical scientist, and I actually basically was like,
oh, shit, I bought all into this like I'm a, you know, this is my fundamentalism and
now I'm actually on the other side of that in a particular way.
So my own unique history is going to have a weird relationship with method.
But here's what happened to me, which I think makes it, makes my system a little different
than what Mark's talking about, or at least it's an interesting odd outlier.
And you hear me all the time talk about the problem of psychology.
So one of the things I'll tell you right away is that there is an established and crystal-clear
academic problem that I am dealing with, okay?
So this is not like, oh, we're just confused, and here I have a wonderful system and it's
a, and as long as you follow it, this is great, okay?
That's all this is.
This is, no, there's a specific, I can hone you into a language conceptual problem, okay?
Which I've now expanded into what I call the enlightenment gap, okay?
I'm not talking about, because I'm writing a book now called The Problem of Psychology
and Solution.
And then I frame the enlightenment gap as the modernist system of understanding, okay?
At least at the level of philosophy and science, if we say from Hume to Kant and philosophy
and Galileo and to Newton, that thing gets solidified, okay?
Now other things that are, of course, happening to modernity, but if that gets solidified as
sort of, okay, this is the beginning of modern physics and philosophy with Kant, all right?
That system, the way it evolves, has no good capacity to solve two foundational problems.
One of which is matter and mind, that's why we get the mind-body problem.
And the other is the clear relationship between society and social knowledge and scientific
knowledge.
And that's why we get modernism and postmodernism.
So the enlightenment gap and the absence of that understanding conceptually, the problem
of psychology then is a natural consequence of the enlightenment gap.
That is, if you're gonna try to give up a science of mind, whatever the hell you would
mean by that, which is then the problem, you wouldn't have social knowledge, science knowledge,
mind knowledge, matter knowledge.
It's a shit show, sorry, it's a trouble.
And then, boom, now you get my discipline.
So now what I am saying is that, and that's why actually rather than go to method, I actually
go to metaphysics.
And then I go to what I call descriptive metaphysics, whereby descriptive metaphysics
means that you have to be anchored to scientific empiricism at one level.
In other words, I'm not gonna go pure metaphysics, I'm gonna go descriptive metaphysics that's
an anchor to the naturalist worldview, show that the metaphysical understanding of naturalism
is completely inadequate, and show my metaphysical understanding is 10 times better.
And now I'm inviting people to play my language game, and then we'll see how it works in relationship
to life, and living and all of that, but it then becomes an interesting, that's where
I'm at in relationship to inviting folks to apply the method, learn the language game,
and just hone in at least on the problem it solves.
And then the process really is I'm a clinician, so I'm really interested in people's live
world life quest, right?
And certainly we need societal institutional things, but I go to the level of the individual
heart, its head, the life that you lead, I also talk about start with your garden, a
lot of garden metaphors I use, and then the method of building a life world life quest
that's satisfying.
Of course, to answer that question is really complicated, and I appreciate Mark's view,
but that Mark's view is absolutely justified in the context of the academy, like the academy
needs that, and social systems need that, and I hope to find that my frame is metaphysics
and the individual and the world view.
So that's where I am, and time will tell whether that generalizes.
Okay, metaphysical question.
You got this elephant, you got all these different angles on it.
There's two ways to look at that.
One is, say, holographically, where there is a whole real elephant and we're only seeing
parts of it, another way is constructively, where we have all these visions, there isn't
really an elephant, but we couldn't make one by putting them together.
What's your take on that, on whether the greater whole is given or is the greater whole constructed?
Well, that's a great question.
I certainly basically answer the former more than the latter.
Now, I think there's a really complicated, so I like John Verbecki's inventio kind of
notion, or realize, the tension between what I would call the ontological side of the
belief relative to the ontic reality of what you discover and the interrelationship between
your ontological claims and the ontic reality is a very complicated relation.
But the Tree of Knowledge basically says, we could understand the elephant of the knowledge
that science has given us 10 times more effectively than we currently do.
And then if we all saw that, and it basically I pull out first chaos of like, what is science
now? Well, there is no scientific world, but who the hell knows?
And then exhibit A and B can be Edward Wilson's conciliance and big history.
So these are in big history and conciliance give you sort of, there is sort of an edge
here.
If you go from big bang to present and from quantum to sociology, we actually can box
in that elephant a little bit.
Then I come along and say, yeah, but you guys are still screwed because you can't figure
out mind in relationship to that.
And then I say, well, okay, I can do that.
I can now pick up that ball with the Tree of Knowledge arrangement.
And then basically say, oh, if you have the four dimensions of complexity of matter, life,
mind and culture, which people have surprisingly been confused about, then you align the frequencies
of behavior across those different dimensions, then everything comes in line and that elephant
pops for you.
So it's mostly the former, although I absolutely appreciate there are a lot of complicated reasons
why it's got a little bit of a ladder in it.
Yeah, Bruno Latour uses the word, which I think he means something similar to John
Vervecchi with his inventio.
And Bruno talks about instoration.
And for him, instoration means something that is simultaneously a discovery and an invention
or a creation.
And I think it's always a mix like that.
Yeah, it depends on the nature of the problem.
I mean, sometimes there are some discoveries you can make.
You say, I think this thing's out here and then you go and you dig it up from the earth
and say, see, I told you, that's a discovery.
But absolutely, theoretical abstract concepts absolutely going to have an ontopistemological
from the view of the knower that then interfaces with them in particular lensing ways that
then do have this invention discovery complexity.
In fact, this is one of the great problems of psychology itself in my argument, the science
of it.
If you're just going to say, we're going to discover the way you are, I'm going to discover
the way you are, Bruce.
And then I'm going to tell you the way you are, as if that then doesn't change what you
are.
And then all of a sudden, as you invent, you discover or John's concept of realization.
Realization both means I'm going to realize something and I'm going to make something.
Well, that interface feedback loop is unbelievably tricky.
And you better recognize that it often where it's present and when it's often very, very
present.
So it's definitely both and but the tree of knowledge just allow you to see the scientific
natural elephant in a just a clearer and different way.
What will it look like if you are successful in your project?
Great.
Yeah, so here's the vision that I have right now is as follows.
And this is what this is the 30 year plan.
Get to get to the half mark of the century, you know, and this will sound grandiose, but
I feel like I'm part of a grandiose vision.
I certainly believe with a lot of futures thinkers that the current course is quite unsustainable.
I like Steve Pinker's enlightenment, you know, vision, but I also think that he fails
to appreciate the accelerating press that we were putting on many, many different things
and the enlightenment version of reality to the extent that we simply follow it as many,
many self terminating elements.
So I'm pretty terrified that the enlightenment is, you know, has given us in its current
form the Titanic.
And there's an iceberg.
OK, and we're already bumping up against some early indicators of that.
And hopefully we're not locked into it in the next five years or else we're in deep trouble.
But the argument is, is that if there's a particular kind of consciousness shift that
could happen over a 30 year period that we have time for, you can definitely see that
we transition from a scientific modernist obsession with certain forms of knowledge,
OK, but are not an integrated pluralistic holistic understanding of wisdom that we will
then transition into clarity about scientific knowledge, what I often refer to as men's
knowledge.
OK, why that I mean modernist, empirical, natural science knowledge, OK, which are the
four key elements that really justify its emergence.
And of course, I call it men's to show the postmodern critique of what it represent white
men fusing with dominance in a particular way and overextending what the transcendent
knowledge that they were communicating and failing to appreciate the complicated issues
of language, of invention, of bias, of self-serving, all that shit that then creates the space
there for trouble.
We need to consolidate that the Tree of Knowledge offers that, OK, in a coherent way to give
us rise to a picture of men's knowledge and then realize that that just needs to ground.
It's not the end of the story knowledge that abstract knowledge is not the end of the story
abstract knowledge is embodied.
And we need to actually have a wisdom orientation, a wisdom orientation, men's knowledge then
becomes women's knowledge.
And so ultimately, the idea is, is that we can sync up and realize that modernity is
coming to its proper end and have some sort of renaissance, renaissance, enlightenment
shift.
That actually appreciates what we need to do is seek wisdom and grounded incoherent knowledge.
Then we have that awakening and then that awakening happens amongst the seers.
The seers figure out a way to translate that into the community.
I often will say it's an archetypal masculine project to get there and then a feminine project
to get it to the community.
I say that with somebody who's got a foundationally feminine heart.
I'm a therapist.
I can't see people suffering.
It makes me cry and I want to take care of them.
That's my, you know, it's an archetypal feminine core, but I have a scientific masculine seeking.
And so that's what I mean by those things, but then bring it into the core, bring it
into the communitas and the commons, have the system digest that and then get it to
the children.
And then to use Zach Stein's frame to have a resurgence of teacherly authority, have a
shift in education at the fundamental meaning of socialization and then raise individuals
to a fundamental, a different way of being.
So for example, capitalist modernist structures turn everybody, at least in the commons, to
an instrumental agent of bottom line efficiency marked by money, which is corrosive to the
soul.
Okay.
The soul doesn't want to just be used as an instrument.
It wants relational value.
It wants to be known and valued.
So we need to shift our capital structures from instrumentality to core valuing of each
other.
If we do something like that, that's not a huge shift, but I mean, it's got a lot of
implications that we actually figure out how to value people's souls in the 20th century,
21st century.
Well, make a big difference in the kinds of transformations that we've got.
Amen.
One of the classical problems with philosophy, spirituality and wisdom teachings historically
is that they've over anchored themselves in some current scientific notion of the day,
which was then later overturned.
So to what degree is your vision really bound to our current knowledge of what the scientific
domains are and to what degree would it hold in place, even if there was some radical disruption
to one of our ways of knowing and sets of assumptions about science?
That's a brilliant question.
Yeah, so it is anchored to when I'm anchoring it to, you know, I'll tell you what it's anchored
to.
So it is anchored to an outline of the Big Bang cosmology.
So there is some sort of matter space-time collapse.
It can be a big bounce.
It can be all sorts of different things inside of that, but it definitely, if the Big Bang,
if steady state theory is the actual thing, then there is a grounding of justification
that I'm slipping on immediately.
And I've told everybody from the beginning that I am trailing that line of justification.
And if that justification goes, okay, I've been very specific about what I'm really trailing
and the depiction of the Tree of Knowledge captures that trail.
So that goes, well, you know, unlike Trump, I'm not just going to try to hold on and say,
no, it really went.
It's like, okay, I'm in trouble here.
You know, this thing, the dominoes of justification are going to start to go.
You know, I believe that cell theory, natural selection and genetics are big pieces of the
puzzle that help understand what life is.
If you get an astrobiological thing that blows that out of the water, that's really different.
If there are genuine consciousness systems that do not need to be mediated by the nervous
system, and what I mean by human psychological consciousness, you know, there are noetic sciences.
If you track those particular kinds of things, now lots of them could be, oh, there is an
electromagnetic wave that you can sync up on.
And then, okay, that's, but if there's an entire another field, okay, that's, you know,
that's encompassing us that we don't know anything about, that's actually generating
and beaming into our nervous system that allows for a collective consciousness that I don't
know anything about, my system's in deep trouble that way.
So there are, yep, it certainly anchors itself to a particular version of naturalism at its
base.
Now that said, I'm also a clinician.
So the left-hand side of that tree is the pure reason side, and as any pure reason system
is going to be anchored to particular types of truth claims.
That can be qualified, I mean, I think that natural selection is blowing up in some ways,
but I'm still, the way I'm anchored to it is still fine, all right, I think you could
fill that in.
I mean, with big banks getting, I mean, not the basic outline is still there, but some
really interesting things are happening.
So there's a lot of specifics that it would be, that could hold, there are some big issues
that it couldn't.
The flip side, however, is the right side of the tree, which is the practical reason
side, okay.
And so the eighth key idea, the little black dot behind me, offers a frame for what I call
psychological mindfulness.
It's calm MO is the frame in that the MO is a metacognitive observer, also stands for
modus operandi, but it basically means you've got to train this part of your consciousness,
shift into metacognitive observer.
Then you want calm body, calm mind, calm spirit, and by that I mean your orientation toward
the ultimate concern.
And then it says, hey, there's an attitude that we're trying to cultivate through the
calm and that is curiosity, acceptance, loving compassion and motivated toward valued states
of being.
And to the extent that we can do that, it says, hey, you'll be able to metabolize what
happens so much in psychological neurosis as people get bumped, they get defensive,
their body goes into polyvagal defense theory, they fight, they fawn, they freeze, they flee,
okay, and then they justify why all that's happening, all right, in a mindless reactivity
that tries to prevent whatever the threat is from activating.
So calm MO says, oh, okay, we are that way, we're primates, tend to do that, when bad
shit happens, okay.
And then also you bring that in, it's a bomb for that, it reverses that, it allows that.
So that's an embodied practice, psychological mindful psychotechnology, you're showing
verbatim thing.
I don't think that we ever, it'd be hard for me to understand why that would go.
That's basically a conceptualization of wisdom traditions and ways of being.
So I think there'll be fruit to eat off the tree, even if some of it gets blown up.
But yeah, it's got some, it does have some truth commitments, no doubt, so.
In psychology, there's some tension or disagreement around whether psychology should be considered
a science.
And I'm thinking, for instance of- I haven't heard that.
Right, exactly.
Like Brad Fricchini, who worked so long in family systems theory.
And eventually he decided to move in the direction of regarding psychology as the youngest of
the folk healing arts, and to really go back to try to root himself in the knowledge of
indigenous cultures on how they process trauma, how they basically, you know, communally support
the transformation of the individual.
And this is kind of an off the cuff question, doesn't directly relate to stuff I've heard
you talk about.
But how do you navigate that kind of territory from within the U-Talk or-
Actually, that's an unbelievably central question to me when I talk about defining
psychology.
This is so it's right at that core.
So for me, you enter into my language game, there is the meta-psychology or what I used
to call my scientific humanistic philosophy, but now I'm talking of exact sign over the
last year, year and a half, I'm like, actually, I'll just call that a meta-psychology, okay?
That's the space in connection between psychology and philosophy, basically.
And I find it helpful to make.
Now, whether or not the one big question is, well, is that part of philosophy or psychology?
So let's at least say there's that position.
And that position can simply be called, well, this is the interface that happens when humans
become self-aware to go, what are we and what are the implications we are for what we ought
to do, which is pretty close to philosophy too, right?
Just centered on philosophy of mind, ethics a little bit, it's got some other areas that
is philosophy concerns itself with.
So that's, so there you go, okay?
So if that is philosophy, psychology for you, well, all right, that's one big way of thinking
about it.
What happens also that you have to contend with is what we mean by psychology in the
modernist sense, I mean, psychology gets its character precisely because it tracks the
emergence of physics, at least modern psychology.
And then it says, we're going to play the language game of science and try to apply
that to the world, okay?
So if you then, in my estimation, if you're going to disconnect and you're just going to
be, I'm going to be an indigenous healer and I don't care too much about empiricism because
I think that that ruins people, great, you know, it probably does, but you're not a psychologist
anymore in my field, at least in a modern scientific sense.
So, you know, the psychology should not be applied to that any more than it should be
applied to the shaman doing his thing right now.
He's not a psychologist.
Okay, so it has a particular character.
It's a unique, you know, discipline.
Some people say it's young.
I don't buy that.
I don't think it's, I think it's pretty old, okay?
I mean, in terms of modern science, how old is that?
And there are a hell of a lot of really young disciplines, molecular biology, a lot younger
than science than psychology, doing very well as a science.
I don't think it's our youth.
I think we were just confused.
So here's how I define it.
In fact, this was central to the Tree of Knowledge, is that you then have to, then there were
three great branches of the field through my meta-psychology.
So as my meta-psychology positions me, I then pull the Tree of Knowledge up and then say,
okay, there are three great branches of psychology from the Tree of Knowledge meta-psychology.
All right?
Those three great branches are as follows.
At a scientific level, the first thing that it teaches you is psychology is profoundly
confused by what it means by mental process, the science of mental process.
And there are two radically different meanings.
One exists at the animal mental dimension, like, do we mean mental process the way in
which the corresponds to the fish in my tank, okay?
Or do we mean human mental process, the way you and I are talking about stuff right now?
What is my subject matter, the fish in the tank and classical conditioning and operating
conditioning and all of that?
Or this conversation and how I feel about my wife?
And the answer from my vantage point is there's basic psychology, which is comparative animal
psychology, right?
And that's what it should be.
It's basically the science of mind, brain, and animal behavior, which is a pure natural
science in the foundation.
And then you get human psychology.
And then human psychology is the base of the human social sciences, which is a totally
different discipline from the Tree of Knowledge vantage point, okay?
And psychology undo this at all.
It doesn't break basic into human, all right?
But both of those are concerned, the language game they're playing is to describe and explain
what you see.
It's a science.
That's what science tries to do.
Creates the thing that you're looking at as an it, it moves, and then you try to explain
it.
That's what science is trying to do, okay?
I'm a clinician.
That's not what I do when somebody comes into my thing, okay?
I'm a healer, right, as in my practice.
So you come to me and you're like, oh, my God, I just had a fight with my wife.
I want to join with you.
I care about your idiosyncratic world.
And my whole goal isn't to describe and explain why you're an it.
My goal is to connect to your soul and move you toward valued states of being and adaptation,
okay?
I'm there to affect change in accordance with some humanistic value structure.
That's what I define as psychological doctors and the profession of psychology, okay?
Which is now for health service psychology.
These are the individuals that get trained to become licensed practitioners.
And that's a totally other field in the way I define it.
That's clinical counseling school licensed psychological doctors.
So now you have my meta psychology, basic animal, human, personality, developmental,
cognitive, social, okay?
You have an applied stream here, like educational, sport, all that stuff.
And then you have the psychological healer doctors enter into the real and do value-based
change, which is not a basic science game.
It's a healer game and that's a totally different feel.
There's a kind of subtle tension in integral meta theory between co-present dimensions
of reality and emergent layers of reality because there's some kinds of overlap between
the categories.
So we think on the one hand about energy, matter, biology, the noosphere with that kind of thing.
There's also the sense that for vacant kinds of knowing or Wilbur's quadrants where something
like interiority and something like participatory relations and something like objects are always
present at every level.
So how do you relate emergent layers to co-present dimensions in your own thinking?
Brilliant.
So I do that through what I call the Quadrant Quadratic.
So I love Wilbur's quadrants, but I identify them as human epistemological quadrants, meaning
that these are frames upon which we achieve knowledge and justification.
So upper interior, upper exterior, phenomenology and behavior, those are great epistemological
frames of the inside now.
And then we can drop down and we have cultural justifications.
Hey, I often say from inside the garden, this is the world's, if you tell me I'm insane,
that's great.
Most of you are standing outside of it.
I would say I was insane if I was on the other side of this equation too.
So the inside the culture from the outside of the system, I love those quadrants.
I find Wilbur's framing.
I haven't talked with Bruce a little bit about this.
I'd love to, Bruce and I will have some more conversation down the road here about, I find
some of Wilbur's ontological framing and commitments to be raised some significant questions.
I particularly don't like his upper right, which I think he conflates a physicalist ontology,
meaning he describes this, oh, it's the brain, with an exterior object level epistemology.
I think he conflates that.
The Tree of Knowledge says, yeah, don't conflate that.
The Tree of Knowledge says, an object exteriority is the lens of behavior, but you need to take
behavior on its own terms, so that right now this conversation that we are having is operant
at a culture person plane of existence, and we can record our behavior and my justifications
for why I'm doing it, and anyone can watch that from an upper, I'm talking right now,
and you don't watch my brain, you watch me behave as a unit.
So what OAI does, the Quadrant is the epistemology, then the Quadratic refers to I am a physical
object, I've got a press on the chair, about 185 pounds, I'm surrounded by, and then we
jump up, I'm a collection of cells, so that's my cell life, into my nervous system that
then creates a collective experience somehow, we can talk about that, that gives rise to
my phenomenological first person view, and then I'm translating that, feeding back, connecting
with you through justification, so that's the culture person plane, and that just also
lines with the perennial philosophy minus the great chain of being, I mean this is Aristotle,
at least on the outline form, so I have an ontology of the matter life mind culture,
that's happening, in the human level we have these epistemological frames that we can shift
back and forth, and you know, I wonder about spirituality, spiritual ontology,
all I'm basically saying is a more conservative claim is I can align the naturalistic view
between these epistemological frames and these ontological layers a lot clearer than we've been,
and that's what I'm offering. Since I mentioned Mark Edwards before, I'll bring him up here,
he also complains about the upper right quadrant as overcrowded, overpacked with
too many phenomena, and for him one of the things that he suggests is adding another access between
energy and form, and he, yeah, he develops that in his own ways, but I was looking to talk to you
also about some similarities and differences between UTALK and AWQL for instance, and in AWQL,
you know, or integral psychology, they're considered to be at least, you know,
six fundamental elements, the quadrants, levels, lines, states, types, and the self-system,
and I, looking at your system, I really see most of those things present, some of them are part of
the constitutive structure of your meta theory, and others are maybe phenomena that are just included
in there, and so in integral theory, two elements that play a very strong role,
constructively, constitutively, are levels and also states, and thinking about your concerns
about the, you know, the spiritual ontology, I think that would probably relate to
some reservations about the deployment of states in integral theory. However, there are possibly
naturalistic and metaphysical ways to understand states that could be, I think, that could fly
within UTALK, so we might talk about that a little bit, but what's your take on the,
especially the place of levels and states within your system? Absolutely. So yeah, I haven't done
the deep dive in, you know, really lining up all of what Wilbur is doing with the six primaries,
okay, and I actually do have some concerns about the whole type thing. Types are really tricky,
okay, and so I know you didn't ask about that, but I'll just say, you know, I've been,
on my to-do list is to delineate this, and in fact, I'm working with Andre Marquis,
an expert integral scholar, and we're debating whether, we're both debating whether we want to
do a dive into a joint book on integral unified, you know, frames that would then really delineate
this in some great detail. So let's just talk about, let's go into sort of the evolution of
consciousness and culture that Wilbur identifies, okay, which I think is actually brilliant,
I really do. I know the, there is a serious concern, and I think this has to be held,
but it also has to be acknowledged, and how we hold an inauguration is really strange.
So the evolution of what we mean, whenever we're going to create a hierarchy, okay,
that's going to create tension, ego tension, like, oh, I want to be higher, you know, boom,
okay, now we're going to have issues. But, so what I'm doing right now is I'm working with
Lee and Rachel Anderson, who I think has a really nice meta-modernity model, okay, so she's in the
meta-modern community, but basically this is what she says, and then we can talk about sort of
the Wilbur Coombs lattice and those kinds of elements and see where they would line up,
but let's just start with some of the basics. So I think it's very, very sensible to talk about
the evolution of human cultural consciousness, okay, and across four different phases,
that's going to line up in the Wilbur system, I think fairly clearly, okay. I think Wilbur's
pre-trans modeling, so you're pre, and then you're in the system, and then you transcend that across
many developmental lines, that's brilliant, okay, it's a wonderful general thing, so I really like
that, I appreciate the domains he applies that to, but we talk about just the basic cultural
consciousness, I like the idea that originally we're an oral indigenous way of being, okay,
that's going to have some animism, some tribalism, obviously going to get spiral dynamics kind of
rolled in here in a particular way, and just the idea of the emerge from the
Utah or Tree of Knowledge, more specifically, idea is that what happens is humans, once they
tip into propositional knowing, okay, we open up a line of communication that's radically different
and develop these systems of justification, okay, so now we're hunter-gatherers wandering around
able to ask why the hell is things happening, you know, good luck figuring that out, okay,
at the level of real abstraction, so you're going to build a tribal,
analytic, animistic way of understanding the world, or at least that's what tends to happen,
and from my vantage point it makes sense, I'm also going to say there's an powerful,
powerful wisdom to be cultivated, okay, in this level of consciousness, and indeed I think that
one of the great Trump, we're seeing sand talk, I'm going to blank on his name real fast, but the
sand talk is now as an indigenous wisdom kind of return, I completely agree that there's a huge
amount of wisdom we're losing from the oral indigenous perspectives, and one of the things
that we need for the 21st century consciousness is an infusion of this, and this is of course
going to be a nod also to Wilbur's insights that we're talking about evolution of include and then
transcend, right, so then what you go from oral indigenous you go into traditional,
so the traditional, what happens to people as they start building civilizations, there's no way
to maintain oral indigenous relations with people, okay, the systems are too big,
and you have to have then, you get experts, you get differentiation of skill sets,
and you get the priests beginning to cultivate expert knowledge, and you get the kings that
have to do things like Hammurabi's code, okay, and now you have law and justification and what I
would call the traditional formal cultural code of knowing, and then that happens first through
the Bronze Age, and then the Bronze Age collapse, that's the first wave of it, then you get axial
age emergence of the great wisdom traditions that we're still with us today, Confucianism and
Hinduism, then you get the evolution from the traditional pre-modern formal way of thinking
into the modern scientific, now we're clearly into orange here, and you get the modern scientific
individual, rational, we can transcend cultural things because we now have the scientific objective
reasoning, and you green and you critique it in the last 50 years, all of that to me makes very,
very good sense, it's a wonderful heuristic, I think that we can then get into states and why
people shift across states, and of course I'm a clinician, if you're a clinician you attend to
states immediately, you don't see people ever as one thing, okay, you have an observer yourself
and be like, oh my god, when my students I was great, I came home and my kids I was shitty,
I was like, I had problems, you know, I'm not the same, lots of different things will create
massive fluctuations, so we can get into the ideographic, in fact what's with Andre Marquis
found is that when integral theorists actually did psychotherapists, they were really totally
focused on states as a major, but anyway at the stage kind of thing, then you have that idea,
oral indigenous, you know, all the way to green, I'm blending I know around that,
and then the position of, and I don't like the term second tier, I will say that,
although I'm empathetic to it, I don't like second tier, I find second tier is basically poking the
first year people in the eye on their ego in a very, very strategically, you know,
erroneous place, you got to hold the ego, don't we know that, you know, to say actually we broke
the ego, and I know that, I got broken, but now I'm free, and you're going to react against me,
because you're paradigmatically frozen and lesser, okay, that's it, it's just a very,
very dangerous way, so in my, because it's, even though there's a lot of things that when I get
around integral people, I'm going, yeah, I love to do that, but you know, it's like how it's freeing,
so include, transcend across the evolution of cultural consciousness, Steve McIntosh,
you know, he does that with developmental politics, he doesn't include the oral indigenous,
but he includes the traditional, the modern, the postmodern, recognize strengths, weaknesses of
each, demonstrate a cultural consciousness that actually weaves that together, creates a collective
that does that, I think we owe Wilbur a whole bunch on that, and I think that there's a huge
amount of truth and value in that. Yeah, I've tended to lean toward models in which the integrative
or metadimension or the second tier is more orthogonal to each of the stages, rather than
leap beyond them. I think we've got a big role for something like a new shamanism,
in that in terms of a wisdom tradition that's ecologically focused and bodyman focused,
left, right, balanced, and oriented towards people taking more responsibility for state change,
brilliant, and I've tended to argue that states might have a basic,
onto epistemological basis, and I think that's one way of unpacking the upper right quadrant,
right, because we get this over association with physical material and objects,
but if you add in different potential ontologies, then you say, well, the objects aren't all physical,
this is a zone of looking at things or returning it like phenomenon, but it's not the same as
17th century empirical materialism. Totally, totally, and I'll say at the, and I'm not a
meditator, I'm intensely psychologically mindful, I do minor meditation, so I, Wilbur has access,
and everybody that does this has access to the witnessing conscious function of the upper left
in ways that, you know, I'm very elaborate on my logos, but as the Dow says, you know,
the Dow ain't the Dow. And the presencing of what I believe that we need to recapture,
what I believe that many oral indigenous wisdom, shaman traditions will capture,
is the cultivation of that witnessing function, and the centering of it, and mastery of it,
and the opening of it, and all of that. Of course, psychology practice, people are
discovering that with mindfulness, and it has its value, although it can become
mick-mindfulness, and you know, it's a dangerous thing to, you know, just, oh, okay, now, just,
you know, oh, God, you know, help us. But if we can actually do that with authenticity,
the modernist, you know, empirical natural science system killed our, what I would call,
our pathic essence of being, meaning underneath our first person experience, and of course,
all the wisdom teachers just said, hey, actually being with that being is pretty,
pretty important for us to, you know, be sane and get along.
Along the line of states, I'm intrigued by the spiritual or contemplative
dimension of meta theory building. And I wonder what your felt relationship is to the,
to the moments of conciliance and mega inclusion when you behold them, or when you birth them.
What's that like, that state? It's wisdom energy, man. It is, you know, it is my calling,
and when it happens, you know, as people know around me, it's like, I get cell activation.
So it's a cellular activation. You know, I'm raised in the New Atheist tradition. My father,
who was more present in philosophy of our family, was originally an evangelical for a while,
and then actually had a conversion into the young adulthood. And then over an eight year
period, the light, you know, almost as ordained as a minute or the light goes out, it becomes a
history professor. And then we grow up with, oh my God, it's actually science. It's not,
it's not Christ, it's science, and sort of a Dawkins-esque view of Christianity.
And so I'm a modern empirical natural science guy, in terms of what, you know,
and thus I'm spiritually impoverished, essentially, is another way of saying it.
And it's through ultimately the Tree of Knowledge discoveries that I rediscover what it means to
be connected to the universe in a particular way, and what that means at the level of every fiber
of your being. And so the times in which I go through my phases of, my wife sometimes calls
me a knowledge archaeologist, when I discover a new gem, and I see what it brings, it's a
oneness experience. In fact, I have a thing called an iQuad coin that has one on one side of it.
And there's a oneness there that connects to the self, to the universe. And it is very powerful.
And it's so powerful, even, you know, I've had empirical experiences, both, you know, and I don't
mean anecdotal. There's a singularity, you know, I may have heard of singularity's term around,
but there's a Russian psychologist, a Russian mathematician, a big history, this is in the
world, the big history is the singularity's idea that there's another threshold, they have
eight thresholds, threshold number nine, some people talk about it as a singularity, I talked
about it as a singularity, so I call the fifth joint point, which is what comes after culture as
the digital world emerges. Okay, well, there is a Russian mathematician who looked at the evolution
of complexity, okay, on a quantifiable measure, and he found Westerners were doing it one way,
like Ray Kerr as well. And then there's this whole Russian tradition of tracking the evolution
of complexity as a totally different data set, all right. And you see these lines and they cross,
one of them crosses with a correlation, he is a super simple formula crosses with correlation,
like 0.994 in 2027. And another crosses in Hickam's vertical at 2029.
All right, this is my, this is my now like, I see God, you know, this is sort of like in math
and in the evolution of complexity is like, oh, how is that possible? Here I'm sitting,
you know, 2028, there's a singularity emerging, I'm feeling it, this is like a mathematical
phenomenon of the universe, you know, so, so for me, absolutely, I, I still consider that a pure
metaphysical claim, meaning I don't know what it means at all. In fact, the critique of it is like,
oh, it's metaphysical historicity. And I was like, I'll take that, that's exactly what it is,
let's make the future history and have fun with it, you know, and then allow you have some faith,
and well, I'll also be grounded. So I've grown enormously and consider myself a, you know,
naturalist and a spiritualist. I'm very clear about I consider to be the horizon of metaphysics
grounding. But the idea that there's a calling there, I feel that at many levels. And the idea
that if an ultimate concern, all of that stuff lines up with me profoundly, you know, at a core
energy level, it certainly, I feel it. I think we're all in good company here. I think we all
have that, that feeling of that glimpse of the mandalic vision that, that just, yeah, brings
all things together, at least for that moment. Right. That's a super important point to anybody.
Listen, it's a state phenomenon. Yes. Okay. If it becomes a trait phenomenon, you're going insane.
You're going to blow all the circuits. Exactly. We'll have to lock you up. Sorry.
I mentioned this to you in email, I think, but I think it connects to what you're talking about
now with anticipation, possibly of singularity. And Jeremy Rifkin has this idea in his book,
Empathic Civilization, about the leaps that civilizations have made historically.
And I relate them. I relate what he's talking about as a subset of your basic idea of joint
points that at each major level of the unfolding of life, of actually the universe, there's a
joint point, which is a point at which new capacities become available that allow for the
emergence of a new form of being. And for him, within the human historical frame,
what needs to happen is the convergence of new forms of communication and new forms
of energy production and sharing. Yes. And when those come together, that basically provides the
scaffolding for the next level of a civilizational order. And he feels we're at the edge of that
now, especially we've got the communication system with the internet. And we're waiting,
in a sense, for the next emergent energy regime that will help provide some foundation for that
next shift. And so yeah, I just wanted to check in with you on how you feel about that and maybe
I want to ask you two things, but I'll come back to the other one later. But for this first one,
between the joint point and Rifkin's civilizational stage account.
Totally. So yes, I think that we're, I love Zach Steinsert time between worlds. Okay, so that's
another angle on this. We're going to some sort of phase change shift. Another, John identified,
John Brevake, the axial age kind of transformation is needed. If we ground this in the basic logic
of the Tree of Knowledge, as I've told many people on our various six to weeks, I don't remember
exactly six weeks to six months, which was in 1997, after I generated the Tree of Knowledge,
I had the insight that the 21st century was going to be huge. Okay. And the reason is clear,
if you follow the language of the joint points, okay, especially for matter to life, life to
mind and life and mind to culture. Once you get what are those cones and why do different planes
of complex adaptive existence emerge and what do we mean by them and what manifests them?
And the short answer is, is that they are complex arrangements of energy information flow
that are then held together by new forms of information processing and communication.
Okay, that provides the fundamental structure that allows the energy to flow through the system
to fend off the second law of thermodynamics and gather the free energy to then get metabolized
and you need the information to detect that and suck it up and then move it through.
That's what cells do. And then nervous system does that for the animal. Okay. So it's like the DNA
nucleus of the animal brain. Then all of a sudden we figured out how to talk. Okay. So now you have
a talking new information processing communication system. So then you get culture person. Now you
looked out at the end of the 20th century where I was at the time and you just asked, well, is there
an emerging information processing communication network system as I type to people on the internet?
Yeah. Okay. Right. So now you get, so now we're laying down the information processing
communication system, which allows, think about what it does like in space, time, energy, information
communication like this, you know, all of a sudden we're in all these different places and now we
all come together in the virtual space and the adjacent possibilities that this opens isn't just,
you know, unspeakably enormous. It opens up a whole other world. The energy thing is now we
have to actually transform the work energy into the system. So you get this information
processing communication system. We have that. We're still polluting the crap out of the planet
in a horrifying way. So we have to figure out how to do, to pull the free energy right without all
the externalities that kill the planet. If we could, you know, people are obviously, we're working
on that. And then the last piece for me is, well, then there's what is wisdom, basically. Okay.
So then the wisdom is the theory and practice of valued states of being that allows us to make
sense and be in relation. And if we get our information processing communication systems,
the energy flow systems and the wisdom together, you then would actually enable the upgrade
and the distribution and the system, the Titanic towards the iceberg transitions
and sails off into a sustainable way of being that addresses, we awaken from the meaning crisis,
we address the mental health crisis, address the environmental crisis. And we realize that, man,
if we love wisdom energy together, we will be a lot better off than we currently are now.
Two things. First, I want to thank you for mentioning Lenny Rachel Anderson,
who I correspond with regularly, she's contributing to the meta modern anthology
that I'm co-editing. But I didn't even think of including her on this series. So I want to say
this to Bruce, we absolutely should try to get her on. Second thing is, where does your model
building and meta theorizing go next? What would you, are there outstanding problems or the things
you want to integrate to make it a more adequate theory? What's its next iteration?
The next iteration then is, to me, is the pragmatic translation. That's what I'm in the
process of. And actually over the last two weeks, I mentioned a couple times with my mind is still,
I'm a little hypomanic because over the last two weeks, I cooked onto this concept called wisdom
energy. I never put those concepts together in the exact way that I've done recently. And the
process by which I did that has unfolded some really exciting things for me. And when I find
that, that's me in my little state of, oh, I caught another one, you know, that's great. At
least I have to metabolize it and see if it really works, you know, it will take a month or so. So
I'm about halfway through that. But the reason partly that I'm really excited about it is because
it's, I see the pathway of the kind of change that it needs, that I've always needed to make.
Okay. So my system, you know, it's like, so, you know, 1997, I've fallen to a rabbit hole of analysis.
It's definitely, it's, it's heavy on logos. I mean, it really is concerned. It's playing the
not modern empirical natural science language game in its own terms. I mean, it doesn't do anything
other than, okay, I want to analyze this, I want to understand this, I want to pull all this stuff
together. And I made a couple of really foundational lateral shifts, first with the justification
and then into the tree of knowledge. And then by myself built this whole thing that is very,
it creates a whole language game that's very difficult for people to follow. And especially
when I still was attached to my ego, and was still in the process of being like, so I here,
I was just basically saying, here's this justification system is like a metastasemic
theorist tends to be in my little autistic world of like, oh, God, this is true. As long as everybody
plays this language game. And of course, people are like, screw you, I like my language game.
But I'm telling you, you'll see the light. Okay. I mean, I'm a clinician, thankfully, so I get to
avoid that off. You know, I'm, I know how to step outside of that. So I'm holding both of those in
my head. But I never really, even my doc students and everything else, the ability to translate
this language to them so that they speak it fluently. They could speak it with me. But then
the idea of speaking it with other people and speaking with other people when critiques emerge
in relationship to it. So you understand what the critique is. It's like, only I can do that. Okay.
It's just super frustrating. Because now you're like sitting on this thing, and you don't know
how to spread it. And that's always been, and I got called in 2015, 16, to turn it into this
garden thing. Okay. Which in retrospect, it's a meta modern artwork of sincere irony. I didn't
know that at the time. It's so fascinating to be called into something. You know, my dad, you know,
as a modernist academic, Greg, there is already weird called the tree of knowledge. Now you turned
it into a tree in a garden. You know, I mean, he's talking to us, new atheists. It's not very
pleased with that narrative. You know, I was like, what are you doing? It's like, I don't know, but
I'm called to it. And actually, I do know dad, but one day I'll be able to tell you maybe.
So, but the whole point of it was, is like, it has to be, there has to be a journey to figure
out how to get to the other side and share it with people so that it then is seeded in others
and then grows from within. That's, so that's where my face is. That's what I'm after.
Right now, what's hot is for me is this idea of, can we cultivate we? Okay, can we cultivate
wisdom energy? I like that. Notice that's a question. Okay. Forrest Landry, you know, operates in
these circles was on still a little while ago. He's connected to like Zach's sign. And he developed
this ephemeral group process. He's grounded in imminent metaphysics. He's got a really fascinating
system of still in process of learning. But ephemeral group process is fundamentally oriented
first and foremost around question generating, which I totally respect. I of all people know
that it's justification relative to question justification makes a claim, which then positions
the opposite. And so justifications, which I couldn't find any other way other than just,
well, here it is, and then deal with it or not. And I get to the backside of that and be like,
can we cultivate wisdom energy that hits people's intuition in the right way draws them
forth? Okay, and then invites them that the appropriate zone of proximal development to
start, you know, metabolizing that doesn't create a dominance ego insistence, learn the system,
all of that. So my hope is that if the system can find its way to be oriented that way,
well, then the translation can happen. So that's, that's where I am. And that's what my hope is.
And that's what the questions we will see. It may only be a convergence of vocabulary,
but I feel like there could be something further there when I'm thinking about
Macintosh's notion of value energy and the metabolizing process of orienting towards
fundamental value. So I think that could be a kind of technology for generating a wisdom energy.
Well, actually, so I defined historically defined wisdom as theory and practice toward valued
states of being. That's essentially, I got hooked in because there was an Aeon article on the science
of wisdom, like just this past week, John was part of the John Berbeke was part of the Toronto
work. And basically, they're like, it's met a cognition, anchored to some fundamental appreciation
for value that's flexibly applied. I was like, Oh, that that is what I mean when I talk about
wisdom. So that was a really nice syncing. That was part of the intersection of the hook.
And so yeah, that's the and I talked to Nick Jankle just yesterday or the day before, you know,
and his wisdom leadership, and it was like, Oh, my God, you had wisdom energy leadership and boom,
there was just pop in there. So that's that's the kind of thing where lots of people can contribute
and bring stuff alive. And then it's but it's not specified. So it caused to grow, but it's
constrained enough so that's in the right direction. I'd love to hear the connection. Steve McIntosh,
actually, having read his book, I thought about that, but you're absolutely right. Excellent.
There was I had mentioned, I wanted to connect to one other thing. And so I'll make that thread
connection before we go too far along. Just thinking about the Tree of Knowledge system,
and the the joint points and the cones. And then I was talking about
Rifkin and his civilizational stages, which is also basically founded on this notion of
these joint points and in cones. And Wilbur, actually, with his fulcrum model of psychology,
does that for the different stages with this ladder climber view model and the different
fulcrum development. So it's like a macro, meso and micro
patterning of the same kind of movement. And I wondered if you had maybe some insight into
the dynamics of the joint points of the Tree of Knowledge that relate or translate to that
movement within the micro level that Wilbur is tracking of the unfolding from, you know, the
the uroberic and then, you know, pre operational and all of those different stages. Totally.
So let's stay with the so there's there's within there's there's emergence within a joint point.
Okay, so you got to get to the from the bottom of mine to the top of mine. Okay. So there's
within dimension emergence. And then there's the big dimensional shifts between the dimensions.
Okay, so if we want to first hone in on what the big dimensional differences are between and why
actually I believe we're at the big dimensional difference here on the fifth joint point. So
and then what are those features? Okay, so and then we can talk about also what are the
leveling ups that take place within and then we can think about them, you know, in different
from different angles. So I just want to make a distinction between like the big shift and within
shift. So what are the elements that go into the big shifts? As far as I'm concerned, well,
I already hit on some information processing and communication. But those things need to also be
channeled into a complexity building feedback loop. All right, that's that's appropriately
constrained, but structured to generate what Stuart Kauffman calls the adjacent possible.
Okay, in other words, an entirely new landscape that then has enough constraints on it, but then
enough feedback so that it grows. Okay, so you get an information processing cell that can communicate,
it's not going to go anywhere just dies, unless it replicates. Okay, and then there's a selection
process so that it then generates. So you get a feedback loop variation selection and retention
is the constrained complexity building feedback loop that then causes the level up.
The argument in one of the things that I saw is that the mind, the life to mind shift BF Skinner's
operant theory, operant selection, reinforcing on the outside allows for an environmental
selection process, really an animal agent environmental selection process, which actually
BF Skinner called commerce. Okay, initially, meaning the animal spends its energy, the environment
either gives you return on the energy in a particular way, and to select it. And then you
retain a memory, although he wouldn't use this term, but basically you retain it's how does it
select skin or never really ask that. And the cognitive neurosciences can answer that it says,
Oh, it stores memory and process it. So you have an information processing and environmental selection
feedback loop. Okay, then you go up and the argument is that language then gets captured
and constrained into the systems of justification. In other words, the constraints that are what's
legitimate, what's not in the various is ought propositional dynamics that then a grow for a
constraining system of paradigms to be built that justify. So you get information processing
communication, but they're actually have to be constrained in particular ways. Okay. So now
we get into this process about where are we, and what kind of constraints that we need. And
I'm arguing that the four core is the energy flow. So you have to pull free energy rate
density off the flow, all life, mind culture has to do that, we'll have to continue to do that.
Okay, the emergence information processing system and communication is the digital.
But what's dangerous is as digital arises, it's going to cause the lower levels to go crazy.
Because there's not enough constraints that allow the proper jump into the holding.
And what are those constraints? Well, for me, the answer basically is wisdom.
So wisdom, and this was the whole idea is like, well, you have digital. We built knowledge
system and really scientific knowledge, but scientific knowledge undercuts wisdom.
Wisdom fundamentally is a metacognitive value grounded state.
It's trans culture. Really, it's the process by which people become sages in versus conventional
thinking. And then the question is, if you can sync up the sages, that value grounded and cultivate
energy information through there, you then create a metacultural consciousness. Okay,
that's the way the term I use, which by the way, lines up nicely because we want to channel
energy to MC squared, just capital, metacultural consciousness.
So the art idea is that what are the theory and practices of valued states of being that we can
bring together? And I offer exhibit A of our political system as how not to do it.
Okay, so look at the United States, look at the current political system and just you want
people to regress into teams that are unbelievably competitive and narcissistic and manipulative
and completely defined as I am good and you're bad and we're going to compete against you and lie
and manipulate all anti-wisdom. I mean, you know, this is my, what I reckon to political,
but I look at Trump relatively concept of wisdom. So we're flipping. And then
if the wisdom systems can sync, then you create through the ecologies. Okay, I talk about gardens
at the Bronfenbrenner ecological scale. So gardens in my soul, gardens with my family,
gardens in my community, gardens in the state, gardens in the nation,
gardens transnationally into globally. And if you have wisdom anchor through those elements,
then you have the proper constraints that can shape the ever emergence of energy information
and to a sustainable complex adaptive point. I would also be interested to see how the notion of
wisdom energy unpacks itself relative to Macintosh's value energy. When I talked to
Macintosh last about value energy, I ended up writing an article which was a Nietzschean
recapitulation of his notion. You'd anchor it in the will to power in a post-metaphysical
universe and get the same pattern he was describing. He's not open to that argument, but
I'd love to see how that applies to whatever argument you might come up with that links those
two together. I'm intrigued. Now, my question is totally unrelated to that, more to long
times of what Bruce was just saying. The way that Wilbur tried to unify psychology involved
these fulcrums and the idea that distinct schools of psychology evolve to address imbalances and
pathologies arising at these transition points, at these joints. What do you think is the common
element of pathology at all the joints, which is also a way of asking what do you think health
means in its most general sense? Again, so you're touching me right at the psychological
doctor level. The seventh branch of the tree, the one with a red circle on it,
is called the nested model of well-being. It tackles essentially the descriptive problem of
what do we mean by well-being because people use that in wide variety of different domains.
There's one angle is, yeah, we have to get clear on what well-being in general is and then what are
the biological, psychological, and social dimensions of that well-being? There's that.
Life, mind, and culture will actually give you a frame and then it says, yes, there are ways to
think about well-being in the biological, psychological, and social. Let's then hone in on
human psychology now because you also then reference Wilbur's point and about what goes wrong.
The first thing I want to do is I want to note that what often goes wrong is at the level of
psychology, not at the level of biology people. The only reason that everything has to be biological
is because psychiatry is the big institutional dog and that's one of the medical disciplines,
and they have to fix broken biology. I love psychiatrists. I don't like psychiatry all
that much. They're committed institutionally to fixing broken biology or they then try to
become a dominant health discipline and adopt biopsychosocial medicine like George Engel did,
but then actually you're now just a health profession writ large. In fact, the best profession
for that is actually nursing, by the way. Nurses should be the actual leaders of
World Health Organization, not physicians, but anyway, women's knowledge. At the human
psychological level, what you basically get are you get dukkha, which is entrapped maladaptive
patterns of ways of being and thinking, that then suck people in to channels of investment
that have short-term benefits in their context because they're trying to manage energy flow
in a particular way, and then you get long-term consequence, but you're stuck with them and
then you double down. Now, the fifth branch on the tree is called character adaptation systems
theory. It is the bridge, it's the fifth branch, so now we're going to start to move into psychotherapy
and the world of that. What it says is that at the center of human psychology are these systems
of adaptation. In other words, what you're trying to do is you're trying to adjust the person environment,
human environment relation. The systems of adaptation go from base to increasingly complicated,
the base systems are habit system. The habit system just basically builds procedural memories
after experience. It has particular ingrained reflexes that it lines up and then builds procedural
memories on classical and operant conditioning and then you just program them and then they'll
get triggered by certain things and then it will orient you to do something if you're used to doing it
and if you can't do it, it will give it craving and it will irritate you if you don't, for example,
if you're a drinker. If you get used to five o'clock coming home and every day you come home
and part of the release of getting home is going over to the cabinet and popping the vodka,
as soon as you start to do that, you're saying, thank you, I'm ready. Then if you decide, no,
I'm not going to do it today, then by 5.30, you're like, your system, you got to release that habit
and then you got to get the drill because we're dependent on it. Then what it does is it moves
you up a system into your experiential system, which is the base of your phenomenology, which
organizes and integrates your perceptions, your motives and your emotions. It's mostly organized
by perceptions, motives, and emotions. That creates basically what you're trying to do.
This is John's perspectival and participatory knowing. This then is the experiential system,
and this is the core. It's affectively organized so that when you do psychotherapy
from an emotion-focused, neo-humanistic perspective, you're really tracking the
foundational organization of that phenomenological center and how it's an organismic valuing process
from a humanistic level. That if it's cultivated right in a non-judgmental sort of way
with proper constraints that the humanist didn't always put on it, but if you give them that,
then you can cultivate that. That's the center of that valuing process. It's going to be actually the
root of much help. Then you move up, so now this is the experiential system, then you move up to
what's called the relationship system. I'm going to be talking with John for a breaky today about
this. The relationship system then goes from a one-animal psychology into a two-animal psychology
where you're then tracking self-other relation. It is evolutionary grounded in attachment,
meaning mother offspring is where it starts. That's where you really actually have to empathize
and relate, and then the social animals get competition and cooperation and then track
their place in social influence and hierarchy's relational value. We have this whole machinery
to determine where we are in social space. What we're hoping to get is we're hoping to have the
alignment of good social influence and be known in value, what I call high relational value social
influence, high RVSI. That means the others know you authentically and they value you,
and you can influence them and you're yoked together. The reverse is low value, low social
influence state, and that's a threat state and you want to attend to that.
These three, habit, experiential, relational, and these are things that we would share with
other primates. There are two others. I'll jump to the last. The last is your system of justification,
your justification system. This is the talking system that comes online when you're about two,
and then builds your narrative so that you become socialized so that people ask you,
well, why'd you do what you do? Who are you? It's your propositional knowing system.
The final system, which is really four in the name, is called the defensive system. The defensive
system is the relationship between your self-conscious system and your animalistic systems.
Then that system is trying to regulate your equilibrium between what your animal wants,
what your private narrator wants, and what the social world wants.
What happens to people is they get trapped into entrenched maladaptive patterns across these
systems of adaptation. Then as they get trapped, they feel enormous frustration, fatigue,
discouragement, anxiety. They do that interpsychically and interpersonally,
and then you get to meet and you guess, come and see me. As a clinician, I'm like, okay,
I'm going to ask you all sorts of questions, and I'm tracking your habit system, your experiential
system, your relationship system, your defense, and identity across your history in the current
context and what you want to do. Then I'll get into, oh, these are the ways in which you've been
trapped. The ideal optimal functioning is a developmental trajectory that allows that heart
and habits to keep yourself healthy and allow power to procedurally enact in the world,
and then your heart as an organismic valuing process through your true relational self
into a narrator that says, yes, this is aligned into a relational world that knows and values
you for what you are. You show me people like that and you hang in my office.
Yeah, thank you. I think that's a great overview, and I have a question which
might cover some of the territory again, but hopefully from a little bit different angle,
and that is the integral model of psychology not only kind of maps out the field,
it actually in practice will lead to different manifestations in actually how you sit
with a client. They're the externals where you use the quadrants and other things like
Andre Marquis where you can use for the intake and all of that, but there are also I think
insights from the model that impact how you are together with the client and what you're
looking for, what you're doing, working with states in order to help individuals step outside
of their embedment in a particular problematic constellation of associations or things or
using perspectives to be able to track where the cognitive and emotional fixations are
in terms of how they're organizing their meaning making. So there are just different
ways that it will bleed into that context, even though you're not talking theory,
wonkish language to them and all of that, but it's a perfume and it actually maybe also unfolds
in the forms of certain techniques or modes of intervention. So have you found in developing
this that it's impacted your way of being with clients and are there any maybe unique clinical
manifestations? Yeah, I mean so this is what I do in terms of so I'm hired and directed
than a combined integrated doctoral program training psychological doctors since 2003.
So I train people to be psychological doctors and so the unified theory then is the backdrop
for that. So the short answer yet just sort of weaves through basically everything.
The you know what I do then I so I translate that there are four major psychotherapy traditions
at the individual level. You have behaviorism, you have the humanistic tradition, you have the
psychodynamic versus psychoanalytic and we can talk about my relation. I have a love-hate relationship
with the psychoanalytic people. I'm hanging up, I'm syncing up with Kadele Last who is a psychoanalytic
philosopher and I love it, it's great. But as a psychological scientist, me and Freud at certain
voices go whoo. But anyway, psychodynamic is brilliant. That's my term for and I love psychodynamic
analytic in its place. But as in the science world then there's definitely you have to know
what the language game it's playing is. So I offer that caveat. And then there's the cognitive
and also lesser but important narrative and existential versions.
The argument basically is that these different paradigms have key insights on patterns of
maladapt adaptation, behaviors, basically track the procedural habit system and the way the
environment selects these kinds of issues and then develops ways to control the contingencies
and cultivate new skills. This can be done brilliantly or can be done all of these then
can be done brilliantly or poorly. The neo-humanistic place that focuses on the experiential systems
like Les Greenberg and his emotion-focused therapy. Modern psychodynamic theories like Paul
Wachtel. I was trained for four years at the University of Pennsylvania, I worked with Aaron
Beck. He's one of the fathers of cognitive psychotherapy. So basically what I would say to
you in terms of how does it, so you come into my, and the first thing I want to know is this sort of,
we're doing therapy, right, is I want a relational participatory dance implicitly
so that you feel like I care, which I will because I haven't been burned out that much.
I care about you and your unique pathic way of being, your unique subjective organismic
valuing process. And then there's a relational field between us where you're tracking that and
I'm tracking that in a dance. And so then as a professional psychologist, it's key for me
to send you the signals that you are valued, okay, and that you're known sort of initially
developmentally in the way you want to be known, okay, which can vary, right, and like you don't
want to be fully known right away. So then our relational dance is essentially finding
how do we do that? And this is the therapeutic relation. And then I just start to listen to
your justification narrative. When I say, Hey, what brings you in today? Okay, that's your justification
narrative of self, the world, my past, my feared future, my angst, etc. And as I hear that, I'm
hearing then the narrator who's willing to share with me and then through the private into the
public. So it's filtered. Who's this goddamn psychological doctor guy, right? That's what
you're like, who is this guy? And what the hell do I really want to tell him? Okay, so that's the
filter. And then I then hear the themes of the, the practices and your habits of your lifestyle
making real simple, your emotions and emotion functioning, your interpersonal style, which
I'm tracking here in your relational world, which you tell me, well, my dad, my mom, this
was where the family I was born in. These are the friends that I had. This was my first wife.
And we blew up this way, whatever, whatever the story's person is. And then I'm getting their
relational field. And then I'm asking questions to see how that narrator justifies all of that.
And where is it stuck? You know, what's the stuckness in relation? And then how do we create
the proper relational participatory element at the level so that the harmony is there in the dance.
And then we have to build the conceptualization, the story of you, your problem, your history,
and your potential. That's the conceptualization. And it's building that shared conceptualization
that puts the framing, the constraints and the hopes on the growth processes.
And then that evolves into the actual tasks of psychotherapy,
which people almost always get wrong, by the way. Oh, what do I need to do? Well,
sit there. Usually. Okay, I mean, the wisdom tradition sort of gets this like, you know,
awareness and acceptance of the two thirds of it. There's like, well, there are four things you need
to do. Yeah, but that's simple, you wouldn't be here. Right. So, so that's the, that's, you know,
and then the tasks. And so the tasks then are, are then you create feedback loops of outcome,
and then you track all that. ComMO, by the way, that, you know, is the fifth, the eighth branch
that about, I mentioned it briefly in terms of curiosity. That is the principles and processes
that I'm guiding, that guide my attention to the predominant socio-emotional maladaptive
patterns that people get trapped into. And that is, that is an overarching set of principles
and processes for reversing those patterns. So we've got these maladaptive patterns, which,
I think to some degree, resemble primitive patterns in the way that a maladaptive
modernity starts to look like a theocratic authoritarian medievalism. All right. There's a
kind of a regressive element to maladaptive patterns. I love it. Really. But there's also
this element where you mentioned this, a lot of maladaptive patterns are characterized by short
term investments with problematic long term consequences. And that leads me to the question
of time and how we relate to time. Right. And, you know, what's your ontology of time? How do you
think time operates in your theory building? And psychologically, you know, what's the basis
of us all having a better relationship with time? Easy question. Right. A real time question.
Yeah. Okay. So, so for me, we're on the cusp of the past turning into the present turning into the
future. We're on a wave of probability. So that's where that probability is when the probable
future, as I ride the crest of the wave of probability, I look out onto the sea of the
way possibility and back onto the sea of effect. So the sea of effect is where that wave of
probability is happening to become the past. And so we're on this causal wave. So that's,
and then the angle in relationship to you looking at that, you look at as a psychological person,
okay, that has a sphere of what the present is from our vantage point. That's one angle. That's
very different than a quantum mechanical view of time. Okay, subatomic particle, the differentiation
of quantum mechanical time, and that frame of references, well, qualitatively, quantitatively
different. Okay. It's also the case that the sense of time at each level and dimension of the
tree of knowledge, that there's different space time dimensions, basically. Okay. So, you know,
plonk time means something at the first, at the floor of the system, I mean, you know, at least
within some sort of scale, a plonk time at the level of psychology or even worse at the level
of sociology means nothing. So things are happening in different frames at different,
you know, places. And we have to be absolutely, you know, keen about that. And we have to be,
I often say, I say, I hope we have the time, okay, for the developmental change. And often you
hear me say the developmental change. So one of the first things you learn as a psychotherapist is
you do not go from zero to 100. You know, you have to go 10 to 20 to 30 in what's called the
zone of proximal development. Okay. So we need, if we've, if the icebergs five years out, we're
doomed, right, that there's no way that the collective wisdom awakening can happen. And
because of the structure of the system, and not only that, as it's regressing. Okay. So five years
is not much in globalization time. And one of the things that's crazy making for us is things
are changing so fast, when we need paradigmatic evolution over time, and things are happening
way too fast. So the timescale relation of the concept of how it operates, of what we're talking
about, obviously people's things like geologic time, you know, those are all so that that's what
I would offer if you wanted to get into what I've gotten into quantum entanglement stuff,
I've gotten into, you know, general relativity, I have things to say about those relationships
with sort of what the physical conceptions of time, it time inside of a system versus
hyper time and global time on the outside of a system. Those are fascinating questions. I'm
no expert on the cutting edge of sort of the metaphysics of time, but I enjoyed a lot of
conversations about that. And it's funky, you know, as I was also, you know, as time and energy,
there's some of the deep, deep funds. And I love those conversations. So is that, is that in the
ballpark, if there are any specifics that are there? Yeah, that's great. The only thing maybe
you can add something in about is, what's a, you know, going forward, what's a more optimal
psychological relationship with time, because a lot of the wisdom traditions, try to put us in an
emotional state where we can use our prefrontal cortex in certain ways to manage future outcomes
better than we might otherwise do. And, you know, to have more foresight to try to have effects that
reach longer into time in effect to take the future at greater scales more seriously than we
habitually do. Beautiful. I mean, you know, that's, you know, as you climb up sort of the
expanse of the ego, Confucius is very explicit about this, but others, you then see you transcend
and you extend right across time. And I wish that we would do that. And so I think that, you know,
for me, one of the things I often tell people is that you have a primary process system
that does work in the immediacy and you have a secondary. Anybody that works in addiction
will know this. Or if you put in more common terms, they've ever dieted or tried to do anything
self-disciplinary, right? You're like, when you're on that Monday morning and you're in your narrator
that's out here one week above or two months out, it's so easy to be like, well, I'm going to do this
because the state system of the elephant or the horse or whatever the animalistic is like,
fine, I just ate last night. I just drank last night. I'm good. I'm on board, right? And then,
Friday afternoon, it was like, I was on board, but I'm now hungry and thirsty and want to have
my drink. And then it pushes you. So, you know, your primary system as an animal system operates
in time in a radically different way than your secondary system. And this is one of the things
to keep people really tripped up. So you have to understand that you are operating in time in
different ways. So that's one thing. The state vision will tell you that time is cyclical. Okay.
Remember, I said, you know, I feel it in myself. I learned a long time ago that you feel that,
and if you try to stay there, and especially as a clinician, I get to see that you're going to go
from hypomania to mania, and then you're going to short out and you're doomed, right? So the idea
that you can create some utopic, euphoric consistent state that you don't have appreciation for the
cycle of time, right? I mean, the seasons for Love of God, you know,
Indigenous people know this in ways that we lose track of. I wish that we could then figure out
the proper relation between past, present, and future. Okay. I think that's a very trauma. The
past is really key. That's a get into trauma and what my orientation about it is. Commmo,
one of the things about, you mentioned, so commmo, the second word is acceptance. All right.
And I really then do then fall into issues of detachment, distress, tolerance, that, you know,
those are sort of Western psychological then bridges into the authentic wisdom traditions,
you know, Zen Buddhism and whatever, but whatever would then orient you towards your capacity for
presence and being. Okay. But I'm also a Westerner, so I do also think then in terms of, well,
I want to be better. M is motivated toward valued states of being. So for me, what this does is it
then positions you from being into becoming and to create that. And then I want to create it across
socio-ecological scale with appropriate time, meaning from individual to dyad in small groups,
community, et cetera. And then so we're going to try to then create a developmental transition
appropriate to scale, holding our animal and head, okay, around being and becoming.
I'm a longtime practitioner of a tradition called TSK instead of TOK.
Okay. Focusing on the time, space and knowledge as
fundamental orientations and elements of the world, orientations towards the elements of the world and
looking at how the constellation of the play of our experience and conception of time, our experience
and conception of space and our relationship to knowing and knowledge all work together in
different ways to establish different patterns of the self system. That sounds fascinating.
Yeah. So it's a topic I love and actually maybe we can talk about it in the future.
I'd be super curious to learn about that. Right now I have time bearing down on me.
I actually have to make the room available to someone else. But I'd like, I've loved the
conversation. I wanted to ask if there's anything else about the, you talk or the TOK that you'd
like to share and add to our conversation before we bring it to a close. Well, I mean, first let
me just say thank you. I appreciate you guys are great. We should hang. I really enjoyed it.
I mean, wonderful, just rich questions, just hitting in exactly the kinds of things that I've
wrestled with for a long time. So it's so fun to have interlocutors that actually know the
kind of angles to take on these kinds of metastasemic perspectives and to be able to allow
an opportunity to see how it's flowered in various ways. It's been a really, really joy to share
it with you. And I love the space that you guys are creating here. It's one of the exactly the
wisdom information energy places that I hope we see flower more of. And that's the kind of thing in
my estimation, you know, that is collects people together, allow in an integrated pluralistic-wise
way of being. And let's hope to try to do that. Because I don't know how much time we have.
And hopefully we have enough. And if we do it, the back out of this century could be a beautiful
thing. That's what I believe. Oh, man. Wonderful. Terrific. I really appreciate your presence and
your work. And I've got a real good vibe about this. So thanks, Greg. Right, man. I've appreciated
listening to you both on various podcasts. It's great to cross. I meet you in person, at least
the two-dimensional person that are Zoom-topia these days. All right. Thanks a lot. Take care.
Fantastic. We'll be in touch.
