BIOLOGICAL ION REMOVAL
Biological ion removal Oasin is the water company in the green
heart of the Netherlands. Every day we turn groundwater into drinking water.
The groundwater we pump up naturally contains high concentrations of iron and ammonium. This
is due to the peat and clay layers that are located in the subsurface. Iron in drinking
water does not taste good and produces stains in the washing and on sanitary facilities.
Ammonium in drinking water can be converted to nitrite. We don't want too much of this
in our drinking water. Ammonium also results in biological growth in water pipes. This
is another thing we want to prevent as much as possible.
Oasin purifies the groundwater to remove the excess of these substances. To do so we use
a sand filter. This is a large concrete container filled with sand through which groundwater
flows. Sand filtration is the first step in our water treatment.
We use bacteria to remove the ammonium. These so-called ammonium removers are good bacteria
that eat up ammonium. In this way they help purify the groundwater, a process which we
call biological treatment. The ammonium removers deal with the ammonium by turning it into
nitrite. This takes away the disadvantages of ammonium.
Oasin process engineers, Harman von der Land and Viren Devet, studied these ammonium removers
to better understand precisely how they do their work.
In the investigation, Viren found that the ammonium removers were very weak. A DNA test
showed that other so-called iron eating bacteria were to blame.
Contrary to established theories, there were a large number of them in the sand filter.
Also, as with ammonium, it turned out that the removal of iron is also largely a biological
process. This explained why the ammonium removers were so weak.
The iron eating bacteria left a lot of rubbish in the sand filter, which we soon had to clean
up. This was a problem as the ammonium removers were just starting to adjust to their new home.
Additionally, the iron eating bacteria claimed all the food, namely the phosphate. This
led to starvation of the more modest ammonium removers. That's why Viren and Harman tried
to separate both groups of bacteria in their study. Each group was placed in a separate
sand filter. And it worked. The result is stronger ammonium removers that have enough phosphate
for themselves and can live undisturbed. They are now better able to turn the ammonium
into nitrate. After one year of practical investigation,
there are also new questions. It seems as if the ammonium removers have another problem,
as they are not as active as they should be. Are there other competitors taking the wind
out of the ammonium removers' sails? Will we see the same results in groundwater
treatment at another location? And, can we use biological iron removal at other steps
in the treatment process? All in all, studying biological iron removal has provided us with
great indicators for improving the treatment process. The aim is to deliver the best, cleanest
water to our customers.
