All right, I'm happy to introduce Antoine, a very energetic young man who joined our
research program when it was in January, just this past year, this year.
And before that, Antoine was working with this startup company called Extra Lab.
And he was on their software engineer side, helping develop systems for capturing river
water quality data with the technology that was developed by the founder of Extra Lab.
But I'm glad he came to us to do his PhD and has been working on issues related to causality
and large language models and he can tame GPT like nobody else.
So with that, Antoine, all yours.
Okay, so thank you, Parveen.
So indeed, today I'm going to talk to you about LLM and causality.
As you can have guessed, if any of you just took a small quick look at the papers, I provided
Leela last time.
So just to put it back in a bit of a context.
This is a picture I use in all my presentations that I used to illustrate what's going on with
climate change right now.
And this is just more than 20 inches of precipitation in one night and for a lot of day.
And it's just to exemplify how climate change changes the way that extreme events are happening
and how can we do to stop them and how can we tackle those problems.
And this is so as Parveen introduced, I'm not going to spend a lot of time on this,
but the statement here is that the decision making process is critical in the resilience
in increasing or decreasing resilience to climate change risks.
And so to address the extreme events.
The problem is decisions are taken by humans.
And until recently, we didn't have GPT and understanding natural language with mathematics
is complicated.
And there is no breakthrough framework until GPT came out, which we've seen as an opportunity
to try to understand how humans think in language.
So what I'm working on right now is using GPT agents to generate multiple decision pathways
based on a context of an extreme event, let's say a forecast of a flooding for a city.
And we use multiple GPT agents to talk to each other in order to come up with decisions
pathway, which then we can evaluate to understand whether it is good or bad decisions.
And this is just the start of a work in which we will try to maximize resilience and see
what is the takes of LLMs and AI in that particular problem.
So I'm going to be presenting that at AGU have a talk on the morning, Monday morning.
If you want to see what it's about, I would gladly see you in the audience.
But so we'll get back on the subject here.
So I talked a bit about LLMs.
Even I'm pretty sure that everyone is here is familiar, whether it is still, I'm going to say so.
Large language models, they are the class of language models such as GPT, etc.
Usually based on the transformer architecture.
And so those models receive a text input and will make predictions, textual predictions.
They're known because they're really good at understanding human language in the sense that
they are a great conversational agents.
So GPTs, Barrett, Paul, and Lama, there's a lot of them.
And you've probably heard about a couple.
And so as for applications of LLMs, translation tasks, you can use them for text generation,
report story scripts.
You can ask an LLM to generate 10 different poems on a subject you like in that particular style.
For instance, can use LLMs for Q&A, synthesizing, etc.
So this is what an LLM is like.
Now, introducing causality is rather complicated because it's a complicated term.
But I'm pretty sure, again, the most part of you are really familiar with what causality is.
So I'm just going to say it's a relation, studying causality,
studying relationships between cause and effects.
Due to Pearl dedicated the major part of this life working on that,
I'm pretty sure you're all familiar with this work.
So I'm not going to stain this image trying to give another definition that wouldn't serve no purpose.
Causality carries more information than correlation,
which is why it is so interesting.
Studying causality is more important than studying just statistical correlations for that matter.
This is why there is a lot of work on studying causality in order to understand how
natural processes interact with each other.
And the question now is, how does those two concepts connect?
Why do we even have this question of can LLMs infer causality?
The question comes from the fact that LLMs learn their input data, their training data is
huge corpus of text that ranges from Wikipedia articles to blog posts to books, etc.
So literally what they are is just a condensed experience of what the world beat them.
And in those texts, there is a lot of information about describing processes and everything.
So today, if you ask a GPT agent, I see it start to rain.
What is the impact on the ground and the LLM will answer the ground will be wet.
So it may appear that the LLM is able to infer causality in that particular setting,
because it's able to tell you what is going to be the outcome of a situation you describe.
But a lot of people have been digging into this and trying to figure out if this is really
causality or no. And if it is, which type of causality it is, and we'll get back to that later.
And let's say they were really possible of inferring causality. What would be the implications
on future research, on our world, etc. And I just want to finish this by putting another
small motivation point, which is that if we get back to my previous topic and the thing I'm working
on from Jang et al. from this paper says, decision-making scenarios require a quantitative
understanding of the effects of actions leading to the desired outcome. In another way,
if we want to be able to tackle precisely decision-making problems, we need to have
an understanding of cause and effects. Otherwise, it's complicated to have all the causal chains
of actions that would be triggered by one particular decision. So this is a bit of the
motivation why it would be interesting for us to understand whether LLMs are able to do causality
or not, and which one. So just a quick view of the papers I used to do this literature view.
Those two first paper are by Jin Little. The first one, they present Clutter, which is a
causal benchmark they use in order to evaluate LLMs to causal tasks, as well as fine-tuning
LLM models to see if they could approve their results. The second one, they introduce a task
for LLMs to be evaluated on, which is called core to causation. So basically, they try to
convert correlation causation and see how well it translates. The two next papers, Kissiman and
Liudel. So Kissiman and LLM is just another study of multiple types of causality evaluation on LLMs.
Liudel 2019, this one is a bit interesting because it's older. So this one was out before
the LLMs actually were advertised and were that popular. And this one uses a different approach
using intelligent agents, but I will get back to that. And the last one, that service is probably
the most interesting in this one because it's the most, not unbiased, but they make the strongest
statements. They say that LLMs are causal parrots and they can maybe appear to talk causality, but
deep inside, they're not at all and never will be. So they make quite strong statements and it's
interesting. And the last one, the last one is early 2023 and gives a couple of insights on future
work in future directions, but don't give a lot of answers in there. So I'll just start by quickly
reminding for this, for the purpose of this study that the difference between causal discovery and
causal inference tasks, because those concepts are used in the papers. So causal discovery
is constructing a causal structure. Basically, it is figuring out a dag, a directly, sorry,
directed a cyclic graph in which all the nodes are variable and there is a link between the
nodes when there is a functional relationship. The causal discovery holds the structure for,
in order to be able to infer causality on multiple levels. Multiple levels of causality,
as if on my pearl, are observational, interventional and counterfactual. Where observational,
you only need to observe the cause and effect for you to be able to say that this is causal.
Interventional requires the intervention, so changing a variable and seeing there is an
effect on another one. And counterfactual is knowing that there is a causality link. It is the
highest level of causality. Knowing there is a causality level and two variables, what would
happen if you would change the variable in such a way? So they just remind the difference between
discovery, which is more about finding the structure that ties all variables together.
And explaining the possible relationship that can be between and causal inference would be more
about determining what level, what strength of causality there is between two variables and
which direction to. And so the first results that are given by Kissimer et al. So they work
on inferring causal discovery. So what they do is they're trying to come up with that direct
to stick with graph using an LLM. And so the findings are that the best LLM in the list,
GPT-4, and is almost always GPT-4, art performs causal discovery frameworks by
approximately 40% on the Tobingen benchmark on pairwise causal discovery tasks. So for
two variable, two by two variables is being able to find out if they could be relating
some way or not. And so this is the list of the model they tested. And almost every time is
GPT-4 performing at the best. So this is quite an interesting result, but
they also balanced that result with the fact that LLMs present a strong lack of robustness.
Because when they fail, it is really unpredictable to predict. It is really
unpredictable the fact that are going to fail or not. So you might have 96% of accuracy,
but it's hard to predict when they will fail. This is what they put the accent on
when they present their results. As for the benchmark they use, it is very diverse.
So over 100 causal relationships from a variety of domains, physics, biology, zoology, cognitive
science, epidemiology, soil science. So there is a couple of examples of relationships that
are in their framework for use to be LLMs. So for instance, alcohol and main corpuscular
volumes. So a question like this will be asked to the LLM and whether, depending on the
answer is yes or no, it will compare the answer with the real in the framework to establish the
accuracy person. Sorry. Yes, so second result is by Zetsu Vigila. They do a lot of different types
of causal inference and causal tasks in their study. It's very complete. They also do a causal
discovery task, which is pretty much the same. They feed a scientific question to the LLM and
depending on the answer they say yes or no to the establishing of causal discovery.
So this is the results they get where GPT-3, GPT-4 are open AI models. Luminous is a model that
is built by Luminous. It's the corporation itself and OPT is the META Facebook LLM. So
yes, Russian? Just to clarify, they're just checking the question and the answer. They're not
actually checking the chain of reasoning. No, not in this one. There is some frameworks and some
benchmarks in which they use a chain of thoughts prompt engineering in order to be able to check
the chain, but not in this one. And they're just using off-the-shelf LLMs. They're not specifically
trained for these. Well, yes and no. So they're off-the-shelves LLM. They're not fine-tuned.
However, they make some assumptions that in some cases the enormously high results for GPT-4
could indicate that some parts of the benchmark are actually included in GPT-4's training,
but it's hypothetical. They don't have that knowledge. It's just a hypothesis they make,
but technically no. It's just off-the-shelves LLM and these ones are not fine-tuned.
And the assumption is that their answers that they have are well-established,
beyond dispute, that this is the correct answer. Yes, I guess. Okay. Thanks. So yes, this is the
result they give for LLMs. To be honest, it's a bit hard to interpret the results sometimes in
this paper. There are some sections that are extremely clear as to the results and findings,
some are less. This is actually one of the main negative point of this paper that's been
highlighted on the open reviews. This paper in particular is going to be published in
Transaction to Foreign Machine Learning. It's been reviewed on open reviews. So all the reviews
are publicly available on open reviews. It's really interesting. I read a couple. And what's
being said about this paper is that the math behind and the logic behind it is really strong,
but sometimes the results are not well explained. And I can really sometimes I just cannot tie the
results to what they claim. But that's why we'll move on to the next one. This is the findings on
different types of causal inference. So by Ginadal, the first paper. And so they test
about 10 LLMs. They test their accuracy on observational, intranational, and counterfactual
tasks. And on top of that, so they are tested again, the clatter dataset, which is composed of
10,000 samples of approximately even distributed for every causal task containing different types
of data. And they also come up with what they call causal caught, which is a fine tuning model
they did using their data set. So they were trying to figure out at the same time how did,
well, how well LLMs performed on causal benchmark, as well as if they fine tuned the model,
what performance improvement do you have? And so they conclude that overall,
the models just perform slightly better than random, which is not that great.
They also conclude that there is two percent, there is approximately two person difference in
accuracy on TPD4 and their fine tuned version, which they say is outstandingly good. I personally,
I think it's interesting to use this approach. However, the results are not that shining for now.
So this is one other result there is. In the second paper they present,
this is another causal task, which they call chord cause. So basically, the point of this is to
escalate one correlation relationships to causation. So you know there is a correlation,
so let's say that causal discovery is almost done, you mean you are sure there is a correlation,
a grounded one between two variables. And the point would be to determine whether it is cold or not.
And so this benchmark is run on 17 LLMs and also 12 fine tuned LLMs, which is on the right side.
So yeah, they give multiple metrics in there. Again, they say the results are not really incredible.
They don't really conclude on the results. In none of the papers, based on the results,
they are able to say yes, LLMs are able to do causality, no LLMs are not able to do causality.
Every time it's always very measured and every paper ends the same way. It's at this point,
we're not able to refute the fact that LLMs can infer causality. So they have strong
insights that they might or might not be able to, but they cannot come up with a conclusion in the
end. Here, what is interesting to show is that in this particular case for escalating
correlation to causation, there is a real impact in fine tuning models. As we can see,
the precision increases a lot between the off-the-shelf models and the fine-tuned models.
So the takes of those two papers by Jin et al, which are separated for two months or three
months, if I remember correctly, and it's relatively linked. So the main overall take
on those two papers by Jin is that using Benchmark, causal Benchmarks, is really
interesting to LLM training as it can really improve the training performance and it can
actually induce some of causal causality, at least on that particular dataset in the LLM,
and also that fine-tuning is really helpful in this scenario.
Okay, so I'm going to join. Yeah, of course. In the previous slide, you mentioned that in the
previous one. In the previous one, sorry. I know, is there? They test for counterfactuals.
Oh, sorry. This one? Yes. Okay. They test for counterfactuals and
interventionals, right? How do they test for counterfactuals?
I don't really know because they don't give any example. If I remember correctly in the papers,
they don't give any example of any example. Well, they do give example structures.
They do give example structures of how their dataset is made, but they don't give like actual
example that are fed to the models as questions and answer. So I'm not really able, let me just
see real quick. No, because this is just the constitution of their dataset.
They explain a bit how they do constitute their dataset. So they choose variables,
generate causal graphs, map them, etc. So the data is composed like this, but they don't actually
give examples to which they are fed the dataset. Maybe with the additional, in the additional
supplementary information, probably they have something in the supplementary information
of the paper or something. They might have something. Well, this is already from the
supplementary, those two slides are from the supplementary information. And I don't remember,
I can take a look afterwards, but I don't remember seeing any example of what they actually feed.
I have some for other benchmarks, but not for this one.
I see. Thank you, Antoine.
Of course. And so yeah. So I guess it's time to talk about this a little bit.
This is a paper by Llewital 2019 and it's so it studies intelligent agent systems.
I just want to say that it is, in my opinion, it is interesting in this context,
just because they focus on what is the importance of experience on learning potential causality.
They use a different approach, which is still interesting because so here what they mean by
intelligent agent systems will agent, they use the actual similar definition of agent that is
in the context of complex adaptive systems. So we're an agent would be defined by an entity that
have sensors that is able to perceive the outside world actuators that can interact with the world.
And also an internal model that is just a logic for the agent to decide what it's going to do
depending on the inputs it receives in the sensor and what it's going to do to the world.
So this is how an agent is defined in the complex adaptive systems and the difference
with the intelligent systems, intelligent agent from the ULL is that they also give
the ability to understand natural language to their agents.
So what do they do with those agents? They trained the agents on multiple life classical scenarios
and then they use humans to create more training instances out of more scenarios
and then they put those agents in those particular scenarios to see what they're
able to do with it. So the agents have a bit of prior knowledge, some more scenarios are created
and then they use the agents. All the scenarios in this study are generated with a game in this fact.
I'm just going to use this fact to add on the I feel like some video games might present like
the perfect ground for testing and simulating this kind of behaviors. There is a lot and a lot
of different examples of people doing reinforcement learning on video games, learning AI strategies
to drive a car for racing lines, this stuff. So I just wanted to make a small side note on
the fact that video games represent a good training example. So in this case, this game is
Minecraft game or interact with the world. And so what they do, they put the agents in
Minecraft and they generate a bunch of scenarios, which is like one, I attack the co and I attack
the co and this is the two outcomes. And for those two outcomes, the agent is going to infer
causal or not causal. So based on their prior knowledge and more scenarios created by players
and then are collected, then the agents are evaluated on whether they experience in learning
from those scenarios, made them able to infer causality in new newly presented scenarios.
They gave a bit of the architecture they use to structure their model and their inference.
So the short experience is represented by I guess the pool of knowledge that all the agents
learn all together. Those are events triggered when you attack a cow, you get some beef.
They don't give a lot of details, whereas all this works if I remember correctly,
but in the end, they just come up with a causal question, which the agents do inference on
and they're able then to classify what are considered as causal or not. And then they just
compare with the example they had in first. So the principle finding they get from this
study is that experience mechanism is key for language concepts, understanding and learning,
which is a very long turn of phrase for causality. So it is interesting. This paper is interesting
in this way because LLMs can be seen as agents in that they are trained and they learn out of
huge text corpuses that represent, I don't know, novels, articles, blog posts, Wikipedia.
Those can be seen as scenarios where the LLM will learn some knowledge. At the end, you can interact
with an LLM as you can interact with those agents. Their inputs are the sensors and the text feedback
they will give is the actuator. You can use an LLM as a robot if you ask, do some actions or something.
So what's interesting is that if we put in parallel LLMs and the agents as described
in this paper, well, basically what they say is that experience is key for causality. So they would
be, from my understanding of that paper, what I get of that paper would be that more data, more
training could eventually lead to causality, which is opposed to the thoughts that are given in
different papers in this selection. I still think this one is interesting. It's a different approach.
I think it's similar to what LLMs do today. Maybe some will argue that it's not, but I found
this interesting. And I guess now it's time to dig deep in the biggest paper in the corpus, I think,
which is set of it. So it's the one when I said they make strong assumptions,
strong claims that LLMs cannot do causality and never could. And the two main potential reasons
they give is that the errors that are contained in the corpus used to train LLMs really hamper
the outputs and hamper the knowledge base. So it would be like, it would be like putting poison
in the brain. Eventually, it's not going to be able to function correctly. So what they say
is that errors in the input data is going to be propagating to more errors in the output.
So this is the first reason. And the second reason they give is the lack of physical data
in training dataset. They say that the whole difference between correlation causation is
the physical evidence and the physical grounding of those facts. And they say that because LLMs
are not trained with physical evidence, physical data, et cetera, well, they generically haven't,
they're unable to ground the facts they claim. To quote, they say prohibits any sort of induction
of the actual data generating mechanism. So this is the two main reasons they give.
And on top of that, they provide with mathematical explanation of why that stands.
So the main contribution in that paper is that they define a subgroup of structural
causal models named media SEM. So the structural causal model, it is, I've did my research on
this, it is a bit unclear to me as if it's really defined by bongers of it, or if it was.
Because I feel like a lot of, a lot of parts in this are shared with the Perlian theory of causality
and more work on it. But if I quote the SEM was first defined by bongers at all in 2021,
then this is the, this is the definition they give. So SEM is a tuple that contains all this.
In short, if I try to simplify the definition of this, an SEM
contains a series of structural equations in the Perlian sense.
Well, that's, that's pretty much it actually. There are some details on the variable. I don't
understand all the, all the subtleties to this definition. Yeah. Maybe we can get back to that
later. Okay, they also remind a couple of definitions and insights. So they remind the
Perl's causal hierarchy, which consists on three languages that can respectively
do observational causality, inter-reventional causality, and counterfactual causality.
And then they give their insight, their first thought on it. M be some SEM. So M, so SEM is
a set of structural equations in that context. Knowledge about the structural equations and
the causal graph of M is knowledge about answering L3 and L2 queries in M respectively.
So their insight is that if M is an SEM, knowing about the structural equations
in that SEM and the causal graph is enough to perform inter-reventional and counterfactual
causality. And this is what they use to introduce their concept of a meta SEM,
which is another SEM that is able to do inter-reventional and counterfactual just based
on those information. So this is literally the definition they give for the media SEM.
And then they will spell the rest of the paper trying to show that LLMs can be assimilated to
media SEMs, which they cannot achieve actually. But I feel like just outlining those particular
properties and giving the insights and everything is still a great contribution to the question
in the sense that it's a first exploration of a real formal process in order to be able to
determine whether LLMs are able to do causality or not. So they, yeah, Ocean.
Oh, I can hear you.
Just trying to parse what you just said, but it sounds like what they're suggesting using
different language is that if you can, if you have enough information in the construct, the SEM,
which is your representation, if you have enough information to answer
interventional and counterfactual questions correctly, then they're saying you can infer
causality. Would that be a good interpretation? In other words, if the representation does not
allow you to answer those two kinds of questions, they're basically arguing that you can't infer
causality. Yeah, I think this is a good summary of the definition.
So it says something about the particular form of the representation that you need to have.
In other words, is it answering the question correctly does not imply that you actually
have, well, that's complicated. It seems to me that you need a particular structure which
enables you to answer them, but answering them doesn't necessarily mean you have that structure.
Anyway, that's kind of what I'm struggling with here. Okay.
Okay, so I'll just continue. So this is the conjecture that you make,
M1 be an SEM and 2 a respective media SEM. So it means that M2 is able to answer queries on
M1 based on its observational data. So basically M2 would be the LLM, this one.
So then define Q and A in the language and in the interventional language of M1,
observational language of M2, causal queries with their respective answers.
Then we have FQ equals A is equivalent to FQ minimizes training error. So basically what they
say in this conjecture is that F of Q, which is the LLM's predictive model. So the predictions
based on the interventional of M1 equals the observational of M2 minimizes training error.
So basically what they say is that you don't learn anything more.
Sorry, I'm sorry. I don't know if that's really clear. I'm going to try this again.
What they try to say here is that an LLM learning on the interventional and not learning anything
more based on that model being able to already have the knowledge on the observational distribution
of M2 is equivalent. So basically in the information of the observational distribution
of M2, you already have all the informations to do interventional querying on the other SEM.
Means that the LLM minimizes training error. So in that case means that the model converges and
it is able to do it. This is the conjecture. In other words, this is the conjecture they come
up with to say that if an LLM can be assimilated to a meta SEM, so it is able to escalate the causal
task rank based on observational data, then it is causal. This is the conjecture they come up with
and they cannot prove it. This is again one of the strongest remarks and feedbacks that has been
given in open reviews for day paper. The reviewer said you make such strong claims on causality
and LLMs, but eventually you cannot conclude on the conjecture. So the work is really interesting,
but eventually you do not conclude on it. They still give results and everything.
In this one, for instance, this is basically intuitive physics, basic logic questions,
such as if flipping switches causes light bulbs to shine and shining light bulbs causes
mothas to appear. Does flipping switches cause mothas to appear, which is a typical
causal question. Those are the results of the following LLMs on all those types of questions.
Everywhere there is an exclamation mark like that. They say that, as I was saying before,
that eventually that data, this type of questions can have been included in GBD4's training.
They give a kind of twisted explanation. They say that this framework was already published in
another paper and they say that they've been extensively running this framework and they
also say that OpenAI's API collects data on queries and answers and everything.
They just make the assumption that maybe the data they used while running benchmark was used in
training of GBD4 when it was GBD3 back then. So this is why they put an exclamation mark next to
it. They say we're not sure we can trust these answers for those reasons. There also are small
variations of the models where every COT thing means chain of thought. I don't know if you're
familiar with chain of thought. Basically, it is what is called a prompt engineering pattern.
So with LLMs, the prompt is the input we feed to the LLM and prompt engineering is how to access
more LLM features and enforce a behavior based on how you write the prompt. So chain of thought is
a prompt engineering technique where you will specify clearly in the prompt that you want the
LLM to output multiple midway thinking thoughts and thinking steps before actually outputting an
answer. So we will look like that. For instance, you could say if flipping switches blah blah you
ask a question and then you say please answer by giving three main thoughts first, one, two, three,
then give a preliminary answer and then answer. That would be considered a COT and it's been
proven as making the LLMs able to answer more accurately or at least to be able to track down
the chain process. There is also another type of it which I am aware of but I feel like it's
incredibly hard to implement but it still would be really interesting. It's called tree of thoughts
which is pretty much the same principle as chain of thoughts but you take branches so that you're
able to track down which path led to which results. Well we can get back to that later.
So this is the results they give about classical causality and in summary the takeaways they offer
they present. So inability to ground textual facts is part of the reason why LLMs are not able to
infer generalized causal relations. However, they acknowledge that LLMs represent a head start to
learning an inference and they are unable to prove conjecture one despite the strong claims that
LLMs are only causal parrots. So there is a whole paragraph on results on actual
causal escalation tests but there is no sort of table that summarizes results.
I feel like this is a work in progress and will be
interesting in the near future if they can come up with more results on the subject.
So this would be approximately a summary of what I've read in the six papers
and so I'm just going to give a couple of future identified work in those papers
so as to align possible research directions from these researchers in that area that may give us
discussion elements. So none of them could actually conclude that LLMs can do causality or not
but what they do acknowledge is that LLMs represent suitable candidates to support
actual causal inference framework just because they have a really interesting knowledge base
as part of their huge corpus of text learning on. So a lot of them cannot conclude on the fact that
LLMs can do causality but they would be inclined to working with LLMs in order to combine with
actual causality inference frameworks. Those in those four papers they share the perspective
that using LLMs as tools to enhance training of existing causal models is worth exploring,
pretty similar to the first one. Another interesting element would be that causal
benchmarks such as the latter presented in the first paper represent interesting
access of improvement for LLM fine-tuning or towards the development of causal LLMs.
So Ginadal, I think she's working on this already because she's publishing a lot and she made it
clear that this is just the first step in her work so I guess this is also interesting to follow,
see if coming up with bigger causal frameworks will make able but I mean in the end what is
still interesting to discuss here is that causal relationships embedded in frameworks
whether it is to test LLMs or to fine-tune them it is still going to be in their knowledge base
in some way. I guess the question that wanted to be addressed here at first is about
interventional and current factual which is not based on observational.
So this is what I had as a presentation and I just think I thought it was going to be shorter
than that and I just think this is a basis to start the discussion on this topic because
we have some elements now.
Thanks Antoine and now we are open for questions.
Yeah, Basie.
Hello, I'm sorry I'm late today so I didn't go to the details of the papers I'm just wondering
whether like the fact that the GPT-4 is better than the GPT-3.5 in reasoning can that be simply
due to that the GPT-4 has more data to be trained and more parameters to be estimated?
It's basically still an interpretation and regression issue and the so-called better
reasoning is a representation of a better regression be obtained through the training.
It is an interesting thought.
Because the concluding saying that the large LAM cannot do the causality so
I mean if we're going back so the reason why GPT-4 is better is
be trained with more data and more parameters to be tuned.
Yeah, yes it is actually true a lot of this is pretty much what they give
and this is what I guess this is what they want to explain when they say that LAMs are
a causal parrots if they see causality in their training base in their dataset and training dataset
they will be able to eventually get that relationship out of their training dataset as a result.
So eventually yes GPT-4 performs better because it's in much.
So the question here would be more to say that are LAMs able to infer causality?
Does it mean that they need to see it all to be able to do real causality or is the question here
more about no can they actually do real causality creating something and this is interesting in
the context of climate change for instance because all the natural processes are non-stationary they
keep increasing in intensity and they either are more intense or more sparse than before etc.
So there is nothing we can predict that we don't understand that so this is what's interesting
in that particular context to me because that would be a great way to evaluate to benchmark
how LAMs interact with those data so because this we cannot have that in our training dataset
the problem is it's in foreseen every time it's new but it's a great remark thank you.
Of course my experience is that the deep learning is a very powerful regression tool
and my personal experience of using the chat GPT is doing pretty well on the dataset that has
trained most from but the pretty poor job kind of the questions that has lastly trained for
for example I sometimes use the chat GPT to provide some suggestions to where to
travel from I can get very good advices in these famous places but if I were asking
where to travel like do the hiking in the places nearby my my current town they just
random answers are not accurate so I still think it's a regression problem for the LAM.
Thanks Pasha. Timothy do you have a question or do you want to participate?
Yeah you know causality is so fascinating and also problematic I'm a little bit rusty but
I'll put this forward and particularly looking at this slide makes me wonder you know
can well I guess the classic response is can we ever infer causality whether for a machine
or human but and my answer I guess is ultimately not but looking at this slide makes me think that
perhaps a question that we could answer is whether an LLM could perform logical reasoning
is that is that a fair distinction are those things the same I feel like when I look at this
slide that the distinction I hear is that the the causal structure is provided to the LLM in
the prompt you know we say if flipping switches you know this happens and if this and that happens
and so the the causal causal structure is provided and what we're testing is whether
the LLM can sort of use logic to understand that relationship when the structure is known.
That's interesting I feel like in this particular example this is the type of question and answering
there is the way they describe it in clatter the genital paper the cool little questions
are really different and so I guess yes your remark is interesting I feel like it really depends
in the different papers on what they want to put forward whether it is interventional and
counterfactual causality or in that particular case maybe it would be closer to logical reasoning
but
I guess it's still here basically what they say x causes y and y causes z does x
causes z would be different depending on the situation so
I mean this is this is the graph this is the this is structure and then depending on the variables
you pick it is true or is not but is it based on logic or it can also based on observations
I don't know if you agree with that well well sure and I guess you know I guess the former
there's no I guess maybe it's still controversial but some might argue that the former you know
inferring causality simply on observations is ultimately something we can never do not that
it isn't useful to sort of try to develop sort of causal models it definitely is but ultimately
it's something we can never do but with logic you know we can come to absolute conclusions like if
we are given a structure we can reason about that sort of you know come up with the determined
sort of relationships based on that structure
Hachin and Beishi did you want to react to this
could you let me share my screen a moment of course
so I put this in the chat I just wanted to make you guys aware of this
paper which I think would be an interesting follow-on to this conversation because
this paper by François Chalet and you can go listen to him on YouTube it's very interesting
I just became familiar with and I recommend this paper for two reasons one is because it
seems like a very cogent analysis of what would be necessary in order to have machine intelligence
and it feels to me like causality the ability to infer causality or to determine a chain of reasoning
using causal principles would be an important component of that the other reason is because
as I've highlighted there he actually defines if he comes up with a metric for defining
intelligence of a machine based on algorithmic information theory which information theory
being sort of a core part of what we're trying to talk about here but one of the things he talks
about there is the need to the need to account for prior information so this discussion about
whether you're memorizing and regurgitating versus doing reasoning has a lot to do with how
much prior information you have if you already know the answer and you give me the correct answer
did you give it to me because you did reasoning or because you just knew the answer and you just
stated the answer so in the paper he talks about the need for being able to assess generalization
ability and we're talking about generalization ability being not just weak generalization
meaning in the context of things you've seen before but strong generalization in the
what he calls developer aware generalization in the in the in the sense of being able to
generalize beyond the situations that you've seen in your training data beyond your prior knowledge
and therefore address novel situations and it sounds to me like if we're going to assess the
ability of a machine to or a program or set of programs to do causal reasoning then
much in the nature of counterfactuals and so on you need this ability to be able to take those
principles and then generalize into some other context that has never been seen before
and so I found this a very interesting paper because he sort of breaks it down into the
necessary and sufficient components in particular if you're trying to compare two agents you need
to compare them with the same priors in other words if two agents have different priors different
levels of prior knowledge then you can't and the second agent has more prior knowledge than the
first and it gives a better answer you can necessarily conclude that that second agent is
more intelligent because it's not starting from the same basis it might also already have known
that answer because it was in its prior knowledge base so I think what you brought up about the
LLMs what training data have they seen Timothy's very astute observation that the nature of the
causal reasoning was already stated in that sentence and you just gave an example and all
it had to do was fill in the blanks with different priors and a's and b's and you know answer that
question was it really doing causal reasoning it was just using a rule which was given to it right
so if I looked at that sentence that you gave me and I just memorized that that that sequence of
sentences and I just applied it in a different context am I doing you know causal reasoning
I think this really bears you know looking in deeper to some of these issues that I think
Francois is talking about in this paper. Just a quick comment I have to leave soon as well so
I think it might be interesting to go through the architecture of either the chat gpt 3.5 or
gpt 4 I'm not sure whether it's solely just based on the transformer or something else but the
architecture definitely will guide the reasoning yeah. So let me make a quick comment I might have
just said this before I mean this this discussion is very very helpful and Antoine thank you for
doing this pretty nice review I mean the what this has brought to light in my mind is the distinction
between causality and logical reasoning which Timothy pointed out and then within that the
causality is basically causal discovery versus causal reasoning is that different from logical
reasoning and so forth right I mean so there are some distinctions to be made and this whole idea
of intelligence I mean is intelligence all reasoning or when we think about intelligence we
think about intuition we think about creativity we think about coming up with new solutions when
new constraints and things present which didn't exist I mean the whole of the science and engineering
is all of that right pretty much all fields where you're trying to find new solutions which probably
do not have a historical precedence and these large language models rely on that historical
precedence I mean the prior such a call it and so how do we make that distinction and
the second thing is that large language models are essentially inferring these things from
the basis of language they are not doing analysis of data there may be auxiliary tools
that say okay now I can go and probe the data but that probing is based on the logic that is built
or large logic that these large language models come up with and so I think there needs to be
some very subtle characterization of what we mean I mean extending this idea of causality in
those three notions that you talked about from a language to a data context we use the word data
loosely I mean what we are using the word data is essentially language data not quantitative
numerical data on which these analysis are built so there is much to be done in parsing this out
very very carefully and going about doing that having said that the encouraging thing which
I find is the following so when I was in grad school I did a couple of courses on artificial
intelligence and the prevailing language at that time was Lisp and prologue Lisp processing and
basically logical programming that's what prologue was so the idea was that if you could program
logic in all its complexity and the many books written on the structure of human logic and
take that and program it you'd be successful in mimicking intelligence and to me at that time
said okay you may be able to do a pretty sophisticated job with deductive logic but there was nothing
in that which would allow you to do inductive logic which basically goes on to looking at
inclusion and creativity the thing is that didn't go too far and then we have these
large language models who say okay I don't need a language that is based on reasoning
all I need to do is have the capability to enforce things from data
and computation and so that's the generative models success where they can pretty much
inferred so the idea is that okay I don't need how to reason everything that I need to learn
about reasoning is already built into the millions and billions of textual data that is there
so if I have the ability to infer that I will even though I don't know that it is
essentially a logical reasoning and maybe some things beyond
my guess is that a lot of the other things are built into our language structure
very deeply and to the extent that we can then reintegrate that re-manipulate that use that
as a foundation for thinking in new ways we can build on it but I don't think we are there yet
and this whole idea of causality causal reasoning causal inference and other things may fall in that
space saying we don't yet know how to go about doing that although that information is there so
the distinction between language and the data-driven approach is important and there is more to be
done with this space than what is out there ocean. Yeah thanks for raising that issue
Praveen and interestingly enough I just came across this paper
called about something called dream coder and if you read down here it says we present dream
coder a system that learns to solve problems by writing programs it builds expertise by
creating programming languages for expressing domain concepts a wake sleep learning algorithm
alternately extends the language with new symbolic abstractions and trains the neural
network on imagined and replayed problems and then concepts are built compositionally
from those learned earlier yielding multi layered symbolic representations that are
interpretable and transferable to new tasks so anyway I just thought it was interesting
because there is actually now apparently uh where are you guys um some small breakthrough into
developing machine learning structures where learning concepts and extending language much
in the way that we learn concepts and extend language in order to be to do reasoning and
causal reasoning and all of that so that's actually an interesting we're just starting to happen.
Yeah I would say that I mean I think we are at the beginning of a breakthrough in these things
we are now assembling essential tools that may help us move this to expect these tools
that are not trained or developed for a specific task to inherently be able to do that
I think is a little far but there needs to be more and that's an opportunity for us.
From an information theory perspective this brings me back to the fact that
um everything we do is based on embeddings we take objects or concepts and we build embeddings
out of them which are then manipulated using reasoning machine machine learning or whether
it's human human or machines and uh so we start with symbols uh the symbols are represented by
embeddings and that's an information theory problem how do we choose the correct embedding
which represents the information all of the necessary and relevant information
which can then be processed and how do you then represent that information in a way that can
actually be manipulated using the tools that are available to us in machine learning that's
typically using uh vectors vector spaces and being able to do dot products in order to
do similarity operations to add vectors in order to do addition and subtraction operations
sort of logical things that are involved in logical reasoning but then on top of those concepts
we have to be on top of those embeddings we have to build concepts which are collections of these
and from those we have to build languages and when we build languages which are minimum this
which are shorter description length representations of concepts uh we're then able to do reasoning
using those higher level objects or concepts and so I kind of I kind of have been seeing this kind
of structure emerging in the machine learning which are particularly in the context of evolutionary
robotics and and artificial intelligence but I think it provides an interesting way for us to
think about how we actually process information using the tools of algorithmic information theory
and channel information and how that leads to us being able to build sort of these informational
pyramids or you know things where we can we can think about things at lower levels of the hierarchy
and then at higher levels of the hierarchy and actually do these sort of intelligent processing
yeah no I agree with that completely Hersch and I think the generative models the transformers
are built on the series of embeddings I mean there's a recursive embedding process
that generates these parameters and estimation of these parameters across these things and
one of the things which we are trying to explore with Hersch is well they're a way for us to
modify that to see causal reasoning can be extracted using that embedding structure so that's a big question
so the thing that bothers me a lot is sometimes we may be using embeddings that are not
properly informative if I just give you a stream of stream flow and I treat
let's say I give you rainfall potential evaporation and stream flow and those are three values and I
just put them in a vector and I'm telling you at this point in time this is the vector and next
point in time this is the vector and this you know and I've got these three values
if I'm not telling you whether the stream flow is going up or going down at that point in time
or whether the the energy is increasing or decreasing or the rainfall is increasing or
decreasing I might be giving an embedding which is not sufficiently informative for you to be able to
do meaningful inference and so thinking about how we develop our data embeddings as a first step
before we even present them to our algorithm seems to be an important step yeah or get the
algorithms to basically build on the initial embedding to explore alternates and see what makes
sense right now I was going to ask if in on this question of embeddings
it would be difficult for a language model to speak on causality because usually we
reason about causality in terms of graphs and as I understand there in the large language model
there there's no structure of a graph so maybe it's using the wrong embedding to speak about
causality maybe the language model understands causality in a different way you know different
embedding than we typically would analyze causality I don't think it's necessary well
Praveen can probably answer this better but I don't think it's necessarily true that a
large language model and graphs are not the same thing because a large language model
can be thought of as a very high dimensional uh joint probability density function and that's
basically how we build those is by using building graphs right of conditional probabilities and so
on um Antoine and Praveen isn't it true that that's what a lot of what's his names
the father of causal inference I forget his name Perl Perl a lot of his work was based on that
that the fact that those two are essentially the same thing yeah yeah I mean the the
representation of causality as a graphical model came out of Perl and then quantified by
sprites I put that link in the chat there's a nice book by sprites which I recommend to
everybody to read a minute just helps lay that down on how to do this in a mathematical way and
how to think about it but I think the real question uh that we haven't yet answered effectively is
in our context where we are dealing with data in space and time what does causality mean
um I mean in in a medical context yeah I mean you can figure out whether smoking causes cancer
or not through a whole bunch of different things but in our context where we have potentially
continuous uh space time domain it's easier to answer the question of causality uh the
necessary condition for causality in time is uh breaking of symmetry in time uh the
past causes the future future cannot cause past that's the necessary condition is that a
sufficient condition or not that has not been well answered now if you extend that in space
there is no such framework right I mean so then you have to ride on a vector space to basically
figure out a directionality and then say okay something that is happening in one space uh
preclude something that is happening in other you might ride on a uh river and say okay I'm
going forward but then the whole issue of backwater propagation and all that thing happens
and then that can break down so what is that framework what do we mean when we say causality
within the context of what we are dealing with uh has not been well defined and that's a struggle
in there and then we anchor on surrogate uh processes and um Allison has done some work
with information theory in which direction the information blows I think like that I mean so
those are good starting points and there might be some hint of how we may go about doing it
but until we break through we are going to be scratching this on the surface and hoping that
somehow some model is going to provide that input um ocean so would it be fair to say that
causality is a representational assumption rather than a fact in other words it's in it's a hypothesis
we make about the world and we test in and just to take a simple example if I just said rainfall
and runoff and I ask you to say does rain call cause runoff that's going to have all the problems
that you just talked about right um but there are there are causal effects increasing CO2
is causing climate change yes so there are definitely open causal issues but my point is
my point is are we treating causality as a fact or are we treating causality as a
representational explanation yeah we don't know that right I mean uh probably that to go hand in
hand a certain type of representation will help us infer a certain type of causality but until
we come up with proper definitions and proper um classifications uh I think what we end up doing
is anchoring on a representation that is convenient and then infer causality associated with that
representation and then so well no this represents everything we got so structural causal model might
fall into one of those categories uh but yeah I haven't I don't know the answer I mean I'm
just articulating uh the questions that go through my mind but I mean if we take an if we take an
extreme example like f is equal to ma right it's a it's a structural representation that was come
up with and you test it and it all never fails uh we start to treat it as a fact of nature right
it's because it's a hypothesis uh that has never has never has never actually been disproved by
by a counterfactual by by an example that that contradicts it so maybe something similar with
causality you have it you have a chain of reasoning and if that chain of reasoning always holds up
then eventually you start to treat it as though it's a fact of nature probably
I mean even if it equals ma is wrong in certain cases like photons it kind of brings the question of
is all of causality emergent you know can you have fundamental laws that are causal or is
everything kind of in a higher um more broad context complex systems well if I can go back
to ask Antoine a question well go ahead answer that first I was just gonna say I think ocean
I don't claim to have read fume but I think you summarize fume's argument that you know
fundamentally we can't know causality absolutely but you know we can we can um you know strengthen
our beliefs and that and sort of this is all very useful I don't think fume was trying to argue that
you know we shouldn't be logical beings and throw out this these aspirations for understanding
causality completely um and I think that's kind of what you're saying that you know yes f equals
ma is wrong but it it's you know right under uh you know most of the conditions that we encounter
in our day-to-day and so it can be basically be taken as fact and that's kind of what our
definition of causality is it's right until it's wrong um but Antoine going back to the large
language models um if these people who wrote all these papers were to take a bunch of um
eight year olds my daughter's eight I'm just picking eight out of a hat and attempted to
do these same tests on them right that's that's kind of what I was thinking about when when you
said that they were testing these large language models to infer causality uh if they ran these
same tests on a bunch of eight year olds um you know in other words uh how do they know that
the tests are actually meaningful tests for establishing whether or not the LLM or the
eight year old has the ability to to causal inference I don't think they do it's I feel
like this is the this is what we're getting out of this discussion is like what is causality in
the end and how can you be sure that it is causality you're inferring and not and not logic
reasoning as Timothy proposed so I don't think they really do all they can do is come up with a
benchmark a controlled one that has causated causes and effects and tests if an LLM is able to recreate
that um but again is this is this purely reasoning or this just um or this just retrieval from your
knowledge and it I think there's also another point to consider um as Previn mentioned earlier
that it's it's a bit different because it's language and might take my thought on that I
don't have anything to support that claim but my thought on that is that we as humans use language
to formulate concepts and to reason so eventually if we reach the point to which the LLM is so
powerful in not in in texts um in natural language processing actually what are the implications of
on its ability to formulate concepts and reason and and like just uh I want to get back to the
chain of thought and and tree of thought prompt engineering techniques I was telling you about
earlier uh the tree of thought is pretty much the same thing so you say to your LLM right this is a
question I want the answer but first I want you I want your first thought on the answer and then
you separate into two and you like choose different ways of thinking about it and just
create a tree and output all difference that would be able that would make us able to track
how does the net I thought there is a very interesting paper on it I can link it I can link
it in the chat tree of thought so my my take on this my question would be um LLMs are basically
two years old and they're able to do so much already and at what pace are they still gonna
grow in the future and what are the implications on the amount of knowledge that will be there
in a couple of years from now because in the end is causality just like you have this in your
knowledge you can take it out and and get it again because if it's that I don't have any
doubt that in maybe 10 years from now or I don't know why at some point we'll figure it out to
every knowledge we know in the LLMs it's it's not reasonable to think that but
counterfactuals and everything some more a lot more I don't really have an answer I don't think
anyone has an answer in the papers I mentioned yes or none yeah this is great discussion
I have more questions here for us to reflect but it seems like we you know collecting all
the reflections it it seems like we still don't have a way to measure causality
um a solid way like we do measure models uh via the wind square error or some other metrics
um and my perception of causality is something that may be reproducible across experiments
in different environments that are looking like kind of the same processes so think about stream
flow in in Switzerland versus Tucson versus uh Washington um but do are we are do we have tools
to measure causality in other words can we say the same way in an analogous way we have a way
machine learning models of overfeeds or underfeeds do we have a way to say this model overfeeds
causality this model underfeeds causality this is a good causality explanation of the process
and I don't know if that exists and that goes back to the way we usually validate or cross validate
models in which we split the the data setting uh a number of faults and then we cross validate it
should we instead do test for causality in a similar way or analogous way in which we
take data sets from different environments and then we see if the knowledge is transferred
across those environments via the cross validation so perhaps that removes a little bit of anxiety we
we have for perfection in causality and we kind of explain it in a way that would be quantified
and not as a binary yes or no um and um another problem is predicting beyond training in the
at once example of climate change it's another limitation I don't know if we are at the point
at which the models will be able to reason and then uh beyond training even though they're
perfectly trained reason about climate change uh consequences and the trends um uh if the trends
are learned from the data themselves then yes but if there's nothing that let us know about surprises
I doubt um and the other thing is the the data limits are really constraining our learning
or the models learning um uh uh pace um of the facts and and and not to speak of the
counterfact loss but I mean those are kind of some of the lines or bullets right could raise from
everybody's discussion but so far it's a great discussion
if if I yeah thank you for intervention Aaron if if I may maybe give another couple of elements
in there to give a couple more insights on those questions okay so I have a small amount of knowledge
on digital twins um before I was here when I was in master's degree five six years ago in France
I was an apprentice at deso systems at the same time and they were working on digital
twins by then so I was a bit in there um in short for those who will know digital
digital twins is a concept that ties a physical object to a virtual representation
where there is a synchronization of data between the two of them and um what's what's hot in the
topic right now is because of climate change and extreme events and everything is a digital
twin of the planet earth um there is a there is um a perspective on that from the european
union which is called destination earth so they plan to do a digital twin of the whole earth
by 2027 I don't remember 2028 my take on this is from what I've seen in the paper
um talking about the intelligent agents that learn about experience um
I drew the parallel between those agents and what on our lens able to do but the key thing here
is that experience is is beneficial to causal understanding and I guess this is what's also
been put forward by my the cold little inference frameworks uh that do need a lot of data
experimentations and everything and so the just my small insight on there would be that
digital twins may just represent a great environment for lm's to interact with
um if the those virtual environments are good enough to be representative of what's
what's happening out there and this is where all work of all traditional all would say research
comes in flow modeling ground flow modeling rainfall runoff chemistry geochemistry and so
my uh my vision of so we're we're at ui uc in illinois and uh the in in the ci net program
we're studying the singham on watershed and so maybe a target I'd like to achieve would be
like to have a digital twin of that watershed represented by a 3d model and data coming in
the same time and on top of that you would have physics a physics engine reality represented by
all the all the process based simulation models we know and etc and this would be the great place
for lm's to fully express itself and make uh interactions and make experiences and this
would potentially provide a great um environment to perform causal inference and maybe to test
whether lm's are actually able to do causal inference because all we've been fitting is
generated text and made up benchmarks which is interesting and it's the first step
eventually experience is the key I feel like and the digital twin would be a really interesting
environment for that this is just like both thoughts I've had um you want to reflect on that
haushan no no no I absolutely I think you're absolutely going down the right track because
you're saying basically would let that you need to not only respond you need to be able to interrogate
your environment right and giving them a digital environment to interrogate is a useful thing to
do and that's actually behind this poet paper that I put up there about you know where you
where the environment changes as the ability of the agent changes so it's like a co evolution
process where it actually evolves the environment which is one step beyond what you're thinking
what you're talking about but it also occurred to me a reason I put my hand up was that I think
it's really interesting to have the llm as the agent that's doing the learning I hadn't thought
of that I think it would also be interesting in a decision context which I think is where you're
going to have multiple llm llms take the roles of different stakeholders uh and play devil's
advocate you know so you've got the rancher and you could say okay your job is to play the the
role of the rancher your job is to play play the role of the environmentalist your job is to
play the role of whatever and you could do some very very interesting role playing explorations
uh with the goal of coming up with potential solutions to difficult transdisciplinary decision
making problems where you can play them out using agents rather than having to get real humans
in there before you then take those to next stage and involve humans
I'm glad you brought it up because this is exactly what we do
perfect and so I'm going to be presenting that with Praveen at AGU and just to give a couple
of heads up so I have a couple of examples where exactly I have a mayor science expert and everything
talking in response to a flood event impeding flood event or something and the problematic
right now is to find the right metric and find ways to evaluate the output of the models because
this is text it's complicated to evaluate compared to LSTM which would output a sequence of numbers
and then you would use all the math metrics you know to evaluate it but how do you do it with text
it's either you come up with something new either you use an llm to do it but there is a bit I guess
there is a bias in using an llm to evaluate an llm so this is a question that needs to be answered
right now but yes um in the control for gowns yeah exactly so yeah if that interests you and you're
coming to AGU my talk is in the morning I'm going to be talking about that oh would you mind dropping
me an email telling me where and when I wanted to to comment on the talks on AGU because well with
names that are usually in the talks and also for the participants who were at the sniff in the house
workshop I collected some of the talks that will be presented by participants at AGU
so we have a I have a nice excel spreadsheet that I could share please save us a lot of
yeah you can even filter it by daytime so you kind of have like a so would you have me send
your information to you so you can like enrich the database no I think I already have you in the
database I even if you allow me I can very quickly of course share my screen and show you it's just
a spreadsheet and I just scraped the data from from the AGU website so go ahead if I'm missing
someone I could even yeah so just to give us an example my talk
are you physically there yeah I will be physically there okay perfect so my talk is also on Monday
but you can see what I what I scraped is just the ID the title of the talk and these are the
participants who are usually in this meetings or who are at the workshop so you can see that it's
Uwe Hoshin myself who I'm the speaker and you can see who is the speaker in the
in this column of authors for you with the double thank you that that's a great help
from what I see we're going to be running around chasing
maybe if you follow this schedule very strictly you will be around the Moscone center a couple
times but I think you can pick and choose what looks interesting thanks for that it's great
all right yeah so I will share the label and we can see how it can be passed around and how
I can add data to it all right perfect thanks unfortunately I have to go for a student exam
um so one final comment thinking about student exams uh this thing about causal reasoning also
reminds me of the kind of questions we try to ask students when they're doing their qualifier
or they're doing their right there's the kind of questions which are just about what do you know
facts regurgitate and then hopefully you get to the kind of questions where they get to
generalize beyond and that's where you test their their true understanding and or intelligence
so it felt it just felt like it has direct relevance to what you were talking about yeah
anyway I gotta go bye guys everyone bye bye and just a final comment that we are gonna be having
our winter break and we are gonna be back on January 17 with Manuel's presentation beautiful
hey thanks thanks everyone bye guys thanks
