Jim Stockdale is Admiral Stockdale.
He was the highest ranking POW in Vietnam.
His, the Stockdale paradox was he noticed
that in those North Vietnamese POW camps
that the pessimists didn't live.
He said, but the really interesting insight
was the optimists didn't live either.
Because what happened is they'd be like,
we're gonna get the boys home for Christmas
or Easter or July the fourth
and those dates would come and go.
And then they would just collapse.
They would lose all ability to maintain hope
after their hope of redemption came and went.
And he said, the paradox was the people who survived
were ruthlessly realistic about short-term realities
while remaining relentlessly optimistic
about the long-term possibility.
I don't know when we're gonna get out
but we're gonna go home, right?
And that is to me is sort of all of us right now.
Hello everyone and welcome back to the Win Win podcast.
Today I am speaking to someone who truly synthesizes
both the physical and intellectual sides of life, Jamie Weill.
I got to know Jamie originally through his work
on the Flow Genome Project,
which is essentially a movement
that seeks to understand the nature of peak performance.
And specifically this thing known as the flow state,
which is, you know, those moments
when you are playing an incredible sport
or you lose yourself in a conversation,
those moments where the world sort of melts away.
So we dig into all that juicy stuff.
But also Jamie is a prolific writer and thinker
on the broader topic of humanity's relationship with meaning.
He recently wrote the book, Recapture the Rapture,
which seeks to understand what he calls the meaning crisis
that's particularly Western civilization
is currently going through,
which affects our relationship with the natural world
and also with each other and of course, competition.
So he has this really interesting lens
of seeing the world through his backgrounds
in psychology, neuroscience, but also spirituality.
So a really fascinating conversation.
I hope you enjoy it.
Let's dig in.
Jamie, were you much of a games player growing up?
And if so, which was your most formative game
in your childhood?
No, I'd say I was generally a terrible games player.
I would get bored or disinterested.
I think Backgammon is kind of where I gravitated.
And then for a brief summer, Dungeons and Dragons.
But I realized instantly after my first time playing
that I was like, oh, wow, this other kid,
the Dungeon Master is just making all this shit up
and we're at his absolute mercy.
So the next week, I got the little book
on being a Dungeon Master and then made my own campaigns
or whatever they were, you know,
had little treasure maps and put them in the oven
with lemon juice to make them all old
and that kind of thing.
And so for a brief, brief stint,
I was into Dungeons and Dragons, but I realized,
in fact, I think most of my friends and colleagues now
that are in the ex-risk space
or the civilization redesign space,
there's a statistically significant correlation
where they were Dungeon Masters when they were kids as well.
So the idea of like building worlds, you know,
that are more interesting than the worlds
that others would subject you to.
I think that kind of definitely carried over in some way.
Designing the rules of the game
as opposed to maneuvering the existing rules
that were passed down on them.
Were you competitive at all?
I mean, I feel like yes, obviously,
like always was excited and interested in winning
up to but not past the point that it got ugly or scrappy
or you had to degrade the spirit of the game
in order to win.
And then I would sort of lose interest or back out.
So I got to know your work originally
through the book, Stealing Fire,
which is about harnessing the power of the flow state
and ecstatic states in order to sort of unlock
not only peak performance,
but maximum enjoyment out of life.
What got you, like, how did you get to that point
where you were like, I want to hack
this very niche particular thing
because you were a wilderness guide, right?
This wasn't through necessarily the lens of sport
that led you to peak performance.
Well, how did you get to that?
Well, I mean, it was a couple of distinct insights.
The first was, I'm a lazy, unmotivated bastard
unless it's really fun.
So for instance, going to the gym,
just, I mean, my hit rate on that zero,
two out of a thousand tries.
But then if it was mountain biking
to the top of a mountain or back country skiing
to the top of something to get there for the sunrise
and then the fun turns, I would be endlessly motivated.
And so I was like, what is the difference there?
And as I started studying that
and as my wife, Julie is a Montessori director,
so she had deep training in Montessori pedagogy
and education and we were also raising our own children.
I was like, okay, so what is it?
What is that big huge variance about?
How can I be, have zero motivation
when it comes to grinding things out
and nearly infinite motivation
when it's connected to play or joy or exploration
or discovery and wouldn't you know it?
The name for that general field is flow states
and sort of, and the technical term is auto-tellic behavior
and auto-tellic just means it has its own intrinsic reward
for doing it.
And so I don't do push-ups in order to get fit
for spring break, I go skiing
because the sensation of turns is delightful, right?
I'll say, surf is surf bum, ski bums, climbing bums.
The whole reason that bum is at the end of their name
is because they've basically chucked all social compliance
and respectability to pursue that thing full-time.
And so my sense was, okay, now I'm super interested
in human development.
How do humans grow from infants to toddlers to children
to adolescents to adulthood?
And through all the subsequent potential steps
in adulthood, it seemed to me that we're sort of drowning
in information and starving for motivation, right?
It's not that we don't know better,
it's just we often, we can't figure out how to do better.
And what if we could connect those two things?
What if you could connect that auto-tellic rocket fuel
of like, I can't help but want to do this thing, right?
Because it makes me come alive, it's intrinsically rewarding.
And then connect that to the project of human development.
So that was really the beginning insight
into why do flow states matter
or what is the actual potential benefit
beyond just having a neat experience here and there.
It's actually, oh, if this guilt and vanity, right, don't work.
You know, most people try to get in shape
because they feel bad about being lazy
and putting on 20 pounds.
Or the vanity, they want to fit in their high school genes,
right, or look great for spring break
and neither of those, all the research shows,
those fizzle over time.
That's why our news resolutions tend to peter out
and all that kind of stuff.
So what if we can harness all of the positive projects
of human development and growth and impact in the world,
two things that are intrinsically rewarding.
And our colleague at Deloitte's Center for the Edge,
John Hagel, has gone on and validated this outside.
And by the way, Montessori classrooms
were actually one of the places
that the original researchers found
were most deeply immersive and generative
of these flow state learning experiences.
And then John Hagel at Deloitte found that teams
that spend the most time
in a collective group flow experience,
so they're not just each individually,
you know, with their headsets on at a cubicle,
but they're actually collaborating and relying on each other
in order to generate the things.
So much more like jazz, right?
That those teams consistently outperformed
other teams that weren't,
and also, you know, even benchmark,
market competition.
Why do you think that is?
Is it because some kind of emergent property
when there's a collective action going on?
Yeah, I mean, Keith Sawyer,
who's at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
has, he's probably the sort of preeminent researcher
and he's literally written a book called Group Flow.
And his studies have found,
and with some of his graduate students
who have now gone on to do their own projects,
they've actually found that, you know,
if I am just me in an individual flow state,
a little kid playing with Lego blocks or whatever it be,
that's sort of good for 100 points.
If you and I are in parallel play,
like we're both playing with our own little piles
of Lego blocks, then that's good for,
that's twice as much fun.
But if we are actually an intersubjective
or interdependent group flow,
so we're building a castle together,
we've pooled our blocks, right?
Or a basketball team, you know,
who was relying on each other,
or a jazz band or whatever it would be,
and that's 300% more rewarding
than just doing it in isolation.
So it is arguably the most intrinsically,
you know, magnetic thing we can possibly do.
And then obviously there are enormous indicators
that a group flow state does, you know,
to your question, is there some emergent property?
I would say it's almost a subtractive property,
which is you don't have isolated,
fragmented egoic drives and will.
And you end up with a coherent collective concerted effort.
So in crew or rowing, right,
they actually have a term for that
when everybody in an eight-man shell, right,
is together, they call it swinging,
which is literally where all the blades are moving together
and you just feel like you're slicing through the water,
which is funnily enough, the same term
that jazz musicians use, right?
What does it mean to, well, to swing, right?
Like that idea of what is that effortless thing.
And I think there's even some jazz albums
that have been called like round midnight
is a very famous jazz album because that was the time,
right, around midnight, first sets already happened,
the band has had their set break,
they're back there smoking reefer and whiskey, right?
Whatever it's gonna be, they're absolutely in the groove
and they come back out.
And around midnight is where you really drop into jazz.
So that would, I would say is,
abs donnelly is it rewarding,
it's also incredibly high performance.
And you do end up with, you know, sort of via negativa,
you end up by removing individual motives and agendas,
getting to some high shared goal
where all effort is multiplied instead of canceled out.
So what's going on?
You mentioned about removing the ego, essentially.
Is that more just sort of a term of art
or is there like something actually going on in the brain
that is neurochemically changing
where people get into this state?
Yeah, I mean, a couple of examples.
One is Isade Business School in Europe.
They did studies on, you know, within the business school
on leadership teams trying to solve complicated ethical
problems and it was literally, I think it was the scenario
was Levi Strauss was opening up a sweatshop in Bangalore
and there's this blowback and how do you manage it?
So there's kind of this multi-variable business ethics
PR question and then they ranked and evaluated
all of the participants with one-way glass
and hooked up to biometrics.
Who was the most effective
and what teams and groups came
to the highest quality solutions, right?
And what they found was is that there was no correlation
between how much a given person said,
how loudly they talked to sort of airtime didn't matter,
volume didn't matter.
So no kind of like monkey primate stuff
of dominance or assertion.
What mattered was which leader was the most coherent
on a neurophysiological level.
So respiratory rate, pulse arc symmetry,
galvanic skin response, vagal nerve tone, EEGs
and just kind of brainwave states
and how effectively were they able to entrain
the rest of their team into that state?
So it's a little bit like the old thing of like Galileo
walking into the clockmaker shop
and noticing that all the clocks on the walls all swung
to the one that had the longest pendulum, right?
And the one and the clock.
You're going to this like synchronicity.
Yes, and the clock with the longest pendulum
would end up then synchronizing all the others, right?
Into swinging.
I didn't know that was the thing that happened.
Yeah, it's a thing.
And I think actually they traced it back
so there's not some metaphysical thing.
I think it was literally like micro vibrations
between the studs and the walls and this and that,
but it's, you know, it's always physical mechanical,
but there was a harmonic convergence, right?
So just that metaphor of the longest pendulum, right?
Or the most potently coherent human
ends up setting the tone, right?
That everybody else coordinates with.
And so that's one example, right?
If like what's actually going on,
what you could say quite clearly
is a synchronization of autonomic nervous response
right into a collective resonance.
And that makes sense as far as, you know,
we are tribal primates, right?
So a mother and child, you know,
infants are absolutely indexed to look at each other,
look at their mother and cue off micro muscles of the face
and all those kinds of things.
It's an adaptive survival mechanism.
We are in a workplace.
You look to see who does the boss,
who does the ranking alpha look at,
sit by, talk to, make jokes with,
go out for lunch with, you know,
we're all looking at soft power
and how do I navigate and negotiate it?
And for most of us, that's all fragmented and chaotic, right?
But when groups can drop in,
that's when you end up with massively heightened performance.
And Tom Brady, the Patriots,
and then, you know, Tampa quarterback,
subject to much, you know,
adulation and scorn depending on whose team you like.
Anyway, you slice it.
I think you could say that he was a master at
in chaotic conditions,
especially like super bowls and that kind of thing,
being able to create coherent group flow
in his offensive line
to then do these crazy rallies and turnarounds.
And there was one particular game where, you know,
the Patriots did a ridiculous come from behind,
sort of 25 or 30 points in the fourth quarter alone.
And they just sort of, once they locked in,
they didn't drop it again until they won.
And that was, you know,
Brady was the longest pendulum there.
So you see that and you think,
okay, so now what are the neurophysiological
correlates or drivers of that?
So without a doubt, some version of mirror neurons,
like the idea of I'm looking at and imitating
or calibrating to another person,
there's also a theory,
Stephen Porges, who was a sort of trauma specialist
and quite well known of polyvagal theory.
So to establish that as an idea,
I wouldn't say it's established scientific consensus,
but his theory is that, again,
as primates, we're highly indexed to,
is someone safe or not?
Basically, you know, friend or foe kind of thing.
And that we do an awful lot of decoding of safety,
security, trustworthiness, intent,
via vocal and vagal tone.
Like my ability to speak, literally the tension
in my vocal cords, the congruence of mannerisms,
affect all of these things.
Well, then, you know, if you assess and then judge,
this person is safe, your vagal tone goes up.
Your sympathetic response,
a kind of vigilance decreases, right?
So you've got mirror neurons, you have vagal tone,
you have, you know, I'm sure, although there's, again,
and our buddy Andrew Huberman has talked about this,
like pheromones, is that really a thing?
Or is it, does it quite behave the way people have said
it does in pop science and that kind of thing?
Open question, but for sure, scent, right?
And calibration, all those things stack up
to being where we are both either sort of incented,
invited or encouraged,
depending on how we're reading each other,
to drop in more reasonably.
And that can get weaponized, right?
You have marketers and neurolinguistic programmers
and feel like they're like model body language.
If I'm doing this, then you do this.
Say my name and repeat it.
You know, all of those kinds of things
where people try and hack that
for other motives or agendas.
But in general, it feels good to be part of a collective
and it feels really good to be in that emergent space
that no one could have predicted beforehand,
where you're going up into a minor seventh
or you hit that solo note just as I change my chords
and the whole thing takes off,
or here's a no look pass
and you're right there before the goal or the basket.
Like that is arguably the reason why all of us
wanna play these games together in the first place.
Does that always have to be a longest pendulum
for this, for the best results?
Are there instances where that doesn't happen,
where everyone is truly sort of equal?
That's a great question.
I mean, the nice answer, the idealistic answer
would be hopefully, yes, of course.
And in fact, those are even better.
But if you take something like drum circles,
like hippie drum circles on the beach kind of thing, right?
You can run that experiment
because in fact that we used to live in Santa Barbara
and one of our music teachers was one of the Lynch pens
of this Sunday, it had been going on for decades.
It was sort of a Sunday afternoon, evening drum circle
on the Santa Barbara Beach.
And usually he would set up with himself
and they were professors at Cal Arts
or this amazing music academy, school in California.
They had world-class Afro-Caribbean drummers,
sitar, tabla players like pros.
And they would set up three, four, five of them
at the nucleus, right?
And then you could have 200 dreadlocked hippies
and they would all sound amazing
with those guys at the core.
But then there was an afternoon where they couldn't make it.
They were traveling with their own tour or something.
So it was just the hippies and no true musicians.
And the thing was just noodley and muddy
for the entire duration.
And so there's that concept of like it takes a field
to hold a field.
There has to be a nucleus that is coherent
as a seed crystal or a metronome
or whatever metaphor you wanna use
in order for the other things to coalesce.
Is it possible for a completely flat,
non-hierarchic emergence into a more ordered
higher energy pattern?
I would say hypothetically for sure.
Realistically, I wouldn't bet on it.
And I mean, that seems to be the case
with almost all evolutionary things.
It's the little differences that give rise to novelty
and therefore complexity and more opportunities to emerge.
If it's a completely homogenous situation,
it seems to take at least a lot longer
for something interesting to emerge out of that.
But yeah, I agree, like ideally it would be nice
if everyone could get a go of being the leader.
So is that what you guys try and do
at the Flow Genome Project?
You try to train people how to be the longest pendulum
or is it more trained to be able to join,
to become a pendulum yourself in the first place?
I mean, sort of it's equal parts.
So the first one is yes, like basically
here's the neurophysiology
of optimizing your own nervous system
for recovery and resilience and state management.
So can you tune yourself to be in the right state,
either alert or rouse, soothing, inspiring,
whatever it might be, angry, calming,
whatever it would be for the actual conditions you face
across a broad spectrum of life.
How'd you go about training that?
Biohacking 101 to start with, right?
Which is sleep more, move often, eat well,
practice gratitude, make love, get outside, sunlight,
all the just obvious, obvious stuff
that's hyper commodified and sensationalized,
but on the other hand, don't skip it,
don't make it more complicated than it needs to be,
and you definitely don't need to buy a bunch of shit
to get it done, but do that.
And then you kind of go from,
once I have my personal self-system,
more or less optimized, or at least doing solidly,
now what are the software?
What's the interpersonal software
that we need to be running to not get wrapped around the axle?
Because most of the time, and most of us these days
are focused on individual optimization.
So I'm crushing it, right?
I'm doing all the hacks, and I've got my ice baths,
and I've got my infrared, and I've got my wear ring,
and I'm doing all those things, right?
But then we run smackdown into the wall of how on earth
do we coordinate and collaborate as tribal monkeys?
And then you get into all the power games,
you get into all the passive-aggressive stuff,
you all get into all the differences of opinions
and the breakdowns in agreed-upon modes of discourse.
Like, how do we even collectively agree
to talk about the things that we're getting bogged down in?
So that's the other element that we teach,
which is just what are the half dozen or so tools and models?
A, to interrupt victimhood culture
and endless tribal politics.
How do you actually say no?
This is Bill Urie's work at the Harbour Negotiation Project.
How do you actually say no and establish
and reaffirm boundaries while deepening
versus threatening relationships?
How do you notice competing commitments,
which is like Bob Keegan's work
at Harvard's Adult School of Development,
like, hey, we say we want to change,
but we also have this homeostatic system
that doesn't want to change, and why is that?
And let's understand what those are.
Polarity is management, where you're like,
oh, binary solutions, we pretty much all solve
for everything we're facing today
that's worth either getting paid for or fixing on behalf.
Humanity is a complex, wicked problem, right?
And none of them submit to binary solutions.
So Democrat versus Republican,
is it all moral failings that the poor are poor
as the Republicans would hold,
or is it all social structures, right?
And, you know, and we need to address systems.
So the answer is obviously it's a balance between both.
And if you ignore one at the expense of the other,
you'll always get partial and ineffective solutions,
just simple things like that, that you're like,
oh, once we sort of upload that software
collectively together, we can have,
it's basically like the Vygotsky and scaffolding.
So Vygotsky was this Russian educational theorist, right?
And his whole notion was,
if you scaffold people's experiences,
so just training wheels, right, basically,
you can raise the level of their capacity
and their performance above and beyond
their innate capacities.
So a mutual friend of Daniel Schmockenberg
who's in Jordan Halls and I was,
Zach Stein is a Harvard psychologist, very thoughtful guy.
And he was working with an organization,
his whole dissertation was on standardized testing
and how whacked it is, right?
And how the inequities it bakes into the system
and that kind of thing.
And they did studies where they would have somebody,
you know, fundamentally on an intelligence
or cognitive capacity assessment, right?
Make sense of your life, make sense of the world,
make sense of this word problem, whatever it would be.
And then, you know, and then someone would score,
you know, a 60% or a three out of five on a Likert scale,
right?
But then they would teach them how to mind map, right?
A tool scaffolding, right?
And they would say,
okay, so now everything you just said there,
and now hit literally draw connections,
draw bubbles, draw dotted lines,
like sort and establish the relationship here
about what you were thinking.
And then retested them.
And they would score a five out of five.
So there's sort of up to this 40% swing
in someone's intelligence or cognitive capacity,
just based on did you give them a tool, right?
It's like Steve Jobs saying, you know,
that a computer is like a bicycle for the mind, right?
And you're like, oh, okay.
So how many bicycles for our minds, right?
Can we share and create such that we can all pedal faster?
Because you wrote a book recently
called Recapture the Rapture,
which is trying to address the seeming sort of psychological
ills of our society.
Can you try and sort of summarize what your thesis is
on why it seems like victimhood culture
has become so dominant?
Disconnection, general malaise people are having,
is it a function of fear of the future?
We've been hearing doom and gloom from climate change
and all these other growing risks.
Or is that something more fundamental going on
inside us psychologically that is giving rise to this?
I mean, I think without a doubt,
like what on earth is going wrong these days
and why are so many people sad, suffering, disconnected?
I think that's just a massive multivariable situation.
But one of the things that I mentioned in that book
was just things are getting exponentially better
and things are getting exponentially worse
at the very same time.
And trying to map two intersecting, contradicting,
overlapping exponential curves.
It's confusing.
Beggars the imagination.
I mean, we're at the whole three body problem in physics,
which I know you must be deeply aware of.
It's very hard to be like sun and moon and stars.
You know, like you get you.
Pan and chaos.
And we are eight billion bodies,
all with volition and pesky human nature.
So trying to map what is going on
as things are simultaneously Steven Pinker
and Hans Rosling and all the lot of like,
if it bleeds, it leads.
You've been massively misled.
The world is safer, better, cheaper,
more prosperous than it's ever been.
Ta-da.
And you're like, oh, thank God.
You know, and then you click over to polar bears
and you know, and Thwaites Glacier
and you know, all of these things.
You're like, oh no, which is it?
Right.
And we have that initial experience,
which naturally triggers hypervigilance
and threat response.
Oh, shit.
Right.
Are we coming alive?
All this wonderful stuff.
My own personal life, my personal growth,
my relationships, my career, am I coming alive?
That's the inquiry I'm in.
Or are we staying alive?
And I need to be practicing triage, right?
And in a threat response.
And toggling back and forth between those two
is crazy making.
So what will we do in that situation?
You'd be like, this is above my pay grade.
Who do I turn to for advice as to what's going on
and what should we do?
And that's where we can then hop over to the meaning crisis.
So if you've got the kind of a poly crisis
or whatever word you want to use for a whole bunch of things
are going, you know, are going into the critical red zone
from geopolitics to macroeconomics to ecology to,
you know, you name it, all of those things are happening.
And at the same time, we've had a concurrent collapse
of the pillars of truth that we used to look to,
which, you know, I loosely just call meaning one pointer,
which would be organized religion,
which for 99% of all of human history
was where you look to do.
Who am I?
Where am I from?
What is this thing about?
How ought I act?
And who are we?
And that's collapsed in the last 50 years,
quite solidly to the point where, you know,
now as most people are familiar,
Pew Research Foundation and lots of others have found that,
you know, I don't belong to anything.
I'm spiritual, but not religious.
It is now the largest and the fastest growing category,
which when you think of, you might just be like,
oh yeah, no, okay, sure, that's fine.
But then you think back to all of human history.
What did it mean if I had identified
as spiritual but not religious?
I would have been a heretic, an apostate, a pagan,
and I would have been run out of town,
burned at the stake, thrown in the prison,
whatever it would have been,
it would have been a death sentence.
So it's super unusual that we've just broken
with lineage tradition, lineage wisdom traditions
of our culture and tribe.
So that's step one, but we've been doing that for a while.
And then you had the Sam Harris's and the Christopher Hitchens
and those folks, the new atheists,
who a decade or more ago were saying,
sort of tap dancing on the grave of, right,
the death of the church.
And they're like, you know, good riddance to bad rubbish,
superstitious claptrap, opiate of the masses,
all of that kind of thing.
And here we're all going to move into, you know,
what is nominally meaning to point out,
which is basically just the modern, rational,
liberal scientific experience.
And I mean, capital L,
liberal, not lefty Democrat, liberal, right?
And just that sense of, you know, reason, empiricism,
scientific method, you know, rule of law, all of those things.
Enlightenment values.
Yes, all the enlightenment values.
But that's been taking a beating as well lately.
And it sort of went into overdrive during the COVID years,
right, the whole epistemic collapse of weight, you know,
the Ivy League schools, half of them have been in the tank
for pay to play, you know, kid placement.
Oh, shit, you can't even trust those guys.
The Lancet is in the tank
for some super shady publications
that they rushed to judgment.
What's going on with the CDC?
International NGO organization, WHO?
Can we really trust them, right?
You've seen the shattering, looking at the banks,
looking at McKinsey, looking at Goldman,
all of these folks getting caught
with their hands in the cage are all of these folks
clearly going above and beyond following the science,
which created this totally understandable backlash
in both the far left and all right,
where you now have these entire spun up cottage industries
of saying, we've been sold a bill of goods
and we can't trust anything that any authority is saying to us.
So now we're gonna do our own research and make stuff up
and then fragmented into the echo chambers of,
you know, cheap to publish, you know,
basically everybody's got their own public access TV station now.
And so unsurprisingly, the quality and the consistency
of any shared truth claims have gone out the window.
Because it seems to, I mean, your friend Jordan,
he tweeted a year ago that really resonated with me.
He's like, everyone's talking about its left versus right,
conservative versus liberal, et cetera.
He's like, no, no, no.
The real generator of these culture wars
is the tension between centralization
and decentralization itself
as two sort of forms of societal structure.
That's where this conflict is coming from.
It's these two forms of governance themselves
trying to find a way to either coexist
and well, not trying to coexist,
trying to both dominate how things are done.
Would you agree with that?
Yeah, I mean, I can for sure see the truth
in what he's pointing out there.
For me, it's a similar delineation,
but slightly different, which is my senses
is that we're waging, there's a literally
sort of a pitched battle for the future direction
of humanity, which is can we level up
into playing an infinite game?
Where sort of all humans are created equal and entitled to,
life limiting the pursuit of happiness
and the objective is fundamentally carrying on
the Enlightenment experiment
with tweaks, modifications, upgrades, true ups,
truth and reconciliation, whatever needs to happen,
but still fundamentally that project
versus the smash and grab down
into finite tribal win-lose dynamics.
And in that way, you get the,
let's just take sort of the proud boys on one side
as militarized, alt-right,
and Tifa as militarized, far left, right?
And they, not surprisingly,
would think they are sworn enemies of each other,
but if you actually bucket them as,
oh, you're all playing finite game,
win-lose, tribal, right?
Versus us stepping up into collectively
figuring out the infinite game,
you're actually on the same team.
Can you give a definition of finite and infinite games?
Sure, I mean, that's James Cass's
original terminology, you know,
fun and interesting little book,
he was a theologian and a philosopher,
but basically a finite game is win-lose
and it's sort of you're optimizing to win or lose,
presumably to win within the boundaries of the game, right?
And your goal is to end the game by winning.
And the infinite game is the intention
is largely to continue playing indefinitely
and to include as many people in the play as possible.
And it's fundamentally the modern,
Western democratic project.
How do we, how do we incent income and innovation,
but also tax, you know, that productivity
to create a safety net?
How do we create education and programs
and rebates and incentives in order to
hopefully inspire and lift people up?
Now, that is always, that sounds wonderful
in the abstract and on a drawing board,
it never ends up that way.
You have rent seeking behaviors,
you have all sorts of people coming in
to put their thumbs on the scale, right?
But that is the game.
And the question is this, how well can we play together?
Yeah, Western democracy tries to be a win-win game
as best as can.
And it's been arguably the best example of that,
certainly beyond the Dunbar number in history,
but it seems like it's going wrong.
My definition for that, you know,
the thing I would sort of point a finger at
to say why it's going wrong is this thing called Molek, right?
Which is the God of lose-lose games, essentially.
Unhealthy game theoretic incentives
where the outcomes in aggregate
of those individual incentives acting on the players
create outcomes that are bad for the whole.
Do you have a similar definition of Molek?
Because we've talked about this a little bit before.
How would you define it?
No, I mean, I think that's a solid working definition.
It feels like it's, you know,
it often gets conflated with capitalism
or markets and market incentives.
And it does feel like it's, you know,
we're talking mythopoetically,
so we kind of have license, right?
But I mean, it feels like it's something almost bigger
than that.
It may well be that in its current expression,
you know, market capital is dynamics
or one of its most obvious, you know,
places to see it in action.
But it is something, I mean, in some respects,
what's the spookier sinister part, right?
Cause this goes back to Ginsburg and everybody else, right?
And, you know, and the ancient Babylonian stuff.
But basically the multipolar trap notion, right?
Which is kind of a subset of all this,
which is sort of if there's an almost certain likelihood
that someone is going to do the shitty thing,
then it might as well be me.
Cause otherwise I'm the Patsy, right?
Otherwise I get left behind, my company fails.
So if it's someone violating tax law
or environmental regulation,
or who's going to fish the lot,
who's going to collapse the last fishery
or chop down the last redwood.
If it's definitely going to happen,
it might as well be me and mine.
And I think that the, what that does
is it basically indexes that we are now going to
justify our behavior based on the near certain likelihood
that there are sociopaths or psychopaths in the mix.
That's essentially making ourselves sociopaths.
And there doesn't actually have to be a psychopath
in the mix to incent all of us to act like one.
It's inclaim self-defense.
So that to me is almost the essence of Malak.
The fact that then that's the sinister evil part.
You're like, how the fuck did we get into this pickle?
I thought we were halfway decent humans.
And the reality is, is I just have to suspect
that it's like that game Mafia or whatever.
I just have to suspect that someone in the room is a killer.
And then I will act like one in order not to be killed.
But Malak is, in essence, it's a coordination problem.
It's getting everyone to agree to not do
the selfish short-term thing for the good of the long-term whole,
even though it puts them at a short-term risk,
essentially short-term disadvantage.
Is there a way to sort of like inculcate that
into people's minds and nervous systems
so that they can stay more resilient to that
through training, essentially?
I mean, I'd love to be able to say yes to that.
I'm massively under-convinced.
I'm not convinced that simply seeking interesting
or peak states necessarily has a one-to-one
or even one-to-three or seven correlation
with development of moral and ethical behavior.
And in fact, particularly in the extended psychedelic
renaissance, Burning Man, transformational culture,
Tulum, Ibiza, circuit, you can actually make
a fairly strong case that it has fuck all to do
with what people, the states that people are seeking.
So that's the sort of, that's the skeptical side of it.
The optimistic side is if people are in a place
of abundance, safety, security, concern,
your connection and compassionate care,
I think we behave better.
So if we are under-resourced,
then that's going to lead to more reactive,
more trauma-informed behavior.
And if our tanks are full, we potentially have
a little bit less clutch and grab
and a little bit more willingness to share.
But that sort of brings us to that question
as to whether or not win-win games are possible,
desirable, et cetera, versus win-lose games
and how do we kind of find our way through that landscape?
So can we, or even should we, be trying to transition
society from what is fundamentally a win-lose game
into an omni-win, win-win game?
Aspirationally, win-win, where we all get to expand
and, you know, expand the game,
play for as long as possible,
include as many people as possible,
is, you know, in a nutshell,
the enlightenment experiment, right?
Bug it up and bastardize along the way,
but still I think really viable and worth protecting.
But I think paradoxically, in order to get there sooner,
we actually need to figure out how to play
win-lose games better, right?
So rather than paying lip service to the ideals of win-win,
but when push comes to shove,
everybody's got the knives out, right?
And you can see this in utopian counter-cultural communities.
We're all one love world, but who's gonna get the nice house?
Who's gonna get the lot?
Who's banging the leader?
Who's gonna get the money?
All of those things, right?
All of those things happen and they happen
because at the deepest structure of biological life forms,
it's one up, one down, it's life or death,
eat or be eaten, right?
And that's not to say that is the only option we have,
it's not to get all Jordan Peters and the About Lobsters
and things like that, it's just to say,
that is a deep root structure.
And so my sense is that we earn the opportunity
to play collaborative win-win games
when there is basically a surplus or abundance
of energy in the system, right?
But if it comes down to vital thresholds, right?
And either I live or die based on whether I get that
next energy credit, photon or calorie, right?
Then it is elbows out and that's okay
because you could say, oh, well, win-win,
we have to expand our consciousness,
we have to level up, you can't solve the problem,
the level that created it, all those kinds of things.
And then you're like, yeah, and that's fine
if I as an individual get in touch with my inner saint
or Bodhisattva, I say, in fact, my life is no different
than your life, I am you.
We are all one, here's my lunch, right?
That's beautiful, individual sainthood,
but that mother becomes a martyr, right?
She chooses that, becomes a murderer if she says,
yeah, and my kid too, for the stranger,
for the stranger kid halfway around the world, right?
So we can have an individual mutation of consciousness
where we're like, I'm willing to sacrifice myself
for a win-win or so that the least of my brothers
and sisters can eat, but we tend not to be willing
or able to do that to our offspring or descendants
that violates a deeper level of code.
So you're sort of like, okay, so what is it like
to play win-lose games and actually commit,
not that win-win, because that only works
with a surplus of energy.
Then we can afford to be generous,
then we can play for the long term,
but when it comes down to true binary, down to survival,
and by the way, all the games people play, right?
That famous book in the 60s,
that pop-psych transactional analysis book,
was basically like, here's all the games,
there's money games, there's power games,
there's sex games, and certainly money, power,
social status are all versions of survival.
If I lose my social status, I'm the outcast of my tribe.
It's a social death, potentially a real death.
If I don't have enough money,
there's energy credits and coin to the realm.
And sex is if I lose in the sexual politics game,
I don't get to reproduce and effectively,
even if I live, my gene, my downline dies.
So all of those are still expressions
of binary life-death games.
So the question is, is how do we treat the losers better?
So how do we redesign the game
so that the losers don't lose so much?
Yes, and or you're decent to them,
and or you provide off-ramps,
you defy the whole classic thing
in the world wars is defeat with dignity, right?
How do you offer?
Provide your opponent with a golden bridge
to retreat across.
Yes, and a number of those things,
and including, and if we think about,
this is almost helpful in the negative,
where the atrocities that we remember through history,
or that you see in films and stories,
the absolute bad guy, bad guy,
is the one who breaks parlay, right?
Or, you know, the right to truce.
Like if the guy comes under a white flag
and you cut his head off and send him back,
you are the absolute bastard.
The ultimate defection.
Yes, we have all of these symbols and cultures
and norms and customs about how can you,
I mean, it's the idea of, you know, in England,
the idea of like, that's not exactly cricket, right?
To say it's not cricket, right?
It doesn't mean it's not the baton ball sport.
It means you're violating the spirit of the game.
So there can still be win-lose games
where you uphold the spirit of the infinite game,
even as you need to, because of resource constraints,
collapse into win-lose,
but you do still acknowledge the spirit of the higher game,
right?
And so, and again, we notice those in the violations
when people break truces,
when people murder all the women and children
in a seized city that surrenders,
versus saying you can go free,
we're just gonna execute or imprison the potential combatants.
Things like the bombing of hospitals and schools
and burning of churches, you know,
when people seek sanctuary in a religious structure,
that's supposed to be off limits.
I mean, it sounds like you're referring
to just sadism, essentially.
You know, or just scorched earth competition.
And the same thing with Walmart squeezing out
mom and pop hardware shops or whatever it would be like,
is there a place where enough's enough?
Is there a place where we've won, right?
But we are still allowing for the ecology
and the humanity for variants to persist,
versus winner takes all, winner takes everything.
What's your leading contender for the way to do that?
Is it just better regulations?
Like, you know, because clearly social norms
don't always hold true.
You know, most 99% of people don't,
you know, when someone waves a white flag,
they go, okay, I've won, you've lost, great.
And that's it.
But there's that 1% that will just for the sake of it.
You know, it's very rare in nature,
but you get the cat that does torture its animal.
You know, it's prey before it dies.
It seems like social norms will not be sufficient
to just prevent those from continually happening,
even though they're so damaging when they do.
Yeah, I mean, this is just a tiny cut at it, right?
This is infinitely complex.
I would say tops down and bottoms up.
Bottoms up, I think that we need to actually
re-institute the notion of healthy cultural shaming.
Because, and I came across,
there was a really interesting,
but called enchantment and exploitation.
And it was basically a story,
a very detailed analysis of northern New Mexico,
sheep herding, and then cattle raising
in like the late 19th century.
And basically the Hispanic communities
that had been there for ages, for centuries,
since original Spanish settlement,
were sheep and goat herders.
And then you kind of had the eastern,
east coast, capital backed cowboys and ranchers
with the barbed wire and all the range wars,
like who got to fence in, what stuff,
and claim the commons, right?
And the idea was that in the Hispanic sheep herding
communities, there was a natural checks and balances.
If one guy got greedy and started growing his flock
and all those things, but everybody was still,
they had to migrate their various flocks
through the same valleys and same watersheds
and this kind of stuff.
They would get teased, they'd get ribbed,
like, hey, what are you getting a little greedy?
Getting a little gordito over there, buddy,
like what you're doing or the aunties and the mothers
and the grandmothers would kind of weigh in
and there would just be this social calibration, right?
Of what was good for the commons, right?
And I think Brené Brown has maybe used these terms
exactly opposite than the way I've come to understand them.
But my distinction between guilt, right?
Which is I am unworthy, right?
Or bad, we definitely want to minimize guilt,
but shame, I have transgressed the norms of my tribe, right?
Is actually an essential tool of governance and correction
from Dunbar.
Yeah, I'm using the other way around as well, actually.
Okay, so yeah, however we would want to do it,
the idea of...
One of them is useful
and one of them is very destructive, yeah.
A natural check and balance
when I transgress the norms of my tribe.
That's important, right?
And we've diminished that in the whole,
no fat shaming, no selection,
no blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
all the things that we've said these days lately,
but the actual thing is like shame is an essential corrective
when somebody gets overly agentic,
egocentric and extractive, right?
So that's one thing.
And then tops down would be probably
the two policy decisions would just be massively
strengthen the antitrust,
statutes and prosecution.
I mean, Peter Teal famously said in zero to one,
like the best thing to have is a monopoly
because you basically set rates and control terms.
You're like, yeah, that's the best thing for that guy
and it sucks for everyone else.
So I think trust busting, whoops.
Trust busting is an essential skill
and then really the only way to kind of muter mollock,
right, is to go at the Milton Friedman precedent
of the singular and exclusive legal and fiduciary
responsibility of a board of governance of a corporation
is to return maximum shareholder value full stop.
That is the toxic cancer and legal precedent
that forces even otherwise well-intentioned people
into the zero sum games that we all live and die by.
You wrote recently about the issue with the 14th amendment,
which I assumed was just a uniformly good thing.
It forced into law the idea that a corporation
is a person with personhood,
and therefore its rights cannot be diminished
or threatened in any way.
And that has meant that we essentially humans
are in service to corporations
as opposed to the other way around.
Yeah, it's absolutely, it's the craziest story
I couldn't believe I'd never heard before.
And so the truth is, yeah, the 14th amendment
was famously the 13th and 14th
were at the end of the Civil War
and were about freeing the slaves
and granting citizenship and status
to former enslaved persons.
Right, good stuff.
Great stuff, but, and this is the weird thing
is even what you said isn't true.
It's not that the 14th amendment guaranteed
those same rights of personhoods to corporations.
It wasn't until 10 or 15 years after it was passed
in like 1866 or whenever it was
that there was a different completely freestanding lawsuit
on behalf of Leland Stanford,
who's the founder of Stanford University.
He was the robber baron railroad guys.
And there was going to be a tax on his railroad.
And basically this guy, he was a judge,
was gonna be in the Supreme Court,
ended up just being a lawyer and arguing for him.
I took on the case and then said,
oh, by the way, you know, 10, 15 years ago
when that Supreme Court passed the 14th amendment,
I was the clerk.
So I was there, all those other guys are dead now.
But here's the deal, let me tell you what they meant.
When they said persons, what they meant,
they changed it from individuals or people to persons
because what they meant was to include corporations.
And since the railroad, the Stanford Railroad Corporation
is a person, we're subject to the same rights
and protection, so you can't tax us.
He fudged it.
He even produced a little black book saying,
see this is in my diary, it says so, it didn't.
And they ran him out of town.
They said, you're an absolute bunk guy.
But the law clerk recorded it,
even though it didn't even work as legal precedent
12 years later, the law clerk recorded it as if it had.
And then that recording got dredged up.
Another 10 years later,
so now you're into like the 20th century,
you're like 1910, 1920.
And the Supreme Court held 32 cases or something like that
on the actual 14th Amendment,
informing the rights of free black persons
to have better treatment under the law.
They sat 247 defending corporations
with the rights of personhood.
So you're like, wait a second, the entire thing about,
and then even today, Citizens United,
which was the Supreme Court decision
on dark money into politics,
which basically has just blown up
the last decade of American politics.
Cause now any Fat Cat corporation,
any PAC can just fund infinitely
and don't have to say who we are
as we buy the votes of American democracy
because our free speech as a person is protected.
So you're like, oh shit,
this has had some gnarly knock on effects.
And it wasn't even the judicial intent at the time.
It was a lie on top of a lie on top of a typo
that then just got picked up and run with
and given us not only American case law,
corporate case law for the 20th and 21st century,
but really now the precedent
for the entire world's protection of corporations.
So it's the most upside down thing
you could possibly imagine.
Are you concerned about the direction of AI specifically?
Where do you lie on the doomer
to rapid accelerationist curve?
Yeah, I mean, my sense on that is,
I only, I mean, I allow myself a handful of things
to go deeply on and then I just tend not to get cluttered.
So I don't, I don't read papers
on CRISPR weaponized bio weapons.
I don't read, you know, there's just stuff.
I'm like, yep, it's out there
and someone's thinking about this, just not me.
And so the thing that consents me the most debate
about AI is the least sexy case, right?
Because if you, you know, you talk about,
oh, is it going to be Skynet?
Is it going to take over?
Is it hal 2000?
All the science fiction and, you know,
pop culture references, we grasp for it
and make sense of it, right?
But the one that terrifies me is just, you know,
that documentary and I forget what it was called,
but it was basically on the Cambridge Analytica scandal.
And it just went behind the scenes
as to how the term crooked Hillary got workshopped
by their data and analysis.
It was the dark marketing agency that was affiliated
with Steve Bannon and Cambridge Analytica.
It did not spring out of nowhere.
It was workshopped with quantitative analysis.
They came that out, they sewed it,
they pushed it out through all the interconnected media
outlets and then that became the crooked Hillary
locker up emails.
You can make a case that that single quant AI enabled
decision broke Western democracies.
You know, the knock on effects
that we are still living through, you know,
everything from Erdogan to Orban to Bolsonaro,
like all of this was made possible
because that meme was seeded and sown and took root.
And you can be on the one side,
cheering at one side, you know, lamenting it,
but that's how it happened.
And so you're like, oh, shit.
When we talk about can AI, you know,
what could it possibly do to us
other than becoming a sinister, self aware thing
that's secretly launching nuclear codes?
You're like, we could just get much better slash worse
at that.
Right, weaponized memes.
It's just weaponized memes and the collapse.
Informational weapons of mass destruction.
Yeah, yeah.
To me, so that's such a low bar.
I mean, the answer is sort of, we're already there.
There's no avoiding that.
And who knows what will happen.
And obviously Jonathan Heights work, you know,
specifically concentrating on adolescents
who have, who were basically super digital natives
and coming up.
I mean, he said, I don't think on the record,
but to a mutual friend of ours,
he said, look, basically any girl
that has gone through adolescents
on Instagram and TikTok is developmentally damaged
by that experience.
And you're just like, that is heartbreaking.
You know, and they just released,
his research organization just released a piece
I was looking at before coming here today.
And it was just these two great,
it was just different age cohorts.
So sort of 18 to 24, 24 to 30, 30.
And basically the, if you were 18 to 24,
you were in either those cohorts,
you were in hockey stick increases
for anxiety, depression, self-harm, those kind of things.
The 35 and older was just trundling along.
It wasn't great, but it was baseline.
And you just, and you could just see it.
And you're like, oh my gosh.
So like we will be reaping that harvest
as they marry or don't as they settle into careers
or don't as they have children and raise them or don't.
So, you know, just as a citizenry, you know,
we have all of these toxic inputs already in the bank.
And then to your conversation with Daniel Schmacktenberger
about, you know, the fact that AI is just a force multiplier
on top of all the existential risk challenges.
And this is going to make all of the bad things
as well as the good things, you know,
but certainly all of the bad things as well,
that much more possible by more and more,
less and less skilled or malicious people
to have the kinds of impacts that could tip the scales.
Those are concerning.
So I almost feel like it's the sort of,
it's the statistically incremental
and damn near inevitable stuff
that if I was going to be a betting man,
I would say those are quite likely to happen
and can have, they're not sexy.
You're not going to make a mini series about them,
but they are the ones that could potentially undo us,
whether or not the big time, you know,
more cinematic epic ones ever come to pass.
Where do you think we should start from
in terms of inoculating us ourselves?
And I mean that from an individual perspective,
all the way up to sort of families,
whether it's businesses to societies,
from these kinds of malevolent forces,
let's say, you know, people who are intentionally
trying to create either self-serving
or just straight up, you know, omniscient or memes.
What are you personally doing
to inoculate yourself from those kind of things?
Yeah, I mean, you know,
this is obviously a ludicrously large
and impossible situation for all of us to be in.
Simply the things that I'm actually doing,
so never mind grand philosophies, just,
I remember Yuval Harari a few years ago,
I just read something where he said he just,
he doesn't consume content that isn't in a book.
He doesn't read anything online?
No, basically he's like,
if it's worth reading or learning about,
I will buy the best book I can find on it and read that.
And I just thought, that's a phenomenal,
that's kind of like slow data,
you know, like slow food movements,
all those kind of things, you're just like, that is good.
And I literally feel different and I feel better
when I'm reading stuff in books,
even if they're topical, you know, it just feels soothing.
It feels more measured.
It feels more, it feels often more detailed.
I get the gist of a full idea or concept or framework.
So while I violate that rule all the time every day,
as I scroll my news feed to see what the hell's going on,
I'm aspirationally in that direction of just unplug
and go into slow, the slow thinking movement, right?
Another is particularly with that crazy making overwhelm,
right, of things are exponentially better and worse
and do I, you know, plan my, how do I plan my day?
I did notice and I've noticed this
on a lot of our colleagues and friends
that the people I know that are sort of quote unquote,
fighting the good fight, right?
They're out there in the front, they're in the public,
they're out there drawing attention
to critical issues, those kind of things.
They're often getting kind of spun up
and burned out themselves, right?
It's a lot to hold and to hold the urgency
and the responsibility is more than most of our psyches
and nervous systems can handle, right?
And I thought, good Lord, if I had a terminal diagnosis,
like if I knew I had a year to live,
the classic kind of thought experiment, how would I act?
And then, and the simple answer is that for most of us,
we would be more free, we would be more courageous,
we would be more truthful, we'd be more heartfelt,
we'd be more adventuresome, we'd do all the things, right?
The outside more, we would travel.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Hot to hearts and bucket lists and you name it, right?
And I thought, okay, well, let's say that 30 years from now,
we really are in that totally bleak wheels off situation.
But I look out my window today
and it's actually pretty beautiful.
Sun is still coming up, the moon is setting,
there's waves to be served, there's powder skiing to be had,
there's music to listen to or share, there's people,
there's loved ones in our lives.
If we pissed away these days,
ringing our hands about what might yet be but isn't.
I mean, it's the old Mark Twain thing.
He's like, I'm an old man
and I've experienced a great many sorrows
only some of which actually ever happened.
You know, we're kind of in that neck of the woods.
And I sort of felt like, okay, so the simplest is for me,
it's almost the hospice tour of the world and life.
Like about six months ago,
I just kind of set down the super intense urgency
that I had been feeling for several years,
including the writing of that last book
where I was like always looking for the solution,
always looking for the way through, right?
Where was the gap?
Where was the seam and the climbing that crazy mountain
that would go and that we can make it through?
Because every single one of them that I tracked pinched out
and it was almost always Moloch, right?
It was like, you basically, his fingerprints are everywhere
where you're like, oh, fuck, that's hypothetically possible
but we're just not gonna do it, are we?
We're not gonna do it
because of a perverse incentives.
We're not gonna do it
because of greed or, you know,
all of the things you're just like, fucking God damn, why?
We could, right?
We absolutely could
but the statistically my gut sense on are we going to?
Incredibly low given current conditions.
So step one was like feed the holy, like celebrate life.
Shame on us while there is still goodness, truth
and beauty in abundance, right?
Not to be sucking the mirror out of life
and not to be putting those memories in the bank.
And at the same time, we can never give up hoping
because if we give up hope
then that adjacent possibility can never happen.
Like for certain is nails in the coffin
if we just go into despair and cynicism
or even just hedonism, like fuck it while the room burns
I'm just gonna party.
Like those are unconscionable decisions.
So can we use our feeding of the holy, the idea of like
I'm gonna bear witness to the glory of creation, right?
And the absolute heart-rending poignancy
of this human experience.
Can I use that, right?
To in some tiny, small, insignificant but profound way
ritually keep the world on its axis, right?
As most indigenous cultures did, we pray,
we make these offerings, we do these things
so that the sun keeps rising, right?
So that the rain keeps falling
so that the crops grow, like can we participate
in the wonder of that creative cycle
while we are fortunate enough
to still have that opportunity and choice
and then oh, by the way, leave space for grace, right?
Because it has always happened that way
and funnily enough, this was also Yuval just mentioned
he typed something maybe just about AI like a month ago
and he said, we have forever all of human history
all of human civilization and culture
is living in someone else's dream.
You know, free markets was a concept, you know?
Like the democracy, civil rights,
everything that we take as the memetic norms
of our reality came up and someone dreamed them first.
So the leaving space for grace is
and how can we dream a way through
that we cannot see from here?
We cannot, because at least I can't, I've looked, right?
And most of the people I look up to have been looking
and if you really behind closed doors sit down
with most of those folks, it's far grimmer
than even the headlines encapsulate, right?
But the reality is, is we are still amazingly adaptive
cunning little monkeys with opposable thumbs
and brilliant prefrontal cortexes.
So we can't see from here what adaptations,
what permutations, what mutations will happen around the bend?
And this goes back to, you know, Jim Stockdale
is Admiral Stockdale.
He was the highest ranking POW in Vietnam
and he actually went on to be
a vice presidential candidate at one point.
But the Stockdale paradox was he noticed
that in those North Vietnamese POW camps
that the pessimists didn't live,
because they were like, oh, I'm fucked, you know,
sure enough, they snuffed it.
He said, but the really interesting insight
was the optimist didn't live either.
Because what happened is they'd be like,
we're gonna get the boys home for Christmas
or Easter or July the fourth
and those dates would come and go.
And then they would just collapse.
They would lose all ability to maintain hope
after their hope redemption came and went.
And he said, the paradox was the people who survived
were ruthlessly realistic about short-term realities
while remaining relentlessly optimistic
about the long-term possibility.
I don't know when we're gonna get out,
but we're gonna go home.
And that is, to me, is sort of all of us right now.
We don't, like, we are in a massive intersecting
chaotic and complex tight spot, right?
And it's the confluence of every intentional
and unintentional quality of our civilization to date.
And we're just huddling off the cliff, no skid marks.
Now, whether or not we can figure out
how to turn into Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, you know,
and sprout wings or turn into a boat
or do something else, we can't see from here.
And I wouldn't give it super long odds.
We may just get subject into the trash compacture of history,
right, but it is on us, it's incumbent on us
to maintain a thread of hope and resilience.
And just so that doesn't seem super pie in the sky,
you're like, okay, to me,
where we can look for the most compelling examples of that.
I mean, A, a POW in Vietnam,
that's a pretty reality-tested one,
but the other are what are fourth world nations or people?
So, right, first world was the U.S., second world,
Soviet Union, third world was everybody else,
AKA all the poor folks that weren't worth scrapping over
for the first two, but the fourth world
were literally diaspora peoples, the Tibetans,
the Kurds, the Roma, right, the Rohingya,
like the all first nations in the Americas, right,
where we are uprooted from our home
and we are dispossessed people
and placeless people in many instances, right?
And so the question there is like, okay, how did those,
in fact, we're just about to be at an event with Bob Thurman,
who's the preeminent Tibetan scholar
at Columbia University's Uma Thurman's father,
but he's a brilliant, wonderful man and scholar
and was largely responsible for the Dalai Lama's mood,
bringing the Dharma to the West
and all of the free Tibet movements
and those kinds of things
and have actually asked him to speak exactly
on this subject, right, which is like,
how do you maintain cultural continuity?
How do you maintain love and compassion?
How do you maintain hope for future generations
that haven't yet been born
while this generation is in the absolute suck of it?
How do we maintain radical hope?
And the key is, you know, as Westerners,
coming to the end of the tether
of our hyper-consumptive, hyper-individualist society,
the last thing we should fucking do
is do some ideological neocolonialism of like,
hey, oh, you poor bastards,
that we really gave the short end to over the last 300 years,
you seem to have figured out some stuff
about how to endure conflict and hardship
and chaos, which by the way, we were sort of responsible for,
but now we're realizing we've cooked our own goose
and can you give us any pointers or tips?
Like that we definitely don't want to do, you know,
because it just becomes, right,
the last gasp of neocolonial extraction
and fetishization, right, of like,
oh, you wonderful wise ones who've endured so much,
do teach us, you know, like that would be insufferable.
To your point about, do flow states or do peak states,
can they contribute to this, right?
An example would be the Native American church, right,
which in the late 19th century started as the peyote cult
and it was, and Kwanapakko was a Comanche
who helped spread it and it was literally
after Indian removal to the reservation systems,
most of their world will have used
connections to their place,
their buffalo hunt or whatever,
whatever ecosystem they were part of, shattered
and they were moved to bum-fucked wastelands
in, you know, in Oklahoma or all these other places.
And yet the connection to the peyote ceremony, right,
and the connection and the singing and the prayer
in the TP, right, was a, and it was highly syncretic,
so it also included elements of Christianity
and connection with Jesus and all of these things,
was a profound healing modality
and it allowed there to be rehabilitation,
restoration and community out of a culture
that was otherwise in collapse.
And so those kinds of moments and those kinds of movements
can be, I think, profoundly informative and instructive.
How do we digest our grief?
How do we metabolize our trauma, individual and collective,
and there's quite likely going to be more of it, right?
In fact, again, Zach Stein has said
we may be entering an era where billions watch
while millions die, right?
And that's actually optimistic.
You know, if you think about the UN's reports
on climate refugees for every additional one degree Celsius,
we're expected to have an additional billion climate refugees,
billion, you know, there's only eight of us total.
So like that gets large in a hurry.
So for sure you could say that fourth nation,
diaspora peoples, do hold insights
and to acknowledge that none of this is neat and tidy.
And one of the questions I intend to be asking Bob Thurman
about this is what about the Tibetan nuns and monks
who have engaged in self-immolation?
There have been hundreds in the last decade
who have said, okay, Dalai Lama, we revere you.
And we absolutely get the long infinite game.
Maybe the Chinese invasion was actually a part of the impetus
to bring the Dharma to the West.
And maybe this is, you know, good luck, bad luck, who knows?
Maybe this is all going to work out for the best,
but fucking hell, man, this is genocide, right?
And we have to take witness.
And there have even been monks in Dharamsala, younger ones
who are like, actually, we need to engage in some terrorist acts.
We actually need to fight back the Compa, right?
The Com people in Tibet were actually, you know,
they were badasses.
They were like the Lakota of the Tibetan Plateau.
And, you know, with all sorts of interesting cahoots
with the CIA and everything else during the Cold War,
actively, aggressively and highly effectively fought
the Chinese.
And it wasn't until Kissinger betrayed them completely
as Nixon went to China.
And then suddenly it was like, oh, we don't need you anymore.
That those guys all got clipped.
So the questions as to how do we navigate
the decades to century ahead?
How do we do it maintaining hope?
I would say the first is unplug from our craziness online,
be more of an analog human to the extent that you're capable,
live as if it's your last year on earth
and suck the marrow out of all the things that are beautiful
and wonderful and true while we still have them.
Without falling into hedonism.
Without falling into hedonism and...
Where you're becoming even more extractive.
Exactly.
And then also, like, let's start girding our loins.
What does resilient culture look like?
And my sense is, is that just a psychological categorical
analysis is that we're actually not built to handle
the stresses and the challenges that we're facing right now
because we're almost 100 years into being conditioned
as fragmented, isolated, rational consumer individuals.
So we've all been conditioned to almost be like potted plants,
you know, and we're wrapped in plastic and our root balls
are all bunched up and we have to rely on artificial watering
and artificial light and artificial nutrient, right?
But if you think, and of course we blow over
and of course we get mold and mildew and fungus
and all these things.
And of course we're not resilient
and a shadow of our former selves.
But when you realize, oh, we have to take our stand
and a stand of relationships and networks and ecology.
And you know, the beautiful, we took our kids to do a canopy
tour in the Redwoods in California a few years ago.
And the interpreter was like, hey, here's the deal.
And this was before that book Overstory came out.
It was before all of these neat books that have been
acknowledging this.
And she was just like, yeah, here's the deal.
The Redwoods that are down on the creek shunt water
to the ones that are up on the ridgeline in a dry.
When one of them gets attacked by a beetle or a pest
or a fungus, the others instantly understand
and develop antibodies.
And even albino Redwood trees, and they point into one,
they're like, evolution, you know, the law of the jungle,
that motherfucker should not live.
A plant that cannot conduct photosynthesis
does not get to spread its genes.
And the entire ecosystem of the Redwood Grove funneled food
to the albino tree.
And it was not as big as the biggest, but it was thriving.
So you're like, okay, so what if we moved more towards that?
Right, because all of our anxiety, depression,
diseases of despair, all of these are coming
because we're isolated, potted plants.
And if it's, I mean, mine now,
and that's how we've been conditioned as consumers.
Every itch has a scratch, and if not, I call them,
I pull a Becky and call the manager, right?
Or a Karen, right?
Like, I'm upset, I want mine.
My rights, my rights, yeah.
That is not gonna be up to the task.
But if you go back to, again,
I mean, think of any of those diaspora peoples,
like I guarantee you their lives have sucked.
Roaming, intransition, et cetera.
Why do they keep going?
It's the Israelites and the, you know,
Moses in the desert for 40 years,
it's we keep on going even if we won't get ours.
And this goes back to that Stockdale paradox.
We keep going on behalf of our children's children.
And it feels like integrating some form
of like seven generational awareness, right?
Which is the idea of like, hey, I'm acting,
and not just seven generations ahead,
which is the way sometimes people describe that,
but three generations behind me.
What did my parents, my grandparents,
and my great-grandparents do to give me even
this crack at life?
Almost certainly for most of us,
they had to embrace harder things than we did.
For sure.
Right?
So you're like, okay, hat tip and gratitude,
and let me not fuck up the lead you gave me.
And then what's the, and I stand in the center,
and then what's three generations ahead of me?
I can absolutely wrap my head around my children, right?
Which is biologically hard-wired.
I can even think of my grandchildren.
That's not a stretch at all.
So add one more.
And now I am in the center of that seven generational orbit
or ecosystem bridging time and space.
And I now have, I'm galvanized in my responses, right?
So my stress levels, my fear,
my sense of even my own narrative,
all get expanded and buffered.
And they've done studies that show that children
who know the family story, interestingly,
who know just not just their parents,
but their grandparents as well,
they're less depression, less anxiety, higher SAT scores,
higher attendance and completion of university.
It's literally like being inoculated.
And the story, interestingly,
the family stories that are the most inoculating,
they have the most positive effect on outcomes.
This isn't like, we kick ass, you know, the go team USA.
It's like, hey, this is us.
This is who's come before you.
We've had our shares of ups and downs, and we're still here.
Like those kinds of stories of triumph and disaster
and perseverance are the ones that actually galvanize us
the best and you're like, oh, that's beautiful.
So really, I would say that the best way forward
into our future is to not in a nostalgic way,
but in a respectful and intentional way,
is to dust off and go back to the past
and realize that we cannot weather this storm
as isolated potted plants.
And we have to put down our roots
into an ecology of relationship, both in space,
the stand in the stand, you know,
we take our stand in a stand and then time,
the seven generations.
And then that, again, doesn't let us off any of the hooks,
but it at least gives us a fighting chance.
I think a large issue for many people is that they aren't,
you know, they don't have their family unit nearby.
You know, my parents live in the UK.
I live in America now.
If I'm having children, how do I give them
the same upbringing that I had with my grandparents,
you know, caught for a while up the road?
A large part of people listening to this
are probably like, yes, absolutely.
I want to be, you know, more located in time and space
with both my ancestors and, you know,
physically in the same city as the people
who I consider my crew, but that is not possible.
And how do you marry that up with, you know,
online can fit that, bridge that gap to an extent,
but then it's making us be more online,
which as you were saying earlier,
is something we need to reduce
because it is not good for us.
So how do we resolve that tension?
I think online to coordinate real life
is a beautiful level up, right?
Online to get lost in the real, you know,
endless looking glasses,
a refractory projected digital narcissism, not so healthy.
So the idea of the ability to find and coordinate
among like-minded folks is beautiful.
And then, and also, you know, just to kind of expand
our notion of what our relations might look like
is that, you know, humans have always been
these crazy mashups, tribes and bands.
I mean, even the notion of like non-chattel slavery, right?
So slavery has been around for an awfully long time
before there was just like the West African movement, right?
And slavery as it was almost always practiced
was basically we beat you in battle
and we're either going to torture you and kill you
or we're going to adopt you and you become one of our own.
And in the same that there's just been recent findings
on like Viking gravesites.
And they're like, oh, whoa, there's way more angles
and Saxons in the gene pool of Scandinavia than we thought.
And what that was was it was, you know,
bringing back slaves, bringing back workers,
adopting or marrying often women,
having children, interbreeding, all of these things.
And even millennials these days, right?
The friends giving and chosen family, right?
So those two working terms exist
because people are saying, gosh, man, my family of origin,
bit of a crapshoot, maybe kind of dysfunctional,
especially if I had different gender identities
or anything non-conforming to the culture of the place,
I had to leave that in order to find myself
and find my people.
That's a beautiful notion, but it's new old.
You know, it's a new expression of what is an ancient thing,
which is we always sort of pitched in
and got on with who we are around.
So even if our biological families are incompatible
or geographically distant and those kind of things,
chosen family, chosen kinship,
those kinds of things can be beautiful, you know,
nutrients that we all sort of, you know,
make us stronger and healthier.
What books have been most formative to your thinking?
Almost helpful for you in the last couple of years,
particularly in finding this healthy middle ground
of maintaining hope, but without getting lost
in the constantly looking for solutions.
I think the one, and I've been recommending this
to everybody lately is a book called Bittersweet
by Susan Kane, and she wrote a book called Quiet,
which was like being an introvert in an extroverted world.
It was New York Times bestseller
for like two and a half years or something,
and Bittersweet is her most recent.
And it was her original premise was,
why is it that Leonard Cohen songs make me cry,
but I love them so much anyway, right?
And then at the same time as she was writing the book,
she lost both her father and her brother to COVID.
So she experienced actual real loss,
and then she was also on this sort of more
philosophical journey.
And her whole thing, it's a little like Pamela Chodron,
and like when things fall apart,
it's just this beautiful notion of like,
hey, we often think of like Maslow's hierarchy
and self-transcendence and all these wonderful things,
but you know, the whole toxic positivity thing is real.
And she's like, actually, there is this bittersweet spot
of being a human, and it is this yearning
for something that is beautiful and not yet, right?
And this sort of residing in all of the constraints
and limitations and heartache and heartbreak
of this actual experience.
And that is gorgeous, appropriate, healthy.
And it's just this wonderful, just kind of like,
ah, you mean I don't need to fix this, solve this,
biohack this, transcend this,
daily affirmation is I can just be in that ennui, you know?
And so to me, I feel like that is super helpful
to all of us who, you know, you just scroll through Instagram
or TikTok or Twitter for this,
and everybody's just shouting at you,
you're unasked for, you know, like,
here's the things you're doing,
and here's what I think you should do,
and turn your easy stops and click on the links
and likes and swipe, and you know, you're just like,
oh, dear God.
So I think that one's beautiful.
I like, I really enjoyed David Graber's
dawn of everything, that big meta analysis
of just human civilization.
He was one of the advisors for Occupy back in,
whenever that was, 08 or 10.
So he's definitely got an anarchist bent,
but his whole thing of like,
he basically just critiques
the endless rise of civilization narrative.
And he's like, man, we've been trying all kinds
of different formulations,
and we've been coming at this,
and we've been, we got into agriculture,
and we abandoned it, and we went back to hunting.
We started with cities in Gobekli Tepe,
but we didn't have farming, we didn't have priests,
and then we kind of, we buried them all and moved on,
and we've just, just this idea
that we are constantly innovating,
and that there's all sorts of decentralized ways
that humans have done the human thing,
instead of we were in caves, and then cities,
and then priests, and then cathedrals,
like he just critiques that and dismantles it
in really, I think, fun and provocative ways.
Do you know Tyson Yankaporta?
No.
He's an Aboriginal scholar.
How indigenous thinking can save the world?
In fact, if you're asking for another book,
I would say Sand Talk.
Sand Talk?
Sand Talk.
Sand Talk.
Yeah, and he said something,
and this goes back to that seven generations idea,
but he says, you know, sort of playfully,
it was sort of like you Westerners, right?
You're wrapped around the axle of all these childish questions.
Like, who are we, and what's the universe,
and what's the meaning of life,
and where do we go when we die, and all these things,
these are things that any young person
in any intact tradition would already know,
understand, and trust the answers to those questions.
Like the idea, this goes back to the potted plants thing,
that we're all sort of isolated and fragmented
and trying to figure this out for ourselves, by ourselves.
He's like, those are ludicrously pretentious questions
to presume you're just gonna take on and solve for yourself.
You know, like the answers are in our elders,
the answers are in our ancestors,
the answers are in our gods and rituals and worship.
This is who we are.
This is the way the world works.
This is why we're here.
This is where we go.
This is where we came from, you know?
And just that idea that that's a sort of almost adolescent
cubris that we can and ought to
figure that shit out from scratch.
Because I think it's fascinating.
I just heard that a few weeks ago,
and I'm still like percolating on the implications.
Okay, do you think we are living in a cosmological game?
And if so, what do you think the purpose of the game is?
Do I believe we're living in a cosmological game?
Yeah, are we in some kind of game?
And if so, what is the objective of the game?
I mean, the old hippie bumper sticker,
like life's the school and loves the lesson.
You know, I heard that one.
Yeah, I don't think it's half bad
if you want to, you know, commit to the bit, right?
Yes, this is a game and this is the purpose.
And in fact, John Lilly, who's the famous slash infamous
University of Pennsylvania PhD, Psycho-naught,
LSD with dolphins, inventor of float tanks.
That guy who went longer than almost any other human
ever has since and come back to tell about it,
went as far as divining.
I mean, he would intramuscularly inject ketamine
and spend hours at a time in float tanks in deep space,
communicating with multiple levels of entities.
And because he was a rational scientist,
was also mapping it.
Now, if you look at his later shit,
which you can find on YouTube,
he's wearing like a Davey Crockett Coonskin camp
and looks like a Lysergic Shoemaker's elf.
So like definitely, he went there,
but he even articulated the Earth Coincidence Control Office.
He was this system that oversaw Earth.
And you can even go to his Wikipedia page,
just John Lilly Wikipedia, and it lists there
the eight rules that he received from Echo
from the Earth Coincidence Control Office.
It was like, everything that's happening in your life
is happening for a reason.
You know, like the key is not to forget.
Like everything here is training you
and training you for purpose built shit.
We control the large coincidences in your life.
You control the small coincidences.
And it's just this whole like rules of the game.
And you're like, oh shit, that is awesome, right?
So if that were the case, wouldn't that be amazing?
My personal situation is I'm almost in the sort of
the antithesis of Pascal's wager, right?
So in Blaise Pascal, right, famously said,
better to believe in God in case he's there,
then not believe in him and burn in hell for my doubts, right?
And I would almost sort of say, and I don't,
this wasn't a choice.
I just kind of have ended up here.
It's almost more like Nietzsche's wager, right?
A better to believe that God is dead, right?
And if it turns out I've got guardian angels
looking out for me, fucking bonus, you know?
So I would say, what's the MVP?
What's my minimum viable philosophy, right?
That gets me through the night.
And to me, I don't know.
And I'm not sure any of us can, but I'm pretty certain.
I haven't yet figured out with any declarative certainty
whether there is a bigger picture,
whether there is, you know, the goddess is alive
and magic is afoot, whether all of these things.
And that's not to say I haven't had
life-changing, shaping, and informing
profound non-ordinary experiences.
I haven't, I do.
But epistemically, where they live
and what that means about larger orders or truth claims,
I don't know, I'm an agnostic gnostic, right?
I've had the experience, the undeniable truth
of effing the ineffable, right?
And I have no fucking idea what the implications are of that.
So for me, the MVP, my minimum viable philosophy
is just I choose to believe,
and this is, I'm willing to like double click on this.
Like this is where I end fact-based assertions
or evidentiary argument.
I choose to believe that a universe
with a little more goodness, truth, and beauty in it
is better than a universe with a little less.
And then that gives me all I need to know to act
and to act in hopefully a direction
that more aligns with that.
I'm not saying that is the truth of it.
I'm not saying that is validated or stamped
by a higher power.
I'm just, I choose to believe that, feels right-ish.
And it's enough to govern all my actions from here.
And now if it turned out that like,
I crossed the pearly gates and I get a little pat on the head
like, oh, Jamie, you were such a sweetheart.
You tried and you struggled and you did this all alone
and you never prayed to all of us.
We were just sitting here ready to cheer you on.
It would have been so much fucking easier
if you'd just relaxed and realized you were on rails.
And I would have gone, oh, stoned me, right?
The joke's on me.
But for me, it's enough to get out of bed.
Right.
And I take that, I would rather be pleasantly surprised
than gutted when I went to lean on something
that wasn't there.
Beautiful.
Thank you so much.
Thanks for listening, everyone.
And of course, thank you to Jamie for joining me today.
I've linked in the show notes below
all of the sort of resources that we talked about
and do check out his books, Stealing Fire
and Recapture the Rapture.
They are excellent.
Also check out flowgenomeproject.com
and also his sub-stack, again, link below.
And thanks as always to my wonderful editor, Raymond Way,
for putting everything together on this,
dealing with all my camera snafus, which always happen.
And to you all, make sure you subscribe
on whatever channel you like to watch or listen to this too
so that you don't miss the next one.
And until then, may your life be full of win-wins.
Thank you.
