Have you ever wondered why robots don't get cancer?
After this conversation, you will.
In this conversation, I had the privilege to speak with Dr. Michael Levine, one of the
most innovative and fascinating biologists I've ever met.
Dr. Michael Levine is a professor at Tufts University and an expert in the field of developmental
biology and regenerative medicine.
Throughout our conversation, we discussed his groundbreaking research, including the
role and notion of bioelectricity.
What is it and why it is so profoundly important, both to biology and medicine.
His theories about the self and free will are mind-blowing.
And some of the things we discussed today sound like science fiction, but let me assure
you one thing, they are not.
They are true science, backed up with great results.
Hi and welcome to my channel.
My name is Dr. Roy Jozebic.
In this channel, I converse with the most interesting and influential people from all
around the world, discussing science, biology, artificial intelligence, and more.
If you find this talk interesting, please consider subscribing, hit the bell button
and be part of this great community.
And now, without further ado, Professor Michael Levine.
Okay, one, two, three.
Hi, Michael, and thank you so much for being on the show.
How are you today?
I'm great.
Thank you so much for having me.
It's a pleasure.
Before we start, since I see this shirt over and over again in many interviews, could we
tell us what are we seeing on the shirt?
It's just a normal B or there is something, it's not a normal B?
Well, this is the Diverse Intelligence Summer Institute.
And this is a student named Brenda made this T-shirt for a community of, it's quite an
amazing community of people who gather to study what we call Diverse Intelligence, which
is intelligence and unfamiliar embodiments.
And so this is a kind of, you can see it's a kind of chimeric B, right?
It's a little robotic and a little, and so these are the kinds of things that I'm very
interested in is novel, novel ways of mind enter the physical world.
You know, I wrote a book about intelligence in Hebrew, it's called Intelligence, the
Unpleasant Truth, but listening to you, you had another definition, James Watson, I think
definition of intelligence is the idea to pursue the same goal by different, from different
perspective.
Could you please elaborate on this definition of intelligence?
Sure.
Well, of course, many definitions of intelligence that I'm not claiming this is the only one,
but one that I like as being useful for research is one that was really used by William James,
the psychologist and philosopher.
And his definition is the ability to achieve the same goal by different means.
And so I like this very much because first of all, it doesn't say anything about what
kind of brain you have or how, where you came from or any of these very specific things.
It tries to understand what is common to all intelligent beings.
And I think that what is common to all agents, no matter what they're made of, no matter
they've all designed, whatever, is the ability to pursue goals with different degrees of
competency.
How clever are you?
And somebody, somebody had this great quote, and I wish I use it all the time, and I wish
I could remember who said it, he said, it's the difference between two magnets trying
to come together and Romeo and Juliet trying to come together, right?
You see that in between there's a spectrum of how much cleverness can you expect when
you put a barrier in this process, minimal for the magnets and quite considerable for
Romeo and Juliet.
So that's the idea.
Oh, this is great.
By the way, the magnets do come together eventually, but this is another story.
You keep mentioning in your interviews, and I listen to many of them as a preparation,
the books that you read when you were 17, the body electric electromagnetism and the
foundation of life.
This is a book by Robert Baker.
And when you speak about the book, you said, listen, I read it when I was 17, and it's like,
this is the origin of me seeking for bio electricity.
Could you please elaborate more on this book and the influence that it had on you?
Because just one book at age of 17 just paved the way to you as a researcher.
Yeah.
So I'll take a slight step backwards and say that my fundamental interest, which I've had
long before that since I was quite a little kid, is really in the way that mind exists
in the physical world.
Okay.
I wanted to know what it is that makes engineering different from biology or what they have in
common and how it is that creatures made of physical things can have preferences, goals,
behaviors, and so on.
Bio electricity is one way in which here on earth, we can see the scaling of goals from
little tiny goals that individual cells have to very large goals that organs and then of
course, whole bodies have.
So bio electricity is very important, but it's just one particular way that that happens.
And there were actually several books.
The very first book that I encountered on this was a book by William, by H.S. Burr, Harold
Saxton Burr, and this guy worked in the 1930s and 40s.
He basically had the first good voltmeter and he went around measuring everything, plants,
rabbits, tumors, patients, and psychiatric institutions, everything he could manage.
And on the basis of this, he wrote a remarkable book, I think the guy had a crystal ball.
He foresaw with this very simple technique many of the things that we've discovered
since then, just amazing.
And so this made a huge impression on me, but not until I saw Becker's book did I understand
that there was actually a considerable body of work after Burr.
Burr's book came out in I think 1936 or something like that.
And what's amazing about the body electric, which is Robert Becker's book, is that he
talks about a lot of the people that have done work since then.
So all the greats of early bio electricity.
And on reading that book, it became obvious to me that this was an actual field that could
be pursued now.
Now also that book has, half of the book is about electromagnetic dangers of field exposures
and things like this.
And I'm not really into that.
I think that doesn't actually have anything to do with bio electricity.
I think that was kind of a red herring, really.
But the part where he goes over how it is that electricity is the basis of embryonic
development, regeneration, cancer, this really kind of put me on the path that that's an
entry point to studying the things I really want to study.
Okay.
So we must, I think, go from there to your interview with Chris from TED.
We have the notion of DNA as being the building blocks of everything human or everything that
is alive, basically.
And the idea is that you have this AGCT, the sequence, the big sequence of DNA.
And with this sequence, you can build everything.
This is like the hard wire hardware of everything alive.
And then after the concept of DNA of genes, we have the concept of epigenetics.
The idea is that some genes can be activated or turned on and off in certain scenarios.
But then that you go beyond or above this level and say, listen, we have another level
of complexity or flexibility, which is bio electricity.
The idea is that cells, the human cells or the just cells communicate and can modify
themselves according to scenarios or the environment with electrical signal.
Is it true?
Am I saying it right?
You're saying it right, but I want to draw a stronger distinction between bio electricity
and genetics and epigenetics on the one hand and bio electricity and physiology more generally
on the other.
The big difference is this.
It isn't, I think, it isn't just another layer of complexity or another set of physical
events that you have to understand in addition to your chemistry and things like that.
There's a really fundamental distinction here.
And let's look at two pieces.
One piece is if we ask what is encoded by these various layers?
So if you look at the genome, what you see encoded are protein sequences.
We can read genomes now, and it's been clear for many, many decades that what's in the
genome are not things about whether you have eyes and how many eyes and where they're located
relative to your feet and how many toes you have.
None of this is directly in the genome.
When you look at the genome, what you see is specification of proteins, little tiny
hardware components that every cell gets to have.
So I'm going to make the analogy and there are places where this analogy breaks down
and there are other places where this is a good analogy.
I'm going to make an analogy to a computer because it's familiar to everybody.
What the genome does is define the lowest level components in your computer.
So it will define things like the silicon, the transistors, and this kind of thing.
It defines the very lowest hardware level.
And then you have a different question.
You have, OK, that's nice.
That tells us about the hardware.
But now I see this thing running some sort of program and doing some sort of things that
may be very simple.
It may be quite intelligent.
Maybe it's running in GPT-3 who knows what it's running.
How do I explain this by reference to what's in the hardware?
And we know that the hardware is essential.
Without the hardware, nothing happens.
But we also know that most people who operate computers don't do it with a soldering iron.
And so you ask this question, why not?
Why do we not do what we did in the 40s and 50s?
And if you see a picture of somebody programming computer in those days, what are they doing?
They're pulling wires, right?
They're connecting wires in and out.
And this is because, yes, you can interface with this thing at the bare metal, at the
lowest level of the hardware.
But what we learn from computer science is that there are actually much more convenient
higher levels of organization here.
And specifically, there are some things known as algorithms, that the computer, right, it's
very useful to think of algorithms and to write algorithms.
If you're really focused, I give you this example, if you're hiring programmers, coders
for your company, and somebody comes in and they say, I'm a reductionist, I have this
Laplacian view of the world where I don't believe, what's this algorithm?
There's no algorithm, there's electrons, and there's Maxwell's equations of the electron
motion.
There's no algorithm, there's just electrons, right?
Would you ever hire that person for your software company?
Of course not.
They would never write anything.
I wouldn't hire anyone who writes in assembly language.
So, of course, if somebody does not believe that there is an algorithm that makes the
electrons dance to the logic of the algorithm, they're not wrong in the sense of physics,
but it's a sterile view that doesn't let you make full use of the system that you have.
It is the software, it is the medium in which the software of life operates.
And furthermore, very much like in the brain, so the other good analogies to neuroscience,
like in the brain, what's magic about the electrical dynamics of the brain is that it
is the medium in which the cognitive content is kept, right?
If we understood how to decode it, and people certainly are working on neural decoding,
we could read out the memories, the goals, the preferences, the behavioral competencies
of a creature by decoding this electrophysiology, that is exactly what electricity does in the
rest of your body.
It is not just a layer of complexity.
After the genetics and the epigenetics and many other aspects of chemistry have had their
say and they determine what the hardware is, now you have this physiology, this real-time
physiology that determines what the hardware is going to do.
So let me just recap and make the distinction about how the software, I thought, and apparently
I was wrong, that my sequence, three billion AGCT sequence determines who am I, so I could
take this three billion sequence, go to the laboratory and say, please duplicate me.
But you say, as I understand, there is nothing in this sequence that tells me, listen, this
is a human being, this is a human body, the eyes should be here, the mouth should be here.
Is it true?
This is a subtle question, so let's distinguish a couple of things here.
It definitely does not say who you are.
So if we were to copy your DNA, we could clone you from your DNA, we would get another body
that is fairly similar to your body.
When you say it will be you, the adult physiology, the memories, the behavior, none of that will
be determined in the same way as we tend to think.
So all of that is really due to various inputs, experiences, all of the things you want to
do.
No, no, no.
I am sorry.
It's like a hardware duplication, like Dolly, but what I meant, you said, or I thought you
said that there is nothing in this genome sequence that tells me, listen, this is the
human body, the eyes should be here, the mouth should be here, we have two arms, two legs.
So if this information is not encoded into this giant AGCT sequence, where is it encoded?
So let's be clear.
If you were to duplicate clone the genetics, you would in fact get a similar body with
the same number of eyes and limbs and everything else, that's what you would get.
But it is not because those things are encoded in the DNA, imagine, if I give you the description
of a couple of transistors and how they connect together, you will end up with a logic gate,
let's say a NAND gate or something like that.
That logic gate comes with a truth table.
And we know that it operates, it does this computation, it makes this truth table.
That truth table was nowhere in the description that I gave you.
I gave you the description of some transistors, where did the truth table come from?
And nevertheless, so you have this very interesting thing where certain kinds of machines, when
they are specified at the hardware level, make use of laws of physics, of computation
to do specific things that were never in the original description.
So yes, you will get a human body, but what's in the instructions is the hardware that then
exploits the laws of physics to do all of these amazing computations that eventually
result in most of the time, two eyes, ten fingers and all of that stuff.
This is a great analogy because one can look at four, I don't know, FET transistors for
100 years without even considering a NAND gate.
The idea is that, okay, so there is someone from above the system, outside the system
who can make sense, I think, you know, the concept is make sense of what we've seen.
Yes, yes.
And my question is, and I hope it's a legal question in your realm, who is it?
Yeah, yeah.
Or what is it?
This is extremely important.
And everything that I've been working on for years now, and in particular with a collaborator
called Chris Fields, we've been developing a way of looking at these things that is really
centered on the notion of an observer.
So everything that we talk about, so behavior, intelligence, computation, physiology, all
of these things, all assume the presence of a particular observer who interprets events
in a particular way.
Now, one key thing, and this goes to Hofstadter's notion of a strange loop, that observer can
be the system itself.
So you can easily have, you don't need one sort of supernatural mega observer to observe
everybody else, systems can very easily observe and interpret themselves if they have the
right degree of complexity.
But none of these things, in my opinion, are objective universal truths.
They are a viewpoint of some observer that sees, in fact, Josh Bongard and I just wrote
a paper on polycomputation where it starts with his amazing discovery that you can take
the exact same set of events, some kind of physical medium doing something, and you can
look at it from multiple perspectives and see different computations happening in the
exact same piece of hardware.
And so I think this is really important.
You put onto a very important point, which is all of this is observer-relative.
And this is very interesting.
I would ask you, in your opinion, okay, maybe the system is complex enough in some level
that can, that the system can observe itself.
But would you also consider the system at the beginning, at the embryo level, as also
complex enough?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, we can tell, look, let's, let's, we can tell a story about metacognition in
bacteria.
So, so, so you have a bacteria and no, just a second, just a second.
I want to go to the metacognition later on.
Please let me, let's start, let's start with the science fiction and move on to the more
science fiction.
Okay.
Because I think everything that you do is so mesmerizing, so mind-blowing.
And let's start with the frog.
Okay.
What you say that you can do is you take an innocent frog and in the process of you're
going to explain me how you're going to put its eye on the, on, on the tail or something
like this.
And you have another thing that you do to the harmless frog is that you can reshape
it face to a Picasso shaped face.
For example, the mouse would be off here and the eyes will be like here and the
nose will be.
So, A, is it true?
And B, how do you do it?
Yes, yes, these things are true.
And, and there are many other similar stories that I could tell you, but, but let's, let's
discuss these two.
So the eye on the tail.
This is the work of Douglas Blackestin who works in my lab.
And what we decided to ask was a simple question.
Uh, how, how much, um, you see, we started out with this idea of intelligence as being
able to get to the same goal despite perturbations, right?
So this is our attempt to understand what is the intelligence of development?
How much, how much intelligence does it have?
Because it's really, it tends to fool you.
The fact that frog eggs always make frogs and acorns always make oak trees give you this
false idea that, well, what else is it going to do?
This, it can do one thing.
That's all it's ever going to do.
So we decided to really see, um, using the only way you can judge these things is to
do perturbative experiments to, to make difficulties for it and see what it does.
So one thing he discovered is that if you take some cells that normally are going to
become eye, you physically take, and this is a very early embryo.
It doesn't look like anything yet.
That's just a ball.
It doesn't look like a, like a frog or anything like that.
And from the front of it, you take some cells that we know are, are supposed to be
eye and you move them to the back of the, the back of the embryo.
And you just sort of stick them in.
I mean, it's a physical surgical transplantation under a microscope with little
tiny needles.
You can do this.
And so you move these cells to the back.
And what we find out is several amazing things.
First of all, even though these cells are in a crazy environment, instead of sitting
next to the brain where they belong, they now are sitting next to muscle, right?
So they're in a very bizarre environment, but they still make a perfect eye with all
of the right components, lens, optic nerve, everything is perfect, right?
Then, so that's the first amazing thing.
So you end up with these frogs with eyes on their tails, on their butts, you know,
anywhere you want.
There's a, there's the eyes connected to the brain.
Now that's the next step.
The eye does not connect to the brain.
The eye puts out one optic nerve.
The optic nerve sort of looks around where he's going to go.
And then it connects to something, sometimes to the, to nothing, sometimes to
the gut, sometimes to the spinal cord.
Okay.
So it does not go all the way up to the brain.
It connects to somewhere local, not too far away.
Then we find out that if we do this with embryos that have no primary eyes, so we
moved all of the cells, right?
So there are no eyes in the head, but, but there is one eye on the tail.
Those animals can see, how do we know that they can see?
Because we built a machine that gives them, gives them training to perform in
particular color assay.
So we shine different color lights on them and then we train them to do particular
things and these, these animals train very well.
They can clearly see the light.
They can, they can avoid a moving light and things like this.
They do very well.
So now this tells you some amazing things.
It tells you that, uh, first of all, that the plasticity of the whole system is
such that we didn't need a thousand generations to, to evolve, to adapt to
this novel architecture, that now your, your sensory system is not connected
where it's supposed to be.
It's connected somewhere else.
You didn't need, uh, eons of evolution for this.
It immediately works right away.
The straight out of the box, it works.
And it means that, uh, it has this remarkable implications for evolution
because if, if you're evolving a system where changes like this don't wreck
the whole, the whole business, that, that really tells you something very
important about how evolution is going to work.
Because remember, one of the biggest problems with evolution is how do you
keep prior gains?
If you have a, any engineer knows that when I first, as a, as a, as a kid who
built many things, when I first, first heard of the idea of evolution, that
you're going to make random changes, I said, are you kidding?
This is ridiculous.
That is never going to work.
Right.
As an engineer, you think you're going to make random changes in this carefully,
you know, sort of working thing, forget it.
It's always going to be bad.
But that's because we didn't understand what we were dealing with.
We're, unlike typical engineers, evolution doesn't deal with passive materials.
It deals with what I call agential materials.
And we can talk about that, meaning that they will try to get their job done.
Even if things go wrong.
So if evolution, let's say there's some kind of mutation that moves the eye to
the tail, but it also does some other nice things, typically in, in, in, in
another architecture, if that animal couldn't see, he would be dead.
And you would never be able to explore the other consequences of that mutation.
Just about every mutation would be, would be very bad, harmful for the organism.
But if many of these mutations are going to be dealt with by the cells and the
tissues that can still get their job done, even if things change, why then
all of these mutations become either neutral or positive?
Because now you have a much smoother surface to evolve.
You have much more flexibility, much more flexibility.
You don't immediately wreck the system.
Every time you try something new, this is huge.
This is, this potentiates the power of evolution hugely.
So that's the story of the eye on the tail.
Now, just a second, just a second.
You, you, you, I actually can feel my brain getting warm.
So one, this is, from what I understand goes a little bit against the concept
of Darwinian evolution, because as Darwin said, there are no jumps in nature.
And what you said is that, listen, we don't need generations and generations
like genetic algorithms that you need, like many, many generations.
We, you can make enormous changes, enormous, a, a fundamental changes
in just one embryo.
This is like an, it's not what Darwin meant.
I think this is one and, and, and B in your fog example, you said, listen,
if, if the fog has one eye on the face, the other eye on the tail will not see.
But if I remove all the eyes from the face, the eye in the tail will be able to see.
So what is the difference?
I didn't say the first part.
So, so, so every eye is going to contribute to vision.
So, so what we have are frogs that have no eyes in the face, none.
And then one eye on the tail and we show that they can see.
Okay.
But if, but what you said that if I just put some cells on the, on the tail
and there will be one optical nerve and this optical nerve will be connected
to the garter, the spinal cord, this eye will be also functional.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
That's exactly right.
That's how the animal will see through that eye.
Yeah.
Okay.
So from this fog and what, and what about the concept of the Weenian evolution
that what you, what you present, what you show here in your experiments are huge leaps.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think that, and, and, and I want to be clear.
I, I am not the first person to show these kind of leaps in the, in the 1940s.
There was this phenomenon called Slippers Goat.
It was this guy, I think he was Dutch that, that had a goat.
This goat was born without arms, you know, without forearms, right?
All it had was legs.
And because goats are very, very robust and very stubborn, he, he learned to walk upright.
So this goat walked, walked upright.
When the goat died, they dissected the goat and they found that many of the changes
that you need for bipedal locomotion.
So the pelvic tilts, the backbone, all the stuff that you need was all there in this goat.
No, no, you know, it normally takes, I don't know,
how many hundreds of thousands of years from, from four legged primates to, to, to
upright humans right there in this goat.
So, so this phenomenon has been known for a really long time.
But I think now we're starting to understand how it works.
And the thing about this, this, this in no way invalidates what, what Darwin was saying.
It's just that Darwin was trying to get to the same outcome, which is adaptive evolution.
He showed how it can eventually happen with a very dumb, passive substrate.
So, so, so if you assume no intelligence in your substrate whatsoever, you can, and we
know from genetic algorithms in computer science, yeah, with a completely passive
substrate, if you just have a big enough population and you do the kind of, you know,
if you have a goal function in genetic, I teach genetic algorithm and in computer science,
but the idea in genetic algorithms that you have the goal function all, all the way, all
the way long and evolution, according to Darwin, is local, is not global.
So there is no, like a, like a big reward function that like extract you from the future.
It doesn't happen.
And this, and this exactly what happens in genetic algorithm in the concept of computer
science, I know where I want to go.
Therefore, I can take, I can extract all of these modifications and say, this is a better
modification than this, because I have the final goal.
This is tremendously different, no?
Well, the part that they have in common is that the environment in a way implements these
kind of fitness functions, right, because, because, you know, you can think about the
biomechanics of the legs and insects and you're trying to jump and the environment will be very
clear who had the nice, who had the well jumping legs and who didn't because it's going to
kill off everybody who didn't jump correctly, right?
So, so there's this notion of a, of a fitness function, of course, many of them simultaneously
in the, in the real world, but, but the part that, that this adds to evolution is an
incredible speed up.
And in fact, I think some minimal intelligence, because when you are dealing with material
that can, and in fact, I can, I have a, I have a student, a laxian who really knows
Laxian, who recently, we recently published an interesting story on this where if you are
dealing with a material that itself has competency, meaning that it's not just a passive
material, exactly what the genome says, that's what it does.
It actually during development has the opportunity to fix up some things and, you know, things
aren't quite right.
It will make up for some of these defects.
Then something very interesting happens.
When imagine that you have an individual and it comes up for selection, and it's pretty
good. It does a pretty good job, whatever, whatever it's doing, does a pretty good job.
Selection can't tell whether it does a really good job because the genome was amazing, or
whether it does a good job because the competency fixed up for some of the things that were wrong
in the genome, right.
And then this becomes as soon as that happens, the selection has a really hard time picking
the best genomes.
What it can do is pick the most competent individuals.
So you got this crazy feedback loop, right, where now more and more of the effort goes
into increasing the intelligence of the system, because and the more you do that, the harder
it is to see the genome again.
It's like many, many variables, optimization functions that you need, you know, to modify
each one of the variables.
And you don't know which one of them is responsible for the optimization function.
That's exactly right. And you will never know.
And Steve Frank gave me a really fun analogy from computer hardware, which is that he says
that as the RAID arrays became more popular for hard drives, the quality of the media went
down because you don't need to have such great media once you have a RAID array.
And that sort of feeds itself, right.
But the trick is it's a one-way ratchet because once you depend on your, you can't now remove
your RAID array and stick with your disk because the disks are junk.
And so that explains some amazing puzzles in biology, including the planaria.
And probably you will want to talk about this, but there are some.
Yes, the two-headed planarian.
But before the two-headed planaria, we needed to pay respect to the Picasso fog.
Okay.
So we had the eye on the tail fog.
And now we're going to the Picasso fog.
And again, this is not CRISPR.
This is not that you take the sequence of AGCT and you cut.
This is like the face.
And I put the face over here.
This is something completely different.
You take the cells that you know, somehow this is a cell of the mouth and you put it
in a different location.
Yep.
There are many ways to, I'll talk about how we did it.
There are many ways to mess up this process of craniofacial morphogenesis.
The reason we did it was, again, that we are interested in finding intelligence in unfamiliar
places.
So when you look at a typical tadpole, and so the tadpole of the frog, it has the eyes,
it has the jaws, the nose, the nostrils, everything, that tadpole has to become a frog.
In order to become a frog, it has to move all of those organs.
So the jaws have to move forward, the eyes have to move, like everything has to move.
You might think, which is from observing the process, that, well, this is probably hardwired.
Every tadpole looks the same.
Every frog looks the same.
So every organ, it just needs to know, go three millimeters in that direction, and then I'm
done.
Right?
So that's it.
You might think that this whole process can be completely hardwired, and you'll go from
tadpole to frog.
So we wanted to test this idea, because we suspected that actually this was a much more
intelligent process than that.
And so how do you test for intelligence?
You make a perturbation, and you see what the system does.
So this was the work of Laura Vandenberg in my group, and what she did was using a variety
of techniques, including surgical transplantation of cells, including bioelectrical modifications.
We'll talk about why bioelectrical, many, many different ways.
Chemicals are different ways to make the early tadpole face be incorrect.
So the jaws are over here, the eyes on top of the head, the noses off to the side.
Everything is scrambled.
And what we observed is that these animals largely became perfectly normal frogs,
because all of the organs starting in the wrong position moved different distances
through different paths to end up in the correct location.
In fact, sometimes they go too far, and they actually have to move back a little bit.
So again, I just going to show something.
This is like the tadpole that's going to be a frog, and you just messed with it.
And our concept is that if you know, let's say that I'm the cell here, over here,
that I know that I need to go four centimeters forward.
But if I go four centimeters forward in this modified version, I will be like a Picasso frog.
But somehow, and you're going to explain me how, somehow these cells, these particular cells,
knows that it needs to move a different length in order to compensate for the mess that you did
in your laboratory.
That's exactly right.
That's exactly right.
So what we were able to show is that this is a more intelligent system than simple hardwired,
because it can get to the same goal, the same anatomical outcome, even if you started in the
wrong starting position.
So now that sounds kind of magical.
How does it know?
But if you think about very simple cybernetic devices like your thermostat, so your thermostat
is what's interesting about it is that it does not always simply go up five degrees.
What it does is it measures the current temperature, compares it to the set point,
and then does whatever it needs to do to try to minimize the error.
It's basically a homeostatic kind of system that tries to minimize error.
And so what we started doing was investigating this process of embryonic development, of regeneration.
I mean, regeneration is the same thing.
If you have a salamander and you amputate anywhere along the length of the limb,
it will regrow exactly what's necessary, and then it stops.
When does it stop?
It stops when a correct salamander limb is complete.
I mean, this raises a very obvious question.
How does it know what a correct salamander limb looks like?
But not just in planaria and in salamandra, in a baby embryo, where the cells duplicate,
duplicate at the tip of the fingers, somehow the cells at the tip of the fingers know,
A, that they are the cells of the tip of the fingers, and they should act and behave differently
than, for example, heart cells, and B, they know where to stop.
Although each cell has no, it's not like each cell has like the master plan of the human body.
Ah, I'm going over here.
And we know that it cannot work that way with the master plan, because it's extremely flexible.
So you can take an early embryo, human, divide it into four pieces,
and you don't get four chunks of a body, you get four quadruplets,
you get perfectly normal, healthy quadruplets.
So you can make all kinds of crazy changes, the cells will get to where they need to go.
So we started thinking about this process.
Could we imagine the whole thing as a kind of homeostatic process, and more specifically,
as a navigational process?
What do I mean?
What are they navigating?
Well, you can imagine the space, it's a virtual space of all possible anatomical configurations.
It's very hard to visualize because it's a multi-dimensional space.
But you start as a single cell, which is here in this space somewhere,
and you need to be up here eventually, which matches to a human, the body,
or a frog, or whatever you're going to be, and you need to navigate along the way.
And like any autonomous vehicle, part of being an intelligent navigator is,
well, what happens if somebody interferes along the way?
Oh, I'm started in the wrong starting position, or there's a barrier,
or something is happening.
How do I navigate?
So we started thinking about this process.
And in particular, what we found was that there's two interesting things
about this whole weird way of thinking about it.
And I should tell the listeners, this is not the standard way of thinking about any of this.
This is not the story you learn in basic developmental biology, right?
This is many of the examples I talk about.
They never mentioned these things in the typical course,
because they are very difficult to explain using traditional viewpoints.
And thus, there's sort of these side issues that I think are actually the most important thing.
So there are two amazing things about this kind of homeostatic model.
One is that it makes a very strong prediction.
It tells you that somewhere there should be the set point recorded,
the same way that in your thermostat, you can point to, well,
how does it know what is the right temperature?
Well, here is recorded somehow, the set point is somehow recorded.
So we should be able to find.
And then the prediction is this.
If we find the set point, if we decode it, and if we learn to rewrite it,
then you can do the same trick you do with a thermostat, which is an amazing trick.
You can change it to keep a temperature of the room, so something else,
without rewiring the machine.
It means you do not have to rewire physically the machine.
And you don't even have to know how the machine works, really.
You don't need to know every aspect of it.
All you need to know is that, in fact, it is a homeostat,
and you need to know how to change the set point.
That has huge implications for regenerative medicine,
because if it means that, it means that if we can not treat cells and tissues
as a mechanical clock, where your only hope is to rewire it to a hardware level,
with genetics and CRISPR and all of that,
if we understand that it is, in fact, a homeostat,
then you can learn to reset these set points and let the cells do what they do best,
which is to build to that set point.
And, in fact, you can get that way success
long before you even understand every part of the process,
because you've offloaded some of the complexity onto the system itself.
This is a strategy that humans have been using for 10,000 years.
Why did we know how to train dogs and horses before we knew any neuroscience?
You don't have to know all the neurosciences.
You have to understand what type of intelligence does your system have,
what is the currency of learning, and how do you interact with it?
Just a second.
I want to go back to your example of self-driving vehicles that you need.
You know what you said, that I can think about it like a navigation algorithm problem.
Let's say, and I specifically ask it because I teach those very subject.
Let's say that I teach a navigation algorithm, like A-style.
I, there is, and you said there is this cell, and there is at the end, the human body.
And the cell need to go from here to the human body and bypass barriers.
And this makes perfectly sense.
If I can compare between this position and the human body, I need a reward or a penalty
function between this position over here and the final body program over here.
And I didn't quite understand where is this reward function.
Yeah, I haven't said it yet.
So, so I'm okay.
Okay.
Okay, I'll tell you now where it is.
I'm just building up the, you know, the story piece.
So you're exactly right.
There is a reward function.
And now it is not a single function that takes you all the way to the end.
It is a series of, first you get to here, then you get to here, then you get to here,
then you get to here.
It's a series of changing reward functions.
The reward function is this.
What we, in starting to think about, okay, so where is this set point?
Where is, we call it the target morphology, the encoding of what are you trying to make?
You know, how many fingers you want to have and so on.
We started to, I asked myself, well, what is an example of this?
And of course, the most obvious example is the brain.
In the brain, we have creatures that use their brain to have a goal that they want to get to.
And then they have some degree of competency of getting to that goal.
Maybe very smart.
Maybe we can not so smart, but they have some degrees.
How does the brain encode goal states?
You know, you might say, well, it's kind of, it's kind of crazy.
How can a bunch of cells encode a goal?
Well, that's what we have in the nervous system.
If you remember, if you're a rat and you remember how to run a maze,
you encode the structure of that maze in your brain somehow.
So we said, well, that capacity surely had to come from somewhere in evolution.
It didn't just sort of arise out of nowhere.
What is the primitive version of that capacity?
And so this is where the bioelectricity comes in.
We've been testing for years.
We've been testing this hypothesis that the electric circuitry of all of your body cells,
not just the neurons, not just your brain, all of your body cells,
what the electric circuitry is doing is two things.
One, holding a memory of what the correct anatomy should be at any given time.
And two, doing the computations that compare the current state to the target state.
So imagine now, you have a particular configuration
and you have a memory of what that configuration is supposed to be.
And I'm going to tell you in a minute that we can now,
we can read and write this encoding.
So you have this electrical memory of what your shape should be.
Your shape is not that it's wrong.
From the perspective of each developmental stage,
the previous stage is a defect.
It's wrong.
From the perspective of a gastrolyph, if you're still a blastula,
well, you're wrong.
That's a birth defect.
You need to be repaired.
And so what happens is that there is an error that gets calculated.
I believe it's basically, although this much remains to be found here,
but I believe it's basically stress.
It's basically cashed out a cellular stress.
The error basically stresses out all the cells,
and they try to minimize that stress by doing all the things they know how to do.
They divide, they differentiate, they do all these different things.
This is great.
If I agree on one and two, that it has like a memory of the final goal and a waste,
this is great.
But my question is, okay, one, how do we preserve a memory of the final body,
of the final shape, and where does this memory come from?
Yeah.
So, okay, so the first question is easier than the second question,
but I'll give you my thoughts on both of them.
What we now can do is something similar to what neurosciences do in the brain,
which is we do electrical imaging in the body.
So we have, and this technique was worked out by Thorly Thorlin and then Danny Adams
in my group and many others, where we can take a voltage-sensitive fluorescent dye,
and this is just a chemical that glows different degrees depending on the local voltage.
And we put it on the embryo, and what you see is all the electrical states across the tissue.
And what you can see is that long before the genes get turned on,
and long before the anatomy is there, you can see a pre-pattern of what the future shape is supposed
to be.
This is what Burr already said this, in 1936, Burr already said this from his measurements
with a voltmeter.
He could already say that, of course, he couldn't see the whole field,
but we can now literally see, and so we've seen patterns of, one pattern is,
we call it the electric phase, because before the phase is formed, you can see where everything
is going to go.
Here, the eyes are going to be.
Here's the mouth.
Here's the placodes on the side.
You can see all this in the electrical pattern.
This is what you're talking about?
This is what you're talking about?
This is the video that, so Danny Adams made this video.
This is a very early one, meaning that this doesn't have a face yet.
These are just an early frog embryo at the very initial stages of development.
But here you can see the different cells.
It is just one cell, yes?
No, there are about, in this embryo, there are probably 32 cells, something like that.
Okay, but you said that in another video, you could see, and the green lines are the
electric signals.
You could see that in the green lines, one can see the shape of the face.
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
Later, about 12 hours after this, yes.
You can see that.
And the amazing thing is, and this is, we should get to the planarious story,
because that's where it's best described.
What we found out is that that electrical pattern determines where the genes are going
to turn on and off, they determine where the anatomical structures are going to be.
And if we reproduce those electrical patterns somewhere else in the body,
you can make those structures.
So for example, one of the earliest things my student, Sherry Ow, did was to reproduce
the electrical signal that normally tells you where the eye goes.
She reproduced it on the gut of the animal, and guess what those cells did?
They make an eye, of course, because these electrical patterns serve as the error function
to the local cells, and they will do whatever they can do to minimize that delta.
This is literally hacking the system.
Yes.
This is literally hacking the system.
So we know what you say is the following thing.
You can record these electric signals that signals the cells to make an eye,
and then play the tape of the electric signals into another place, and the cells over there,
for example, in the gut, knows or compute according to the stress how to make an eye,
because this is a software.
And if you hack the system, if you know the language, you could do whatever you want.
Yes.
Yes, that's exactly right.
And the only reason we are able to do that is because evolution gave us a machine that has
this architecture.
Why does it have this hackable architecture?
Because that's how evolution makes the embryo in the first place.
All of these cells are hacking each other all the time.
They have this amazing interface on their surface, which is these ion channels,
these little gates that send ions in and out that determine the voltage state,
exactly like in the brain, all the same mechanisms, exactly the same.
And it is reprogrammable in exactly the same way that the nervous system is reprogrammable,
meaning the exact same hardware can learn many different things,
depending on its history and experience.
And this architecture, evolution loves this architecture,
because that's how you can most easily make complex embryos that repair themselves
and do all these kinds of things.
We are the second to discover this.
The evolution was the first to discover all of this.
And we're just hacking into that same interface.
Before we move to the plan area, I must ask you,
before I met you, I have never came across those mind blowing ideas about bioelectricity,
etc.
And you said evolution was the first, we were the second.
Now, without this knowledge, without this notion of bioelectricity,
that explains so many, so many different things,
how traditional biology or traditional biochemistry explain all the unexplainable things
before your research.
There is a difference, so there's a difference between
explaining and you can, so the thing is that for any phenomenon,
you can always drill down to the lowest level
and describe what you see at the lowest level.
And you will never find magic and you will never find fairies.
You will always find physics and chemistry is what you will find.
So you can see- Maxwell equations.
That's it.
You will find, you can do that at any point.
And you can always drill down and you say, well, what more do you need?
I see the atoms are moving, the genes are being expressed, emergence.
They will say that, right, that there are local rules,
the cellular automata, and eventually you get emergence.
That's fine.
Then the question becomes, okay, very good.
But now you want to make changes to the system.
Right, you want to make changes to the system.
What do you tweak to make changes?
And so here is my prediction is, and this is not something
that makes many people happy, but I will make this a prediction anyway,
that the standard paradigm ideas of- look at modern molecular medicine.
Everything is focused on the hardware, crisper, genome editing,
pathway rewiring, protein engineering.
All of this stuff is down at the absolute lowest level.
I think that all of these things will plateau in terms of their capabilities,
will plateau after you've picked all the low-hanging fruit
that are easily done at the hardware level.
Yeah, you can do amazing things in assembly language, sure,
but at some point, you flatten out, right, and you need to go beyond,
and you need to really get the promise of transformative regenerative medicine.
You need to exploit the beauty of your material.
The material is intelligent.
You can treat it as a mechanical clock, sure,
and you can try to program your computer with a soldering iron and some magnets.
You could try that, but why when you have this beautiful interface,
that's much better?
And again, you cannot finish the unfinished symphony using only your knowledge of acoustics.
You need a different way, a different level of knowledge of understanding,
which is much higher, and this is the knowledge of music.
Now, you can reduce in some way to a very specific part all of music into acoustic,
but it really doesn't go all the way.
You can't explain music with acoustic.
By the way, I think that you cannot explain up until now,
I thought that you could explain the human phenomena with biology,
and I think that you still, there is much more to the human phenomenon than biology.
And chemistry.
Well, yes, and I think that's true.
And I think that these other levels of description exist for a reason.
I don't think that...
Well, and in fact, it used to be this question of reductionism, right?
Do you get everything from the lowest level?
It used to be a philosophical question,
and people have argued about this for millennia.
That is no longer a philosophical question.
It has been answered in a rigorous mathematical way by people like
Giulio Tononi and Eric Hall and folks like that.
And you can now calculate that in certain systems,
higher levels of description literally do more work than the lower levels.
It's an amazing discovery in information theory
that actually you can now calculate this strictly speaking.
And I think this is the difference, is that after the fact,
so after I tell you that, hey, these things are smart enough to do this and that,
yeah, then you can drill down and see all the molecules and say,
hey, it was the molecules all along.
But that's after we did this.
And so what I always say is, this is not a philosophical question.
This is an empirical question.
You may have a model that's in terms of molecules.
I may have a model that is in terms of error minimization and goals.
And let's see what each of these models facilitates in terms of biomedical advances.
Your ability to modify, change and predict complex behavior is much greater
than just looking in the scope of the just the only molecule or the only cell or the single cell.
So we must move on to the plan area.
And what I know from your research is I can cut plan area.
I can control x, control v, control x, control v.
And I can make plan area leaves forever.
So let's start with cutting.
How do you cut your plan area?
So yeah, so plan area already live forever.
They are immortal.
They do not age as far as we can tell at the body level.
And one of the amazing, so they have many amazing properties.
So they are immortal.
They are highly regenerative.
So you can literally, you put them on a piece of ice to anesthetize them.
And then you take a scalpel and you cut them into pieces.
And within about a week to 10 days, each piece will grow a perfect tiny little worm.
The old part shrinks to be matched, size matched to the new part.
The new part grows.
It's exactly, will be an exact copy of the new one.
This is also how they reproduce.
So they, to reproduce, they tear themselves in half and then they regenerate.
And so that's how they, that's how they reproduce.
And two more amazing things.
One is that, and this was first discovered by McConnell in the 60s.
And he got a lot of flak for it, but he was absolutely right.
If you train a planarian in a particular task and then you cut off their head,
which contains their brain, the tail will eventually regrow a new head and a new brain.
And it will remember the original information.
So there's this movement of learning information between the brain and the body
and then back onto a new brain.
So, so there's that.
And then the final thing is this, which kind of gets us.
Just a second.
You said, you said so unbelievable thing in a very, you know, peaceful way.
If you cut the tail, the brain will, the tail will develop a new brain with all the...
What?
Whoa.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Don't tell me.
Do you have like,
how do you...
Leave me.
How do you explain it to yourself?
How do you explain this wonder based on your understanding in biology and chemistry
and physics and all the knowledge that you have?
How do you explain it to yourself that it will grow with the memories of the brain?
How?
The only...
No one knows.
Okay, so this is a big mystery and we do not know.
The only thing that we know for sure are two things.
One, that information that you learn is at least in that animal.
I'm not sure what happens in mammals, for example.
But in that animal, what you learn is not strictly in the brain.
That much is clear.
And two, wherever else it is in the body, it is able to be imprinted onto the new brain
so that it can control behavior correctly.
That is all that we know.
We literally have no idea what...
I mean, other people have studied the transfer of memory, for example.
David Glansman studies transfer of memory by taking RNA from a trained C-slug
and he shoves it into the brain of a new C-slug
and he shows that you can transfer some memories this way.
So there's some work on this.
But we don't know.
I have no idea how this works in planaria.
We just don't know.
Okay, so we take the planaria and I can stitch together two heads.
So I can make it two head planaria, but there's no stitching.
So there's no stitching.
Okay.
So what we do is...
So here's the thing.
When you cut a planarian, so you have a tail, a middle, and a head
and you cut it into...
You make two cuts.
So you remove the tail, you remove the head,
and now you have this middle fragment.
With the old permission, I'm taking this from Chris,
but this is Chris with you.
So I am allowing myself.
So this is a planaria and I'm making two cuts.
This is one cut and this is the other cut.
And we see the heads only here.
Yeah, so what we're going to track is the middle fragment.
Let's look at the middle fragment.
Okay.
That's it.
That's it right there, the middle fragment.
So now in order to regenerate, this little fragment has to remember
how many heads am I supposed to have and where do these heads go?
It could go up at the top.
It could go at the bottom.
How do I know where it goes, right?
So if you listen on Spotify, please switch to YouTube.
Now you must see it.
Yes, please.
Please, Michael, continue.
So this fragment of tissue has to make that decision
of how many heads am I going to grow
and where do these heads belong?
So we hypothesized, and this was the first person
to do this in my group was Wendy Bean,
and what she did was she used a voltage-sensitive dye
to ask the question, can we find the electrical pattern memory
that tells you how many heads you're supposed to have?
And this is really, look, if I make the claim that any kind of morphogenesis
or development, remodeling, regeneration is the behavior
of a collective intelligence of cells in this anatomical morphospace
that we talked about, right?
Does this collective intelligence, just like we are a collective intelligence
of neurons, there's a collective intelligence
and it has to make decisions in this space.
So by looking at the bioelectrics,
we are reading the mind of this collective intelligence
exactly how neuroscientists try to read the mind of animals with brains.
So we looked for this electrical pattern.
Sure enough, we found one.
There's an electrical pattern and you're seeing it here
that says one head, one tail.
The red portion tells you one head
and the blue portion tells you one tail.
Yeah.
So I'm pointing now, this is one head and this is one tail.
So it should make from this middle planaria,
it should grow on the top head on the bottom tail.
Exactly.
Exactly.
But having seen this, we can say,
okay, I'm going to rewrite this set point.
I'm going to reprogram that memory into a different memory.
I'm not going to touch the DNA, just like you do not touch the wires
of your thermostat when you reset it.
I believe that this is a goal-directed homeostatic system.
I believe it's using this voltage to know what to build
and I'm simply going to rewrite it.
Now, how do we rewrite it?
Well, the voltage is there because of the action of these ion channels
that pass potassium, sodium, chloride, protons, and so on.
And so what you can do is you can, with a computer model,
you can ask which ones of these do I need to open or close
in order to make the pattern be different.
So you're literally interacting with,
we call this the bioelectric code,
the idea that if we understood which channels and pumps to turn on enough,
we could make that pattern be whatever we want.
So you open and close channels in order for the blue one
to look like the red one and then you get the two-headed wall.
Exactly.
All the red one to look like the blue one
and then you get no head wall.
Exactly, because these, now why does it work?
It works because, and both of these have completely normal hardware.
There's nothing wrong with the genome, the cells,
everybody's, all the cells are exactly wild-type cells.
The reason it works is because this is not a hardwired system.
This is a system in which the cells will build whatever the pattern says.
So now what can we build?
We can build two-head worms.
We can build no-head worms.
We can even build now worms with heads of the wrong species of planarian
because there are other species that have triangular heads
or flat heads or round heads.
We can make them build these other species
because the cells are very happy to build whatever the electrical pattern says.
So this is the example, you know, we talked in the beginning about how do we,
how do we know any of this is true?
Because you can literally see the memory.
You can rewrite the memory.
And then you can, you can see that the cells will,
the exact same cells will build.
Now the most amazing part.
And you discovered another thing that if you cut the two-headed planaria,
what, what, what will happen?
So I keep calling this thing a pattern memory.
Now what's the most important thing about a memory?
The most important thing about a memory is that it's not only rewriteable,
but it's stable.
So that once you rewrite it, it stays where you put it.
So what we found was now, now this is really interesting.
This is, this goes back to our, our discussion of explanation versus a pre,
pre, you know, sort of pre invention.
Two-headed planaria were first seen around 1903.
Okay. That's somewhere around there was the first time anybody saw for it
because you can make them and there are other ways to make them.
As far as I know, in that whole time, until we, we did it for the first time
in like 2008, something like that.
Larissa Wozniak was a student in my group who, who I asked to recut these guys.
As far as I know, nobody had done it in that whole time because it was pretty obvious.
Everybody thought it was pretty obvious what would happen.
The genetics are normal.
You've got rid of the second head.
Well, then of course it should go back to normal and be a normal worm.
That's not at all what happens.
That memory, that electrical memory stays.
So when you take a two-headed worm and you cut off the heads and that electrical circuit
will still say two heads and the piece will build two heads forever.
As far as we can tell, you can keep cutting them and cutting them and cutting them.
They will always make two heads.
And so, so you can imagine the modification that you did, you know, making two red,
two red things, just it preserve.
It's like a, it's like a register.
It preserves the electrical state.
Then, and then if I cut the two head, it will produce another two head.
And if I cut the no head worm, it will produce another no head worm.
Yes?
That's actually, you know, I'm not going to swear to that because I don't remember
if we ever recut the two, the no head worms.
I don't remember.
I may, maybe we did that.
I don't know that for sure.
I know, I know we, we focus most of our effort on the, on the, on the two head worms.
And you can sort of imagine this amazing scenario where I can take an, oh, and, and of
course, the way they reproduce is they tear themselves in half.
And when they tear themselves in half, you still get a two headed worm.
So I could take these worms.
I could throw them in the, in the Boston, in the, in the Charles River here.
And a hundred years later, some scientists will come, they'll scoop up some worms.
They'll say, oh, a single headed form and a double headed form.
Cool.
It's a speciation event.
Let's sequence the genomes and see what led to the speciation event.
Nothing.
There's nothing wrong with their genomes.
Their genomes are exactly the same because it is not a hard, hardware level problem.
So you can ask a philosophical question.
What determines the number of heads in a planarian?
You can sort of say the DNA, because under normal conditions, the DNA produces an
electrical circuit that has a default behavior, very stable.
The default behavior is to say one head and under those conditions, you make one head.
It's like you buy a calculator and every, you buy a thousand calculators,
you turn them on, all of them say zero by default.
When you turn it on the juice, they all say zero.
It's a very reliable circuit.
Yes, but there was a programmer who said, say zero.
That's the next, so we'll, we'll get to that momentary.
If you, if you reject to the concept of the external programmer, the question remains.
And the question, even bigger, because two headed planaria is an unstable,
situation for, for the planaria, but nevertheless, the planaria keep being a two headed in
after cutting and cutting and cutting again.
So this is very strange.
Yeah.
Well, that's not the only thing.
So, so I'll, so I'll tell you a story about, about how, how really strange it is.
It's even stranger than that.
What, what, what, one interesting thing about these planaria is that because they often
reproduce by tearing themselves in half and regenerating, it means that unlike us, you see,
in, in, in, in most animals, if you get a mutation in your body, your children don't inherit that
mutation, right?
The soma is disposable.
The body is sort of disposable.
And then children come from the egg in planaria, many species of planaria.
This isn't true.
If you make a mutation that doesn't kill the stem cell that it's in, it will make the
multiple copies and it will refill the rest of the animal.
And so, so for 400 million years, these guys have accumulated mutations.
They, in fact, to the point where they, every cell can have a different number of chromosomes.
It's called being mix a ploid.
They look, they look like a tumor genetically.
They look like a tumor because every cell has all this crazy stuff.
And yet, so, so think about this.
What a scandal this is that I, that I never heard this once in all of the, you know,
developmental cell biology classes that we talked about the genome and how important it is.
Never heard once the idea that the animal with the worst genome with the craziest genome has the most robust anatomical control, fully regenerative, cancer resistant, no aging, perfect anatomy.
But how is this possible?
How is this, how is this possible that, that, that, that, that the worst genome and so this drove me crazy for years for, for decades.
Actually.
And only in the last year, I think we now have some understanding of what's going on here.
And what's going on here is related to a story that we started talking about, which is that when you are dealing with material that has a little bit of a, of a ability to make up for defects.
Whether they be physiological defects and I have, I have some amazing stories to tell about that with anatomical defects, whatever, evolution ends up having, there's a, there's a feedback loop, which means that evolution ends up making improvements in the algorithm, because it can't see the genetics very well.
And the more, the more this happens, if you take this all the way to its logical conclusion, you end up with an animal like planaria, where all the effort went into making an algorithm that makes a beautiful plan area, no matter what the genetics looks like.
So, so this explains right so so what you have here is basically an animal where the algorithm has been selected for the ability to repair, even when your pieces have a lot of junk in them.
And that explains one at one really bizarre fact about planaria.
Every other animal that we know of fruit flies chickens humans, you can find mutant lines. So there are albino, you know, albino mice and the flies with weird curly wings and humans with different, you know, genetic whatever's that you can you can get these lines in planaria, there are no mutant lines.
No one has a weird line of planaria, except our two headed form and ours isn't genetic. There are no genetic lines now why is that people have been trying this for many decades to make transgenic worms to do mutagenesis.
It doesn't work. And I think the reason it doesn't work is because the algorithm is optimized by evolution to ignore defects in the hardware. It's unreliable computing at its, at its, you know, at its, you can't mess the planaria.
You can't you just can't mess the planaria because the algorithm is so strong.
You can you the only way to do it is to is to really hack the algorithm itself which is what we did to make the two headed forms. But other than that, for as far as genetic defects, there are no transgenic lines of planaria there are no mutant lines.
Wow, which leads me I think to the most obvious question.
What can we learn from planaria because we obviously as human beings we are not planaria so how can I take all the knowledge that you have about planaria and this I this massive robustness and say okay, how can we imply or apply some of those things to human beings and to cure diseases for
Yeah, yeah, the good news is that these amazing tricks specifically the multi scale competency architecture this idea that that the cells are not passive components but they're trying to implement goals is extremely ancient it goes back all the way to our unicellular
ancestors to microbes and in fact bacterial biofilms this is this is amazing work by a girl so well in California looking at how bacterial biofilms have brain like electrical activity.
So evolution discovered that electricity is good for scaling intelligence, all the way at the time of bacterial biofilms not to not to us not to you know mammals all the way back.
It is incredibly well conserved. So, that means that all of the same tools and principles that we use in the so called lower animals so in planaria in frog and mouse, all of these things are like very likely to be directly applicable to us.
I have and I have to do a disclaimer because David Kaplan and I have a company called more for pseudocals ink where we are trying to do this for biomedicine so you know, this is my my commercial disclaimer here.
I really think that all of these technologies, not just the bioelectrics but the idea the specific idea of repairing from a high level not by micromanaging these things, but by communicating with the cellular intelligence.
Really, I mean this is not, you know, new age metaphors this is I mean I think it's, it's literally true that what we are doing here is we are sending signals to a collective intelligence to convince it to move in that more for space the way we wanted to move.
And this is, there are just, there are two very simple examples. When we induce the eye on the on the gut of a frog.
We didn't have to give all the information about how to make an eye. We don't know how to make an eye the eye has dozens of different cell types we have no idea how to do that.
What we did was a very simple sub routine call. It was a very low information content electrical signal that just as build an eye here. That's it.
We didn't have to give all the details, because the cell, the collection of cells already knows how to do this by following this particular.
Trying to reduce the error to this particular representation in the frogs when we, when we make a for adult frogs regenerate their legs, which frogs for adult frogs normally don't do that salamanders do it and frogs don't do it.
This is a stimulus at the wound that lasts for 24 hours the treatment lasts for 24 hours, the leg grows for 18 months after that during those 18 months we don't touch it.
So this is not 3d printing this is not micromanaging gene expression and this is not putting stem cells where you want them to go it's nothing like that.
Communicating to the collective all the way upstream, what they should be doing and if we understand the language, then that's biome that's the road to biomedicine.
Like I told my viewers, we started with the science fiction and then we move on to the more science fiction and to the more science fiction.
Now don't give away any commercial secrets, but how this process is going to be let's say that I'm going to be treated with bio electricity.
I have two questions one, how do you record those signals and two, how do you play them. Are you going to electrify me with like what the process is going to be like and how do you.
And let's say that you need to inject this electrical signal into the stomach or can you, I can hear what is going to to be the procedure.
Okay, so, so a few things.
We don't use any applied electrical fields we don't use electrodes fields no waves no magnets and then nothing like that. What we do is we are going to open and close the native ion channels that control the electrical.
It's we're going to use the native interface so the keyboard as it were of these tissues. They already give us a beautiful interface we don't need to do anything else other than control this interface.
The key to all of this is a computational platform that we're developing that and we've already used it we've had success of repairing brain defects and cancer normalization and some other stuff where what you can do is you can compute which channels
need to be open and close to move the electrical pattern to the way that you want to move it. Now the way you you apply it is this so so our current applications is for limb regeneration.
So somebody loses a limb. What happens, and we've done this in frog and now we're doing this in mice. What happens is that you put on this thing it's a wearable bioreactor that's made by David Kaplan's group.
It has a little bit of silk gel inside and inside that silk gel are some drugs, which we call electroseuticals that are specifically targeting different ion channels that we have computed need to be open or close to tell the cells at the wound.
Don't scar remake whatever goes here normally which is a normal limb. So that's what that's what it's going to look like. Now, I will also point out that you mentioned the stomach I will also say that one of the things that we've been discovering in all of these experiments.
Is that bio electrical information is highly non local, meaning that when we fix the brain for example in the frog, we can do it from cells in the belly from the opposite side of the embryo, because, and I guess it should be no surprise
electrical networks are very good at integrating across space right. So we found that you do not need to necessarily treat the exact same cells that you're trying to reach the system integrates information from very far away in the body.
So, so I don't know, you know, in the case where there's a there's a problem deep inside. I'm not even sure that we're going to have to go there directly I think you might be able to treat at a surrogate site.
We've done that with cancer, for example, we make tumors on one side of the temple, and we treat them from with using either optogenetics or various other ion channel modulators on the other side of the animal on the opposite side of the body.
I just in all. So just a second, in mice, you just cut the arm, and they put like, like a gel and the, and the place keep growing the leg to be to be super clear.
We have not yet published this working in mice. Okay, so with these experiments have just been started we are of coming it's kind of obvious after the frog you go to mammals so we're going in mice.
And we have published so far so the thing that for sure works is that you can do this in an adult frog in an adult frog that normally never regenerates his leg. You, you after the amputation you put on the bioreactor it stays on for 24 hours.
And then for 18 months it regrows a night a leg with toes and it can be feeling at the end and then it can stand on the leg everything like that. The next step is mice but I'm not claiming we have done this in mice.
No, no, no, no, but would you, it's, and do you think it will be also be applicable to amputation in human beings?
Do you mean mutation or do you mean injury?
No, that is it. Yes, in injuries that I put the gel and the hand will regrow itself regenerate itself.
My personal opinion is that your personal belief. Yes.
My personal opinion and I cannot tell you how much time this will take because I don't know, but my personal opinion is that yes, it's going to work. There is no reason it can't work.
Deer, deer, every year, you know, deer, you know, the big adult mammals every year they regrow their antlers, right? Bone vasculature, innervation, like a meter of every year.
There is absolutely no reason mammals couldn't do this. We need to find the right trigger and we need to find the right supportive apparatus so some kind of a micro environment that will make this possible.
I believe it's going to work.
You made me speechless. Basically, you just made me speechless. It's so, wow, the complexity.
I'm in the field of computer science and artificial neural net and we always say, yes, artificial neural net, it's like the neurons, but it is not like the human neuron because the human neuron is so much more complex, so much more adaptive.
And this is going back to one of the things that you said, why robots don't have cancer, because again, in robots, we have passive parts that combine to something more intelligent, but in human being or in any living creature, the elementary parts are also very intelligent.
Like you say, intelligence in the cell.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's not just neurons, every cell, every tissue in your body has some degree of competency to solve problems in different spaces, in transcriptional spaces, in physiological spaces, in morphological spaces.
All of them have this kind of intelligence and cancer is what happens when that breaks down and you have autonomy of lower level units that decide to go off and have a different agenda.
But the good news is that it makes this the whole structure incredibly robust.
And if you think that it's science fiction to regenerate the limbs, I will point out one other thing, which is that in frog, the signal to regenerate the leg and to regenerate the tail in the tadpole is exactly the same.
Meaning that we don't even have to, not only don't we have to provide the details of how to do it, we don't.
Just regenerate, just regenerate.
And build whatever normally goes here, that's what we are really telling it, build whatever normally goes here. And so I think, and can we also say stop regenerating in cancer cells.
We've done it in the frog we've done it and we're now doing it in human glioblastoma tissues.
Yeah, no, you absolutely can. Now, to clarify, we are not telling the cells grow or don't grow. What we are telling the cells is connect together into a nice electrical network, and remember what you're supposed to be doing.
And when they do that what the tissue remembers is, oh yes, we were some nice skin or some nice muscle or whatever we were, whereas before that, they're basically amoebas that treat the rest of the body as outside environment.
Which leads I think to the concept of collective intelligence, and many people say and you said yourself that we treat and colony as collective intelligence.
But we said, listen, collective intelligence are in everywhere. So could you please elaborate on the concept of collective intelligence in, in the context of cells and human beings.
The fundamental fact is that, to my knowledge, there is no such thing anywhere as an indivisible intelligence that can that is not made of parts, everything is made of parts.
So now the question is, isn't it amazing, I mean we are a walking bag of neurons and other cell types. Isn't it amazing that these cells who have little tiny local agendas, right, they have preferences about metabolic states about physiological states.
But when they get together, they acquire preferences that are huge. So, so all of your little tiny neurons get together and they have opinions about the world financial markets and, and, and, you know, the fate of mankind after the sun burns out, you know, they have these enormous goals that are unfathomable to the individual and so to the individual cell.
And so the world emergence doesn't solve anything. It's just a world that, you know, just shut up emergence. This is basically the meaning of this world.
Yeah, emergence.
There is much more to be done and we have I have put out a very specific theory of how cognition scales. So how you take little tiny homeostats that care about little tiny local things, and how connecting them together allows you to be an being an emergent being that has a much bigger so so so
all this the cognitive light cone, the cognitive light cone is a notion of what is the scale of the largest goal that you can pursue.
Not how far you can see and how far you can sort of sense, but what is the largest goal that you can pursue. So if the largest thing you care about is the local glucose concentration, well you're probably a bacterium.
And if you have you know 10 minutes of memory behind and maybe five minutes of anticipation forward. So you have this tiny spatiotemporal light cone maybe you're some kind of bacteria.
If you're a dog, you know, you can have quite a long memory back you can have some predictive capacity forward.
You are never going to care about what happens in three months 10 miles over, you just can't that that's that goal is too big for you. If you're a human, you can have enormous goals planetary scale goals about things that will happen long after you're dead.
So, so we have this amazing fact and maybe it gives rise to some psychological pressures actually that that you can envision goals that are absolutely unachievable.
You know, the simpler organisms all their goals are achievable because they're shorter than their lifespan. So you can achieve all your goals, the humans, you may have goals that are enormous.
So, so the trick for all of this is to cash out how it is that you scale goal directedness how you connect the cybernetics systems with tiny little goals to get systems with much bigger, much bigger goals.
And that's what that's what all of this is about.
And one can one, if I go, you know, top down approach, and I say, okay, I start with a big goal, and then I divide and divide and divide.
Then I can explain each neuron going to do the very same exact tiny, tiny, tiny thing, but they can't go the other way around I can't start in the single neuron and then move up up to the giant goal that will happen after I did.
So it is very tricky. And how can you explain this very, this single, single neuron acting in part of, you know, decision making for the world financial crisis.
Well, of course, the single the single neuron isn't doing that. What's happening is that you have a larger system that is bending the action space it's bending the the the energy landscape for all of its parts to get the parts to do things that they otherwise wouldn't do that's
kind of the whole point of, of this collective action is to, is to get the parts to do things that by themselves they're not going to do. And so you have this, it's we're back to this idea of, you look at the computer, and you say, I it's doing an
algorithm to calculate, you know, pi. And then you look down you say but this electron here, what makes this electron do go from here to there to help to calculate the pi right.
And it's, we have many examples of this where you have these like this this the scaling of levels, and that's the trick in biology to understand how it happens in biology, and then to use that to develop new technologies that that achieve intelligence in that in that way
to scale architecture. And can, and can we say that the single neuron somehow knows through back propagation and, you know, a penalty and reward that is, is actions are part of a bigger goal.
That's, that's a really interesting question so, so how, how do you, if you are part of a bigger system. How do you know that I suspect I don't know the answer to this but I suspect that some kind of girdle theorem limitation is going to say that we can never really
understand the mind of which we are part. Okay, the bigger system that we can never really understand it, but I bet that there are techniques from let's say information theory or something like that, that can help you gather evidence to the fact that you are part of such a system.
So, I have this.
Yeah, I have this sort of fantasy of, imagine, you're, you're a neuron inside a brain. Actually, there's, there's two neurons and the one neurons as to the other neuron.
I think our universe is a cold, unfeeling place of zero agency. It's just physics, no one cares what we do.
You know, it's just, it's just this this cold mechanical universe. The other neuron says, I disagree. I think I can, I can sort of feel that the universe has a, there's a mind to this we live in a, in a mindful universe where some things are rewarded and punished.
And every time there's this sort of like, like wave of corrective propagation, I feel that the universe is not indifferent to what we do. I think we, you know, I so I can't tell if it likes cats or dogs or what this neural net is trying to do but but I have this this feeling that that that the agency of my environment is not zero.
And in the case of the neurons, of course, the second neuron is correct, because, because even though he cannot comprehend everything that that brain is doing, he does not live in a mindless universe he's part of this thing this this this giant mind right.
So, of course, you know, we meet people some people feel that they live in a, in a cold mechanical universe and other people feel they learn lessons right the universe is teaching me a lesson and I've learned you know it likes me to do this and that.
I don't know what the answer to that is, and I'm not sure we can prove it. But I think it would be a big mistake to assume that we are necessarily without the agency of our environment is necessarily zero.
Wow, it's not it's not biology it's not philosophy it's even not philosophy it's I think it's theology so the idea of meaning and purpose so Michael Levine thank you so much for your time, and it's not just for your time it's for your.
A groundbreaking research and what you do, and I think it's like I asked you about what do you hope what do you believe I believe that I'm talking with a future Nobel Laureate, and I think that this is so mesmerizing and thank you so much.
I always ask my guest, and I must ask you, could you give me just one single productivity tip, because what you do in your lab the living lab produce so much valuable work.
So if you can share with me just one single productivity tip that you use, I will appreciate it very much.
Okay, here's one one thing that I tell my students and postdocs. I think it's very important to clearly separate creative work from mechanical work.
And specifically what that means is, let's say, let's say, let's say you're going to write a paper, and many people are stuck because because they have many ideas and they're trying to write it down and you have to keep changing it.
So what I do is is the following. I have a creative phase where I think about what do I want to say what is my story how do I want to whatever.
After that I make an outline. And then after that my goal is to to so I go as a computer scientist you'll understand what I'm saying I go bread first always bread first.
The first thing I do is put in an outline that is that matches my creative vision of how I want to tell the story. After that, it gets a little more mechanical because each big point of the outline well it's kind of clear what has to go under that.
The next step is even more mechanical. And if you do that properly, you you lose by the time you get to the bottom of that outline there is no more degrees of freedom left, you know exactly what goes in now it's total mechanics you just type in whatever the outline
that's what you put in. And so, by separating the process where where it's it's you know sort of intuitive and creative and all that, from the process where okay now I can see exactly what has to go here.
You, you end up not getting stuck right and so, so that's I try to be very clear that way and that helps me get things done.
This is great and the mechanical Michael Levine is part of the collective creative Michael Levine which is our topic of the conversation today. Thank you so much for your time. God bless you and keep on your very important work that that that you're doing.
Thank you so much I really appreciate the conversation it was great fun. And yeah, thank you for having me on.
Bye bye. Bye bye Michael. Thank you so much on this channel. You will see the authors of these books and many more having great conversation with me. Please subscribe, hit the bell button and be part of this great community.
See you in the next video.
