Hi, welcome to another episode of Cold Fusion. Last episode, we took a deep dive into the
emerging battle for AI supremacy between Google and OpenAI, with Microsoft's backing.
Just a couple of days later, both Microsoft and Google came out with their announcements.
It's just crazy how fast things are moving. So how did each company go with their announcements?
Well, very differently. Microsoft gave an awe-inspiring presentation, while Google scrambled and
fumbled. A Google presenter became embarrassed and flustered when she realized that there was no
phone to give a live demonstration of what she was talking about. Investors weren't so impressed
either, so Google's parent company, Alphabet, lost $100 billion worth of value during and after
the presentation. So, sit back, relax, and enjoy the show as we take a look at the biggest war in
technology in a very long time.
First of all, I mean, look, I have the greatest of admirations for Google and what they've done,
and, you know, they're an unbelievable company. They're the 800-pound gorilla on this, which is
what they are, and I hope that with our innovation, they will definitely want to come out and show
that they can dance, and I want people to know that we made them dance, and I think that'll be a
great day. The race for AI dominance is heating up. And on February 7th, Microsoft fires the
first shot across the bow at Google. They unveil their grand plan for AI. Then the next day,
Google shoots back and unveils their AI. To say that both presentations were unequal
would be an understatement. So let's start with Microsoft.
CEO Satya Nadella takes to the stage. He talks about how every walk of life is beginning to be
changed by AI, then goes on to talk about the three stages of the web. It's birth on PCs and
servers, then mobile and apps, and then the next phase will be AI. Satya and the rest of Microsoft
have begun to see an issue with search. The fact is, search hasn't changed in 20 years,
and some people think that Google has gotten even less accurate lately because of SEO keyword
stuffing. Microsoft's new edge browser and Bing will be able to do three new things.
Answer your questions, chat with you, and create new things.
To highlight some interesting insights into the current shortfalls of search,
they mentioned the statistic that 40% of people search for something and immediately click back
out of the result that they got. This means that they can't find what they're looking for,
and they calculated that about half of all searches don't get the answers that you want.
Most of these are very specific queries based on your personal situation.
Microsoft showed a chart highlighting the issue. You've got search on the x-axis,
and generative AI on the y-axis. The new Bing will bridge that gap between the two,
giving you the power of traditional search with the helpfulness of the good people on Reddit.
This chart specifically reminds me of the unveiling of the iPod and iPhone,
where Steve Jobs clearly laid out a gap in the market and showed where a new product could
fit in to solve it. I think this chart might be historic in the same way.
So getting onto the new Bing itself, it's running on AI that is quote,
much more powerful than chat GPT and tuned specifically for search. In the presentation,
Microsoft states that because they already have a search engine, they can now use backend
web indexing and data to efficiently and directly tie into the new version of chat GPT.
So onto the new Bing interface. When you type a complex query, you'll get the typical results
on the left, and on the right, you'll get a synthesized answer with sourcing. You can ask
about current events or future events and get the same experience. A particularly cool example
was asking if a specific seat from Ikea would fit in a 2019 Honda Odyssey.
If that new love seat from Ikea is going to fit in the back of my Honda Odyssey,
and what you'll see is Bing can actually find the dimensions of the love seat,
the interior space of the car, and then make an estimation as to whether it will fit.
In this case, I'm choosing an example of where Bing does not know the answer.
And we know that we can't be definitive about it. And the reason I'm doing that
is because we know we won't be able to answer every question every time.
But Bing can still provide some helpful information, as you can see on this answer.
We also know we'll make our share of mistakes. And as we be in, there's roll this out.
So we've added a quick feedback button at the top of every search so that you can give us feedback
and we can learn. But this was just the beginning. The main feature was the new chat section.
Think of this as search with your own personal helper to help you refine your query until you
get exactly what you're looking for. This comes in handy for activities like trip planning and
shopping research. Let's start with shopping. So I'm going to look for a 65 inch TV.
We give you a good set of answers. But now I want to refine this query. So I can do that by
going to chat. Now I can either swipe up with my fingers or look up here at the top of the screen.
We have now a new chat scope. And with that, with one click, you are now into chat.
Look how beautiful that is. Search to chat. Just so seamless. So you can really,
you can just talk to it. You can just ask for it. So in this case, let's say,
I'm going to ask for a gaming optimized TV. All I have to say is which of these are best
for gaming. And we remember all of the context. Since we know you're asking about gaming TVs,
we pull out, oh, this one has a game optimizer. This has game mode. And so we make that really
helpful. I'm on a budget. I'll ask you to adjust it for which one of these is the cheapest here.
I didn't know you could get a flat screen for under $500. But that's a good deal there on Bing
if you're looking for TV. Engadget elaborates a bit more about how the experience was.
Basically, think of this layout as the physical manifestation of what Microsoft is calling your
AI copilot. In here, you're encouraged to be way more conversational than you would be with, say,
Bing's regular search bar or even a Google search. So after you get your initial round
of answers from Bing, you can follow up with questions without all every little bit of the
keywords or context that you provided earlier. And the system will still know what it is that
you're talking about. In fact, it'll keep all the context until you hit that sweep or the broom
icon to the left of the input field to start a new topic and clean the slate altogether.
So Microsoft has also added AI into their Edge browser. You can, for example, pull up a PDF,
ask questions about it, summarize it, and compare it to other stuff on the web.
Just take a look. It's pretty mind blowing. And you're going to notice now that we've integrated
Bing in a really cool new way. Let me show you. I'm browsing around in my new Edge browser,
and I want to read Gap's quarterly report. And up comes the 15-page Gap PDF. It's pretty long.
I won't have time to read all that. What I'd love is a summary of the key points. With one click,
I can open up the sidebar. I can use chat and Edge to simply ask it to give me the key takeaways
of the page I'm on. So I'll just say key takeaways from the page. And Bing in AI can now read that
PDF and look how great it comes up with the summary of the key points here. Very, very cool. A massive
time savings. But now I want to compare this with, say, Lulu Lemon, who also has their third-quarter
earnings. Bing can now call out to the web, pull information from outside of this page,
bring it into Edge, compare it with the information that's on this page,
all with an Edge. And I asked it to do it in a table. And look how amazing this is.
Just like that in one table. I can get an answer to this question. Think about how much time that
would have taken otherwise. I really do have to say that's great execution by Microsoft.
There's also a new compose tab where you can generate whatever content you'd like,
specifying the tone, length, and other parameters. So if you still couldn't see it with chat GPT,
there's no longer any doubt the world has just changed. It's the summation of human knowledge
squeezed into an AI, or at least the start of that process. Just stop and think about that.
We're living through history. So what was Google's answer? Unfortunately for Google,
everything got off to a horrendous start. Google's new highly touted AI chatbot,
Bard, has already made a boo boo. The very first advertisement for Google's Bard
showcased it giving a wrong answer. After Fortune reported on the incident,
Alphabet's share price began to slide. In the ad, Bard has given the prompt quote,
What new discoveries from the James Webb Space Telescope can I tell my nine-year-old about?
Bard responds with a number of answers, including one suggesting the JWST was used to take the very
first pictures of a planet outside the Earth's solar system, or exoplanets. This is inaccurate.
The error was spotted hours before Google hosted a launch event for Bard in Paris,
where a Google senior executive touted Bard as the future of the company. Shares of Google
parent Alphabet were down more than 7% in early trading Wednesday, outpacing declines in the
broader S&P 500. The event was very disappointing. Very little time was spent on the Bard conversational
AI. A lot more time was spent on reiterating how good existing Google products were, like Search,
Translate, Google Lens and Maps. The elephant in the room was what Microsoft and OpenAI were doing.
So, after 13 minutes talking about other things, they finally got onto their ChatGPT competitor,
powered by their research language model, Lambda. The thing was, it was presented as a
stand-alone product. What they showed was very similar to ChatGPT. There was no sourcing,
or further integration into any OS, or any other kinds of features. Google is basically
where OpenAI was last year. The biggest steal for Bard is its ability to answer questions
with no one right answer. Google calls this NORA, and here's an example.
And then of course, the infamous moment of the presentation. Presenter Liz Reed was about to
demonstrate multi-search, a new Google Lens feature. And this is what happened.
It was the most embarrassing incident in a tech presentation,
since Steve Jobs' Wi-Fi wouldn't connect back in 2010.
And it couldn't have come at a worse time for Google. Aside from this, there wasn't much else,
and then the presentation just moved onto Google Maps. Overall, the Google presenters
seemed flat, and also, the live stream's comments were turned off, very unusual for a Google event.
So the event didn't provide any groundbreaking information, or much information at all for that
matter. It only signalled that Google probably isn't prepared, and doesn't have a solid plan yet,
or they would have showed it. In my opinion, they just shouldn't have done the event.
As mentioned, $100 billion of stock value was lost due to their poor performance.
Of course, markets are volatile, and it's probably going to bounce back, but it is an
indication of what investors immediately thought. Google, no doubt, will probably regroup and figure
something out. There just isn't really another choice for the company.
Satya seems genuinely very calm, cool, and collected about the whole thing.
There's a great interview by The Wall Street Journal, where he behaves like he's just stumbled
across a gold mine, and I don't blame him.
We are grounded in the fact that Google dominates this space. I feel like a new race is starting
with a complete new platform technology. I'm excited for the users to have choice, finally,
and a real competitive race out there. How are you thinking about monetizing this?
The last time I checked software, I mean, it's a search, was the most profitable category
there is on planet Earth. Therefore, all I need is a few more users, and someone else that I'm
competing in has to keep all of their users and all of their gross margin. I'm looking forward
to that. Our intent is to do that, which is to put stuff out there with safety, but at the same
time realizing that we are going to have to think about safety as an ongoing responsibility, not a
one-time responsibility. There's a lot of fear that AI is going to take our jobs, replace us.
Is that unfounded? And how do you think about tools like Bing now and how we use it in the
job market? I think of this as at the foundational level going to help us do our jobs better,
reduce some of the drudgery in some of our jobs, whether it's in coding or in writing or in
automating a workflow or searching for information. So at the fundamental level, I think we need a
productivity boost. I feel it'll create more jobs. The barriers to knowledge work will come down.
So I mean, the unintended consequences around labor market shifts are always something we
need to be mindful of, but I don't subscribe to this zero sum or one lump of labor fallacy.
And I think that we want to have new jobs get created and more job opportunities.
What about this guy? Does Clippy haunt your dreams?
Not really. It's probably the thing that was the most fun character Microsoft introduced,
which, you know, think about it, right? We have been on a 30 year journey to perfect it. So I'm
excited to be here in 2023 launching Bing with AI. So one of the key things in this story is that
Microsoft has little to lose, but Google has everything to lose. Satya told the Financial Times
that search has changed forever and Google has to defend their entire market share.
So what about the wider discussion? What about the jobs that will be replaced? Website content
makers may fret. AI may have taken a lot from their businesses. It will also be interesting to see how
publishers and content owners react to this. The chat answers are more advanced than the simple
query answers that we see in search engines today. And it's clear that people will click on links less,
even if Bing is clearly sourcing information here. There's about a billion questions that can be
raised from this moment in history. Will there be lawsuits from news sites over using their content?
What about political bias and censorship? What about all the unintended consequences?
Time will only tell. I can only hope that the benefits outweigh the risks. And on the bright
side, it's obvious to see that there is a large benefit here. I think the next wave to excite
everyone would be an audio version of this. A smart AI assistant that has actually good voice
synthesis. That's the next step. I actually briefly mentioned this idea a few weeks ago
on the Through the Web podcast. So check it out if you haven't already.
So in conclusion, as I said in the last video, even just a year or two ago, nobody would have
thought that Google would be in this position. From their presentation, it looked like they were
unprepared and they weren't integrating barred as well as chat GPT was being used. But that's just
me. What do you guys think? Anyway, so that's an update to the beginning of the AI war. I'll be
interested to know your thoughts. Anyway, thanks for watching. If you did like this episode, got a
whole bunch of stuff on AI, maybe if you're wondering how this all started and who invented AI,
I've got a video on that. If not, there's a bunch of other stuff on here too, on science,
business and technology. So you've been watching Cold Fusion, my name is DagoGo, and I'll play you
out with yet another new track I made on the second channel. Cheers guys, have a good one.
Thank you for watching.
