Hi, welcome to another episode of Cold Fusion where I cover anything in science, technology,
business or history.
In front of an enthusiastic audience, a 35 year old Trevor Milton stands on stage proudly
proclaiming his latest achievement.
The year was 2016 and the charismatic energetic Trevor seems like he's just about to change
the world, behind him was his tool to do just that.
It was a truck running on revolutionary hydrogen technology.
It could save both money and the environment.
This truck, called the Nicola One, was going to disrupt the $1 trillion trucking industry
and would go on to make Trevor a multi-billionaire.
Bosch, General Motors and other big names all wanted to work with Trevor and his revolutionary
company that would later be worth $34 billion.
The only problem was that none of this was real.
The vehicle behind him was simply a shell that couldn't even drive itself and none
of the technology that he talked about even existed, but this would only be the beginning
of the lies.
So how was everyone fooled and how could a man look so confident about his achievements
while knowing that none of what he was saying was real?
You are watching Cold Fusion TV.
Today it seems like the world of startups is having its fair share of charismatic swindlers.
From Theronaut to Wirecard, the game plan is simple.
Pretend that you have a revolutionary technology or business plan, gain billions in investment
and finally fake it until you can cash out with billions.
In the case of Nicola Motors, you might just end up with a $34 billion company.
To understand how we got here, we have to go back.
Our story starts in Utah with Trevor Milton.
Trevor was born in 1982 and had a rough upbringing.
His mother died of cancer when he was just 14 years of age and he would witness her coughing
up blood in her latter days.
Trevor and his four siblings had to learn how to survive with a bedridden mother and
a father who worked four hours away.
It could be said that these experiences made Trevor driven.
He wanted to make something of himself.
Milton and his father were close.
Many years later, they would even go into business together.
But that comes later in the story.
After high school, Milton took a Mormon missionary trip to the favelas in Brazil.
The experience got him thinking about wider problems, particularly environmental ones.
He would return back to Utah in 2003 and would attend the Utah Valley State College to study
sales and marketing, but he would drop out after just one semester.
He had his eyes on bigger things.
He wanted to start his own company and so he did.
His first company dealt with security alarm sales and Trevor would sell off the company
for $300,000.
But in this deal, there were already signs of trouble.
According to the buyer of Milton's company, he overpromised the potential of the business
resulting in a loss for the buyer.
Milton also allegedly cheated his business partner out of $50,000 during the sale.
In 2009, he would move into the online ads business with a website that sold used cars.
Trevor would then move on from selling used cars to building vehicle power plants.
And if you think this was a bit of a leap, it was.
He had no formal training in the industry.
Undeterred though, this effort would come in the form of dehybrid.
The plan was to transform existing diesel engines to run on compressed natural gas.
Now, this idea was solid, natural gas has less emissions, lower maintenance costs and
is overall safer.
The execution of his plan, however, was a disaster.
As mentioned, Trevor had no formal engineering experience.
But after some good marketing, he managed to convince the company Swift Transportation
to invest $2 million.
In the deal, 10 trucks would be converted as a trial run, then later, 800 trucks.
But as it turned out, Trevor wasn't pulling his weight in the deal.
A 2012 lawsuit revealed that only 5 trucks had been delivered.
In addition, the engines had major problems and didn't do at all what they claimed.
And to top it off, part of that $2 million was squandered on personal living.
Milton was simultaneously bleeding through investor money and needed more.
In 2012, he tried to find another investor in Utah to buy out the company, but they
smelt a rat and backed out of the agreement.
To run away from all of his legal problems, Trevor started a new company with his father.
It was called Dehybrid Systems.
Dehybrid Systems and Dehybrid were completely different companies and the similarities in
their names was intentional.
Trevor and his father now had complete ownership and would work on the same technology but
now without the legal problems.
This move left the whole Dehybrid partners with nothing.
As outlandish as this was, the plan worked and a new company, Worthington Industries,
paid $16 million for their company.
The only problem was that the company was in shambles.
In private conversations, Trevor admitted that parts of the engine systems were falling
off the trucks, something he stated was potentially fatal.
At the end of the day, all that mattered for Trevor is that the deal was paid out for him
and his father.
I freaking helped design and develop and fix all these repairs that Worthington didn't
know about.
These back of cab units were actually falling off of the trash trucks.
Falling off the trash trucks.
Like breaking off.
They were shearing the damn freaking frames and then coming off, like nearly freaking
causing deaths and stuff.
In 2014, Trevor founded what would become Nicola Motors.
Meanwhile, Worthington was losing millions.
The faulty engines that Dehybrid had given them was causing nothing but problems.
Milton was making money while the companies that he sold off were money pits.
Milton would continue to convince people that he had valuable technology.
On May 9th 2016, Nicola Motors announced the Nicola One, a semi-truck that would revolutionise
the transport industry.
It could travel 1,000 miles without stopping and only took 15 minutes of downtime to refill
and do another 1,000 miles.
The global trucking market is worth over $1 trillion, so a disruptive technology like
this could be a game changer if someone could make it work, that is.
On a bizarre twist, allegedly, Nicola bought the design from a man in Croatia for a few
thousand dollars, but this didn't stop the company from suing Tesla for $2 billion, claiming
that Tesla had stolen their design.
Unaware of Milton's past, the world was abuzz with the news of the revolutionary truck.
So how were they going to do this exactly?
Well, with the same technology that had been a complete failure in the Dehybrid companies,
of course, compressed natural gas technology.
The truck was to be revealed in a live event in December of 2016, a very tight deadline.
Could Nicola pull it off?
They must have thought that because they began to take pre-orders.
They stated that the Nicola One was, engineered, developed, and is finalizing assembly.
But what did they actually have?
By August of 2016, the Nicola One was just a frame on wheels.
The body hadn't even arrived yet, there were no production facilities either, and according
to a source familiar with the project, the workers were scrambling to the hardware store
to pick up basic parts.
Meanwhile, the Nicola Motor Company Twitter account was hyping up the event.
They stressed that the truck would be fully functioning.
Amidst all of this, at the beginning of August, while the truck was still a frame, the company
abruptly announced that it had pivoted from compressed natural gas to hydrogen fuel cell
technology.
The hydrogen fuel cell announcement was even a shock to those within the company.
In mid-November, as the show was drawing closer, the team was hard at work slapping
the truck together.
There were no electric motorcores or gears, only axles in an empty shell.
The body finally did arrive in late November, roughly a week before the show.
Age 2, the chemical formula for hydrogen, was decalred proudly on the side of the truck,
even though there was no such technology inside.
So I can understand that building a prototype can be less than elegant, but to call this
fully functioning was at the very least a bit misleading, a fact that would later come
back to haunt Nicola.
But more on this later in the episode.
When the big day came, Trevor seemingly couldn't hold back his emotion when talking.
Perhaps it was an appeal to one's emotional side to shut down rational thinking and scepticism.
Bloomberg would later state that the statements made by Trevor had alarmed some people familiar
with the truck's capability.
They told Bloomberg that the truck was inoperable and had missing key components to power itself.
The whole truck was powered by a mains power cord that was connected under the stage.
Trevor would put an emphasis on the touchscreens within the cabin, seemingly the only part
of the truck that actually functioned.
The whole thing was essentially a big shiny decoration.
So how long have you been working on this, because this is a fully functioning truck
right here that we're sitting in, so how long have you guys been working on this?
Years in secrecy, it's been very hard.
Some of the people have found out about us over the last four or five months as we announced
some of the lead up to this big event, but it took years and years to get here.
This isn't just a pusher, like a lot of vehicles that they unveil or just vehicles that don't
actually function.
It's a fully functioning vehicle, which is really incredible.
You can go through, you know, we can...
Functional or not, Trevor had smoothly talked his way to entrepreneurial fame.
The internet was ablaze with buzz, and from there, they were off to the races.
During the event, in January of 2017, the company raised capital as part of its series
A round.
Nicola also signed with Bosch, as well as FuelCell and Hydrogen Partners.
The plan may have been to leverage existing suppliers to deliver on their promises, but
as time passed and the hype from the December 2016 show faded, people that were following
closely began talking about the company, stating that Nicola needed to show some updates on
their truck, the Nicola One.
So, in early 2018, a video of the Nicola One was produced to dispel the rumours that
it wasn't a functioning truck.
The video was called, Nicola One in Motion, and the video seemingly worked.
Even Arizona Governor, Doug Ducey, was impressed.
He agreed to host the Nicola Manufacturing Headquarters in his state and even played
a video during his announcement.
And once again, there was now a tremendous amount of buzz and excitement.
A lot of people were looking forward to the pre-production units to be released the following
year, but this was never to be.
It seems that Trevor was up to his old tricks again.
He never really had any plans to finish developing the Nicola One truck, he was only interested
in one thing, raising more money.
After the 2016 announcement, to the shock of all of those involved in the Nicola One
project, the truck's development was abandoned, but nobody outside the company knew this.
The promotional Nicola One video proved to be a sham itself.
According to a former employee who spoke with the Nicola Chief Engineer, Kevin Link, the
video was simply the result of Nicola towing the truck to the top of the hill and letting
it roll back down.
Unsurprisingly, those who worked on the video had to sign NDAs.
By September of 2019, Trevor Milton owned 40% of the company and by age 37, he was now
a billionaire.
So the company was going to use compressed natural gas technology and then pivoted towards
hydrogen technology.
They were going to use hydrogen as a kind of fuel to power an electric motor.
And why the difference?
Well, hydrogen goes further than a battery electric truck does and it's a lot lighter
to operate.
So ultimately, it's just a lot of like juggling these different things, but we're pretty
close.
We just ordered the largest order ever of electrolyzers that I know of.
So an order yesterday was over $30 million to produce over 40,000 kilograms of hydrogen.
We just made that order yesterday from Nell out of Norway.
So we're already prepping our first five stations to be up and running.
We're breaking ground.
We should be breaking ground this year on these stations.
As good as this sounds, hydrogen is expensive and requires a lot of engineering to store
and transport safely.
The plan for Nicola Motors was to have 700 hydrogen stations around North America and
70 in Europe within the next decade.
Nicola planned to make its own hydrogen by using energy from solar and renewable sources.
This all sounds amazing, but when you look into the details of who was spearheading a
lot of the key technology aspects, things get a little suspect.
Nicola's director of hydrogen production is none other than Trevor Milton's brother.
Previously to joining Nicola, his work consisted of pouring concrete and building a barn as
a subcontractor.
Not exactly the experience needed.
According to those familiar with the matter, Trevor's really didn't do much at the company.
He was kept around to do a few odd jobs, hold a rope here, fetch those tools and that kind
of thing.
Trevor had given Trevor's, along with other family members, Nicola Motors stock worth
over $110 million.
Nicola's head of infrastructure development, in charge of building out those 700 plus hydrogen
station networks, was previously a general manager of a golf club in Idaho.
Again, not exactly the experience one would expect for the job.
As pointed out by Kathy Wood, CEO of Ark Invest, hydrogen on average cost three times as much
as electric.
Trevor needed a way to fix this.
In an interview, Trevor claimed that Nicola produces hydrogen for under $3 a kilogram,
81% cheaper than the rest of the world, representing a major breakthrough.
We're really an energy technology company.
We sell the energy to consumers, not to consumers, but I'm sorry, businesses that are buying
the trucks.
That's where the money is.
Obviously, we want to reduce the cost of our truck, but we're now cheaper to drive than
a diesel is per mile, and we make five times the revenue of our competitors.
It's awesome.
That's why Nicola's really cracked the chicken and the egg.
The generation that's investing now, they care more about the environmental impact of
what you're doing than they do like, oh, you're six months or eight months from revenue.
They don't care.
They're like, you know what?
You're changing the rule.
You're going to reduce emissions more than anyone else.
We're invested into you.
When pressed, Trevor later acknowledged that Nicola produces no hydrogen at all, but this
didn't stop BP later pledging to join Nicola to build out their hydrogen fuel network.
It really is amazing when you think about it.
Trevor had perfected a devious game.
He would act as a spokesperson for Nicola and make up lofty claims to gain partners.
Essentially, Trevor would use these claims to get investors and more partners and then
use the brand recognition of those partners to get even more investors.
Ultimately, all of this didn't matter though, because the next piece of technology that
Trevor was going to announce was going to change the world.
In late October 2019, Trevor began teasing on Twitter that Nicola was going to change
the world with an upcoming announcement that was bigger than anything that he had announced
in the past.
While he was tweeting up a storm, in November of 2019, Milton cashed out $70 million and
bought the most expensive house in Utah, a $33 million mansion on a 2,600 acre ranch.
He told the Wall Street Journal that this place was, quote, a sanctuary for my family,
friends, and others to enjoy.
On November 18, 2019, Nicola began negotiations to go public.
The very next day, the company announced that it had solved one of the greatest challenges
facing sustainable energy, a high density battery.
This new prototype battery would provide four times the energy density of lithium ion and
could power a Tesla Model S for over 600 miles.
On Twitter, Trevor claimed that he had seen this technology perform with his own eyes
and promised a major demonstration.
Riding high off the announcement, Nicola motors began to receive serious attention, and Hoosier
Bush was first to jump on board, placing a pre-order for 800 trucks.
Trevor estimated that the value of this new technology was to be worth hundreds of billions.
The thing was, Nicola had no pattern engineers, chemists, or research papers published.
The truth was, Nicola had acquired the battery maker ZapGo for $56 million.
As it turned out, ZapGo's technology was vaporware.
It was a scam.
It didn't exist.
And so there it was, Nicola, who had misled so many, had been misled themselves.
Interestingly, ZapGo was headed by Charles Resnick, a shady character who had just scammed
NASA a few months before the Nicola deal.
Charles used the money from NASA to hire numerous adult workers, certainly not a business expense.
Charles would plead guilty in January of 2020, but once again, all of this didn't matter
to Trevor.
He was still on Twitter, touting the non-existent battery technology.
With nothing more than the promise of a revolutionary truck that rolled down a hill and a game-changing
battery technology that was purchased from a company that was a scam, Nicola went public
on June 4th, 2020.
They did so through a technique called a reverse merger.
The thing is, with reverse mergers, you don't have to disclose all the intricate details
of your company, something that a regular IPO would require.
This should have raised some red flags from investors if they knew more about the history
of Nicola.
But alas, investors were euphoric, and Nicola shares spiked.
In one week of going public, the market value of Nicola surged past that of Ford, over $30
billion.
To put things into perspective, Ford sold 5.5 million vehicles in 2019 with a revenue
of $155 billion and had a market cap of around $28 billion.
Nicola, on the other hand, sold nothing and was valued at $30 billion, making it the world's
biggest truck maker without selling a single truck.
And with that, overnight, Trevor became a multi-billionaire.
It was settled, the markets had spoken, he was the next Elon Musk.
Things would soon change for Trevor though, but not before one last cash grab.
On September 8th, 2020, Nicola Motors announced a $2 billion partnership with General Motors.
GM was going to take an 11% stake in the company and manufacture their electric pickup truck,
the Nicola Badger.
The questions have to be asked, did General Motors do no research, or was something else
at play here?
Despite the chaos, Nicola was again accepting pre-orders for their badger truck.
To date, no one has ever seen a Nicola Badger, they only exist as a rendering as far as the
public is concerned.
Finally, after lying for years and roping in some of the biggest companies, two days
after the GM deal on September 10th, the short-selling investment firm, Hindenburg
Research, released a scathing report calling Nicola Motors an intricate fraud.
The firm said it had gathered extensive evidence, including recorded phone calls, text messages,
private emails and behind-the-scenes photographs detailing dozens of false statements by Milton.
They accused him of lying about Nicola's technology.
This was a bombshell report, and soon, the gates were blown wide open.
We believe this is only the beginning of Nicola's unraveling, Nicola's almost no
intellectual property products to revenue to fall back on.
We think the company's key asset was its founder's ability to raise money through hype
and then Hindenburg are saying outright lies.
Trevor Milton knew that this was the end, and he publicly promised a full rebuttal to all
the damaging claims, but instead, he deleted his social media accounts and disappeared.
Hi, Trevor Milton, the founder of Electric Tuck Company, Nicola, is voluntarily stepping
down as executive chairman and giving up his board seat.
This move comes after short-seller Hindenburg Research accused Milton of making false statements
about Nicola's technology in order to try and grow and secure partnerships with automakers.
Both the Justice Department and the SEC are investigating allegations made by Hindenburg.
On the 21st of September, Trevor steps down from the chairman position and former vice
chairman of GM, Stefan Gerski, takes over.
Nicola's stock plunged by 40% and negotiations between Nicola and other partners stalled.
And finally, a sexual assault allegation by Trevor's own cousin just added to the horrible
mess.
Many banks liquidated their Nicola stock, seemingly in disgust.
The company received a myriad of subpoenas and investigations by the Department of Justice
and the Securities and Exchange Commission commenced.
His company marketed as a game-changer.
We've built something that no one else thought was possible.
Cleaner vehicles powered by hydrogen and electricity.
For every doubter out there that said that there's no way this is true, how can that
be possible?
We've done it.
But now, the billionaire founder of Nicola Motor Company, Trevor Milton, is being charged
with securities fraud.
Do you have anything to say about the charges?
We have a statement.
Check it out.
It's seen leaving a Manhattan courthouse Thursday charged by federal prosecutors who
say he lied about every aspect of his truck of the future.
Milton claimed that the Nicola one could be driven when, in fact, the closest it ever
came to driving was when a group of Nicola engineers took it to the top of the hill
and rolled it down so it could be filmed for a commercial.
Prosecutors claiming the truck's door even had to be taped up for the video so it wouldn't
fall off.
At the end of July, 2021, a federal grand jury charged Trevor Milton with three counts
of criminal fraud.
The U.S. Attorney's Office in Manhattan accused the 39-year-old billionaire of lying to investors,
making false statements about the company and wire fraud.
The SEC also filed civil securities fraud charges against him, requiring the court to
permanently bar him from acting as an officer and ordered him to pay fines as well as give
back any revenue gained by his deceit.
Trevor Milton, of course, denies all wrongdoing and has pleaded not guilty to the charges,
but this will be a matter for the court to decide.
Since the charges, Nicola stock has been steadily falling.
Following the indictment, the company stated, quote, we remain committed to our previously
announced milestones and timelines and are focused on delivering Nicola Trey battery
trucks later this year from the company's manufacturing facilities.
Trevor continues to move forward under new management, but it has to be said, correcting
the course of a company built on fraudulent claims by a compulsive liar is not going to
be easy.
The GM deal lies in limbo and the stock price is at an all-time low and faith in the company
dwindles every day.
Bosch, General Motors and a slew of investors are left holding the bag.
On a wider point, it's becoming clear that investors have collectively lost their minds.
This seems as if they're only driven by lofty promises without doing a shred of research.
Everyone was just so excited that they didn't want to look deeper and herein lies the problem.
Think of yourself as an inexperienced investor.
You heard about this new company and it just showed off a revolutionary truck.
It was powered by new hydrogen technology and also had amazing new battery technology.
They'd partnered with major companies like Bosch and BP and this company has raised a
lot of money.
You'd think you've hit a goldmine, you'd also think that you've gotten in on the
next Tesla.
This whole train wreck really is the old adage, fake it until you make it.
But what happens if the things that you promise turn out to be much harder than anticipated?
When do you pass the point of no return and just keep lying until you get caught?
For Milton, he just kept lying until the very end.
In a way, the story of Trevor Milton and Nicola Motors would almost be impressive if it wasn't
so morally bankrupt.
Maybe he did this all to provide for his family that had suffered so much during those early
years.
But it could have just as easily been pure greed, I guess we may never know.
And with that, that is the wild and twisting story of Nicola Motors.
So let me know what you think in the comments section below.
So thanks for watching, my name is Dago Gogo and you've been watching Cold Fusion and
I'll catch you again soon for the next episode.
Cheers guys, have a good one.
It's me thinking.
