This episode is brought to you by Ground News.
Hi, welcome to another episode of Cold Fusion.
Samsung's management has stated
that the company is in crisis,
but Samsung is more than just a company.
It's a dynasty where leadership
is handed down through the generations.
Samsung basically runs Korea.
They alone account for 20% of South Korea's entire GDP.
Few companies anywhere in the world
have such a dominant impact on their home country's economy.
It's so influential that some jokingly
referred to South Korea as the Republic of Samsung.
Consumers in the US and other parts of the world
may just view Samsung as a phone or electronics brand,
but in South Korea, Samsung is on a whole different level.
The company is everywhere,
with its hand in nearly every industry you can think of.
They have 80 subsidiaries.
The flagship is Samsung Electronics,
but they dominate construction, real estate,
food production, finance, life insurance, and healthcare.
But they also build armored vehicles, oil tankers,
have a clothing and entertainment branch,
and even run hospitals.
When I was in Korea last year,
I even saw Samsung branded cars.
It's hard to believe that such a company
started by selling vegetables and dried noodles.
At the start of 2024, Samsung Electronics,
the crown jewel of the empire, was valued at 400 billion.
Then starting in July of 2024,
a sudden panic hit the company's stock,
and foreign investors frantically began selling off
their Samsung shares.
They lost $122 billion in value.
In just a few months,
almost half the company's market cap was wiped out.
This kind of drastic drop is concerning for any company,
yet alone one that's tied so heavily
to the GDP of an entire nation.
So what's behind the panic?
While we all know that stock markets can be fickle these days,
and even a rumor can start a selling process,
there is more behind the scenes.
Samsung itself has reshuffled some of its management
and forced a six-day working week for executives
to get their house in order.
And that brings about a major question here.
Are there major problems with Samsung?
Or is this just overblown market sentiment?
In today's episode,
we investigate what's going on with Samsung,
the management changes,
and what this all means
for one of the world's most influential companies.
You are watching Cold Fusion TV.
Before diving in,
we should remember that Samsung has run differently
to companies in the West.
Samsung is what's called a Chaebol,
or family-owned conglomerate
that's passed down through generations.
That's like if Zuckerberg was to hand over his empire
to one of his children.
The Samsung family are the most powerful in Korea.
In fact, Mickey Lee,
the producer of the Korean movie, Parasite,
was a Samsung IRS.
She was also instrumental
in pushing Korean culture into the mainstream.
But back to Samsung,
being a Chaebol company means that a lot of people
and a lot of control stays within the Lee family,
the company's founders.
This concentration of power
has created its own set of challenges.
Over the years,
there have been a number of corruption scandals
and legal battles that have tainted Samsung's image.
As Jeffrey Cain, author of Samsung Rising, puts it,
quote,
One of the largest scandals happened in 2017,
the company's heir, Lee Jae Yong,
became embroiled in bribery scandals.
Lee was charged with offering
38 million US dollars in bribes
to four companies run by a friend of the president
at the time.
Interestingly, one of the companies was in Germany
and provided horse-riding training
to one of the daughters of the president's friends.
In return, Lee was to get government help
for a corporate merger
that would give him more control within Samsung.
This scandal shook both public and investor confidence,
but by 2022, he was out of jail
and back as Samsung Electronics' executive chairman.
So why was this?
Well, the Korean government basically stated
that Samsung was too important for the government to mess with.
South Korea's most powerful business leader, J.Y. Lee,
emerged from an attention center just outside Seoul,
a free man,
a judge ruling it was hard to see the reason,
appropriateness and necessity
of arresting him at this time.
Later that year, Lee was convicted on a drug charge.
So the leadership of Samsung
has a bit of a question mark on it,
but that's not all.
Samsung is also known for its rigid hierarchy.
When things are good, this works well,
but insiders say it's a culture that stifles innovation
and makes it hard to adapt
to rapidly changing market demands,
a factor that would soon come into play.
When we talk about Samsung's $122 billion market value loss,
we're really talking about Samsung Electronics.
It's important to make that distinction
because Samsung operates a massive conglomerate as discussed
and has a range of divisions under its belt.
At the core of Samsung Electronics businesses
are two divisions.
One is the Device Experience Division,
which includes smartphones, TVs, refrigerators,
and other home appliances.
The other one is the Device Solutions Division,
which focuses on semiconductors and display panels.
Samsung Electronics, specifically its semiconductor
and consumer electronics divisions,
play the biggest roles in the company's market performance.
So when Samsung Electronics fell 32% from its high,
this seemed to be more than just the CEO fluffing about.
So what gives?
Well, it comes down to three big factors.
Number one, missed opportunities in AI.
Number two, a chip-making disadvantage.
And number three, some chaotic leadership changes.
Let's break these down,
beginning with missed opportunities in AI.
If you look online,
most media outlets point to Samsung's inability
to keep up with AI.
They tout this as a major factor behind the stock crash.
So is there any truth to this allegation?
Well, the short answer is yes.
When Generative AI took off, there was an AI gold rush.
Basically, everyone on the internet hates Generative AI,
but the fact of the matter is,
it can make a lot of money
for those companies who position themselves right.
Microsoft, Google, and especially Nvidia went all in.
Nvidia, who supplies the GPUs that powered AI ventures,
had their value skyrocket past $1 trillion.
So where does Samsung fit into this picture?
Unfortunately, nowhere.
They've been on the sidelines.
As a major semiconductor player,
Samsung has lagged behind
in its high bandwidth memory production.
High bandwidth memory, or HBM,
are special chips that are used in high-end graphic systems
like the Nvidia H100,
very same graphic systems that power AI.
The latest generation of high bandwidth chip
is called the HBM3E,
offering transfer speeds in the range of terabytes per second.
In an extremely high-profile deal,
Samsung was supposed to make
these special memory chips for Nvidia,
chips crucial for Nvidia's AI efforts.
But in one of the biggest blunders of the year,
reports indicate that Samsung completely fell flat.
Their chips couldn't reach the strict requirements
for heat and power efficiency that Nvidia required,
and it was a tough blow.
Falling short of a major client like this
comes with consequences, and for Samsung, this was costly.
Meanwhile, competitors like SK Hynex
have sweaped in to take advantage
and now hold a strong lead
in the high bandwidth memory market.
And now, they're currently the exclusive supplier
of these chips to Nvidia.
If you take a look at this graph
for the high bandwidth memory market,
just at a glance,
we can see that Samsung's flat white line
is consistently at the very bottom,
trailing well behind its smaller competitors
in the high bandwidth memory space.
Samsung knows they're falling short,
so they published a recent apology
acknowledging missed targets and struggles
in high performance AI memory.
Investors were further disappointed
with Samsung's latest quarterly profit.
It was 900 million below expectations.
They still did make 6.78 billion,
and that's nothing to sneeze at.
But falling short by nearly a billion
doesn't exactly make investors jump for joy.
Samsung was in panic mode,
and Vice Chairman Jun Young Hyun's recent statement
blatantly admitted that their failure
to meet market expectations
has fueled concerns
over Samsung's technological competitiveness
and future direction.
This, quote unquote, crisis,
as Samsung management calls it,
even led the company to enforce a six day work week
for its executives in an attempt to regain lost ground.
In short, Samsung, who manufactures chips,
were caught napping as AI chip hardware took off
and investors aren't happy.
Beyond AI, Samsung's chip business
is also facing critical challenges
in the smartphone chip space.
Their Exynos chips are a thorn
in the side of the flesh for Samsung.
For years, Exynos processors have been criticized
for issues like overheating poor battery efficiency
and subpar performance
when compared to Snapdragon's Qualcomm chips.
In fact, Samsung has lost so much faith
in their Exynos chips
that they often choose Snapdragon over Exynos
when it comes to their own flagship Galaxy series devices
sold in crucial markets, especially in North America.
The big competition for Samsung is of course, TSMC,
the Taiwanese giant that's absolutely mastered chip making.
Samsung's semiconductor business is a massive operation
with sales toastling almost $60 billion in 2024 alone,
but they've consistently found themselves
one step behind TSMC.
Their Taiwanese competition has an ability
to produce chips with greater efficiency,
more power and fewer defects.
Their pedigree has allowed them
to secure big name contracts with Apple, NVIDIA and AMD.
In contrast, Samsung has grappled with lower yields
and production delays.
As time passes, the gap in technical ability
between the two companies keeps growing.
In Q1 2024 alone, the top 10 semiconductor foundries
generated a collective 29.2 billion in revenue
and TSMC dominated the market
with a staggering 61.7% market share.
Meanwhile, Samsung had a meager 11%,
pretty concerning in comparison.
And if Samsung can't close this gap soon,
they risk losing even more ground to TSMC
and with it billions of dollars in potential revenue.
And to make matters worse, TSMC is no longer
the only competitor.
Samsung is also facing heat
from fast-rising Chinese competitors.
Chinese firms are catching up quickly
in sectors outside of the US sanctions.
These are legacy chips used in cars, airplanes,
home appliances and consumer electronics.
By the third quarter of 2024,
Samsung's performance was already taking a hit.
Memory chip demand was coming in weaker than expected
and all of this was the complete nightmare scenario
that Samsung had been dreading.
As the challenges piled up on all sides,
behind the scenes, Samsung has been scrambling
to address its internal issues by reshuffling leadership.
In May 2024, they announced the removal of Qiyang Qihiyang
as chip head and brought on Jun Yonghyun
to head the core semiconductor business
and steer the ship in a new direction.
This decision came well before the stock sell-off
by investors that started in July.
So it indicates that management knew
that the company was struggling
to get the chip out of the market.
Management knew that the company was struggling
and needed to change.
But this reshuffle in leadership
isn't just about some fresh perspective.
It's a response to mounting pressure
to fix a long-standing history of internal mismanagement.
The company has been through multiple leadership revamps
over the years with three new CEOs appointed in 2021
across its major divisions.
The frequency of leadership changes signals instability
and it may suggest that there's a lack
of a clear long-term strategy.
According to ZedNet, the recent shuffle
is just the latest attempt to revamp leadership
but without clear results.
This internal chaos may only add
to Samsung's perception of instability.
All of these issues, AI stagnation, chip struggles
and corporate chaos over the years
created a perfect storm that slashed Samsung's stock
into a bear market.
So what can Samsung do to turn things around?
For starters, as already mentioned,
they brought in Jun Yonghyun
to lead the semiconductor division.
Jun previously headed Samsung's battery
and energy solutions arm
and played a big role in the memory business.
He now has the task
of navigating the semiconductor crisis.
The hope is that his background
will help stabilize this vital division,
especially as global demand fluctuates.
They're also making some tough, cost-cutting decisions.
There's layoffs planned across Southeast Asia and Australia
that could impact 10% of jobs in the region.
It's a harsh move
but they see it as necessary to stabilize the ship.
I would like to see their bonuses though.
Well, there are 150,000 staff overseas
and that's more than half of Samsung's entire workforce.
The markets though where job losses are occurring
this time we're hearing are Australia, New Zealand
and also Southeast Asia.
And about 10% of the market or the workforce
in those markets could end up being affected
though the numbers are likely to vary
among each subsidiary as well.
Samsung's device solutions division
which handles memory and systems
recently reported a 40% profit drop from the previous quarter.
In response, Samsung plans to scale down
its foundry operations by up to 50% by year's end
and this is to adapt to weaker demand
from key clients in the US and China.
Meanwhile, they're reshaping their investment strategy
tripping non-core projects to focus on core areas
like semiconductors and display technology.
They've also hinted that more actions could follow
though the specifics are still under wraps.
Now let's take a step back and assess
whether the stock market collapse is overblown
or is it just a panic?
Yes, they've lost 122 billion in market value
and upper management is absolutely panicking
but is it all doom and gloom?
Samsung's core strength lies in its diverse portfolio.
One sector can be negatively affected over time
but other sectors can keep the ship afloat as a whole.
In this case, the most affected business sector
is Samsung Electronics
and looking at their recent earnings, it's a mixed bag.
Revenue came in at 59.3 billion
up 7% from the previous quarter
but operating profit fell 6.9 billion
due to one-off costs
including incentives in their semiconductor division
and their earnings do have some other bright spots
like their smartphone sales and display technology.
In short, while Samsung Electronics
has had its challenges
particularly in memory chips and semiconductors
it's not all bad news.
The stock sell-off is more a vote of no confidence
when it comes to the leadership
and the direction of the company.
The stock market is looking to the future
not exactly what's going on right now.
So it's been a rollercoaster for Samsung lately.
Currently, it may not be an extinction level event
but losing $122 billion in such a short time is a huge blow
and as mentioned, if their leadership doesn't steer the ship right
they might risk more panic.
Once again, let's not forget that stock markets are fickle.
They're driven by many factors
including global economic shifts, sentiment shifts
and even short-term events.
Still, the whole too big to fail mindset
doesn't always hold up.
I'm not saying that Samsung is the knocker of 2013
but clearly there's some work to do.
Ultimately, we have to wait and see what happens.
Getting informed on the top news stories
is more complicated than ever.
That's exactly where today's sponsor, Ground News comes in.
Ground News is a website and app
developed by a former NASA engineer.
She was on a mission to give readers an easy
data-driven objective way to read the news.
Using the story of SpaceX's Starship
completing its sixth test flight as an example
their bias distribution chart
shows me the political leanings of the news outlets.
If we compare the news headlines about the event
we can see that the left frames it as a technical failure
while the right focuses on the growing relationship
between Elon and Trump.
Scrolling down, I can compare every single article on the topic
with convenient tags showing me context about the source
like how factual it is and who owns it.
Ground News's blind spot feed is also great.
This shows you stories that are under-reported
by one side of the political spectrum.
For example, if you're on the left
you probably didn't catch the story
about how Biden missed the G20 photo.
So, Ground News is a fantastic tool
for getting international views,
sifting through misinformation
and identifying media bias.
They provide all the tools you need to be a critical thinker.
And right now for Black Friday
I'm offering 50% off their vantage subscription.
That's what I use for unlimited access
to all of their great features.
It's their biggest sale of the year.
So go to ground.news.coldfusion, use the QR code
or click the link in the description
to subscribe for under $5 a month.
So, what's your take on this?
Would love to hear your thoughts
in the comment section below.
So anyway, that's about it from me.
If you did like this episode,
feel free to check out anything else on Cold Fusion.
There's plenty of interesting stuff here
on science, technology, business.
And also, if you've made it this far
and you're one of those OG subscribers to Cold Fusion,
you would have remembered my Samsung video
about 10 years ago.
So if you were there for that video,
thanks for sticking around.
Really, really appreciate it.
All right, my name is DeGogo
and I will see you again soon for the next episode.
Cheers, guys.
Have a good one.
Cold Fusion.
It's new.
