This video is brought to you by Imprint.
Hi, welcome to another episode of Cold Fusion.
Has anyone seen Mark Zuckerberg lately?
He looks a bit different.
The CEO used to be known as the quintessential nerd,
but now the plain tees and dark hoodies
have been replaced with contemporary style,
and his timid frame has now been replaced
with that of a fully-fledged MMA fighter.
This makeover might just seem like a change in personal appearance,
but when you look deeper, it's significant.
Like it or not, Mark Zuckerberg
is one of the most influential people on the planet.
Billions of people around the world use his products.
Moreover, no one can challenge the power
he holds within Meta, literally.
Meta's corporate board is set up
so that Mark can't be removed against his will.
So a rebranding of the Zuck
is more consequential than meets the eye.
It could be a clever strategy to redefine
how the public perceives Zuckerberg
and, by extension, the companies he leads.
Is it working?
Early signs say yes.
We'll talk to that later,
but much of the internet is already approving the change,
with GQ Magazine stating that the rebrand is so good
that it, quote, needs to be studied.
And it's not just the outside.
Mark also appears to have modified his political views.
In this episode, we'll take a look at the new era of Zuck,
his journey, how he reinvented himself,
and how all of this affects the companies that he runs.
Those who know a lot of details about Meta's controversies
aren't likely to fall for it,
it just might shift opinions for a lot of people out there.
The behaviour of humans as a group is pretty simple.
If the majority respect a public figure,
that positive perception leaks into everything
that public figure does.
A great example is the power of a CEO's public image.
A positive example of this working was with Steve Jobs.
If you think about it, he was basically a modern take on Gandhi,
from his meditative poses when answering questions,
his philosophical answers, even down to the round glasses.
It can be traced back to his love and inspiration from the 60s
when Eastern ideas came into the tech world
during the hippie movement and computer counterculture in California.
For Steve Jobs, the Gandhi aura worked in his favour for decades,
hiding his temperamental and explosive nature behind the scenes.
Even till the 2000s, the public ethos for Apple remained the same,
an alternative tech company made for the benefit of humans.
While according to them,
everything else on the market was unnecessarily complicated
and anti-human.
Zuckerberg is almost the complete opposite.
For much of his career,
Zuckerberg's public image has been characterised as anti-human and detached.
Zuckerberg was, in many ways,
emblematic of Silicon Valley's culture of innovation
without a deep concern for social impact.
In the movie The Social Network,
which is based on the story of Mark Zuckerberg
and how Facebook was first founded,
Mark was portrayed as an awkward, unlikeable jerk in a hoodie.
Even though the movie was released in 2010,
that perception would linger for years to come.
Zuck's business acumen would be demonstrated over the following decade.
At the end of that period, Facebook had 2 billion users
and his acquisitions of Instagram and WhatsApp proved to be as successful.
He had so much power within these companies
that he essentially was Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp.
There's no doubt that his personal brand began to suffer
alongside Facebook's growing controversies.
Zuckerberg effectively became a transnational tech czar
at the centre of privacy scandals
as well as political and cultural debates,
the results of which made Zuckerberg
one of the most hated household names.
In 2018, the Cambridge Analytica scandal
further destroyed Mark's public image.
We've got to remember that Facebook was accused
of allowing a political analytics firm
to improperly access the personal data of millions of users.
Zuckerberg would testify before Congress
and it was bizarre in many ways.
His behaviour was so unhuman
that he would be called a robot or a lizard in a human costume.
That sounds pretty bad already,
but what was going on internationally was even worse.
In some countries, Zuckerberg's companies caused many apocalypses.
In 2017, Facebook contributed to a genocide
against the Rohingya people in Myanmar.
In Colombia, Facebook has been a breeding ground
for social unrest and political fighting.
And then there's Sri Lanka.
During its economic meltdown,
Facebook was in the crosshairs for spreading false rumours
and conspiracy theories, which only made things worse.
Meanwhile, content moderators both in the US
and developing countries faced poor working conditions
while screening horrific content,
often without support from Facebook.
Then in October 2021,
whistleblower Francis Hagen reveals some shocking information.
The company had internal knowledge
of Instagram's harmful effects on teenage mental health
and its role in stoking political violence around the world.
And the same was true for Facebook.
I saw Facebook repeatedly encounter conflicts
between its own profits and our safety.
Facebook consistently resolved these conflicts
in favour of its own profits.
The result has been more division, more harm,
more lies, more threats, and more combat.
In some cases, this dangerous on-life talk
has led to actual violence that harms and even kills people.
The leaks painted a troubling picture.
A company aware of its impact
but seemingly unwilling to make any substantial changes,
and this ignited public distrust on a global scale.
For Zuckerberg, now the problem went beyond negative headlines.
It was about facing a new kind of backlash
that threatened the future of the entire company.
With so much at stake,
Zuckerberg had to rethink not only his personal brand
but how Facebook was perceived on a global scale.
Zuckerberg's first major rebrand was not a personal one,
but a corporate one.
In October 2021, the same month as the whistleblower leaks,
Facebook officially rebranded its meta.
It was a move designed to signal the company's pivot
towards the future of virtual reality and the metaverse.
I am proud to announce that starting today,
our company is now Meta.
However, the timing of this rebrand was suspicious.
Facebook just wanted everyone to forget about their past,
but it didn't really make sense,
especially when Facebook was still Meta's largest platform
and their primary revenue source.
The metaverse Meta's namesake
was supposed to be a connected digital universe
where people could work, play, and socialize through virtual reality.
The results were less than stellar.
Clunky movement and menu mechanics, terrible graphics,
and a barren wasteland was the best that we got.
Still, in 2024, the metaverse is losing the company billions.
This digital selfie of Zuck in the Metaverse
also didn't do his public perception any good.
As the $10 billion metaverse was flopping,
the stock market reacted.
We all remember that massive stock dip of Meta in 2022.
In the same year, he ranked fourth
on the world's most hated billionaires list.
This was his rock bottom.
At this point, he was probably worse off
than all those years ago when the social network movie was released.
So really, even though Meta represented a daring new direction,
the company couldn't escape the shadows of its past controversies.
Business-wise, though,
Zuckerberg did miraculously manage to stabilize the ship.
Eventually, as the rest of the tech world pivoted towards AI,
so did Zuck with his open-source Lama LLM,
and he would also focus more on VR and AI headset hardware.
As Zuckerberg forged ahead,
he faced an uphill battle of convincing both investors, users,
and the media that Meta was simply not Facebook with a new coat of paint,
but actually a company genuinely committed to change.
And to do this, he had to change himself.
Somewhere in 2023 is where Zuckerberg's personal rebranding became evident.
The CEO, once known for being dweebish and awkward,
threw himself into MMA training and athleticism,
sharing social media posts highlighting his martial arts training and gym routines.
This transformation was to show that Zuckerberg was tougher,
more disciplined, and a determined leader,
someone capable of navigating Meta through turbulent times.
The shift also helped humanize him in ways where his previous image failed to do so.
There were regular memes of Zuckerberg being a droid or a robot,
but now he's just a dude that does MMA.
In fact, Zuckerberg competed in his first jiu-jitsu tournament,
and he won gold and silver medals,
and this achievement actually received positive reactions from the public.
This surprising turn has sparked curiosity from both the tech world and the public at large.
In many ways, Zuckerberg's transformation into a more normal and accessible figure
has softened some of the criticism directed at him.
And we can't forget the Elon Musk vs. Zuck cage fight.
It never materialized, but it was a surreal moment in history.
But the next stage of the transformation came in 2024.
The Meta CEO began to look different.
In April of 2024, he posted an Instagram reel about updates to the Meta AI assistant
and Llama 3 AI model, but people weren't focusing on that.
They were focused on something else, his gold chain.
Street wear had entered the picture.
After 13 years of jeans and gray shirts,
Zuckerberg transformed himself into an unlikely fashion talking point.
Recently, he wore a shirt that essentially read either Zuck or Nothing,
a play on an ancient Roman saying either Caesar or Nothing.
Another recent shirt sported by Zuck features Greek words that mean learning through suffering.
These choices in apparel are purposeful and self-referential, a move that some people like.
Other than his appearance changes, though,
Zuckerberg, particularly over the last year, has appeared in popular podcasts and shows,
whether that's showing up on Lex Friedman multiple times,
or more recently, YouTube shows like Cleo Abrams or The Verge.
These appearances were generally received favorably by audiences.
Alright, so at this point you might be thinking,
okay, yeah, but who really cares?
Normally, this wouldn't mean that much,
but the thing is, Zuckerberg's style directly impacts how people view him and Metta.
Billions of dollars are on the line here.
As the CEO of a tech giant,
under scrutiny for something as serious as child endangerment,
his image is crucial.
In our celebrity CEO culture,
could Zuckerberg's transformation from an awkward nerd to an MMA fighter
divert attention from Metta's ongoing issues?
By presenting himself as more approachable and dynamic,
Zuckerberg is signaling to everyone that Metta is evolving too.
Amber Vence Box, founder of the shopping platform LTK, explains to TechCrunch,
quote, we have spoken and written communication,
we have body language, and we have drip.
Our appearance does communicate a lot about us
and influences the way that people feel about us.
Personal style is a communication tool.
Just compare this picture of Zuckerberg to this droid pretending to sip water.
It's not at all logical,
but the changeup really does affect how people think about him.
And it's not just MMA or sporting certain clothes,
because as recently as August 2024,
Zuckerberg wrote a letter to Congress,
which seemed to express regret about failing to speak out against the administration
when it pressured Facebook to censor certain COVID-19 posts during the pandemic,
a move that free speech activists couldn't believe.
However, this image overhaul has raised some questions about its sincerity.
Is Mark Zuckerberg's new persona an authentic reflection of personal growth?
Or is it simply a well-orchestrated PR campaign designed to rehabilitate his tinnish reputation?
Either way, is there any evidence that it's working?
The answer is, actually, yes.
When talking about AI and stealing data to train models,
Zuckerberg argued that this should be considered fair use
and that, quote, individual creators or publishers
tend to overestimate their value of specific content, end quote.
He took a hard-line stand saying,
if content makers demand payment, he'd just remove them.
Already, not good.
But then, when it came to the negative relationship between mental health and social media on teens,
Zucker straight up disputed the claims and growing controversy.
A terrible look.
But the thing is, have you heard any of this recent news?
Some of you might,
but it certainly didn't receive the same amount of public scrutiny that it would have,
if Zuck was still a lizard robot.
Everyone has basically been focusing on Meta's latest products,
unveiled by a new, transformed Mark Zuckerberg.
The new cycle quickly moved on.
Of course, there are a lot of other variables at play,
but it's still very interesting to observe.
Meta's recent Orion smart glasses unveiling was perceived very positively by the public,
but there's room for pause.
Smart glasses, by their very nature,
collect vast amounts of data, including the user's location, behavior,
and even biometric information.
This data can be used to create hyper-personalized experiences,
but it also raises concerns about how much of a user's life will be monitored and tracked.
Again, we have to remember,
Meta isn't known for respecting user privacy.
And another point to consider,
two Harvard students demonstrated just how easy it was to track unsuspecting people
by hacking Meta's Ray-Ban glasses.
Welcome back, we've all heard about those smart glasses,
but did you know there was a way to use the glasses
to learn personal information about strangers just by looking at them?
Yeah, this is some frightening stuff here, right?
So there's two Harvard students that are now highlighting the privacy vulnerabilities
that are associated with these glasses.
We built glasses that let you identify anybody on the street.
The information that took less from just a photo of your face is scattered.
Wait, wait, wait!
I'm scared!
To use it, you just put the glasses on,
then as you walk by people, the glasses will detect when somebody's face is in frame.
This photo is used to analyze them,
and after a few seconds, their personal information pops up on your phone.
Oh, hi, ma'am.
Wait, are you a...that's C...
Yes.
Oh, okay, I think I met you through the Cambridge Community Foundation, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, it's great to meet you.
I'm Kane.
Reactions Harvard juniors Ann Fu Nguyen and Kane Ardaifio got
when they showed people how quickly they could learn personal information about them,
like their address and family members' names,
range from amazement to shock.
What about John and Susan, are they your parents?
Oh, my God, yes!
There were like, oh my God, I've never seen that photo of me before.
before so it was pretty clear to us that like a lot of the data that we were
able to uncover using these like relatively simple tools is like people
didn't even know that existed. They use smart glasses that anyone can buy. Sure
all of this data used to recognize the people in the video is based on
information that's already publicly available on Meta's apps but having
someone know your personal information by just watching you walk down the street
is a point in society when it comes to use a privacy that we've never ever
been at. The data harvesting though goes beyond possible targeted ads and
identification. Meta has stated that images and videos captured by smart
glasses could be used to train its AI models which is a whole nother can of
worms. So in summary even though Zuck and Meta's rebrand has softened his image
the bigger issues are still at large.
While Zuckerberg's revamped and tougher image may be grabbing headlines it
doesn't change the fact that Meta still faces some big fundamental issues. Meta's
business model relies on keeping users engaged and enraged. The longer people
stay on the platforms the more money Meta makes. Unfortunately controversial or
sensational content just tends to do that best dividing every society it comes
across. Meta's reliance on targeted ads is also a concern for privacy. Its
impact on political discourse and mental health are messing with the lives of
billions. He may have changed his appearance but can we really trust the
guy? I'd say the vast majority of people still say no but it begs the
question what could someone like Zuckerberg do to regain trust after
doing so much harm to so many knowingly or unknowingly. But credit where credit
is due running one of the most influential companies of our generation
from such a young age is by no means an easy feat. For Meta and Zuckerberg to
truly regain public trust it must go beyond rebranding efforts. They've got
to make substantial changes to how the company operates interacts with its
users and most importantly respects its users. So what's your take on Zuck? His
transformation and the overall story surrounding his companies? Let us know in
the comment section below. If you're watching this channel then you probably
love learning new things but it can often be difficult to find the time
that's where today's sponsor Imprint comes in. They offer bite-sized learning
in a style that's both beautiful and builds a learning habit. It features
book summaries, courses and articles on science, technology, business, history,
economics, leadership and more. Imprint breaks down learning into engaging
graphics, animations and lessons that can replace useless social media scrolling.
With Imprint each lesson only takes a few minutes a day. I enjoyed the lesson on
thinking like a scientist from the book Think Again by Adam Grant. It teaches us
that usually when we're making decisions or communicating with people we tend to
have overconfidence in our assumptions. Thinking like a scientist means that we
take in new information or adjust our views. In an experiment it was proven
that business leaders that adopted that mindset vastly outperformed the control
group. Fascinating stuff. So to try everything that Imprint has to offer for
free for a full seven days visit Imprint app.com slash cold fusion or click the
link in the description. The first 200 of you will get 20% off an Imprint
annual premium subscription. Also if you're a Patreon of Cold Fusion be sure to
check your notifications. I've just made a big announcement over there. So
thanks for watching. My name is DeGogo and you've been watching Cold Fusion and
I'll catch you again soon for the next episode which will hopefully be on the
topic. Why is Generation Z so poor? It's gonna be an interesting one so keep a
look out for it. Okay, cheers guys. Have a good one.
Thanks for watching Cold Fusion. It's me thinking.
