It is definitely one of nature's special numbers, on a power width, for example, pi and with
E, all these interesting transcendental, in some cases, numbers that crop up time and
time again in different problems, and the Feigenbaum constant is this universal constant.
So what I want to talk about is a symbol delta.
Now that convention is used for very many different things in physics, and conventionally
means a very small quantity.
What I want to talk about it is in a different context, and actually in the context of chaos
theory.
So what it is, is something called the Feigenbaum constant.
But before I can tell you exactly what the Feigenbaum constant is, I need to tell you
a little bit about chaos theory.
So most people have heard of chaos theory and have some understanding of what, some
idea perhaps of what chaos theory might be.
In fact, chaos is used in a very, very specific sense in physics.
Generally when you talk about chaos, you mean something very random, very disordered,
with no sort of pattern, no sense to it all.
That is not what a physicist understands by chaos.
We see a very distinct difference between a chaotic system and a random system.
I think the modern understanding of the term chaos and the modern sort of chaos theory,
if you want to call it that, arose with a guy called Edward Lorenz.
He was a meteorologist back in the 60s, and he set up huge supercomputers, well at the
time there were supercomputers in the 60s, to model actually meteorological systems to
model weather systems.
Out of his model, for example, he'd plot this function, this wind speed or whatever,
a wind direction, as a function of time on an hourly or a daily basis.
One day he got to the middle of a run, say let's use this one, and he had a row of numbers
representing this particular graph, and he got to, for example, this point.
What he wanted to do was go and get a coffee.
So he wandered off, and he got his coffee, and then he set about, well let's restart
the simulation, restart the model from this point, and what he did was he looked at the
numbers, and to save himself some time, he decided this is typed out to six decimal places.
We don't really need six decimal places.
What difference can the fourth decimal place really make?
Let's just type this into three decimal places, save some time.
And that's what he did, and at the time, any physicist or mathematician would probably
have thought the same, very small changes are not going to make a big difference, but
in fact when he re-run the simulation, what he found was that, well okay, it started off
roughly the same, but then remarkably, very, very quickly and very dramatically, it followed
a completely different pathway.
So this is, many would feel that the origin of this idea that if a butterfly flaps its
wings in Texas, it affects the weather in London, the key idea here is that the system
is incredibly sensitive to its initial conditions, and to changes in those initial conditions,
and very, very small changes blow up rapidly, and a really interesting way of looking at
that, really important way, is in terms of population dynamics.
So let's talk about fish, and in fact, shortly after Lorenz did this work, or maybe even
in parallel, I can't quite remember with Lorenz's work, there was a lot of work on using simple
models to model the population and how the population of fish, for example, and all the
animals, but let's stick with fish.
Well, so let's look at how the population varies from year to year.
We have some particular growth rate which defines this, but let's say that at some point,
that growth rate changes, there are more predators, less food, competition for space changes,
and so what we end up with is a different growth rate, a different number that controls
this dynamics of the population.
It's a number, it's worked out by Mitchell Feigenbaum, and it was first measured by Albert
Liebscher-Behr, a wonderful French physicist in sometime like 1977, and he took a cell
of helium, imagine this box, it actually had a width to length ratio of 4 to 1, so this
is a bit exaggerated, and heated from below, and then the helium rose up and made circular
convection rolls, just as you get convection rolls near your radiator, and these convection
rolls stayed in the cylinder, and then at a particular temperature difference between
the top and bottom, they started to waggle around and oscillate with a particular period,
and then he heated up a little bit more at the top, and instead of waggling around with
one period, it went waggle, and it took twice as long to go around, and then he heated a
bit more, and it went to four times as long, and eight times as long, and 16 times as long,
if you were to plot a graph, because that's how we physicists work, but just imagine we're
doing it, and the temperature difference is along here, start off when you have one period,
and then it would break into two, it would take twice as long, and then this bit here
would break into two, and then this bit here will break into two, and it gets smaller and
smaller and smaller, and tidier and tinier, so you have the first bit, and then you measure
this temperature difference, and then the next bit, and then you measure this smaller
temperature difference, and the next bit, and this bit. So it's so that you're getting
closer and closer and closer to the point where it's going to take an infinite amount
of time to repeat the age of the universe. And beyond here is a new monster called chaos.
So what we're seeing here is, okay, here's our value of the steady state population at
this value of growth rate 2.9, we've got one value, now it splits, it splits again. And
so the magic number that nature throws at us is if we look at the separate, I need to
draw it. Suppose you get to this point and you have a pitchfork like thing, that is here's
a bit of wood and it goes into two metal prongs and this bit goes into two, the length here
and the length here, you take a ratio of these things, the big one over the little one and
it comes out as a number of 4.66. So here's one splitting, here's another splitting, here's
another splitting. And the Feigenbaum constant we get from looking at the relationship of
those gaps, those splittings. And the key thing is it's not just populations of fish
that this applies to, it applies to systems like for example a pendulum, if you take a
pendulum and you apply a force, a very enforced to it, it does this periodic doubling route.
So it does this and then it goes into different modes whereby the period doubles and doubles
again until it reaches chaos and where you literally don't see a pattern in the movement
of the pendulum. Or you could have, let's see, an electrical circuit, you have a capacitor
with a nonlinear element in there and it will do the same thing. And this pattern of splitting
apart and splitting apart, splitting apart, smaller, smaller scales occurs all over the
place or in animal populations. So there is something about this scenario, this route
to chaos, which is universal. And physicists love it when it's universal because you're
not dealing with a particular problem, you're dealing with something which runs through
nature. So this is a marriage between mathematics inventing this scenario and then the experimentalist
Albert Liebscher-Behr very delicately discovering it in the most unlikely circumstances. Yes,
I was invited over to Paris by him, first of all to examine a thesis of one of his students.
On vortex nucleation in orifices, which he was also working on. I actually spent some
time with him at his house in the countryside and there's a picture of him with my son
who was very shy with the camera so he was wearing a snoopy mask just to make sure. The
other son that also didn't like having photographs taken, he always took his tongue out at me
because that particular day he was taken out by Albert who insisted on making little boats.
You know you can fold these into little boats and every puddle we came across in the country
so Albert would put this little boat in the puddle and then we arrived back late for lunch
and I think the chigo of lamb was overcooked.
Pi is a big number that we use. This is one of the secondary numbers that we use and it
comes to explain these things. It's rather like the critical exponents in phase transitions.
These are very nice attractive numbers but only to those people in that particular field.
It's not as though they affect the general public.
