And I mean, in some sense, this is really just an effort to
rethink. Yeah, you've been a very busy person. And I haven't
been completely docile for the past period of time. So we may
have some useful new things. I think so. I think so. There's
something like there's some fundamental energy information
syncing up that I think we can do.
I also really enjoyed your stow up. You know, I listened to the
metacrisis and sovereignty as a the foreseen function. I vaguely
remember participating in that. I don't have any recollection of
the content. Anyway, you did a nice job articulating sovereignty,
metacrisis and ways in which we might cultivate sorrow, use the
metacrisis as a forcing function, cultivate sovereignty.
Indeed, or be used by it, perhaps will be used by it. So I
appreciate that. And, and you did some stuff on john's
identity education stuff, which you had a nice conversation
with him on that. And much of my attention over the past, let's
call it eight weeks has been towards the this broad category,
roughly now being known as web three. In some sense, also
being known as the metaverse. Okay. And being firmly Gen X, as
are you. I know how words and the naming of things tends to
happen. Yeah. Okay, remember, when there was an information
superhighway. And when there was a series of tubes, and there
was a worldwide web and various things like that. Right. So I'm
not, I'm not sort of ensorciled by the notion that somebody like
Mark Zuckerberg might try to name and claim that metaverse.
Yep. Nor by the notion that it's very well understood exactly
what it is that we're referring to when we wave our hands in
that direction. Totally. Right. And maybe this is maybe so here's
the here's the point here's the conclusion. And it's not going
to be at all surprising to you. This is just another way of
saying something that we've hit on many times is that what I
would say is that the notion of the content of the reference
metaverse. And for the moment, I'll actually just collapse web
three into that. Okay, pointer. And there's a bunch of
different things that are part of it. Got it. Actually, it's a
question. The fork in the road. So the nature of the meaning of
the notion of the term metaverse is as yet undetermined. It
for sure involves the resolution of the relationship
between what in many places have been called the newosphere
or the virtual or that thing that distinguishes humans from
the rest of nature.
Which I call capital C culture and the culture person plane of
existence. The culture person plane of existence, right? It
involves the resolution of that question of the relationship
between that object and nature. So the relationship between
mind and body to make it very simple. Along one path, the
transhumanist path to kind of give it a name is the path of
mind, establishing dominion. And I mean that quite
specifically over body over nature. I personally do not
like this path.
And then but it's not the only path. The other path is right
relationship between mind and body between nature. One might
say governed by or mediated by held by and in some sense
representing soul. So there's an interesting whole thing going
on here. From an aesthetic perspective, there's certain
warm tones in this in this language feels more coherently
integrated. More more coherently integrated. Yes, more
wholesome. Yes. And more thriving. And one might by the
way point out for those who are breast tax also more capable of
actually enduring for any meaningful period of time. But
that's like the back half of the 21st century. Right. So it's a
little bit longer story. But I think that's that's that's
probably a conversation that's worth having more publicly and
more broadly, because I feel right now that we're at a moment
where, well, first, people are a little bit narrow and trying to
understand the nature of this thing, metaverse, like, is it
via goggles sold by Mark Zuckerberg? Categorically, no. But
also, I guess a little bit defeatist of a feeling of an
inevitability of the transhumanist path. No. And while
I'm certainly aware of the, how would I say the transhumanist
path is up by a lot of points at halftime. But it's only
halftime. We got work to do. We have some power. A couple of
secret weapons to still pull out. So talk to me about secret
weapons.
Well, there's different kinds of coins and different kinds of
energy information patterns that we might be able to decode.
So as context, because I suspect with hope that we will
actually share this more publicly. Sure. Greg, you have
been having conversations with a number of other folks for the
first time. My new new connections are being made
most notably with Benita Roy and Forestlandry. And as a bit of
context, one of the challenges that I, by the way, Eric
Weinstein have bemoaned over the past decade and a half is the
rag tagginess of the Rebel Alliance. The Empire, as
empires do, has been very good at wearing shiny black leather
and destroying worlds with death stars. Rebel Alliance has
been extremely poor at having conversations. Right. So
correct. It is quite hopeful for me that these conversations
are now beginning to be had. And people are beginning to be
able to learn how to orient their attention to the right
conversation and the right person, and then have enough
capacity, emotional, semantic, abstract, to be able to actually
have that conversation and connect. And so this is this at
the end of the day is our ultimate secret weapon. Amen.
Amen. So if right, if we can find exactly that context and
shared understanding to afford a participatory network that
enables us to weave a tapestry together, and do so then to
build, take the red pills together and be aware of what
we're doing with organization and clarity, then that's gonna
afford us a second half opportunity to win this game.
Right. That's right. Yeah. And then I would call it
Kool-Aid drinking metaphors notwithstanding.
So yes, I've been having a number of conversations with a lot
of different people lately. I had a conversation. In addition,
Paul van der Clay just put up on, you know, and so that was
really interesting. And got a chance. I mean, it was a private
conversation with Benita. But I've been meaning to hook up with
her for a while. She did a wonderful presentation at the
stowa on the self, the origins of self, in a particular way that
I thought complimented the stuff that John and Christopher and
I had done in the elusive eye. And I could see a lot of
opportunities for us to, you know, synergistically dance. And
we were able to come together. And I knew that, you know, a lot
of people see my system and rightfully so as some meta
systemic architecture, which is always for many people are more
process oriented and rightfully skeptical of some obsessive
compulsive, you know, quasi autistic like structure that I
figured out how solve everything now is everybody just
speaks this language, we're good, you know, and there's some
sub dynamic there. But actually, that's not really there is
that we can process that aspect that that is not all that this
is. And it's certainly not all that this affords. So I was able
to, I think we were able to build some bridges and watch a
process dynamic approach, resonate and sync up and show
also there's a lot of architecture about the self and
various facets in the models to use the model is that really are
very limited, like genuine disagreement, just different
language, different emphasis. And so that's, to me, that's, oh,
yeah, no, here's another example of an integrated pluralism that
could be framed as a Oh, no, we can't but no can get framed as
a Oh, wow. No, these are these are complementary structures that
we can get a coherent integrated pluralism, where people are
realizing that they're playing a part of the weave, you know, a
thread in the weave. And I had a pretty similar conversation
with Forrest along those lines, you know, that
So there's, this is one of those, how would you call it? The
thing is an example of the thing that it talks about. Yep. And
so it should be the case. If you have one of these, these
objects, these, let's just call them, I don't know, metatheories
just to kind of get sure, very roughly articulated, this
particular kind, right, as you say, there's a distinction,
there's a totalizing kind that takes itself as a once and
forever reification that has no evolution of all the ability
built into it. The ringed away. Yeah, exactly. The one name, one
and then this is other kind, the kind, for example, that you're
representing. And the whole point is Benita is and Forrest is
and right. Right. And what should happen is, from the middle,
like from the middle, when these encounter each other, there
should be a way from their own way of being from their own
nature of noticing the fact that the other is the same kind of
thing, by definition, coming from a different place, and
therefore having a different way of doing what it does. But
intrinsic to each one of these kinds of operators is a capacity
to develop a bespoke protocol for communication and
harmonization, which then generates an instance of
integration and connection that again, is never totalizing. It
doesn't collapse anything, it just creates more like a richer,
deeper weave in tapestry.
Exactly. And that, my friend, is a wonderful description of what
we, if we can achieve this thing and make those kinds of
connections, that's going to be central to it, you know, and
this integrated pluralism, this new kind of sensibility, which
I feel super intimately with John now, in terms of just a, you
know, so a real, genuine synergy between two meta theories, you
know, that were completely developed independently of one
another, that now have lock and key, I would at least, you know,
so I don't want to speak for John, but for me, a lock and key
synergy, which I don't know has ever been done before. And, you
know, it'd be interesting to know in sort of the history of
ideas, because the old modernist structures were not
systematically oriented in an integrated pluralistic, it was
oh, I'm going to build a justification system, and then
you enter into it, and then that works, and then it then it's
just competing between other systems of justification.
You can sit and have, yeah.
Okay, I've got I've got mine, you've got yours. I'm going to
throw away 30% of mine, you're going to throw away 40% of
yours, we're kind of like glue them together into a new one.
And it's the meta move, I'll create a meta system, which is
a synthesis of two lower level systems, but it's not this
integrative pluralism. Maybe at this point, it's actually
worthwhile just spending a little bit of time in the
distinction between those two notions. Yep. Being quite
decisive, if you really can grasp how this, for example,
categorically resolves the sort of old fashioned conflict
between individualism and collectivism, which is just
like a modernist artifact, which is not relevant to this new
context. I know that's sort of very helpful, like lots of
people are like, Oh, okay, cool, I can just throw out that whole
conflict, no longer relevant. What's happening in this new
context?
Totally. So for me, in fact, you know, the basic idea of an
integrative pluralism, and by the way, I heard Jim Ruck call it
a coherent pluralism, sometimes I'll add coherent
integrative pluralism together. But basically, there's an
appreciation of a dialectic between some sort of epicenter,
you know, integrating function, and a perspectival pluralistic
diverse shift that affords sort of this dynamic in a relation,
which of course, sort of just makes sense in my system, you're
going to have different entities coming up as specializing
different elements, okay, of some sort of potentially shared
ground. Alright. And then what was before was sort of like an
argument that you're going to build a system of justification
that maps the territory, and then kind of is a pristine
modernist notion. Okay, if we think about this, oh, we're
gonna, it has to be reasoned in this based on accuracy, and
this based on analysis, and it's going to have truth value or
not, and it's going to be in competition with others, and then
the battle and maybe break up, but really, I just see them
basically sitting there as independent paradigms, okay, as
the making truth claims, you then they get the postmodern
structure coming along and critiquing, which basically says,
Oh, all of that is imminent contextual justification, meaning
you guys are saying you're developing your pure systems,
right? But really, you're, it's your, you know, we think Nietzsche
as the first postmodern, you know, it's your it's the
psychology, the philosophers 90% of the goddamn system. Okay,
it's all just a justification of whatever dynamics they're
dealing with. They say it's some pristine metaphysics, but
it's basically their perspective in the world, right? And then we
can extrapolate that to the to a crass postmodern view is like
it's all fucking justification. It's all just a, you know,
imminent context of power and justification. And there's no
ground upon which you would then, you know, afford any
legitimizing function, which then of course, in its extreme,
says, Well, there's no, there's no claims to be made at all,
and all relatively equal, etc. And then of course, that's kind
of absurd. Right. And so the integrative plural meta modern
integrative pluralistic sensibility is, Hey, we all are
as specializing different, you know, pieces of the elephant in
a particular kind of way, right? And the, you know, the blind
men in the elephant metaphor, we're going to as special lies,
we're going to see various elements. And then we were
going to weave together and see how these synergistically
pluralistic perspectives may afford a coherent integrated
understanding, and appreciate the diversity while also having
a shared context of richness and growth. And that, that
sensibility seems to me to be far superior in a synthetic
synthesis, hegelian sort of way from modernity, and its
justification rationality, and postmodernity is at all
justification context BS to an integrated pluralism that then
affords a collective intelligence sense making,
especially if we add the zoomed D a logos to it. So zoomed D
a logos, unlike the old where you had to just write shit, right?
Right? Like as I'm so I'm an academic, like this thing right
here, like this right here zoomed D a logos is like, so I can
now call Benita. So in the old days, if we were both academics,
I'd publish something and then she would publish a critique of
my metasystemic structure, because it's the wrong direction
to go. Right. And then I'm like, Oh, God, you know, now I have
to gain a that thing and undermine that and justify why my
justification system in writing in a context of competition of
you know, Swords of academia, right? Now it's like, Oh, call
somebody and be like, actually, that's true in some ways, but
that's not my full emphasis. And I love the fact that you're
going that way. And actually, Oh, really? Oh, yeah. Because
actually, I think this is good. And this is really
complimentary. Oh, so a face to face D a logos that affords the
capacity to, you know, have an oral indigenous relationship,
feedback on each other, make corrections immediately in real
time. It's totally different than the old game of refined
publication, so that you get a defense of a particular
persistent in writing, where you're basically, there's no
iterative immediate feedback process, which is a dialogue is
so unbelievably good at. So it's a real this D a logos thing
from an academic perspective, and affording this capacity to
build rich relations and an integrated pluralistic
understanding. It's a it's a that now we can build on some of
the digital metaverse shed as a game as a as a medium potential
game changer, if we can turn it into a strength. And I think
that right, one of the things that afford that. So as an
exercise, hold on one second.
There we go. Okay, as an exercise in self referentiality. I will
act. This is the old internet ping, I will act or I will take
the what you just provided, I will metabolize it and I will
not vomit but articulate express back out something.
But the point, the meta point is then to say, Okay, cool, we're
doing is we're orienting in a trans to use for a specific
language, transcendent location, by means of the real
relationality of this zoom D a logos environment, and the sort
of pointer complex, right of the semantic terms that we happen
to be using in broadly speaking share. So a couple points like
one point is the role of media. And you mentioned that in the
old days, we might even say modernity is a consequence of
books, the consequence of print, both as an opportunity and a
constraint. And you could now communicate with a much larger
group of people over a longer period of time than just the
local individuals you could interact with in conversation.
But you couldn't have the context relevance, right, the
relational possibilities, both at the EQ level, as well as in
terms of just the semantic requirements of what context
provides, right? So you were this new milieu of that sort of
behavior, that sort of justification system that was
selected for effectiveness in the context of book became a kind
of artifact that began to generate and attract human
attention and energy, and to coordinate more and more choices
and behaviors to the degree to which we were beginning to
explore the potentials that afford, which of course, we're
many. For example, much of the scientific enterprise is no more
or less than the fact that you can begin to collaborate with
people that you don't know by means of appropriately
structured text. And concepts like peer review, much maligned
in some quarters, which appropriately, are basically
just a simple technology to say, okay, well, how do we deal
with the problems and the possibilities of decontextualized
relatively broadcast, you know, tight semantic articulations.
Okay, cool. That's one, two.
This notion of the, in the larger context, many of the things
are happening. We have people are having kids, people are
making money. More specifically, there's this wave that's been
going on. And by the way, now I'm back back up like Gutenberg,
roughly speaking. So that's okay. Okay. People were people were
fighting fights, people were conquering, that's the better
word for conquering and defending territory. That was
already happening. That was a whole wave. It was kind of its
own sort of movement to it. And books enters into this field.
And it changes the terms of that field, and does not sort of
cause it or cause it to disappear. But the form of the
kingdom that is appropriate and possible in a pre literate
environment is not the form of a kingdom that is possible and
appropriate in a post literate environment, and the ability to
send dispatches that can communicate to further governors,
right, the British Empire was was produced as the consequence of
the ability to actually figure out how could you effectively
coordinate and deploy force and power economically,
diplomatically and kinetically, by means of the written word.
That's what it is. There's an organ for doing that kind of
thing. So we say, you know, we're in the process of a
technological disruption, at least as significant as the book,
obviously, I would say much more so. One affordance of which is
this notion of real time, highly contextual, high relational
conversation, zoomed the logos. I like, by the way, the
implication of zoom is a as an adjective as well as a noun.
It's changed the state of the game. And we don't we don't
have to engage in the kinds of things that happen in the in
the decontextualized written word form, we can engage can and
should and will inevitably will engage in a different style of
interaction. Right. And it gives rise to a completely
different form of coordination, which is now well understood in
the in the thing named Web three, they don't yet I don't think
understand why, like what they're actually in service to, or
what is the real potential? What is the what are the design
characteristics of what the potential looks like on its
interior as it develops? But they're aware of the fact that
they are actually dealing with a new level of coordination, and
that portends much back to Rebel Alliance and stealing a
win here in the winning seconds. All right. Okay, hold on. Ah, and
so, and much of the criticism of postmodernism is correct is
accurate. There is a
intrinsic. It's fun. I'll just use the language from post
modernism intrinsic totalizing characteristic that is
associated with the model or the approach of book, right, of
written, of written word. It's sort of because the rate of
communication, the contact, the contact decontextualization of
it. There's a need actually to form a paradigm, right. The
paradigm is an artifact of this point in time, I would say.
Hmm. Yeah, I'm gonna propose that as that's a yes. This is
actually, by the way, I had this title long time ago, but I
sort of embedded Kuhn inside Foucault. And so Foucault's
concept of the episteme is more fundamental than Kuhn's concept
of the paradigm. That the paradigm is a form appropriate to
the episteme of the moment of that. Nice. I could totally see
that. Yep. And it has to do with things like the the
translation cost of different kinds of language. If I'm
building a new same doing just like chemistry. And I've got
terms in chemistry that other people people don't know. And
it's costly to learn a new term. It's not not trivial. I'm very
confusing if you don't know what the terms mean. Right. And so
people trying to learn this thing. Yeah, well, exactly. To
the point, let's hold that actually as a good model. So the
old fashioned way of doing it is you create a dictionary. I
need to okay, well, here's the official fucking meaning of the
terms. If you need to know what they mean, go here. We've
created a formal totalizing centralized common that has
hierarchical domination over the meanings of these words. If you
disagree, fuck you, you're out of the team, you're not on the on
the on the board. And here's what it looks like. But if we all
agree to this sort of finite construct, then we can coordinate
using these hyper decontextualized written
constructs. If you haven't got any context, you can't be like,
wait a minute, hold on. What do you mean by that? That sounds
sound weird to me. If you can't do that at all, then you
literally either you just don't communicate, or you have to have
some kind of totalizing construct that defines what is valid
discourse within a particular paradigmatic frame, right? Just
the consequence, right? There's no sort of here nor there.
That's just what happens. And similarly, that same thing
works at the level of political power. If I want to be able to
effectively coordinate economic, financial, kinetic, diplomatic
energy across some spatial location, I have to have a
defined after control the definitions of the meanings of
the words within that particular communications milieu. Otherwise,
you know, cell, the guy on the other side is like, Oh, that
means by doesn't work, right? You have to have agreement. What
it means, we all have to have a shared dictionary of what
terms mean within some level of rigor, right? And that of
course, requires that each sort of sphere of influence, which
largely, of course, became linguistic. You know, the notion
of a nation is being effectively the playing out of a
particular linguistic, and therefore ethno cultural, but
linguistic constraint. And remember the French formally,
now have a formal institute that does nothing but precisely
define every single word. You know, they kind of got the essence
of it pretty precisely. That's just it, right? That's just how
it works out. And so then, of course, as you say, we end up
kind of in this wrestling match of no, no, no, my definitions are
more right than your definitions, or our right and your
definitions are wrong. And therefore, you have to play on
my turf, because I don't want to be playing in your turf. And,
you know, the strict kind of subordinate construct, which
makes people a little bit, which gives right, like individual
versus collectivist. And a collectivist relationship is
precisely the subordination of my experiences, my meaning, my
understanding to some kind of formal construct that is
necessary for shared communication. Hold on. So I can
make this less choppy.
On the right network, I have the right network. All right,
well, we can do. Okay, so
so then we end up with the new thing, this new milieu, new
possibilities. It sits on top of the old. So one thing is that
we're part of part of the essence of the new is that the
old happened, we're aware of it. It's not what happened in
Venice from, okay, God, I understand all that that was part
of how things happen. I kind of learn those lessons as humans
tend to the hard way. Okay. And we're sitting in a very
different potential. If I have not only, you know, the tension
that not only can I call you and disambiguate and have
relational context, but also I have to because the power, the
possibility of some sort of formal, man, this is a pain.
What's happening? Why is that happening? I'm seeing you like
on and off, just like completely red. Are you having the same
same thing on my end?
I'm having a bit of your, yeah, you're, I mean, I'm definitely
tracking you, but it's, we got it, we have some interference.
I don't know. On my end, everything seems very strong.
I mean, shift to a different network.
Check minds.
Okay, let's see if that makes a difference. So far, no, not at
all. It may be on your end. So let's see.
Right. So not only can I now engage in a zoom to your logos
when there's a moment of ambiguity, but also in fact,
have to, because everybody's involved in the conversation.
And we
I'm going to terminate the call and start.
Perfect. Do you want to, do you want to send me a zoom link on
send you send me a zoom link? Okay.
To the point, every, every new thing has its own pluses in
mind.
Well, there's many, right? You can take a look at how Twitter
operates.
So what are the, what the point I was making earlier is that we
now, of course, this is the story of the building up the
internet. We have this.
Oh, come on now.
Are you still there?
Yeah, I'm here. I'm here.
Okay. My computer.
There we go. Okay.
What do they call it back? Like back in the late 90s and early
2000s, like, you know, everybody has a printing press, that
kind of a thing.
Three channels on TV, 2000 channels to now everybody, that
point.
The idea that in Twitter, everybody is somewhat symmetric
in their capacity to participate in the conversation.
They're not, actually, because a number of followers and
algorithmic throttling and things like that, but it's a
different environment, which means the tech, this is back
in one of my feces, right, the notion, the, the technology,
the institutional framework of the Belute Church, which
evolved to regulate the mechanics of coordination and
paradigmatic formation in the context of mass media
communication, right, breaks down, has broken down and is
accelerating in this breakdown.
Because it wasn't evolved for this particular environment,
this needs to be so we're in the process, successfully or
not. And of course, you can always fail to adapt to your
niche of evolving a new form of how we do this sort of thing in
this, in this new potential in this new environment. And to
loop all the way back, this new environment is one that you're
calling sometimes coherent, integrative, pluralism. And it
has characteristics of neither needing nor requiring a
subordination. On the part of members of the dialogue, I'm
not playing your game, you're not playing my game, we are
afforded the possibility and the potential of producing a novel
game bespoke, right, every relationship is its own play,
which has as a consequence, the enriching of both of our games
intrinsically, totally, which is why we continue to play. And I
would say meta enriching, because it's that underlying piece is
so powerful, and also synergistic value, or we call it the
anti rivalrous consequence that as you and I, for example, play
in this way, and thereby enrich our own capacities, it produces
a higher degree of potential in every other possible game we
might play.
Totally.
So by talking with Greg, I actually become a more valuable
player in the larger game for literally everybody else. And if
you sort of just multiply that out, that gets from a process
perspective, the shape of that curve is very steep. It's
absurdly steep, actually, this begs the question of the
singularity, we'll ignore that for the moment.
So let's see. So, so I'll just, so just to riff off that a
little bit, if I put it a little bit in Utah language, where
most the old relationship, the systems of justification that we
operate under, and are subordinate to. And now, and
then, so you get modernity, you get the basically the tribe,
and then the civilization, and then it's, it's dictating in
the traditional civilization. And then we get into refined
knowledge, and we get science, but modernity is still
basically creating systems of justification that you're
subordinate to at various levels. Yeah. Postmodern sort of
comes along and says, Well, it's all power, but it's still
basically then like a battle of justification in a particular
way. We are actually now at a place to, we're not going to
like teleport out of justification, but we can get
adjacent to justification in a different kind of way. Again, we
can relate to these systems of justification through, oh, here
you are as specializing in a particular part of the whole,
you know, through your narrative and propositional
structure, and I can relate to you where you are in that, and
then I share where I am in that. And now rather than trying to
then think about, okay, there are no point of justification, or
we're going to subordinate ourselves, we're going to be
like, Oh, we're going to integrate a pluralistic system of
justification that we can be adjacent to participate in, but
not necessarily force some sort of. Yeah. And there's a so your
definition of ego, what the ego is, right? We have a bit of a
historical ambiguity, you know, Freud uses it differently than
the Buddhists do. So we're going to use the, the Greg and Ricca's
version of it, which I quite like, which is the kind of the
human neurocognitive faculty for producing systems of
justification. Exactly. Great. And the sort of the classic
problem is the one where you yourself subordinate yourself to
your own ego, right? The ego self inversion. Yep. And the
social version of that is the same kind of thing, right? So if
Jordan's ego is interacting with Greg's ego, and Jordan's ego
is subordinating Jordan's self and Greg's ego is subordinating
Greg's self, boom, we're locked into this entire set of cascade
effects that produce these sort of dominant structures. This is
by the way, a very clean way of describing the transformation
into game A, from my perspective. Totally. Okay. So what we're
noticing is that we can notice that there's an individual
version of this form of just proper relationship. Oh, systems
of justification are a thing. Nice. But that's the whole thing.
Right there. They're a map. They're not the territory and
there is a territory. How do I know? Well, the ego is a thing.
It's not the whole thing. There's a self. How do I know? Because
I do. You know, I can just, here I am, there's a self, I can
begin to get very, very clean distinction of distinctions
between them by a variety of practices. In my case, it happened
to be meditation. And, and, okay, well, that affords us a
whole new possibility. We no longer have to imagine that this
game is just a kind of a winner takes all slugfest of power,
manipulation, and justification. But actually, there's, there's a
ground, there's a self, systems of justification or a tool for
coordination between things that are outside of the scope of
the systems of justification, like say, that's really, and
humans. This back, by the way, to the fork, transhumanism and
this other thing. Yes. Right. And I would then say, what
modernity did, and then capital labor relations created a system
of justification, skits into the conversation outside with
forest systems of justification that then are instrumental
result in a power law distribution of influence in a
particular kind of way. And that fundamentally miscalibrates the
actual heart, which actually should be ideally calibrated on
relational value rather than social influence. And one of our
tasks in this transformation is to recalibrate a power law
distribution of influence into a more Gaussian distribution of
relational value and connection in that regard. So in terms of
the kinds of moves that we want to be making relative to
modernity, we want to get adjacent to our justification,
see the monsters that we created and all the power that they
did, diagnose them in a particular way, and then rotate,
you know, that if we're able to weave this together, this will
forward as the faster you win this game.
Yep. Okay. So I want to double click on that. It's a
profoundly powerful construct in insight. Again, one of these
things that enables us to be liberated from things that in
many ways can be depressing constraints. So what you just
said is something like this. Pareto distributions are yes,
they happen. But they're an artifact of a particular form of
social relationship. Right? So if you have a social
relationship that operates in a certain way, which I just call
it, call it society, society, we can sort of describe that in
more detail. If you have a society, then you're going to
have Pareto distributions of social relationships. Kind of
done. But that's not the only kind of relationality. In
fact, it's even not even the more fundamental, but the more
basic, more fundamental kind of relationality, which I just
call community, just to make a distinction, doesn't have a
Pareto distribution as its equilibrium. Right. There's a
Gaussian distribution as its equilibrium. If you can land on
that, like if you're a person who spends time in places like
economics or in politics, you care about justice, this fact,
this distinction is super profound. It describes the fact
that there is there's a way to achieve a kind of quality of
relationship that we would define as, say, justice or
fairness or equity. There's an actual way to get there. Right?
You can't get there staying inside the form of society. If
you stay inside the form of society, you're never going to
get there. It's not a thing. You have to go down and over into
this other form. But once you get this over form, not only is
it possible, it's actually equilibrium state. And that's
there. That's the power of this approach of being able to say,
okay, I agree. We don't like this particular structure, this
way this structure plays out. But but how is this like, what
is it? Say hello to the new boss, same as the old boss. If you
think that just by killing the king and installing yourself as
king, you're changing the nature, you're not. But there is a
different place. And it's not imaginary. Right? It's not the
kind of the communist mid century, you know, failure of oh, not
getting the thing and there's a place. So let's just talk about
like, why is there a Pareto distribution in this thing I'm
calling society? What do I when I say society, what is it?
I'm really talking about what do I mean?
Yeah. First off, the lovely yeah, I mean, the short answer. One
short answer is money and influence beget money and
influence. Okay. So as you have more opportunity to gain
control, and there are lots of different, this Pareto distribution
basically is that a small number of individuals acquire an
enormous disproportionality of influence and control, okay, and
a power kind of law distribution. So for folks that
don't know what that is, that's that's the essence of it. And
then it creates a massive inequality. And we have seen
that in our society, in virtually any context, in any
societal organization tends to drift into these Pareto
distributions, they're very difficult to prevent. There's
a and there are reasons why that we don't we can dialogue about
but I don't know that that's crucial. For me, the issue is
that when you get this, that's going to create all sorts of
problems. Okay, the focus is on influence of our modernity, we
create capital labor, what we're basically trying to do is
actually observable work effort, and our science orient us in
this perspective, which I think is a deep mistake. One of the
things that are enlightenment is that we don't get human nature
right here. And we can talk about what the distinction is my
own history of social influence, relational value, etc. But it's
the felt sense of being known and valued is our core. That's
crucial. We certainly track social influence. But that's
another aspect and we miss this psychology misses this, the
humanists sort of get it. But anyway, the point what you made,
we can actually see in the world, I want to be people, all you
need to do is you go back to hunter gather oral indigenous
structures, the vast majority of oral indigenous structures are
about building community. Okay, and guess what narcissistic
ego shit is regulated deeply in that structure, they do not want
people pulling out what's called the blue line on the in on
the influence makes I'm superior. And I'm going to
egoically control your ass through power. They regulate that
virtually every community society figures out structures to
regulate. Okay, so then what happens is we basically release
that thing. In game a world, we've released that thing. The
society and the Pareto distribution and nature, power
and influence afford a capacity, even our justifications
release that thing. So what we are saying is is that they Oh my
God, if we then invest in that societal structure in
particular, well, that's what you get, you get game. And you
can't just kill that you actually need to what is the kind of
structure that's actually sustainable. Actually, if we
look at this, and we actually create a particular type of
oral indigenous DLO goes kind of dynamic that is a fundamentally
different dynamic with this ego as power issue. Well, then
maybe we have something serious going on here.
Yeah, so what I would say, and I think you're going to agree
with me on this is that the we've actually produced a lot of
good language to describe the thing that I'm calling society,
or particularly the thing that more fundamental and calling
gay man, which has to do with the the prioritization, almost
obligate mediation of relationality by means of ego.
That's a very clean way of articulating it. Now, what's
happening? Well, what's happening there is the ego at the end of
the day is a finite state machine. Right? If you if you
understand that from a computational perspective, things
lit up. Yeah, you think about money, right? Money is a finite
state machine. It's very, you know, has a large amount of
processing power. That's why it's functional. It's what what
markets do, right markets are a massively parallel information
processing machine. But it's a finite state machine. And ego
works very functionally inside money, money and ego connect
quite nicely. There's there's a reason why they're very wide
narcissistic ego ego personalities perform very well.
They tend to rise to the top of the predator distribution, the 80
20 rule is a common vernacular for that. When when one mediates
complexity, when one mediates rich, highly contextualized
relationships, by means of the complicated by means of finite
state machines, even very large ones, one is operating in the
form that I'm calling society and therefore has by implication,
for sure, guaranteed things like predator distributions. Yep.
And for sure, guaranteed things like a infinite cascade effect
in paradigmatic interrelational communication. Because you now
have to find some way of doing some translation between your
finite state machine and my finite state machine, which means
that if I have a small deviation in the way that my state machine
maps particular context from yours, we actually can't engage in
any real communication, either I have to learn yours, which is
what education has become education machine for stamping
shared models on mines, which has an ancillary benefit, training
cells to become egos, socialize them into the system. And of
course, training egos to become narcissists, right? Of course,
right? So it's not, if you understand how these system
dynamics work, it's not confusing how we got where we are. And
frankly, where we are, like where we are, it's like, Oh, yeah, I
know where we are. And I know how we got here. And how we get out
of it becomes Oh, okay, to get out of it, as you say, we need to
say human nature isn't the kind of thing that was written about
in the Enlightenment, neither Rousseau nor Voltaire nor any of
those guys were frankly close. We've got some pretty good ideas.
More importantly, we've got good models, as you said, the
oral indigenous cultures tell us what it looks like. And there it
is, those are humans operating according to human nature, more
or less. We can do a diff across a very large number and get a
nice, you know, basic model. And now double clicking on my fork
in the metaverse. And we're entering into a new milieu. We
are in fact, literate. We're not an oral culture, we're a
literate culture, decreasingly, and maybe that's the best. But
we're also zoom theologous zoom theologous culture, almost
certainly. I don't think that there's a path where we drop
back down into a pre electrical civilization. Well, I mean, I
don't like that. And land. There's a lot of paths where we
do that. But we don't like it. Just keep going. Way, way past
oral indigenous. But but there is a path where we find this new
higher tone of human nature, establishing right relationship
with this thing, the virtual, the virtual per se. And this is the
key. And this is the point of the metaverse, the metaverse is
where we actually look at the notion of technology in the eye
directly. Exactly. We're not we're not looking at like a pair
of eyeglasses, right? We're not looking at a pen. Right? We're
not even looking at a cell phone. Right? We're actually
looking at the essence of technology directly. And asking
what's the relationship here? We want to play the narcissist
ego finite state machine game. AI wins. Yeah, I better play in
that than any human mind will ever be. And you know, Elon
Musk's, Elon Musk's gambit is, well, let's just become AI, like
the only payment kind of person just do that. Which if if you
don't have the rest of this theory, it's going to make sense.
That's that's what you'll get to our proposition is that no,
there's actually a whole other kind of game that we can play. I
want it is not a relationship where we are operating and
coordinating by means of ego by means of systems of justification,
where where systems of justification being a thing, where
aware of ego being a thing, but we're actually held in a much
larger, richer, fully contextualized world called
reality. And in reality, we can actually reposition
technology in its proper location.
Beautiful said.
Easiest said to done.
Well,
we didn't win the game as a function of it, but it was
brilliantly articulated.
Right, right. This is the halftime. I was just coaching
half time saying, all right, this is the halftime to me.
Now there's there's a play that another game actually played
out. But that's like that. That's how it was up, right? You
got a team algorithm. Alright, team, what I call it one time
called team godless communists, just to kind of use a nice
entry Americana, which is just algorithm, just another way of
saying the same thing, right? Team ego, team narcissists, team
finite state machine, team society, team systems of
domination, team can't get outside of your own system of
justification and bullshit yourself into meanlessness,
right? It's all that team, right? We're on that side. And
then team human, team soul, team self, team context, team
complexity, team, nature and technology in wholesome
relationship, right? They're there in life. Totally. That's
the fork. That's the fork of the metaverse, as I'm calling it.
That's right. Call it right now. That's the fork in the
metaverse. And bing, bing, bing, as we said, the potency, the
expansion of the field of possibility that emerges in
this new kind of zoomed eologos, new form of generative,
integrative pluralism is our secret weapon. It's
yep, qualitatively vaster. It's a different order of infinity,
and is possible in principle in the algorithmic domain.
Definitely. Actually, yeah, so let me let me let me take a
slight right turn, and come back to this. Okay, because you
said secret weapon, and I totally agree. But I want to add
something, some things to that weapon. Okay. Which I which
part of through the integrative pluralism that I really feel is
emerging is a the ground, the intellectual groundwork for a
new enlightenment, which affords the intellectual
architecture in addition, you know, to the sensibility and the
media and the axioms and whatnot, in addition. So so if if we
can also analytically diagnose the justificatory histories,
okay, and demonstrate where the human nature shit got wrong and
what science did and what that was wrong, and then upgrade it
and say, Oh, well, now we know that was wrong. And now this is
what right is in a way that, you know, a 15 year old can totally
then narrate and understand with reliability and validity
clarity. Yeah, okay, then you're in a different kind of place in
terms of what affords the capacity to spread the system,
because if we can get it right, that the diagnosis and the
upgrade analytically is clear as well as the cultural flavor.
And then that affords, not that we subordinate to it, but clear
justification about what this path is relative to our past,
in an analytic way, that will afford additional momentum and
capacity in getting our shit together.
Yes, particularly among those for whom analytic
Exactly, assessment is a key component, which is definitely
not everybody, but but in relationship to a coordinating
function, it could play a central coordinating function in
relationship.
Great. Yeah, I agree. The challenge, of course, and this is
where why people like you and john play an important role is
ego defense narcissism, various forms of fragile ego, and the
unwillingness to, well, it's funny, not just let's just be very
precise, the degree to which the ego has effectively colonized
the self and protect its territory using the tech ego is
very good at using
it. That's a good justifier.
So, you know, if you happen to be an individual who is kind of
afforded to analytical methodologies for perceiving and
making sense of the world and then making choices, notice that
this thing we're describing, ego, you may have pwned you at
some point in time, you may be particularly challenged in
unponing yourself because your your your primary faculty, so
this you this capacity to engage in this particular mode of
thinking happens to be one that is particularly gameable by the
ego. So you're sort of relying on something which itself
doesn't have your best interests in mind, and lives inside you
and uses your own, perhaps in some cases, tremendous capacity
to justify, to justify itself, which is what it does first and
foremost, in all circumstances, the one thing it justifies more
than anything else is that it's your best buddy and really needs
to be in charge.
And of course, complete all the various games of fear and shame
and depression, all the other elements, right, it has fingers
very firmly on buttons that it's surrounded with systems of
justification your interior. So for that portion, and here in
many cases, I'm often speaking to technologists creating web
three, you got some work, you're gonna have to actually step
through this particular portal, I can tell you, I'm of that
type. And I saw this thought it through very clearly, and then
bootstrap myself through the portal, to some extent, not
particularly effectively, but better than zero. So it can be
done. And I would say also should and must be done for path
two, to be lift off, right? That's right there. What's the
other piece of it?
The analytic possibility.
The other possibility, of course, just speaks to john's
video series, the meaning crisis. Right. This left hand side is
just another way of saying the meaning crisis. So the algorithmic
transhumanist thing is just cotton candy, man, you're not
getting nutrition, you're the whole soul, bad calories. And if
the meaning and mental health crisis, and you look out across
our adolescence these days, and that doesn't think that maybe
those are not the healthiest developmental calories we should
be chewing, you know, if that doesn't make your skin get a
little bit iffy, right? Yeah, the data are pretty clear, people.
Yeah, calories. So calories. So the other side, right, there is a
better way, right? There's a better way. There's a thing where
your soul is nurtured. Right? There's this thing where you
yourself is seen and met. That's right. There's a place get
your soul and spirit in right relation to the real natural
relational technological world we are in. Yep. So that's the other
people for whom that those words are the ones. And of course,
they're all part world part of the same whole. So all the
different people and all the different words so they can all
be heard. And again, the beauty of course, here's then we get
this this this integrative pluralism. Different people can
have perspective and their their aesthetics and there's the
things that they have seen in the beautiful aspects of reality
that they've discovered and found that are most precious and
bring them forward and share them for the nurturing and
growth and development of each other, which throws off this
gigantic explosion of potential lurking just on the other side
of the of the what is it called? The eye of the needle, just on
the other side of the needle. If you just go through it, trick
your business, right? You can have to leave money behind.
Definitely not only like your personal money, I mean, money
as a concept.
You know, money's context that little toxic
at least as the primary as the primary mechanism for mediating
coordination. I don't know when he has no goal in the future.
Right, right, right. But as a central as the central bottom
line.
Yeah, exactly. As the bottom line now. And not even as the
part of one of a triple bottom line, but as a as a piece of a
much larger tapestry that we aren't really using the whole
complex whole as reality.
So you enforce sync up on that, which is really good. Like such
a nice thing to have that as a proof, like it's provable. You
do proof on this.
No, it's a it's a I mean, we're I consider us we synced up to
start a real journey of real deep analytic deconstruction and
reconstruction relation. So I'm really looking forward. Yeah,
it's gonna be good.
There's one other thing I don't know how to tell what do you
have?
I'm on borrowed time right now, but everybody's out and about.
So let's keep going.
Alright, so here's it here. I want to drop this and see how
this because this came. I wanted to share this with you. They
listed your last conversation on energy information. And
with Matthew. Yeah.
And I wish I had more background on him. So some of his
proof of work concepts were not did. I mean, I had to infer
quite a bit in relationship to sense making for the
conversation. Yeah, right. But I definitely look forward to
syncing him up with him. And I wanted to then share with you
some of the stuff that I've been doing somewhat with John on my
own, some coin stuff. Okay. So with the I quad coin. And
connecting as I heard him talk about the ribosome and those
countries, and the way in which you're sort of the fundamental
basement on energy necessary for information and then what
information is. So I'm working on out the idea. I was working
with John and we and I was sort of like, I hooked on to this
imaginal. Okay, concept the imagine. All right. Concept the
imaginal. John emphasizes this as a differentiation between
imaginary so fully imaginary stuff that's not imaginal, then
is in this intermediate space. Okay, whereby you're
representing something but then in representing it, you
afford potential in utilizing it for seeing things you hadn't
seen before. Okay. And that all of a sudden that hit me in a
particular kind of way. All right. All right. Whereby I
realized the concept of imaginal creates a beautiful
intermediate space between what we might call the experience of
the real so my say my perception of this can this is a can of
Dr. Pepper. Okay, and we can say well, that's real at whatever
level of construction, I have a visual image of that. And I see
something that's real called Dr. Pepper. Okay. And then I can
have it in my head. I can have an image of that. Yes, it
corresponds to the real. Then I can imagine the Dr. Pepper
moving around. Okay. And wonder what it's like to drink and
the silver potentially an imaginal space. And then I can
have it sprout wings like a fairy and fly off and call that
imaginary. Okay. Okay. So what does that do that creates a kind
of a continuum of my immediate experience of the real and my
virtual, you know, experiential system, like as I'm
experiencing what's in what the hell is going on inside my head,
but my subjective conscious experience of being of the real
will call that the imaginal real. Okay, so so imaginal direct
representation, then imaginal would be possible. Okay, space
and then a full imaginary would then be in the space of the
counterfactual impossible. All right. So now this issue of
imaginal became a dimension around a intimate way of
information processing, specifying a dimension of the
its relationship to you have the information processor, and
it's relating to the environment in a particular kind of
weird way on a continuum of the imaginary. Okay, whereby the
tightest aspects are where this imaginal real is really in good
complex looping with whatever out here, versus okay, then
imaginal and then imaginary. Yeah. All right. And you notice
that I'm doing this dimension thing here, I'm creating an a
wide dimension up here. Okay, that's then tracking the thing
that it's tracking. So this is the can out in the world. And
then this is my experience of it immediately. And then as it
go up, okay, and the imaginary. All right. All right. So
here's the reason that I'm doing this. Okay. This is that I
believe that there is a deep relationship between what I just
specified at the level of the imaginal and the real and the
relationship between real numbers and imaginary numbers. Oh,
crap. Okay. Okay. In the way in which mathematics thinks about
imaginary numbers as being orthogonal to the real numbers.
Okay. And the way in which then when you do an imaginary and
real, you get a complex number plane. Okay. All right. The
trend. So here's what's the here's now a working map. There's
an imaginal layer of information processing in a subject. Okay,
that corresponds then that's embedded in the real world.
All right, there's a dimension upon which there's the mapping
of that of that whereby you engage in in an interactive system
that you can then talk the complex, transjective,
interactive, which is basically as my imaginal system is
connecting with the real, then there'll be a complex interface.
Okay. All right. I'm believing that we may have been a way to
take the topology of imaginary and real numbers and complex
numbers. Okay. And basically, impute that onto Oh, the shit
that happens inside my head is akin to an imaginal dimension
relative to the real. And then I interface that with in a complex
transjective plane.
Sorry, ma'am, I do not I do not I cannot follow and I don't
mean in any way to say I disagree. I literally like when you
heard me say oh shit, like when you interjected the complex
numbers or the imaginary numbers. I don't know my my I cannot
follow down that particular route.
I'll try one more little thing and let's see if then we can
drop this. Okay. There's some stuff here that I'd like to
feed back to you. This connects back to my conversations
Matthew and it may it may look like there may be something
that happened to or maybe that we actually have to do this
triadiquary, for example. Okay. All right. So here's the so I
was trying to explain this to my parents. So first you have sort
of energy, and then you have matter. Okay, then you know, I
have the life, mind and culture that are coming off of matter.
Okay, in the tree of knowledge, right? Okay. So life, then
really what I'm representing with life is the complex adaptive
plane of information processing and communication that give
rise to this complex network. Okay. The semantic content of life
then is being thought of as an imaginary orthogonal dimension
to matter.
Okay, so can I can I say it slightly differently? Please. Can
I say that it is a transcendent? And again, in kind of like
the Landry sense or in the sense of like, a Kantian sense
even. Sure. Okay, we're saying more or less the same thing.
Yep. Okay, great. Yes. So to save the language back. And this
is actually kind of interrupts. Let's do it. Let's do it more
like this. Yep.
We can do it very easily. I got a real cow. And I got a real
bucket. And I need to tell you, hey, would you mind taking that
bucket over that cow and milk the cow? Now we have this really
cool thing, where I can replace the actual physical real cow,
which is heavy and over there with this sound cow, which
resembles it in many ways, not at all.
Totally. And yet enables us to coordinate our orientation so
that shit can happen. Now,
on paper, you know, this is sort of classic semiotics, I have
a I'll draw a picture of a cow, which is already representation.
I've got the word cow, and they are both pointing to something
that is is real. But it is transcendent. It is neither the
physical embodied actual metabolic cow or the sound cow. And
yet there's a way for them to be pointing at the same kind of
thing, which you're now saying that's the at the imaginary that
is or the imaginal that's in the imaginal plane, the imaginal
mode. Yes, okay. And then we have two, we have three three
things, right? First is that that can happen. That's part of
the universe we live in is that can happen. The second is that
there is an energetic benefit and energetic cost associated with
that move. The cost is the information processor that has
the capacity to do whatever sorts of sort of perception,
disambiguation, pattern recognition, work necessary to
be able to map to percept or tons to each other. The energetic
savings is a benefit is what you can do when you don't have to
actually physically walk over and touch the cow and wave the
bucket around, but can actually just issue the sentence. Yeah.
So there's sort of this trade off brain, right? The innovation
of brain is the discovery of the potential available when you
have an organ of information processing potential of a
brain that can then use systems of justification
linguistically to coordinate them into a distributed
cognition function, which enables an unlocking of a
tremendous amount of information compression in the
transcendent or in the imaginal space, which is what we're
doing right now. All right, so
brilliant page. Yep. So, so right. So now that what the
tree of knowledge saying is that you look at a life and that
life, the semantics of life at the cell level, the RNA DNA
when he's describing the ribosome. Yeah, that information
store that affords the complex dynamics of a cell to make its
decisions in relation. Yes, I like imaginal life. It's the
is the semantics of okay, that they can't be reduced to the
fucking matter because it's this instantiated modeling of
matter and it communicates at this network-binded level. So
then it affords us that what is the semantic binding that's
modeling the reality through this information network that
then is doing it based on energy constraints as they was
talking about. So it's the information relative to energy
constraint. Yep. And then that's the cell DNA, RNA, communication
network structure that gives rise to what we call the life
plane of existence, then it's mediated by this kind of
imaginal processing. And then you upgrade that. So now you get
a dimensional of imagination, imaginal around neurocognition
through a brain and the animal mindedness of sensory motor
looping. And it's doing an imaginal in relationship to the
biological. So it then drops the imaginal up a degree. So that's
a secondary imaginal. And then us through a proposition, we get
a third tertiary imagine. Yep. Okay. And now we can stack the
imaginal languages upon each other. And the relationship is
this orthogonal informational relation. Yes. And then sort of
kind of use the metaphor you used earlier. The thing that
Matthew and I were talking about is the distinction between the
proof of work methodology and the fake methodology is the
distinction between the imaginal and the imaginary.
Exactly. Yes. Okay, proof of stake has as it's sort of it has
a dairy Doridian, a dairy da. Just crash the internet again.
Back proof of stake. Yes. The last I heard was proof of stake.
proof of stake is effectively identical isomorphic to many of
the problems we were just discussing in terms of like dairy
dollars point around language, right? If it's entirely
self referential, if a word means only its relationship to all
the other words in a language, then it's not it's not bound to
reality. It's not bound to nature is not bound to anything
other than its own systems of justification, actually, as it
turns out, the only the only way you can get there is actually
already when you've lost the plot and have self identified the
ego, the systems of justification as reality. And then you kind of
look around go nothing the systems of justification around
here. And then you you know that you run off on that on that sort
of in some sense preordained dead end journey. But you're like,
no, no, no, there is a way there is as you say, Hey, if I if I'm
just doing something very simple, like say, Hey, would you
bring me that hammer? And the loop has a loop that goes from the
informational into the energetic, meaning did you actually did
digreg actually hear what I was saying, understand it, walk over
grab the object known as hammer and bring it to me. If yes, that
loop right the loop from the informational down to the
energetic backup is real. And that's part of reality. If you're
running in just the algorithm and just the informational, it's
unconnected to reality and is sort of preordained to closure
and entropic noise in a finite time relatively quickly, by the
way. But if I'm looping it, you know, then that's just in
complex space, we use the word of complex dynamic space, and
that's life, right? Then I'm just engaging in adaptive life.
And so, so by the way, the hypothesis here, which is, I'm
gonna say, that's what it's like, it feels like it may be a big
deal is to say this thing, proof of work, which I learned as a,
like a pragmatic notion. Oh, it's a way of solving a particular
kind of kind of game theoretic problem, which is resolved a
mathematical question around the Byzantine general's problem.
Okay, I can almost like, but just inside that book, go, Okay,
look at it. Okay, I get how it solves that problem. This is a
very different proposition. The proposition here to say no, no,
no. This is the thing that enables the joint point, evoking
Greg H, the joint point of person culture space, to actually
move to whatever this next level is. That's the thing that I'm
pointing out, which is why I had to CC you on this one, right?
The problem is that this thing, proof of work, is the thing that
enables computation, which is information processing, qua
information processing, like this, if we're looking now at
technology, qua technology, not any artifact of technology, we're
looking at computation, qua computation, information
processing, information theory, information in and of itself.
Proof of work is nothing more or less than the mechanism by
which that is strictly bound to energy. And that if you don't
have energy bound information bound to energy, then
information flies off into a, an entropic closure, which goes to
noise in a finite time. If you do have it bound, then you're
beginning to actually do something which is happening in
the real. And you can begin to build on that.
Like a complex system.
Like a complex system. Yeah. So, so I'm now a, I'm now a proof
of work maximalist. Yeah, yeah. And what that does is it
affords a foundational linkage between a foundational concept,
two foundational concepts, okay, of energy and information on the
one hand. And now the ease with which you metabolize what I was
saying, once I rotate it a bit, okay, the, the, this relationship
between these dimensions of complexification, this life, mind
and culture shit, okay, to go back to what I was saying, like
we can upgrade the old misunderstandings, the entire
enlightenment failed to appreciate how to fucking get from
matter in motion into actual, what do we mean by life? What do we
mean by mind? What do we mean by culture? Because they were
operating on a particular set of assumptions of what the real
had to be. Okay. And now that we can point in mathematics to the
logical relations between structures like between real and
imaginary numbers and the orthogonal mapping between
those that actually transposed in the relationship between real
and information processing. All right. We are afforded to me
what I'm wondering about is we're affording a particular
framing that has long eluded our understanding basically
between matter and mind ultimately, or between energy
into matter into life into mind into culture into the forms that
we are using to map the substances and to create a
transjective conforming grip between being and thinking into a
clear metaphysics.
Yeah. Um, yeah, just as a nice, how to say, not even caveat,
but just a nice thing to put out there. My mind does not handle
certain kinds of math particularly well. And I can tell
you right now that I have, I've endeavored mightily to
understand what the fucker meant by imaginary numbers. I can get
them down to their formulas, I can use them, I can do stuff with
it, right? But I kind of got nothing, like it feels very
weirdly, I almost panicked, whoa, but you're barring that leap
right there. The continuity of what you were just describing,
and we could probably continue to kind of massage it and hammer
on it. I get where you're going, I get the point. Let me see
there's some other things that came up. So yes, I think that
Oh, okay, there's a couple. One is an acknowledgement, a thing
that we should acknowledge as a culture. You know, we're on the
one hand, we're standing on the shoulders of giants. On the other
hand, we're staying on foundations of sand, beautifully
set, right? These are both true. The guys were doing their
best with very, very limited frameworks, ability to experiment
coordination capacity. And there's a lot of path dependent
stuff that was outlining the swept into the rug. Like shit, I
don't understand how that works. Well, fuck it, I got to figure
out how to do this problem over here. Fine. Simplify, reify,
hope it doesn't come up until after you know, my job is done,
which is a pretty human thing. What a human nature. That's a
very human thing to do.
Sounds like a reasonable justification.
Exactly. And it's okay, like it's okay for us to actually zoom
back and look at something and say, Oh, all right, let's let's
take this unexamined for 300 years, set of axiomatics. Oh, boy,
these are really, really not particularly functional. All
right, fine. So unplug that, expand the back out. See, geez,
look at all this structure that was built on top of a bunch of
actually quite poor axiomatics. How much of that can we just
throw away? A lot of it. What can we build new neat stuff? Can we
plug a lot of old stuff into it? Sure. Because most of the old
stuff is actually just pragmatic, having to do with what
really works in a real world, right? Or looping it all the way
back, by the way, the technocratic error.
Technocratic error is built on top of a lot of those axiomatic
errors in a deep way. And it's not it's a problem. It's something
that it had the loops have not closed to force the capitulation
that it's a problem, but it's a problem. And we can again, we
can argue that ad nauseum, which Matthew actually does a
quite a good job at in language that doesn't know what he's
going to understand. None of the tech, none of those who are
motivated enough to understand it will understand that's a bit
right. Right. Right. But yes, that that acknowledgement of
saying, Hey, we actually are in a position where we can use these
things like zoomed dialogues and integrative pluralism to
radically upgrade the robustness of the way that we go about
thinking about this whole story. We're not beholden in Enlightenment
era, or modernist era, or late 20th century, like we're not
beholden too much, if anything, really. I mean, the whole point
of this integrative pluralism frame is like, look, Greg and I
met, what, two years ago? If that you've got a vast, you know,
long lifetime of thinking about lots of things. Right. And from
point of view, that's not my native point of view. I got my
own stuff. And yet, we've been able to figure out how to achieve
generative dialogue. Effectively, instantly, this is a key
thing, like, immediately, and then it continued the process.
Right. So it's a one grip, and then it can expand. And it's
it's like useful from the very get go and continues to have
richness, which is nice. Right. You don't have to have this. It
sucks for two years and is useless, then hope it works
out and get a payload at the end. You can actually have a nice
smooth. Okay, cool. This is an interesting insight. I walk away
from this with some increased capacity, more meaningful
existence in life in reality, and notice that it just affords
more possibility on a go forward basis.
Totally on my end as well. And that's the synergy of it. And, man,
we tap that. Yeah.
Now I am. Yeah, the borrowed time is definitely no longer
being called to. So I hear it. Good to see you. All right, me
too. So it's a Hey, man, enjoyed it.
