Hello everyone, today we have another important guest, he is a philosopher, he is a scientist
and he has very interesting book as well.
So he is from UK and most importantly his book like many, many big university they follow
and they do research on his book from let's say example Oxford University, Cambridge University,
MIT and many big university actually following his book and he is a very big scientist and
philosopher, he has a lot of contributions in global arena.
So hello Mr. Anthony, how are you?
Greetings, I'm honoured to be here, thank you very much indeed.
Yes, very good.
So can you please introduce yourself about your introduction?
Yes, I shall add to your wonderful introduction, thank you so much, yes I'm a philosopher
and a science fiction and science writer essentially and a theistic evolutionist and
so today I'll be introducing some of my concepts in terms of theistic evolution and why the
whole notion of God is so important to science.
We are led to believe that science and God are diametrically opposed, you have to believe
in one or the other but actually they can work together symbiotically.
In fact theology, philosophy and science can work together as one, if you like, as a
trinity in a sense, they become one in essence and they live together symbiotically and this
is a very important concept which I speak about a lot in my work.
So yeah.
Okay, very interesting, so I know you are a debater and you have a strong argument on
metaphysics and you are a believer as well and this is very interesting for us.
As I said, I write a lot about artificial intelligence, the universe, terraforming Mars and so forth
but today obviously I'm going to concentrate, gravitate to one around one essential point
which is science and theology.
As I said, our philosophy, science and theology can actually work as one, so you don't have
three but in essence you have one giant universal orb of thought where science, philosophy and
theology sit together symbiotically and you have one giant universal orb of thought and
they're one and they work together.
So they're not diametrically opposed as many scientists are led to say like Richard Dawkins
and so forth.
Very interesting, yes, like we want to know about all of your arguments and how you start
your analysis.
Obviously this is a very extensive thing in the sense that it's extremely multi-dimensional,
there are so many key points so I will just briefly touch on certain things.
Now the first thing I want to touch on is what is man?
Well, man is essentially a bundle of particles, okay, we're a bundle of particles but we are
made up of a neutron, essentially we're made up of a neutron, we're made up of many particles
but the particle that we are made up of predominantly is a neutron.
Now the interesting thing about a neutron is this, that a neutron is not only radioactive
but it also decays within 10 minutes.
So the interesting thing here is what gives, how is it that we are here if we are made
up of something that is A, radioactive and B, decays within 10 minutes.
Incidentally this is known as weak decay, this is known as weak decay because within
the world of particle physics, within particle physics units, 10 minutes is actually a very
long time so it's known as weak decay.
So 10 minutes within the world of particle physics, particle physics units, 10 minutes
is a very, very long time but within our world, our classical world, 10 minutes is a very
short time so here you actually have the relativity of time at play.
Not to mention that when a neutron decays, once a neutron decays becomes unstable and
in quotes dies, its energy is never lost because of the first law of thermodynamics, the conservation
of energy.
Because of the first law of thermodynamics, its energy is never lost even though it becomes
unstable and decays.
So it becomes a proton, electron and a neutrino.
So you have the first law of thermodynamics there, proton, electron and neutrino.
So once a neutron decays, it becomes a proton, electron and a neutrino.
So going back to my original point, how is it that we exist if we are made up of something
that is A, radioactive and B, decays so quickly.
The interesting thing here is this, an atheist will say this is an accident.
I say this is orchestrated because it's far too complex.
Once you place a neutron into a nucleus, it becomes bound.
In other words, it requires energy to release itself from, it becomes bound in the nucleus.
As it becomes bound, it loses energy.
So it becomes bound, it loses energy.
So if we apply E equals MC squared, if we apply E equals MC squared, we know that if
it loses energy, it will also lose mass.
It loses so much mass that it stabilizes within the nucleus and it can no longer decay into
an electron, proton plus neutrino.
Now this is an incredible thing and we exist because of this process.
In fact, all the heavy elements, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and iron, all those nuclei exist because
of this.
Everything exists because of this process.
That once you place a neutron into a nucleus, it becomes bound.
It loses energy.
E equals MC squared, so it loses energy, it also loses mass.
It loses so much mass that it can no longer decay into a proton, electron and a neutrino.
So it doesn't decay and that's the reason why we are here.
Now my argument is this.
An atheist will say this is nothing but an accident, just a complete accident of nature.
I say this is far too complex to be an accident.
This is, to me, orchestrated.
There's thought process in this because it's far too complex.
It's the same.
In fact, many people will say, well, okay, fine, but who created God?
Well, that's an oxymoron.
By definition, God is an eternal being that transcends time and space.
Incidentally, time and space is an electromagnetic field.
It's zero point, electromagnetic quanta.
It's an electromagnetic field.
We who are bound by time and space past, present and future that live in a trinitarian perception
of reality cannot perceive something that is determined in nature, but God dwells outside
the sphere of time and space and he is the mechanism involved with what I've just explained.
Otherwise, to say that this is just an accident is, for me, impossible.
It's far too complex.
It's far too complex.
The whole thing about the neutrons I have described to you is orchestrated by a power,
by a higher power, by a mechanism.
And this mechanism is an infinite eternal being that exists independent of both time
and space.
So that's my first point.
In fact, to elaborate on this, I could say that this is essentially order out of chaos.
Through chaos, God establishes order.
Through chaos, God establishes order.
In fact, we see this with the Big Bang.
In fact, we see this with the formation of molecules.
Let me explain.
How does life arise?
Life arises as a result of an imperfection at an atomic level.
The stable atom, the stable atom doesn't do anything.
It's the atom that lacks an electron.
It's the atom that lacks an electron, the needy, abnormal atom that seeks to merge with
other atoms, forming covalent bonds, DNA, RNA, and then life starts as a result of an imperfection
at an atomic level, order out of chaos.
Incidentally, this proves that the whole concept of perfection is nothing but a construct
of the mind.
The whole concept of perfection is nothing but a construct of the mind, because it's
the atom that lacks an electron, the abnormal atom, the atom that is needy, that says,
wait a second, I need atomic equilibrium.
I need balance here.
It then binds to other atoms to make up for that missing electron.
And through this process, we have in physics, covalent bonds, RNA, DNA, and so forth, and
then molecules are produced, and then life, and the evolutionary process begins with a
deficiency at an atomic level.
Life starts at an order out of chaos, essentially.
So this is the first point I'd like to make, and it's a very interesting point.
My next point is actually this.
What is the universe?
Well, I'm going to break this down into two.
The first part of this is basically that the universe, coming from a cosmological perspective
here, is actually a trinity.
What do I mean?
The universe is a spacetime matter continuum.
The universe is actually three in one.
It's a spacetime matter continuum.
It's a trinitarian perception of the universe.
If we break these down, let's take, for example, time.
What is time?
Time is past, present, and potential future, because the future only exists as a potential.
Past, present, and potential future, the future only exists as a potential.
Within the three segments of time, it represents the totality of time.
You have a trinitarian perception of reality.
In fact, man's oscillating consciousness is integrated within three perceptions of time,
past, present, and potential future that represents the totality of time.
We live in a trinitarian perception of reality.
Our oscillating consciousness exists within this trinitarian perception of reality.
Our soul, which is our mind, will, and emotions, is a nexus of electromagnetic forces that
cannot be destroyed because of the first law of thermodynamics.
Our soul is integrated within this trinitarian perception of reality.
There's a trinity within time itself.
Space, barring time, space is three-dimensional, and within each dimension of space, it permeates
all of space, trinitarian perception of space.
And matter, and when I say matter, light and sound, matter, light and sound, is the unseen,
omnipresent energy that manifests itself in various forms of measurable motion corresponding
with natural phenomena.
Light produces light energy that produces the light that it's seen.
Light produces light energy that produces the light that it's seen, and the same mathematical
formula for sound.
We live in a trinitarian universe, space, time, and matter, as I've said.
Space, the three dimensions of space, time, past, present, and potential future, and obviously
light and matter, as I've just described now to you.
So it's a very interesting concept.
Now B, is the universe a mechanical universe or a dynamic universe?
The universe, as Isaac Newton was led to believe, is actually a mechanical universe.
It's a mechanistic universe.
Dynamic universe requires a mechanism.
We can see how it's evolving, and so forth.
This is not a dynamic universe.
A dynamic universe is a living system.
It gathers information as it goes along.
And so you get a basically random evolution.
It becomes unpredictable, non-linear pattern, yep.
And dynamic processes are systems with information feedback operations, i.e. a fractal.
But we don't have this picture of the universe.
We don't have a dynamic universe.
We have a mechanistic universe.
So a mechanical universe requires a mechanism, again, proving that there has to be a greater
being that transcends time and space, infinite in both time and space.
As I said, space and time is an electromagnetic field, zero point electromagnetic quanta.
And we are bound by time and space, therefore we cannot perceive something that is beyond
time and space.
To perceive God is something beyond us because God is eternal.
We are beings that have a past, present, and future that live within a trinitarian perception
of reality.
Okay.
Excuse me.
Right.
My next point is this.
What was responsible for pumping energy into the open system, the universe, in the very
beginning?
First law of thermodynamics, the conservation of energy.
Energy cannot be destroyed, but will transform from one form into another and so forth.
What was responsible for pumping energy into the open system?
Again, this mechanism, this infinite being that transcends time and space.
Right.
My next point is this, and I'm going to sort of do a little bit of a jump here, but bear
with me.
Sorry.
You know what it is?
I've got so much to share.
I've had to make certain points and I'm sort of gravitating, but my mind is exploding with
ideas.
So I'm trying to sort of narrow it down and give little bits without going overboard.
Right.
There are two kinds of things.
There are things that exist necessarily, excuse me, and there are things that exist contingently.
Things that exist necessarily exist out of the necessity of their own nature.
In other words, they have to exist.
Okay.
Things that exist necessarily have to exist.
They exist out of the necessity of their own nature.
What do I mean?
Mathematical objects exist in this way.
The number five exists in this way.
Numbers exist in this way.
Abstract things like this.
The number four, the number three exists in this way.
They exist necessarily, out of the necessity of their own nature.
But things that exist contingently by contrast don't exist necessarily.
They exist because something has caused them to exist, i.e., man, animals, the universe.
Now a clever atheist will come along and say this, actually, we don't need that.
You know why?
The universe is eternal.
We have an eternal universe, the eternity of matter theory.
Most pantheists believe in the eternity of matter theory.
In other words, we don't need to explain the universe because the universe has always existed.
Therefore, we don't need God.
We don't need an eternal being.
The universe is eternal.
It's always existed.
Thus, we can push God aside.
No need for God.
But does this work?
A, there is no mathematics to actually back this concept of the eternity of matter theory.
Noxha mentioned that there are four things that can dismantle this argument very quickly.
The first is this.
If the universe was eternal, it would have reached a point where all usable energy was exhausted.
We don't have a picture.
The universe is full of cosmic energy.
So if the universe was eternal, it would have reached a point where all usable energy was exhausted.
But it's not like that.
It's full of cosmic energy.
The second one is this.
Background cosmic radiation.
Background cosmic radiation.
Heat remnants left over from the Big Bang, which we have detected in the universe.
We know that an explosion took place.
Relativity, the third point, we know that the universe is expanding as a result of dark energy.
70% of the universe is predominantly dark energy.
And this, and our universe is expanding, which implies that the universe at one point was a cluster.
It had a point genesis.
It's not eternal.
Not at all.
Now, the most beautiful point is this.
The second law of thermodynamics, entropy, the immutable metaphysical law of the universe.
Entropy means erosion and decay.
Death is a manifestation of this law.
It's the immutable metaphysical law of the universe.
Do we see entropy at play within the cosmos?
Yes, we do.
Take a star.
A star will succumb to gravitational collapse as its elements grow heavy and lose energy and eventually die.
And then it distorts the fabric of time and space in the form of a black hole.
So we see stellular death within the cosmos.
As I said, star will lose energy.
Its elements will grow heavy, eventually decay and decay and decay,
and eventually distort in the fabric of time and space in the form of a black hole.
Singularity and so forth.
That's another topic.
There is death within the cosmos, which implies there's a point genesis to the universe.
So the eternality of matter, the eternity of matter theory, is very easily dismissed and is left for science fiction books,
which I write many about.
Many stories are about this, but it's nothing but science fiction.
The universe had a point genesis, and these four arguments destroy this argument completely.
Right.
My next point is something from nothing.
Richard Dawkins and Lawrence Krauss discussed this extensively.
Something from nothing.
Now, what do I mean?
Well, due to the laws of quantum mechanics and relativity,
we now know that empty space is actually not empty.
That every single point in space actually contains information.
I repeat, every single point in space contains information.
The universe is a giant cosmic superconductor.
There's an invisible field everywhere in the universe.
We know this through the hydrogen collider.
I accept that, no problem.
So basically, what we have is virtual particles,
virtual particles, a bubbling brew of virtual particles that are popping in and out of existence,
within space, every point in space contains information.
So empty space is not empty.
Virtual particles that are popping in and out of existence, perpetually, continually,
within the quantum world.
Empty space is not empty.
Virtual particles popping in and out of existence, perpetually.
This can only happen within the quantum world, by the way.
It couldn't happen within a classical world, our world,
because it would violate the laws of energy.
You can't produce mass where you didn't have mass in the first place.
So this is only reserved for the quantum world.
So what a physicist or a scientist like Richard Dawkins would say,
because of this, if you wait long enough,
you are guaranteed by the laws of quantum mechanics alone
to produce something from seemingly, seemingly, in quotes,
because empty space is not empty,
you are bound to produce something from seemingly nothing,
i.e. particles and matter,
because gravity allows, sorry,
gravity allows negative and positive energy configurations.
Okay?
Right.
In fact, once you apply the laws of quantum mechanics to gravity itself,
space itself becomes a quantum mechanical variable
and literally fluctuates in and out of existence.
And so just via the laws of quantum mechanics themselves,
you can literally produce universes, spaces and times
where there was no space and time before.
But there's a problem here, Richard Dawkins.
Laws do not create matter.
The laws of quantum mechanics cannot create matter.
Laws do not create matter.
If you're not saying that the laws of quantum mechanics over time
create matter, you're ascribing creative power to laws.
Physical laws do not create physical realities.
Let me look at a cell.
Take a cell.
A cell operates under certain laws, okay?
DNA, RNA and so forth, okay?
But those laws that govern that cell
didn't bring the cell into existence.
So we need to separate agency, sorry,
we need to separate agency from this whole notion of,
shall we say, a cell being created by laws.
Laws do not create physical realities.
And this is a very important point.
Laws do not create physical realities.
So there's a problem here for atheists.
The laws of quantum mechanics alone
cannot create physical realities, my friend.
No laws can.
Laws only describe how certain things
work under certain conditions.
As I said, you take a cell, a cell
operates under certain laws, but those laws
were not responsible for bringing the cell into existence.
Laws are one thing, agency is another.
Laws are one thing, agency is another.
The question is, who created those laws?
That's Qi.
Only God that is infinite in both time and space
could have ordained those laws, could have created those laws.
In fact, our universe operates under certain mathematical laws.
Nature operates under mathematics.
So an atheist is basically saying that these mathematical laws
are nothing but a coincidence.
No, these laws were inscribed and it
takes a mind to have formulated them for the universe
to operate as it does.
So there we have it, my friend.
My next point is entropy and evolution.
Back to entropy.
Entropy is a second law of thermodynamics.
Sorry.
Entropy is a second law of thermodynamics.
As I said, it's the immutable metaphysical law of the universe.
Everything over time decays.
Everything over time decays.
Proteins, molecules, and so forth.
Death is a manifestation of this law.
So how could proteins and molecules
have become far more complex over time
in light of what we know about the second law of thermodynamics?
That tells us, actually, it's the inverse.
Over time, things become corrupted and disintegrate and die.
Many scientists will use the open system notion
as a way out of this.
But to me, there is no way out of this.
The fact of the matter is, if proteins and molecules
are becoming far more complex over time,
there has to be a force that governs,
there has to be an energy,
there has to be a mind that is doing this process.
In other words, evolution only works theistically.
To say that this universe started via evolution,
atheistically, it's saying that proteins and molecules
over time become far more complex
and then suddenly life appears.
But that's impossible,
because entropy tells us the inverse.
Over time, things die.
So how could things become more complex over time?
You need a mechanism.
God is this eternal mechanism.
He is the mechanism behind the mechanical universe.
He is the mechanism behind evolution.
You need God.
This is why I said science and God and theology
work together symbiotically.
Instead of having three,
you have one giant universal orb of thought
and God controls all the mechanisms of life.
Now, I'm saying this from a non-religious point of view.
I'm just saying that God is the great architect,
the great mind behind evolution,
behind the mechanical universe,
because otherwise we have a problem.
We have a mechanical universe.
We don't have a dynamic universe as I've mentioned before.
Not to mention, as I've said,
entropy tells us that over time things become corrupted
and over time things disintegrate and die.
Proteins and molecules over time die and disintegrate,
but we don't have that.
For evolution, we have the inverse.
So how could evolution work?
You need a mechanism for this process to continue.
And that's why we're here,
because God is working through evolution
as he's working through the mechanical universe.
Okay.
My next point is this.
Our planet is approximately four and a half billion years old.
Approximately four and a half billion years old.
Okay.
After about half a billion years, excuse me,
we had the first formation of life, should we say.
We had bacteria and microorganisms
after about half a billion years.
Yeah.
So that's pretty much what happened.
After that, then things became far more complex,
bigger and more interesting.
Now, my point here is this,
and I wanna be very brief here,
is this, within evolution,
we transition from physics to biology and then to chemistry.
But I'm gonna sit at biology.
Once we reach biology, biological processes,
as I mentioned, we had microorganisms and bacteria.
We transitioned from biology to chemistry.
We have this sudden quantum leap from biology to chemistry.
Biological processes to chemical processes.
But no atheistic evolutionists,
including Richard Dawkins himself,
can explain this sudden transition.
He doesn't know, because incidentally,
as a result of this quantum leap, if you like in quotes,
we had the formation of genetics.
Genetics started as a result of this sudden transition
from biological processes to chemical processes.
And then we had the formation of genetics,
the first high-tech genetic molecule,
a precursor to DNA, and then suddenly, life.
He calls this a gap.
This is not a gap.
This is a colossal gap.
You know why?
If you can't explain how genetics started,
you can't explain evolution,
because evolution sits on the pillar of genetics.
Evolution sits on the pillar of genetics.
So if you can't explain how we went from biological processes
to chemical processes, okay, this sudden transition,
and then the formation of the high-tech genetic molecule,
as I've mentioned, yep, and then DNA,
if you can't explain that, you can't really explain genetics.
You sorry, you can't really explain evolution,
because all of evolution sits on the pillar of genetics.
He says, this is a missing gap that we're trying to fill,
but he can't fill it, because the only thing
that can fill it is a divine spark.
A divine spark is the only thing can fill that transition,
i.e. what created genetics was this eternal infinite being
that transcends time and space.
Exists outside of the sphere of time and space,
independent of both time and space.
As I said, space and time is an electromagnetic field,
zero point electromagnetic quantum.
It's an electromagnetic field.
God dwells in eternity.
He is the spark in that gap to explain how genetics started.
Richard Dawkins says, this is a gap.
We don't know how it started, which we're working on it.
We're gonna find that one day, hopefully.
They're never gonna find out
because of his atheistic attack.
He doesn't want to admit that there is something
far too complex here for him to deal with.
The fact of the matter is,
we transitioned from biology to chemistry,
then we get genetics.
Evolution sits on genetics, the pillar of genetics.
If you can't explain how genetics started,
you really can't explain evolution.
God is the mechanism behind genetics.
He is the gap that fills that gap that he says is a gap.
And all life started with this eternal being
that transcends time and space.
Evolution needs God.
The mechanical universes needs God,
as I've explained through entropy,
the first or thermodynamics and so forth.
Right, I'll end with this last point here.
The reason why people struggle
with the whole concept of God, as I have said,
is because they're bound by time and space.
They're bound by time, as I've already explained.
We live in a trinitarian perception of reality.
We live in past, present, and potential future,
because the future only exists as a potential.
We live in this trinitarian perception of reality, okay?
We're bound by time.
So we live in these three different segments of time,
past, present, and potential future.
And beyond that, we cannot perceive something
that is actually eternal in nature.
So the problem is something within the nature of man,
we don't have the cognitive faculties
to understand something that dwells in eternality.
It's something that transcends time and space.
It's something beyond the mind.
Yet at the same time, we have the ability
within our intelligence to understand
that we could not have come here,
as I've discussed from just a mindless explosion.
As I've destroyed the eternality of matter theory,
as I've told you, that's impossible.
So you just have to say this is just a mindless explosion
and suddenly we're here.
No, it couldn't be.
There has to be a mechanism at work.
In fact, epistemology in philosophy
is all to do with knowledge,
where does all this knowledge come from?
It all stems from the eternal source.
If you remove this infinite being,
if you remove him from the equation,
even knowledge, everything collapses,
including knowledge and so forth.
All things, including knowledge,
stem from the eternal source
who dwells outside of time and space.
I'll leave it with you.
Thank you for your nice discussions
and a very good debatable strategy.
But I have some perceptions and I just want to know,
and there are very good audience.
I will come to the audience response as well.
First thing first, you are discussing about
present the world,
how the world is running and how it works
and how God has relationship with every aspect of this world.
My first thing is that
there are many philosophers like you,
but those who are not believers.
My first point is that, why you become believers?
My second point is that, at present,
we are in challenging situations
with COVID-19, pandemic and many more things.
How you want to explain at present particular situations
with your analysis of God.
Why these things happen?
Right, right, okay.
Firstly, it's very important that I mention this.
The sheer fact that there is suffering in the world
doesn't disprove God's existence.
It just means you have to change your philosophy,
your theology, you understand, excuse me, of the universe.
People use suffering to say,
well, we all suffer,
there's terrible things happening within the universe.
We're sorry, within our planet.
Terrible things happening on our planet every single day.
God couldn't exist.
Suffering does not disprove God's existence.
Even if you have to come to the analogy,
the point to say, well, God is evil, so be it.
But it doesn't disprove this mechanism.
God exists, whether he's good or evil or both.
You know, dualism, what I'm trying to say is,
suffering does not disprove his existence.
It just means we have to understand things
a little bit clearer, a little bit more clearer.
For example, the whole notion of evil.
Evil doesn't exist outside of man.
Let me explain.
What is evil?
Is a lightning storm evil?
No, it's an atmospheric discharge.
When a snake bites, is that evil?
No, it's a defense mechanism.
The same with a shark and so forth.
An earthquake is to do with tectonic activity,
seismic shifts, releasing of energy and so forth.
All these natural things that we call natural disasters.
It's just nature, it's not evil.
There's no evil involved.
The only thing that is evil is what lies
within the soul of man as a potential thing.
Evil only exists within the soul of man
as a acting potential.
Within the reptilian complex,
there's a region of the brain
known as the reptilian complex.
I know.
Hello, Mr. Anthony.
Dear audience, I think Mr. Anthony has
some of the issues with internet.
So hopefully soon he's gonna come up with his analysis
and he will analyze all of the things
in a professional way.
And most important point of view is that
Mr. Anthony actually trying to explain
the existence of gods
and by which we can analyze our present situations.
By which we can understand
that how we can sustain in these worlds.
Mr. Anthony, can you join with us?
Yeah, no, I think the wife has just gone down.
I just want to move you into the next segment.
Okay, so dear audience,
I already discussed with Mr. Anthony
and he is actually facing some problems
and issue with internet connections.
He will come back soon.
And by this time, based on his discussions,
like how different audience come with their questions,
you can ask questions.
So when he joined with us,
I'm gonna ask him questions about this
metaphysics and existence of gods
and biological economy and more interesting things.
And...
Yes, Mr. Anthony.
I'm trying to explain the quality of Mr. Anthony.
Yes.
Sorry, Mr. Anthony has a few of the issue
with the internet connection.
So he is solving his internet connections
and he's joining with us.
And he has actually a lot of contributions
in metaphysics, et cetera.
And his books, he has many, many interesting books.
All of his books now,
a student from Oxford University,
a student from Cambridge University,
student from MITs and the many, many big universities.
They are following his concept,
even he attended and different debating
and many more activities.
So already, yes, yes, already Mr. Anthony joining with us.
Can you hear me, Mr. Anthony?
I can, I can, sir.
As I was saying,
you were talking about the whole notion of suffering.
As I said, suffering does not disprove the existence
of an eternal creator,
even if you have to come to the conclusion
that the creator is not of good nature.
It doesn't disprove that God is the mechanism
behind evolution, the mechanical universe
and the universe as we know it.
It doesn't disprove that at all,
even if you have to come to that point.
The point that I was saying to you is this,
the whole notion of evil,
evil does not exist outside of man.
As I said, natural disasters like earthquakes and so forth
is to do with tectonic activity, seismic shifts and so forth,
going into geophysics and geology and so on, yeah?
Seismic shifts, racing stress,
the same with the thunder and lightning,
atmospheric discharges,
these are natural things that have to occur.
A shark is an evil when it goes to eat.
That's all it knows.
It's a predator, same with a snake and so forth.
So outside of man, there is no such thing as evil.
These are just...
I think Mr. Anthony has the same issues again.
So he need to, he need to solve these things.
This is very interesting discussions.
I do not want to miss his interesting discussions
and definitely he gonna solve his internet-related problem
and he will come back soon.
So sorry about the internet problems.
So I think that Mr. Anthony actually facing
some of the internet-related problems from his sites
and definitely he gonna come back again.
I'm not able to read him.
Can you read him to the point?
Yes, can you please join me?
I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
I'm getting sold here.
One minute, two minutes is not enough.
So we are communicating my teams
and I'm also communicating with him
in between one and two minutes he gonna join with us.
So what I'm discussing about some of his contributions.
So you know at the present situations, he live in the UK.
So in UK, he facing some of the challenge
and problem with internet and other things.
So hopefully, hopefully he gonna solve these things soon
and he will join with us.
So basically, I just want to share some of his biography
and some of the things that we are going to discuss
about his biography and some of his international contributions.
Specifically, he born in England in 1975
and he is a philosopher and science fiction writer,
author on quantum chronics and quantum chronics too.
Imperial planet, silent art and the Mars time project.
His book deal primarily with philosophy, science,
artificial intelligence and theology.
Anthony books are held at various universities such as
Oxford University, Imperial College, London
and highly diverse by some of the world leading scientists.
So this is actually a very interesting discussions
when even personally I attended Oxford Union
and in the Camden Union, you know Thursday night,
they have a debate, they have a debate on existence of God
and many interesting topic.
So this kind of discussions actually help us to understand
how we have to play in that present situations
and how we can play and may solve these issues
in the present situations.
Then there are a lot more confusions in the present science
and the present situations and we have to solve
these specific issues.
And when we are scientific believers,
when we are real believers of the God
and with the proper knowledge and with the proper analysis,
that time we can solve all of the problem.
Even in present pandemic situations,
we believe that there are many things we cannot solve
by ourselves, there are existence of God
and God will solve the specific problems.
And if we can solve this problem,
then example we can make our life more perfect,
we can survive more effectively.
And dear audience, you can wait for these honorable speakers
and you will come back soon.
So we are trying to communicating with him.
So definitely he gonna join with us
and he gonna discuss with all of the specific issues
about the God and about his analysis and everything.
Hello, I'm sorry.
I'm sorry about the wife.
Yes, can you please explain some of the issues
because audience are observing your show
and there are some sort of interaction
for your internet connection.
Yes, unfortunately with all my brilliance,
that's beyond my power.
Okay, go ahead.
Yes, I just want to know.
Let me finish this point.
As I said, evil only exists within the soul of man
as an acting potential.
Hear me out, evil only exists
within the soul of man as an acting potential.
Within the reptilian complex,
within the reptilian complex as a region of the brain,
when you have too much activity,
electrical and chemical activity
within that region of the brain,
it brings out the worst in man.
And then they do evil acts.
But outside of man, there's no such thing as evil
as I have described to you.
This is just nature taking its cause as I have mentioned.
Please go ahead.
I just want to know about your book
because I know that your book already-
I've written six books, so which one?
You can describe any of your present books.
And most importantly, I want to know the relations
in between your books and Oxford University, MIT
and the Cambry's Imperial College,
how they use your books,
how they do research on your books.
Okay, yeah.
Well, basically, even though I'm a science fiction writer,
as I said, I do write hard science fiction.
One of my books was The Mars Time Project, for example.
In that particular book, I write extensively
about terrifying Mars, colonizing Mars,
the science involved and so forth.
And that's just one particular book.
That's a novella, which I published actually last year.
Some of my other work deals with robotics,
artificial intelligence.
I deal with the whole notion of AI.
In fact, my last book that I published a few months ago
is called Androids and the Gods.
In quotes, do androids dream of the gods?
And within the book, what I have is robots, androids,
that start to develop theological concepts about God.
How can a robot develop a sense of God?
So what I write about within this book is this,
that if a machine, a robot, can somehow develop,
in itself, a sense of God, we have to redefine metaphysics.
We have to redefine the nature of the mind.
We have to redefine everything, in fact,
even the nature of God.
So do androids dream of the gods, androids and the gods?
So if a machine can somehow develop within itself
an understanding of who God is, that God exists,
we have to redefine metaphysics.
We have to redefine the nature of the mind.
And then we create a new philosophy, completely.
So if a robot can develop in itself a sense of God,
we have to change everything in terms of what is man,
redefine metaphysics, redefine the nature of the mind,
and so forth.
In fact, interestingly, with AI,
the cells within the nervous system,
the cells within the nervous system
are the closest things in the universe
to the transistors and gates of a computer.
So there's an incredible thing here.
Obviously, the human brain operates on neurons,
a symbiotic connection of neurons,
and a machine operates on mathematical algorithms,
bits of programming logic that govern
the mathematical pathways of a robotic mind.
But there's an incredible parallel there.
As I said, the closest thing in the universe,
as I mentioned, the cells within the nervous system,
within a human brain, the cells in the nervous system
are the closest thing in the universe
to the transistors and gates of a computer.
So I'll write more about that as well, yeah.
Okay, there are very interesting sessions
about your metaphysics and how things is moving.
Let's say I'm a Muslim, I'm a practicing Muslim.
So I know that you have a knowledge on Surya Mokhari,
you have a knowledge on Korans,
and you know many interesting things about slum.
So how do you want to define slum
and how do you want to make a relationship
between this Surya Mokhari and all of your analysis,
even present science and technology and improvements?
Okay, well, what I will say is this,
and I'll start with a very good,
I'll start with a magnificent compliment,
actually, about Islamic culture.
Firstly, is this, I will say this,
the Islamic world, the Muslim world,
I mean, I lived in Qatar, Doha, for example,
and the generosity that I had there was second to none,
not to mention that they built the first library
in Cordoba in Andalusia, you know,
during the wars and the Crusades
when Spain was under the Islamic Empire.
And so actually, the Middle East,
the Arab world has actually contributed magnificently
to science, but we're going back some time.
So they were, if you like, back in the time,
they contributed magnificently to algebra,
as we know, algebra and so forth.
For me to now start to intercombine,
because I think you're asking me now to intercombine
my knowledge of science and philosophy
and metaphysics and so forth with Islam,
I'm not in the position to do so, I'm going to be honest,
because I don't know enough about Islam to do that, okay?
What I do know is, as I said,
I have researched a little bit about
Sahih Al-Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, Al-Tabari,
I am aware of the Hadiths, the narrations, and so forth.
I know a little bit about the Quran, Islamic culture,
and so forth.
So for me to give you a concise, precise answer,
I would have to know a little bit more about Islam.
I don't know enough about Islam to give you that answer.
All I know is this, irrespective of any religion,
God exists, He is eternal.
He is the mechanism behind quantum mechanics,
as I told you.
He is the mechanism behind the mechanical universe,
as I told you.
He is the mechanism behind evolution,
because of entropy, as I told you.
Over time, things become less complex and disintegrate.
Proteins and molecules over time decay and die.
They don't become more complex.
But evolution says that over time,
proteins and molecules become far more complex,
and suddenly life came into being.
But we couldn't have that, because entropy,
the second law of thermodynamics tells us the inverse,
that over time, all things become corrupted,
most systems become corrupted,
and things decay and die.
So how could evolution be?
It requires a mechanism.
God is this mechanism, whoever He is.
God is this mechanism behind evolution,
behind the mechanical universe,
behind quantum mechanics, as I told you.
Before, scientists, sorry,
the Richard Dawkins and Lawrence Krauss,
they'll tell you, hey, look,
the laws of quantum mechanics,
over time, just based on the laws of quantum mechanics,
you can produce something out of seemingly nothing.
But that's impossible, because laws,
laws do not create physical realities.
Laws only describe how certain things
work under certain conditions.
They don't create physical realities.
You need something more.
That's where God comes into the equation.
As I said, every point in space contains information.
Virtual particles that are popping in and out
of existence perpetually,
we live in a cosmic superconductor.
Of course, I know that.
The hydrogen collider has provoked that.
We live in a cosmic superconductor.
There's an invisible field every way in the universe.
There's an invisible field everywhere in the universe.
We live in a cosmic superconductor.
Every point in space contains information.
Space is not empty.
In fact, there's no such thing as nothing.
Even nothing is something,
there's no such thing as nothing,
even nothing is something.
So every single point in space contains information.
We know that there's an invisible field
everywhere in the universe.
And this invisible field is actually responsible for all of reality, because all of reality
can be described by quantum mechanics.
But this doesn't disprove God's existence.
God placed the quantum world into being.
He placed the classical world into being.
He operates through the laws of quantum mechanics.
So yes, everything is made up of quantum mechanics.
Everything is made up of quantum mechanics.
Everything is to do with subatomic particles, streams of light that oscillate.
Everything in the universe oscillates, streams of light that oscillates.
We live in a quantum world.
Everything is based on quantum mechanics.
The universe is a cosmic superconductor, virtual particles that pop in and out of existence
perpetually.
As I said, this can't happen in our world, a classical world, because it violates the
laws of energy.
You can't produce mass, we didn't have mass in the first place.
So this is reserved for the quantum world.
So all of reality can be described by this invisible field.
But that doesn't mean that God doesn't exist.
God placed that invisible field.
He created that invisible field.
God is the God of quantum mechanics.
He created that particle, and that particle represents all of reality, because all of
reality is explained in quantum mechanics.
In fact, if you amplify frequency, you change the structure of matter.
Everything is based on quantum mechanics.
All of reality is based on quantum mechanics.
But that doesn't just prove God's existence.
God is the God of quantum mechanics.
He operates through quantum mechanics, which is why I said to you before, an atheist will
say that with the laws of quantum mechanics combined to gravity itself, then space itself
becomes a quantum mechanical variable, literally fluctuating in and out of existence.
And you can, by the laws of quantum mechanics alone, create universes, spaces and times
where there was no space and time before.
But that's impossible, because you still need a mechanism, because physical realities do
not come into being as a result of laws.
Laws only describe how things work under certain conditions.
They cannot create physical realities, which is why physical laws are one thing, agencies
another.
God is the creator of those laws, and the universe operates under certain laws in quantum physics.
I challenged Dawkins.
I challenged the very best.
Nobody will beat me in this.
I can guarantee you.
Okay.
Brilliant.
I just want to go with the audience's response.
Gary Popp, he said, I'm very proud to know Anthony.
Gary, Gary is actually, please finish, then I'll go ahead.
Okay.
She said, informative session.
Thank you, sir.
Ayaz Ahmed, nice and really informative discussions.
He's from India and IBM TV.
He said, Hi, Sharif Uddhila Ahmed Rana and Anthony, what's chemistry behind biological
economists, and G. Saroj, let me stop you there.
Sorry.
I thought that you were going to give me a bit more information on Gary's message.
Let me mention the Gary pop.
Sorry.
Gary's actually my best friend and a dear brother.
So hello, Gary.
Gary is actually a musician and aside from being a musician, he's actually the guy that
is behind all my artwork.
He's the artist behind all the book covers.
So a big hello to Gary.
Gary, as I said, is a brilliant artist and we're brothers and so there you go.
So there are many good responses specifically on Keith has questions.
What chemistry behind biological economy?
He asked what chemistry behind biological economy?
What chemistry behind biological economy?
Yes, that's a half-baked question.
So, okay, no problem.
So on Keith, if you have a specific question you can ask again, you will give you answer.
Okay.
I have a specific question because let me let me let me mention this, let me mention
this because sorry, whoever's asked that question has has formulated the question in
such in such a manner that it's sort of half-baked in the sense that as I mentioned, whether
you go into biology, chemistry, physics, quantum mechanics as I have mentioned extensively,
reality, metaphysics and so forth because I'm a universal mind.
I touch on every dimension of philosophy and science.
When you look at biology and chemistry, as I said, going back to that transition in
evolution where I told you that we go, we transition from physics to biological processes
and then we have that sudden quantum leap into chemical processes.
You remember I told you earlier, we have this sudden transition in evolution in the sense
that we go from biology to chemistry.
As a result of this transition from biology to chemistry, we have the formation of genetics,
the high-tech genetic molecule and then DNA and so forth and then all life.
No atheistic evolutionist, including Richard Dawkins, has been able to explain how this
transition has occurred.
They can explain vast amounts regarding evolution.
I told you, our planet's about four and a half billion years old.
After about half a billion years, we had microorganisms and bacteria and then from then things became
far more complex over time and a lot larger and so forth and then the whole evolutionary
process began.
What I'm saying is this, nobody can know atheistic evolutionists can just understand how we had
this sudden transition from biological processes to chemical processes.
As a result, we had the formation of genetics, the high-tech genetic molecule.
From there, we had DNA and so forth and then the whole evolutionary process commences.
What I'm saying is with this gap, this is not a gap, this is a colossal gap in the sense
that if you can't explain how genetics started, you can't explain evolution because all of
evolution sits on the pillar of genetics.
All evolution sits on genetics.
They can't understand, no, Dawkins does not understand how genetics started, but I do
in the sense that the only thing that could have kick-started genetics is an eternal spark
that transcends time and space, that exists beyond time and space.
As I said, time and space is an electromagnetic field, zero-point electromagnetic quantum.
It's an electromagnetic field.
God dwells in eternity.
He's the spark that created genetics.
He's that gap that they call a gap, that spark genetics, thus evolution, thus life.
He's that spark behind the mechanical universe.
He's that spark behind evolution.
He's that spark behind the atom, which I had mentioned earlier, behind the atom that lacks
an electron, the abnormal, unstable atom that lacks an electron.
All life starts as a result of an imperfection at an atomic level.
The atom that lacks an electron seeks to merge with other atoms, forming covalent bonds, RNA,
DNA, and the whole process of life starts as a result of an atomic deficiency.
When they're out of chaos, God works, operates.
Through chaos, He establishes order, as I had mentioned.
The stable atom with eight electrons, the stable atom with eight electrons doesn't do
any stable, it's, in quotes, perfect, but doesn't do anything.
It's the abnormal and stable atom that creates life.
As I mentioned to you before, this is a perfect example to say that the whole notion of perfection
is nothing but a construct of the mind.
It doesn't exist, it's a construct of the mind.
The abnormal atom creates life.
Perfection is a construct of the mind.
So mentioning back to what I had discussed earlier with you, this and obviously the whole
notion of the chemical, shall we say, the biological transition from biology to chemistry
and the formation of genetics and so forth.
Okay, brilliant.
I have a specific question for my audience.
But we know there is small amount of things about the black hole and the process with
your metaphysics idea and everything.
Can you explain the black hole issues and how actually?
Yeah, well, I mean, as I told you, I mean, black holes occur as a result of stellular
death as a star loses energy, succumbs to gravitational collapse, because a star essentially
resists gravitational collapse all its life.
As its elements grow heavier, the second law of thermodynamics is at work, the immutable
metaphysical law of the universe, death, as I said, there is death within the cosmos.
So basically the immutable metaphysical law of the universe, entropy, the second law of
thermodynamics is at work within the cosmos.
As we see a star eventually succumbs to gravitational collapse, it resists gravitational collapse
all its life.
As it succumbs to entropy, it loses energy and it distorts the fabric of time and space
in the formation of a black hole, singularity and so forth.
And then of course, we have the whole thing of supernova, neutron star and all the rest.
But I think we're sort of de-gravitating away from the issue here a little bit, but I'm
pretty happy to discuss these matters as well.
So no problem.
There you go.
At present, let's say we have a competition in between machine and human.
So we are developing artificial intelligence as well as we are humans.
There are many more challenging issues right now.
So my question is that, like how you explain these competitions, the competition in between
machines and human, how we can analyze the AI and beautiful things inside AI and how
we connect the dots in between humans and machine.
Okay, well, I'll start with this.
I start with this.
I write a lot about androids and robots extensively.
In fact, my last book, Androids and the Gods, was all to do with androids, robots and robotics
and so forth.
And I go from the very beginning and I expand my work to the point of where I told you,
I wrote about androids and the gods, do androids stream of the gods.
If an android can develop a sense of God within itself, then we have to redefine metaphysics.
We have to redefine the nature of the mind, the nature of God and so forth, which is a
colossal philosophical concept.
But I mean, in short, I write extensively about AI in terms of robots, androids.
For example, how do you give a machine a goal?
It needs a description of a future situation.
How do you give a machine an active goal, which is very different?
It needs a description of a future situation, a present situation, and then a process that
thus needs to make them the same to change the present situation.
So I go into the philosophy of AI as well.
I speak extensively about robotics.
In my last book, as I said, I intercombine theology with robotics.
That is my essential key here.
How can I say this?
I actually go beyond, I mean, we have science fiction books that deal with robotics doing the
basic tasks that we expect robots to do.
But I take a robot and it actually has the capacity to interconnect with God,
to develop a sense of God, which is why I said I take metaphysics and robotics to another level,
with all due respect to other science fiction writers.
I've taken it to another dimension.
We have the four law of robotics, which are fantastic.
I've created my own law of robotics in my new book.
An android will be programmed to acknowledge the one world government,
sorry, an android will be programmed to acknowledge the one world government as its
only God, the first law of robotics.
I mean, I could go into that, but we'll say that for another day,
because there's a lot to do with this particular topic.
So I connect AI with theology and metaphysics.
So if a machine can develop in itself a sense of God and understanding that God exists,
then we need to redefine metaphysics.
We need to define the nature of man, the nature of the mind, and the universe, God and so forth.
So I take robotics to another dimension altogether.
Yes, can you hear me?
Yes, can you hear me?
I can hear you.
Okay, so thank you.
Thank you.
Can we extend a few minutes, because I have one hour of time for you.
You can extend as much as you like, no problem.
Okay, thank you.
No problem.
Thank you.
So at present situations, we have a lot of tensions and we have a lot of
issues between believers and non-believers, as well as we are facing a tremendous economical
challenges.
Do you have any solutions at present right now?
Do you find any things in your mind or in your ideology?
How we can overcome from these situations?
What you thought, what you believe, how we can make this world better?
How do I believe we can make this world better?
Yes, like example, what's your thoughts?
So you're breaking up.
Can you hear me?
Yes.
Can you hear me?
Yes.
So you're breaking up a little bit.
Okay.
How we can make the world better?
Yes, how we can make this world better.
And most importantly, how we can overcome from present situations, like in pandemic
situations.
Do you have any specific thoughts?
Well, in terms of making the world better, I think that all comes to do with the moral
philosophy and understanding that there is a greater being beyond time and space and that,
in fact, our morality is etched into laws that God has given us.
And this is the anthropological argument.
The anthropological argument is that within our soul, we have an understanding of what
is right and wrong.
So I think really, to make the world a better place is to have higher moral values and to
hold on to those higher moral values, which have been inscribed within our soul.
As I said, our soul is a nexus of electromagnetic forces.
Our soul is our mind, will, and emotions.
It's a nexus of electromagnetic forces that cannot be destroyed, as I said, for the
first law of thermodynamics will suggest that.
So our soul, our being, has to be morally receptive and understanding rights and wrong.
So ethics, morality, and being very sensitive to things of this nature.
I think you have a better world.
Okay, very interesting.
I want, this is my last question, from your perspective, for believers and non-believers,
what's the best advice from your side?
How we can do more research on that?
How university educations can be more involved with that particular point,
like and do more research on that particular point on believers and non-believers?
What's the issue?
How we can solve these things?
And how we can create more logical society?
So basically, what you're saying in essence, how can we bring
atheists to really understand that there is actually something that transcends time and space,
that there is a greater reality beyond this three-dimensional space?
Is that what you're asking me in essence?
Well, I would say the only way you can do that is to do what I'm doing.
The only way you can actually get atheists to think is to have people like me on your show,
writing the books that I write, and challenging their arguments.
As I said, I'm willing to challenge the very best.
Dawkins, whoever it may be, the very best I'll challenge, no problem.
Because I know that my arguments are too strong, too tight.
When you really analyze science, when you, as I told you, I'm going to go back now to the very
beginning of our discussion. When you look at the neutron, as I told you,
man is made up of many particles, many particles.
But the particle that we're made up of mostly is a neutron.
It's radioactive, and it decays within 10 minutes.
So how do we exist?
As I explained, when a neutron decays, it decays into three particles.
Proton, neutrino, and electron, yeah?
I mentioned that.
So you have the first law of thermodynamics.
Then we also mentioned the fact that it's known as weak decay.
Within the world of particle physics, it's known as weak decay because it takes so long to decay.
But in the classical world, this is a very short period of time.
So you have the relativity of time.
So going back to my point, why is it that we exist,
if we're made up of something that is radioactive and decays so quickly within 10 minutes?
Well, I told you, this incredible order out of chaos,
once you place a neutron into a nucleus, it becomes bound.
Once it becomes bound, it loses energy.
Now we apply the formula of relativity, E equals mc squared.
We know that if it loses energy, it will lose mass.
It loses so much mass, it stabilizes within the nucleus, and it doesn't decay.
And that's why we exist.
As I said, this is not an accident.
It's far too complex.
This is orchestrated by a higher power.
This is not an accident.
Impossible, mathematically impossible.
Okay, this is a very nice discussion for world talent economy forums.
And futures, we want to arrange a different kind of debate.
And I know you are a professional debater.
You acted in Oxford and the Cambrian and the Oxford.
Well, I haven't actually debated Oxford.
I've challenged the atheistic society here in London.
Many times, Chris Street, who is behind Richard Dawkins,
sort of should we say society and so forth.
So I've tried to initiate a debate.
I'm still waiting for that debate, and I can't wait.
I hope it does happen.
But I have been on television, revelation TV six years ago.
As I said, I'm a philosopher, an author of six books.
Quantum Chronicles 1 and 2, Imperial Planets, Silent Earth.
The Mars Time Project, which is all about Mars,
a completely different model together.
And my last book, Androids and the Gods,
and now I've started a new project called Beyond Earth's Horizon,
which is about parallel dimensions.
So I'm very multi-dimensional.
As I said, people ask me, what are you right about?
The truth of the matter is I'm a polymath.
I write about everything.
Science, philosophy, theology, space,
just an explosion of everything, really.
And that basically summarizes me and my work.
And I look forward to being on your show in the future
and debating some atheists.
Please let me know when.
Yes, definitely.
We will arrange a lot of debate and we will invite you.
And hopefully by this way, with the debating,
with scientific arguments, with scientific dialogues,
we will make meaningful contributions
and we will build a better society.
And here we try to give opportunity,
all of the brilliant people in one talent,
one talent economy forums.
And hopefully we will achieve our goal
with the brilliant effort and with the best effort,
people like you, you contribute your knowledge,
those who contribute with your analysis,
we will find out the solution.
I will just conclude with this, by the way.
All the knowledge in the world,
you could have all the knowledge in the world.
But if you don't have that connection
with the eternal being, it means nothing.
You can build a computer, a supercomputer,
which I write about in my books, in terms of AI and robotics,
mechanical brainwave.
You can have a computer that can have all the answers to life.
But if that isn't connected with the eternal source,
it collapses.
Epistemology, which in philosophy is to do with knowledge,
if you do not connect all that knowledge
that has been given to you from the eternal source,
because all knowledge comes from the eternal source
that transcends time and space.
All knowledge.
Otherwise, how do you explain knowledge?
It all comes from the eternal source.
If you remove God from the equation,
knowledge collapses, everything collapses.
Morality, everything.
You have chaos.
So after all I have said in terms of my explanation,
I've gone into science, philosophy, theology,
I've touched on many areas.
I've tried to condense a lot into a very tight space.
And so it's been a pleasure.
But at the end of the day, if that isn't connected to theology,
science and philosophy mean nothing.
It hovers hopelessly in space with no connection.
It doesn't mean anything.
Science and philosophy needs to be connected to God.
Otherwise, it's meaningless.
I understand that, my friend.
Yes, this is very interesting discussions.
So definitely we will connect with science, philosophy,
as well as we will connect with God.
And by this way, we will create better community.
So anybody has better argument.
Anybody want to do a debate with Mr. Anthony?
I think he's ready.
And we are here.
I'm willing in an hour's time.
No problem.
Let me know.
Any time, even midnight.
On that note, I just want to say a big thank you to yourself
and to my friend, Gary Pope, who's watching this.
As I said, Gary's a dear friend.
He's a dear brother.
He's a fantastic musician.
And all my artwork has been done by Gary.
So a big hello to Gary.
And thank you for watching, Gary.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for your time and thank you for your passions.
So definitely we're going to invite you
future for a classical debate.
Thank you, Mr. Anthony.
When you get the atheist, make sure you get the very best.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for your advice.
Bye-bye.
