Should you go to college?
Whether you are young or old,
the decision to go to college is a huge one.
I already did a video on whether you should go
to college or not.
The answer is probably yes, particularly in America.
And in Europe it's free, right?
But in America you have to weigh the cost,
benefit, and all of that.
But there's really five reasons to go to college.
And the truth is, if you can accomplish those things,
if you can do those things that you get from college
in other ways, and I'm gonna share a couple stories
of people who have done this,
then I don't think college is as required.
And I'm not the only one saying that.
There are a lot of people who, not just old people,
but young people who are now saying,
I don't need to go into massive debt
in order to accomplish those five things.
So what are those five things?
We are gonna do HTML, CSS, yes.
So what are the five things?
The first thing is obviously people go to college
to get a job.
Now, that doesn't necessarily,
that's not usually the first reason
to go to college that people go.
They don't even think of that.
And usually they'll pick a major like psychology,
which I actually helped someone actually get a job
after they got a major in psychology
because it couldn't get work.
I'm not bagging on psychologists.
I'm just saying that if you want a job,
you gotta get a degree that's gonna get you a job.
I have a Russian degree.
I actually had a job in Russia,
but my wife told me she didn't wanna be in Russia anymore.
So I had to re-skill and I had to use a bunch of the things
that I learned on my own in the computer lab
as a linguist and a linguist, computer lab,
and also by building out my own home lab
without going to college at all
and continuing to go to college.
So the number one reason is to get a job, right?
Now, you can definitely qualify,
you can learn the skills to get a job
without going to college.
In fact, I made a whole video about why computer science
might not be the right choice for you.
Computer science is definitely the right choice
for certain professions, but not the ones you think.
If you wanna work for a Silicon Valley or any company
that's doing tech things that's gonna pay you a tech salary,
you're probably not gonna want a computer science degree,
honestly, you're probably gonna want the skills
that you would get shooting to get a certification
like a Red Hat certification, or one of these is there's now,
there's another video of me drinking
while talking about the Red Hat certification
because I really hate that the system and ComTAA
and all of the certs that are out there
that you can get to supplement your college.
Some of them are cheaper than that.
They're also not necessary to get a job.
And so another story, some time ago, I believe it was in 2013,
IBM made a very public statement about
that they don't require anybody to have a college degree.
And they made a big deal of it
and they showcased a few people,
one of whom got a security job for IBM at 18
without having anything, anything.
They had a lot of knowledge.
I think that person may have actually had
a security certificate of some kind,
but the point that IBM was making
and many other big companies did around 2013, 2014,
that was a long time ago, was that you didn't need college.
And there's been overwhelming evidence
that you still need to go to college to get a job,
which brings us to the second point, right?
So IBM created a system called K through 16,
which was this educational system
that took you all the way through
the first couple years of college.
And then you just would go through that
and I don't even know where that landed.
I don't know if they're signaling it.
But the second main reason to go to college
is to get a job.
I mean, it's to actually make more money at your job.
And that is statistically borne out by the science.
I'm gonna refer to Adam Ruins College.
Please go watch the video about this.
It talks about, yes, at every stage in their careers,
people that went to college made 30% more in America.
And generally, you know,
it enjoyed better opportunities because they went to college.
I hate reporting that statistic.
I hate it because it shouldn't make any difference.
If you have the skill,
you should be paid for that skill, the end.
And so that's the second reason,
to get a job and to make more money, right?
Those are not the first two reasons
that people cite to go to college.
Most of them, they cite it while they want the third one,
which is to find yourself,
to discover what it is you wanna be,
to, you know, to smell the roses
and figure out what it means to be a thinker,
to take philosophy classes,
to, you know, get high or get drunk
and figure things out or to write poetry or to do whatever.
People use college as an opportunity of self-discovery.
And it's very expensive to do that.
To go to college, to pay, you know,
$3,000 and $4,000 a semester to find yourself,
it's an extremely expensive way to do that.
Take a gap year.
In fact, some colleges that are more responsible than others
have gone so far as to say, you can take a gap year
and we will pay you a scholarship
for you to take a gap year before college even starts.
So you can figure it out, what you wanna be, who you are,
what you believe, you know, people,
there's huge debate in the larger culture world
about the value of a college education,
particularly now in 2024 when there's like all kinds
of radical, you know, things happening on college campuses
because college campuses have traditionally
been the places where progress happens.
That's where people are testing the boundaries.
They're contesting their personal boundaries,
they're testing their societal boundaries,
and they're discovering things.
And some people would cite that that's the number one reason
to go to college, that that's why we have to have colleges.
We have to have places where people can go and think
and not care, you know, not care about the bill
that they're gonna get or the fact
that they might lose their job.
Tenured professorships is one of the worst things
that ever happened in the world
because these people don't have to worry
about accountability at all
because they have a job no matter what.
When is that ever a good idea?
I mean, I don't think that's a good idea.
Anyway, so finding yourself, who you wanna be,
what is your career gonna be,
what are you gonna do with your life?
That is the third reason.
That's usually one of the main reasons that people go.
And along with that, who are you gonna meet along the way?
And this includes your potential, you know, life partner,
particularly Mormon.
If you're a Mormon, there was a joke running joke saying
if you're a Mormon, you're gonna go to college
because that's where you're gonna meet your spouse, right?
And so women who are not encouraged to get education
were, you know, they would go there to find a husband,
they'd find their husband, they'd drop out of school,
and then they'd go back later in life.
It was absolutely abysmally bad, it's a horrible thing
because, you know, education for women
is kind of downplayed.
They've since kind of come around on that.
But the point is connections, right?
You're going to college to create connections.
Some of those connections
are gonna be lifelong friendships.
Some of them are gonna be potential job opportunities.
Some of them, I mean, professors, right?
Some of the friendships that I have made with professors
while I was in college have gone on to be some of the most
valuable things in my entire life.
And I cannot say it any other way.
You know, some of the people that I met in college,
they have the same sort of thing.
Of course, I met my wife in college.
So the people that you meet in college
are gonna be some of the most important people
you're ever gonna meet.
Again, it's a very expensive way to meet people.
And I'm gonna come back to that point
by telling some stories about alternative ways
to do these different things.
And the fifth thing is to learn how to do your laundry.
To put it bluntly, you've got to learn how to adult.
You've got to be a grown up.
You've got to take care of your laundry.
Whether you decide to live in your car
or an apartment or whatever,
you've got to learn to do your dishes.
You only have one fork, one knife, and one spoon
so that you never have dishes piled up
like I had to do because otherwise
nobody would ever do the dishes.
You've got to learn to get along with people
that you're roommates with.
You have to be a grown up.
You have to learn how to manage your life.
You got to do your finances.
You have to understand what it means
to buy something, to buy your first computer on credit
so that you can build your credit in America
so that you can survive in America
because you have to have credit.
You know, there's a professor, a good friend of ours
who went her whole life without buying anything on credit
and she can't do anything.
She almost couldn't get a mortgage
because she was so responsible with her money the whole time
because she's not playing by the capitalist system.
I don't care if you like it or not, I hate it.
That's just the rules of the rules of the game.
So knowing the rules is half the battle.
So let's talk about some alternatives
to doing those five things.
So to conclude primarily before we go out
to the next part, it's really important
that you say to yourself,
okay, college has become the most convenient for many people.
Albeit expensive, college is the most convenient way
to do all five of those things, right?
They've got a dorm set up for you
to help you learn how to adults.
You know, they've got resident assistants
to help you know where to go get your vaccinations
when you need it.
I mean, they got all kinds of weird things.
College campuses, since the dawn of time,
since the dawn of college campuses
have been set up to meet the needs of those five things.
And it's extremely convenient for most people.
It's also very, very expensive.
But why would knowing about those five things
on their own be relevant?
Okay, so let's give you a couple of examples.
One of them is getting the skills to get a job
and getting more money to get a job,
getting the credentials that are gonna get you money
to get the job, and maybe meeting people
that would get you a job, right?
Let's talk about those three things.
There's other videos on this,
but let's say I'll do another video on online universities,
right?
But when you talk about a college experience,
the general college experience,
I went to football games, I had all the thing,
is that, you know, it's the opposite of an online degree.
If you go get an online degree
from an accredited institution like WGU,
and there's a separate video on that,
then you are not having many of those five experiences,
right?
But you're spending a lot less money.
So one of the ways to do the first three,
the make more money and get a skilled job skills,
and me people are gonna get you a job,
is to go to an online university,
and or, which is way, way, way cheaper,
or focus on getting credentials,
or doing whatever else it takes to establish trust
that you can do the job.
Those are things you can do on your own.
If you took the cost, this is a true story.
So my son went to a community college,
computer science 101 course,
and there's 85 people in the room or something,
and they asked him to raise his hand,
and they said, does anybody here
have any programming experience?
And he raised his hand,
because he had already completely learned how to code
in Python and Go, he'd made several applications in Go,
on the back end, and in actually JavaScript as well.
So, I mean, he knew how to code.
He had proven, he had built online interactive
web sockets based games,
with all of the components of programming in that realm.
So he had a lot of the, I mean,
the fundamentals of programming
that were taught in CS101, he had a lot of them.
And then he proceeded, he raised his hand,
he was the only kid in the class who raised his hand.
He went up and talked to his professor at the end,
and said, is there any way I can test out of this class?
And they said, no, I'm sorry.
So he paid $2,000 for a course
that covered material he already had.
I have another story about this.
Gabe, if you gave out there,
Gabe taught himself assembly when he was 16.
He ordered his own circuit boards
that arrived via DHL from China
that he designed on SOLIDWORKS himself,
while he was with me,
while he was doing beginner boost stuff.
He literally had his pick of colleges,
and when he went to his first college,
he had to take CS, whatever,
to learn computer engineering,
and he ended up teaching the assembly class.
He paid $2,000 for the privilege
of being the unpaid TA for that course.
And then he immediately became the TA,
a applied to be the TA, and he became the TA next.
He became the TA for the course,
and now he's teaching all the play.
He was in the class, he knew everything.
He knew everything in the course,
and he was totally frustrated,
but he's like, whatever.
He paid all this money
because the system wasn't set up to let him say,
oh, I already know this, right?
So there's a couple of takeaways from that.
The first one is, you can learn any skill
that's taught in college.
You can learn any skill that will get you.
In fact, some skills that they won't teach in college, many.
MIT very famously has a thing called the Lost Semester,
where they teach you how to use desktop Linux,
among other things,
because it's not included as a part of the curriculum,
because it's not serious enough.
You know, it's totally stupid.
And the point is, is that you can learn those skills
other ways.
You can make more relationships with other people
in other ways, and you can do it for on the cheap way better.
So WGU is another one of these universities
where you can learn all those things.
Now, WGU is gonna leave you hanging
on the other two things.
You're not gonna meet as many people through WGU bottom line.
Just not happening.
It's not gonna be as society.
You're probably not gonna meet your spouse at WGU, right?
You might make a business contact or two,
but probably not.
So that means you're gonna need to actively go out
to meetups and do the things
that you have to do throughout your career.
Anyway, might as well get started before college.
In fact, one of the biggest complaints I have about college
is that because it so conveniently covers all five
of those things, when people leave college,
they don't know how to do those things outside of college.
But if you focus on preparing relationships
at local meetups, knowing what conferences to go to,
you know, knowing who to hang out with,
building a group of professional peers and friends,
really a professional learning network,
if you're doing those things,
which you should be doing already,
then you've already learned the skill
and now you're just using the same skill
and you haven't had to pay any money to college to learn it.
You haven't become dependent on the college to cover them.
I mean, and the colleges have an entire ecosystem
of dependency because they keep pumping
in the whole alumni thing, give us more money,
come back as an alum, help other people
who go to this college because you like our college
better than all the other colleges, right?
No, I think it's a mistake for many people.
So those are the five things.
So if you go to WDU, how are you gonna meet
those other two needs?
Learning how to do your own laundry
and what was the other one?
Making one money throughout your career?
Meeting other people, I think.
The learning how to adult is the thing.
The best way to do that,
and I'm gonna share a story here,
the best way to learn how to adult
and to meet other people on,
oh no, discover yourself, discover who you wanna be.
So I have a story from somebody that is indirect
that I read some time ago.
It was about a woman who went to college.
She went to Harvard, she graduated in Harvard,
and I don't remember her degree.
And she wrote an article, I believe it's on Medium,
that said the most important things I learned,
I didn't learn from college.
And it's pretty much, the summary of it is,
she went bureau packing, she went back packing in Europe
and living on the total cheap, and she just accounts,
she just recounts all of the really life-changing
experiences that happened to her
while she was just walking around Europe,
meeting different people, staying in hostels,
getting to know others, and also thinking
about what she wanted to be, who she was gonna be,
what she was gonna do with her life,
and a lot of time to think and stuff.
Some people do Appalachian trails,
some people live out of their car
and travel across the country.
There are lots of opportunities to discover yourself
that do not have college impact.
I would suggest that college is probably
one of the worst places for you to discover yourself.
It's a great place to be exposed to new ideas,
ideas that you might not have been exposed to
because you didn't know about that book,
or you didn't know who Joseph Campbell was,
or you didn't know, I mean, there's a million things
that you may not have known.
But if you learn early, maybe after watching this video,
that you can build yourself an autodidactic learning plan,
that includes reading and learning about the things
that constitute the bulk of self-discovery at college,
you can do it.
You can make your own self-discovery course,
or your own thing, and it can include interactions
with others, it can include traveling the world,
and it's gonna be way, way, way cheaper
than a study abroad.
Story about that, when I did study abroad,
I was like, I don't have the money.
I was working three jobs to get myself through college,
and this was in the 90s.
I don't know how people go to college now, right?
And I was working three jobs, I was like,
I don't have money to pay $4,000
to go on a Russian study abroad, so you know what I did?
I was like, let me see if I can find a job.
So I found a job, I found and got a job
being an American, being a Russian cruise translator,
which I later kept growing that job,
got a lot of experience in Russia,
was one of the most proficient Russian speakers
in my entire Russian department,
because I was making money working in Russia,
and I didn't have to do a study abroad for that.
So I got paid to go to Russia.
They paid to go to Russia.
You know what, a lot of those people
who did study abroad did?
They would go to Russia, and because they didn't,
usually they weren't paying themselves, by the way,
there was somebody else who was paying.
They would go to Russia,
they would go with their American roommate,
they would travel around, they'd speak English
the whole time, they wouldn't learn anything.
So they would be $4,000 lighter, they'd come back,
they didn't have any Russian skill,
and they had no other experiences to talk, to speak of.
Meanwhile, I came back and I had a lot
of real solid experience teaching people English,
teaching them business skills,
and learning how to do the whole thing in general.
So the point of it is, if you're gonna be able
to do this long-term, you need to really have a plan,
and that plan should include self-discovery
at a regular time, you don't need college for that.
And whatever techniques you learn to find yourself,
whether it's yoga or going on a bike trip,
you should be doing that anyway, right?
You should be learning those skills anyway.
So don't necessarily have to go to college for that,
even if you do go to college, figure out what that is.
I don't need a field trip in my Russian honors class
to show me Arches National Park
so that I can basically get Mormon stoned
and recite poetry under an arch in Southern Utah.
I can do that all on my own,
I don't need to pay money for that, right?
So that's what I would suggest.
And hopefully that's been a summary
of whether you should go to college or not,
and what are some of the things.
If you're really trying, this is a really tough decision,
and the decision about whether to go to college or not
is fundamentally colored by those five things.
Go ahead and review those for yourself.
And let me know what you think, put it in the comments.
That's just my idea that I've had with others
as we've talked about whether they should go or not.
And I do think that most people should get a college degree,
and I'll do another video on that
about how to get the college degree as cheap as possible
if that works for you and your career plan.
And you should have that plan
before you even think about going to college.
I know it's crazy.
Can you imagine actually knowing what you wanna be in life
before you go to college?
It can be done, I've seen it.
