to talk about the auto deducting habits of a successful technologist. What does that mean?
Well, as we wait for people to come in, I imagine some of you are going to trickle in. I'm going
to go ahead and just kind of give you an overview of what that means. So let's break it down. First
of all, an auto-didact. A didact is somebody who wins. It's at learning. It's somebody who can take
care of their own learning. Basically, it's a fancy word for saying independent learner. So if you
are able to identify things that need to be learned and learn them quickly, which I call
just-in-time learning, you can stay ahead. You can stay ahead of the requirements of your team.
You can stay ahead of your competition. I mean, I hate to put it that way, but
you're always in some sense, you're always being evaluated against your peers. So you need to
keep up. And I just want to tell a couple stories about such that I'm a big storyteller. So as you
guys come in, please say hello in the chat or something. But it's a couple of stories. So
the first thing I want to talk about is the other day, somebody asked the question while I was showing
off a group that had gone to a field trip and I was going through them all and I was talking
about each one individually and I was saying, hey, look at all of these people. And I have good
memories of that. And somebody asked the question, what is the one thing that distinguishes these
you know, they seem like very advanced, but when you get down to it, there's one thing that
distinguishes them all and somebody was asking what that is. And the one thing that really
distinguished all of those people from the others and many of the others that I've encountered some
is that they had a hunger for learning that was innate, that was unsatisfied, that overtook their
desire to do other things, other things that might have distracted from their learning.
And that, so talking about, I mean, we can talk about becoming an autodidact, we can talk about
it in, you know, academic terms, but to really actually internalize it and find a way to get
that motivation for yourself, that's a pretty big challenge. And there's a lot of things in
the way of that. And I want to talk about some of that over the course of the next few hours.
I honestly don't know how long this particular segment will be, but it's worth talking about.
And I think it's worth talking about at the very beginning. There's no surprise that this is the
first segment, the first series, I suppose, of the beginner boosts that I'm doing. And I have
talked about this before quite a bit, just in different ways and forms. So that's the first
story. The first story I was going to tell you is that, you know, I asked one of the boys,
why, how did you learn math at 10, 11 years old? It's not algebra isn't taught until 14. So I just
went and learned it. So we have a crazy amount of resources to be able to go out and learn things
on our own. And yet, we often lack the motivation to do it. So that's one of the main things I
want to talk about is the motivation to do it. What does it mean? What are some of the actual
practices? You know, there's like those Stephen Covey books, seven habits of successful people.
I don't know if there's seven habits, but we're going to talk about a number of things that you
can put into practice right away that will make you more successful at maintaining your knowledge
and getting motivation to do it. So let's start with the motivation topic. What is it that actually
gets you excited to do this? What is it that you want to do that that reaches out to you and
makes you happy? So Sir Ken Robinson, he has a book out of their minds and I love it. He's not
with us anymore, but in that book, he talks about that people generally, they have an innate
desire to learn. They have an innate creative desire. It's actually kind of tied to the
creativity desire. We're naturally curious from the time we're children. And in his words, it's
beaten out of us during the time when we go to school. And that's actually really unfortunate
because when you want to learn something, you can't really learn something unless you really
want to learn it. This is part of this whole thing. The worst thing, I'll draw a contrast here.
I've had people say, well, my teacher didn't teach it to me well. You're a bad teacher,
you didn't teach it to me well. A lot of times people would actually complain to me about their
teachers. I've had it a couple of times when they complained about me as a teacher and I was like,
we got to talk here because I am not your teacher. I said in the introduction video,
teaching is a transitive verb. And I actually had somebody, I'm really pissed off, pardon my
French, an actual teacher who was a parent of a student who indirectly heard this saying,
but I said, there's no way you can teach anybody anything. And in the process, I really angered
them because this idea of teaching, it's not so much about the word. I personally don't like the
word because the word implies a transfer from the teacher to the person. And in Paulo Freire's book,
Pedagogy of the Oppressed, he talks about this false idea that we can open the heads of a student
and deposit a bankers education, it's called something into this person and that they're
going to learn it and go. And the only learning that happens in that scenario is for the teacher.
And he argues that it's actually a control mechanism for oppression. And that traditional
Sir Ken talks about beating creativity out of kids mentally and stuff. And Freire talks about
oppression and it just starts to sound like a Pink Floyd show, if you know who Pink Floyd is,
because that's really what we're faced with. I have no contempt for any specific teacher or school
on this matter, but I can tell you from personal experience, because I was never formally trained
as a teacher. And you can take that as you wish, you can say, you know, this guy should go jump
in a lake, I shouldn't listen to him, he doesn't have five degrees and certificate that say what,
I tried, I actually tried to do that. I actually had a good friend who befriended me on Twitter,
frankly, as a teacher when I was seeking to go into education. And they talked to me about things
like lateral entry, which is a fancy word for helping people from the corporate world or the
enterprise to move into education, kind of fast track them so they can come in and be teachers.
And I hung out with them, I started a company at Tech Retreat. Lots of amazing, you know, teachers
that I came to know during that time. And it was really interesting because the ones that I was
able to identify, and this is going to be important for you, because you have to learn,
I almost wish everybody could learn the techniques and the pedagogies of learning, because if they
were to learn them for themselves, and I'm going to cite my teacher, Professor Lunkwist,
back in like sixth grade, he did this to us. He took what he had learned as a teacher,
and he taught the teaching technologies to us. And he said, okay, now it's up to you to go apply
that you taught us things like Bloom's Taxonomy and all that stuff. And we won't necessarily go
into all of those things. I'm going to try to identify some specific practices that you can,
I'm suggesting things. So this is also one of those times when that we're also going to be
I'm going to be presenting ideas and asking you questions. Unfortunately,
there's not a lot of people here that I can introduce a Socratic kind of dialogue with,
but I want to ask you the question, what do you think it is to learn? How come you struggle
with learning? Why do you struggle with finding your motivation? Can you remember the specific
time when you, the general time when you got so frustrated that you felt like you couldn't be a
creative person anymore, or that you couldn't think outside of the box, that you couldn't be a
critical thinker? And I actually might, and during during on this particular series, I might
actually as homework, and it's those kind of words are always jokes with me, they're kind of making
fun of the cliche. But, you know, in this case, the homework would be watch, you know, dead poet
society with Robin Williams. And, you know, and this idea of like adopting true education for
yourself, and your own learning and empowering yourself. And I know this sounds like a bunch
of like, you know, I don't know, you know, fluff, I guess, you know, people like, Oh, yeah, let's
just run around and teach ourselves and the whole world will be great. You have to this the
difference between an auto didact, and this is actually part of the definition if you go look
it up. If you go look at the definition of an auto didactic, you'll see that it's much more
than just being an independent learner. And people said about homeschoolers all the time,
you know, oh, I'm a homeschool, that means I was independent learner, you know, whatever.
The difference between being an independent learner and being an auto didact is structure
and discipline. So the auto didact, and we'll cite some of the auto didact and history that
you'll recognize, they, they plan for their learning, they don't just say, I'm going to make
time to read before I go to bed, which is, you know, a nice thing to do is a good habit.
But they do more than that. They, they seek out to make sure that their needs are met and
that they follow their own schedule. You know, the word curriculum is applies because they
create their own curriculums, they create their own learning paths. And frankly, they have to,
because most of the auto famous auto didacts in history haven't had anywhere to go to be
taught. There's nobody to teach you how to create the light bulb, you know, Edison and the, you
know, they, they had to set out to follow a plan. And it's, it's kind of related to science. And
people tell you that when you go to college, that, you know, college is going to be the place
where you're going to learn, you know, how to think critically and how to do things. Well,
it's also the place where they throw you to the wolves because you have to figure out how to
manage your own learning. You're no longer told, read these 10 pages tonight and digest it and come
back. You know, and thankfully, by the way, these traditional forms of education, which really were
born out of the industrial age to ship people through the system so they could build more tanks
is, is going away. You know, Montessori's had been doing this for a while, but, but the idea is,
is taking root. And strangely and ironically, it's one of the things that politically, both the far
right and the far left agree on. They agree that our system needs some reform and that
a big part of that reform is going to be learned, like letting go, letting go. And, and I'm not
going to go into it, but like Merhaden, Michael Moore has done a documentary where he interviews
the people from Finland, teachers from Finland, and you can throw the rest of, you know, whatever
you think about him away, but I strongly encourage you to seek it out and to, to, you know, just
study and learn about what it is that makes Finland the number one education system in the world.
Dwarfs everybody else. And I'll, I'll give a little spoiler here. They got out of the way.
They got out of the way. They gave them the tools and they got out of the way. It's a lot
like what Socrates would do. And, and they, they let people, they got rid of recess for, I mean,
they added recess, sorry, they got rid of homework and people say, Oh, you can't have good learning
if you do that. You know, you have to like drill on mathematic drills and stuff. I'm not saying
that you just walk around loosey-goosey, but that is a combination of freeing yourself and, and
allowing people to have the freedom to go to, to, to consider their own path so that they can make
their own path. And then it's not, it's not a matter of saying, Oh, I'm not going to do anything.
I just play computer games all day. That's not what I'm saying. What I'm saying is you,
they're given the freedom to start to build their own curriculum. So you're also starting to see
colleges now that have uncurriculums or free curriculums. I don't know if anybody is in this
thing who's actually heard about this. Yeah, there's, there's some good comments in here.
We're going to go back, we're going to go back and read those. That's going to be really great.
I'm looking forward to reading those. So, so we have, so this is great because we're getting
a dialogue started. I was looking forward to that. So let's move on to that and I'll wrap up this
point. So the point is that the institutions are coming around and they're allowing people to,
to have the motivation and to move forward. And the big part of this, of this system is
figuring out how to measure everything. And that's a different conversation. That's more of a
conversation about, about how do you, you know, assess for yourself? And that's actually part
of this conversation, whether we get to it tonight or, or tomorrow or whatever. At some point, we're
going to talk about how to set up your own self assessments, how to set up your own curriculum
for yourself, how to write it out and how to draw on, you know, the resources that are out there
already. So, so let me just recap this little segment here and then I'm going to take a break.
So we're talking about not only independent learning, but setting up a detailed plan for
yourself about what it is you're going to do. And then that then follows on into the conversation
about, well, what are those skills to do that? How do I track my learning? How do I, what are the
techniques to do that? And there's lots of techniques. And it's really up to you as to how
do you do that. Some people like kind of a more detailed approach. And we're going to get into
that part next. So, so, you know, stay tuned for that. I want to take some of the comments here.
They're really good. And, and then we're going to be moving toward, well, what are the specific,
you know, we're going to brainstorm the different techniques and you can pick whether
your favorite one. And that's really important because everybody is different. And I certainly
have a preference and I'm going to tell you what my preference is, but, but I want to, I want to
allow you to, to identify your own preferences in there and figure it out. All right. So I'm going
to switch for a second. It's back to our, let's go switch back to our, to our, do we get our,
do we get our, our thing different? Here we go. There we are.
All right. So let me see if I can free up some of the space to go look at some of these comments.
You have to forgive me. I'm running it a little bit bigger resolution than I normally use.
So money makes me happy. YouTubers. Hello, hello. Pristar Dumbledore. Money is the only thing that
makes me happy. Rob is great speaker. Thank you. While I agree with this student taking the initiative
and learning there is certainly such a thing as a bad teacher. Absolutely agree. I totally agree.
In fact, I, we could probably talk all day just about dealing with bad teachers.
You got to ask yourself why are teachers attracted to the profession in the first place?
And especially given the money that's involved and that can, that can get dangerous really fast
because obviously you can't generalize. But, but it, you know, there's, I have run into teachers
who are all about control. Mrs. Walling, my kindergarten teacher, totally messed us up.
Bitter woman at a spinal brace her whole life. She would throw rulers at us. I will never forget
that teacher. She was downright abusive to the physical abuse in point. But I want to share
a couple other teachers in my history that I'm very grateful for. And I want to sort of dedicate
this particular series to them because they have really set my life up to, to want to do many of
these things in honor of them because they were so amazing. So we'll talk about the good and the
bad teachers, but yeah, they're definitely bad teachers. And I can think of a couple examples
of teachers who consistently year after year fail to engage their students and also fail to provide
help with the resources they need to succeed. Yeah, it's really sad. But is it the teacher's
fault? Is it the system's fault? Is it, you know, there is, it's just such a complex issue. You
know, and unfortunately I tried, I just so you know, I tried to engage in that system. I tried to
become a part of the traditional system. And ultimately I realized that I couldn't do it.
I just couldn't do it. I had to do go my own way and I was going to make lots of mistakes.
And I called it my learning lab. I learned a lot along the way from the people I listened to the
people that I was with. I'm really happy to read Paulo Freire talk about dialogic, you know,
relationships with your students, which is of course a little bit of a variation on Socratic
method and learning on my own and do my own reading about how people actually learn. And
I'm not saying I'm better than the traditional system. I'm just saying there were so many
constraints in the traditional system that just, I just wasn't going to make it. I was just going
to be suffocated. In fact, I tried twice. I taught at a community college and I actually had
the director tell me after he gave me a whole bunch of stuff and said he'd never made a web page
and he was the director of web and game design director. And he joked over a beer saying he'd
never actually done it. He had just cut and paste all the stuff out of the books. And he, he said,
he joked with me that that was his secret and we laughed about it. And I love the man because I
mean, he, he's the one who got me into doing it. But I, you know, at the same time, I had 50%
failure at a community college and I was totally upset. I went and said, why, why is this? What
is wrong here? He's like, am I doing a bad job? And my failing goes, no, that's good, man. I'm
like, what are you talking about? And I won't say the school, but he goes, he goes, you gotta
understand, half the people are here to get their veteran benefits and to do whatever is the minimum
necessary. They don't really care about learning. They just care about getting through something
they've been told that they have to do. And I just want to talk about the, that's like the
anti-pattern, the anti-auto-didact. There's been a, it was a huge Twitter feed some time ago,
where somebody posted a thing saying, why would anybody bother to learn if I'm not going to make
more money? And the whole thread just exploded. It was like, full of all these auto-didact, just
like, how can you say that? Do you not really enjoy learning something new? I would go so far,
and I've been challenged on this, I would go so far as to say that it is the purpose of life
to learn. So, you know, about everything. And that's why I'm so obsessed about learning everything
from every angle. And, and, and I suck at it. I mean, there's many things that I have not been able
to, to do in the, in the process. I know I've, I've failed and on certain things. And, but my point
is, is that I'm hungry for it. And I'm not always hungry for it. Sometimes I just want to veg out
like everybody else. But, but to say that I just, I have no desire to ever learn anything else.
I don't understand that. So apparently some people feel that way. But a part of becoming an
auto-didact is overcoming that. And, and I, there are some ways to do that. And I happen to think that
some of those people, I don't, I don't know, I don't have any science on this, but I happen to
think that a lot of those people who feel that way, somewhere along the line were traumatized
during the learning experience. And, and, and that's very easy with a bad teacher,
as somebody's mentioned there, as, you know, and then you, what do you got? You know, you have,
you have people associating trauma with learning and, or you have people with learning disabilities,
you know, who don't want to do it. And I have a story about that I'll talk about a little bit later
about a good teacher and a bad teacher and a really good mom that I had and have who took
advantage of that. Let me remind me of that story in a bit. Let me read another comment here.
I know that's only a small part of what we're discussing. Right. And I agree that if a student
consistently blames their teachers, it's like the student who has not taken up responsibility.
And I had, I had a direct experience with this within the last month. And unfortunately,
it was somebody that I had to let go. And, and it was, it was somebody who I, I, I,
it's kind of a negative story. I don't want to dwell on it. It was somebody who had gotten
into my community without being interviewed, uh, as a friend of a friend, uh, back when I wasn't
interviewing. And, uh, they had zero desire to learn, uh, when they, when they, and it
perpetuated over two or three years. And, and because of the grandfather nature of it, I kept
trying and trying to find something. And I kept, actually I kept, you know, quiescing and giving
into what the person wanted. And that meant doing simpler and simpler things and gamifying it as
much as I could and taking more breaks. And, and you can tell that, I mean, this person would sigh
and they'd be like, Oh, I'm bored. And like, there's no, there's a couple of words you never want to
say around me. I'm bored. I just can't deal with that. I, I, that, that sent, I, you know what,
I said it a lot as a kid. So I want to be a hypocrite here. I said it a lot. I remember
actually on the summer days I'm bored. And then before I found Dungeons and Dragons and a million
other reason, things that I, I could entertain myself with. I mean, we didn't even have the
internet back then. So it can be a break. Uh, but yeah, that, so, and this, this particular person,
they also just decided to not pay for a couple and then tell me they weren't going to come back.
And so that was enough for me to let them go. But, uh, you know, I, and it came back a hundred
fold. I mean, they, the pair, I actually tried to suggest that, that the person gets some help and
that came off wrong. And, uh, it was a, it was a tragedy because I mean, it ended up being a huge
disagreement. And then them just getting all upset because they didn't know that, that their child
was struggling. And, and, but anyway, so, so if you are helping people to learn, just, you know,
stay engaged. I mean, and I think that's what we're talking about here. But the reason that
I, that my story came up is because this person, every, almost every single time that we started
a session, I would have chitchat and they would complain about their teacher every time there
was a new teacher they were complaining about. Well, they just don't understand this and this.
And look, some of those teachers were probably, you know, exactly as the described, but I'm betting
not all of them were. Uh, and, you know, so anyway, we, we, this isn't about, uh, teachers. This is more
about taking the methods of learning, uh, out of the, the, the purview of the teacher and saying,
I don't need a teacher. It doesn't, we're not saying we don't appreciate teachers. What we're
saying is you don't need one to learn. And it's almost like the, the system has been set up to
say, you must have permission to learn. And that is just screwed up. I mean, that is really screwed
up. Think about that. You know, you don't need permission for that. And it's part of the whole
industrial control complex, which is a bigger topic, which we won't get into. Uh, I apologize
for nitpicking on that point. Yeah. Uh, it's, it's a whole speech in my speech. Uh, who are some
of those great auto.x? We're going to go through that a bit. Okay. Don't, don't let me forget about
that. Deflare. Okay. Bad college teacher is why I gave up on programming. Yeah. Yeah. It's my biggest
fear, by the way. My biggest fear is that I would push somebody too hard and make the programming
too hard and that they would, they would make a false, uh, conclusion based on, based on what
I did. And obviously that's an unsubstantiated fear on my part because I mean, maybe I would
do a bad job, but, but, but one bad teacher is certainly not enough to, I mean, it can certainly,
you know, and I'm not, I'm not trying to make light of your situation, but you have control.
And now you recognize that you had one bad teacher and you can't blame that teacher anymore,
because now you know that you have the power to go forward and look at it your way. You know,
um, uh, there, there are other ways of thinking about this. You ever, you know, there are certain
things in life where we don't say them or do them because somebody else has, has done or said them
and it makes it taboo to say them. And we can either choose to avoid those things or we can own
them and say, no, I'm going to take this back. I'm going to take control of this. I'm not going to
let this event live in my head and control what I do next. Um, and it's hard. It's easy to say all
the stuff. It's really harder to do it. Um, and so yeah, bad teachers are the reason I hit stool.
And you know, that is not an uncommon sentiment. Uh, a lot of people don't like school because of
that. And most people will have a story of that one great teacher who is really amazing. And I
want to share, uh, I mean, we have a lot of time here and a lot of this is going to be story time,
from you and from me. I just believe that stories would really help to bring home the ideas. Um,
and I have some stories of auto died accents and really great teachers and a couple of really bad
ones. And I'd love to hear your, um, your, your stories as well. Um, I love to learn just not,
not with the school model. There you go. So most people say that if you, if you dig deep enough
and almost all of them have somebody that they really like that they have a memory about and
they were someone who just kind of bucked the system and did whatever. And that's pretty much,
that's pretty much the plot line of dead poet society. Um, and you really need to watch it,
but make sure you bring Hankies or something because it's a, it's a tearjerker. It's an
amazing movie. I'd say it's probably one of my top five, if not my number one movie of all time
contacts right up there too. But, um, but it is, it is really amazing because it digs right into
that issue of, of control and that has been institutionalized in the traditional education
systems for all kinds of reasons that have nothing to do with helping you learn. And most of these
systems, uh, are set up to control you when in fact, if they looked at you as the customer,
and that's when I do mentoring, that's why I call it mentoring, by the way. Uh, first thing I tell
people is you are the boss. I work for you. And, and that, that's a really foreign concept. I have,
I have people come in and plop their, you know, their, their bum down and when they're new and,
and particularly when they're young and they say, okay, what are we doing today? I don't know. What
are you going to, what are we going to do today? Well, I said, what do you want to do today? You
know, it's, it's socratic and all that, but it is reflecting back that the responsibility for
their learning is not with the teacher. The responsibility for the learning is with you.
It's with you. And if we could just get through to that and, and enable that, if we could help
people understand that they, the learning ends with them, begins and ends with them. Now, people
are being paid to help you learn. But if teachers started looking at themselves as the role of
facilitator and mentor and equal with their, the person that they're with, and this is all
by the way, if they were to start to, to identify with them, instead of be superior to them and say,
you're going to do what I tell you, you're going to sit there and you're going to say,
ma'am or sir, and you better pass this test or I'm going to fail you and I'm going to send it to
your parents and everybody's had a teacher like that. And there's no way you're going to learn.
That first of all, all that cortisol is going to destroy your ability to learn
physically, chemically in your brain. And that's why so many people do so bad on tests
is because the stress of the test, I'm one of these people, by the way, the stress of the test
is in people say, we have to be able to work under pressure, blah, blah, blah. And I,
that's sort of true, but most learning and most skills don't require an intense level of cortisol
and adrenaline to do them on a daily basis. What they, what they really want to see is,
do you have the ability to clinically analyze the situation and do your own research?
The number one skill that needs to be tested is, can you learn? That's the most important
skill of all. If you can't, and everybody says, I'm a great learner, I'm a fast learner,
but you know, you need to prove that. And we're going to talk about ways that you can
not only, you know, progress in your learning, but prove that, you know, how to learn fast.
And we'll do that with some stories here. So, so yeah, the school models, hey, Ilya,
college helps a little to learn by yourself, but it seems like kids that want the textbook pages and
everything is given to you, is given to you style. Yeah. And I'm going to, I'm going to throw myself
under the bus here. I had a story about this. I was, I was, I've always been sort of taken
charge of my own learning, but there was one time I didn't. And I was in, I was taking a five credit
hour college course for Russian and Victoria and Mikhailovna, who I've ripped on before on the stream.
And I mean, this woman was straight out of the Russian communist block. She,
she was the death of me. I mean, she, and you know what? She was, she was really good at identifying
people who tried to, to test the system and learn well. And I, I happened to believe that she was
really hard on people who she felt had, had ability. I want to believe that anyway, because she was
hard on me, man. And I had to live with her. I literally, I lived in the Russian house with her.
And, and, oh my God, it was just, it was a nightmare, but, but because of her,
but there was one time when we did, we had a test and this other teacher, Galina Samalkova,
we had been preparing, it was her class and she had always told us what things were going to be
on the test in the book. And the whole idea of testing is, is, you know, it's just, it's,
it's hard because the testing is set up to be for the institution. When you do a certificate,
you can't even get your results for God's sake. I mean, if you can't, if you can't see your
assessment, what's the point? The point is, it's, the whole thing is set up. That mean,
all of that system needs to be set up and needs to be revised so that it's focused on the learner.
And a lot of that doesn't have to be this high stress test. It can just be, you know,
dialogue or, or, or watching somebody observing them, see if they can do the thing,
you know, like a language lab, like what used to do. But, but yeah, this, this idea that I have
to go in and take a test and then it gets in a really hairy territory. Cause what about assessment?
How do you compare against other people? How do you decide who's better suited for the job than
another one? Big questions that I don't have any answers to, but in this particular case,
you know, that it was like a test was ready. And he said, okay, you have to answer this test.
And you have to get ready for this test. And, and I had learned that I could, I could pass every
test if the flying colors, if I knew it was going to be on the test. And in this particular case,
the regular method of preparation wasn't done. And there was a substitute and guess what? It was
Victoria and, and she didn't cover anything that was going to be on the test. And we all did bad.
I talked to other people in the classes and stuff and we all had a really hard time. I mean, it was
a really tough test, but me being me, I went to the Dean and I said, I, you know, I'm really sorry,
but I, this, this, no, what I do, it wasn't the Dean. The Dean was another story. I ultimately
went to the Dean who told me, you know, he just laughed at me and said, you know, you've just
had the most wonderful experience you could possibly have because, Hey, Jim, because you,
you now understand what it's like to be Russian. And he told me a story of some Russian teachers
who were brought in front of a conference of teachers and individually berated in front of
the entire crowd and then told to go sit down. And he, he, and that, that has relevance. I'm
just a little bit of foreshadowing there. So I went to Galena and I said, you know what,
will you please help me prepare here? And, um, and you help me understand why you weren't there.
I just said, I just would, I was trying to be as nice as I could. And I said, I just would really
appreciate if, if you would be the one to prepare us for the tests because this is your class.
And I just feel like it would just, it just feel like it would be more effective. And that's
exactly how I said it. I, I didn't make a big stiff about it and anything. I just said, you know,
I, I, and I really liked Galena. And I would say, were you, were you pleased just next time?
Would it, would it be okay if you were the one who prepared us for our tests? Cause it is kind of
important. Uh, and, you know, cause Victoria had no idea what was going to be on the test. And
therefore she didn't tell us cause she was subbing and it got back to Victoria. And so Victoria had
to substitute for Galena, uh, again. And she came into the room, uh, this, this has some point
somewhere. Uh, she came into the room and the first thing she said when she sat down is a class
of 40, 50 people. And she said, well, okay. Uh, okay. Robert Mühlstein thinks that we were not
very well prepared. Uh, for the exam. And so he, she says, Mr. Robert Mühlstein believes
that he was not properly prepared for the test. And then she says in Russian, uh, I would like
Robert Mühlstein to stand and tell the class why he feels like he was not properly prepared for
the exam. And I was losing my, you know, I was like, I wasn't mad. I wasn't, I wasn't, I was
just pissed. I'm sorry. I was pissed because first of all, my confidence had been violated.
And secondly, you don't call out students. This is the same woman. Uh, oh, it was a nightmare.
This is the same woman who held up. Uh, it was kind of funny. Actually, if you're not the person
getting beat up in classes, she would, if she would hand out papers in class, in class, she would
hand out papers in class and she would tell the grade A, you know, and whatever. And then there
was, I remember Brett, I'll never forget. Brett was like, he got an F on a paper and he goes,
Brett, new Brett F. And he's like, oh man. And you had to go down there and pick your paper up.
Can you believe that? I mean, I was like, this has to be illegal in America, you know,
and they didn't care. And so actually after several of those instance, which I consider
harassment, like educational harassment, I, I, you know, and I went up to, to talk to the dean and
the dean's pretty much, oh, another American snowflake needs to get schooled and how Russians do
things. And, and I was like, yeah, the school doesn't care about the students. And in this
particular case, you know, he considered it, I lost my scholarship because of this woman.
I mean, she, this woman cost me because of the things that she did and, and the way that she
ended up taking my thing, even though I proved overwhelmingly that I passed the class with
fine colors and every other class, she, I lost my scholarship because of the C she gave me
and Russian 101. I had to take it again. And I was pissed. I mean, I was really pissed because
I knew it's funny because I went on to become one of the best, I'm bragging here, but one of the best
Russian language specialists and I was the one who, I was paid to go to Russia and work
instead of paying to go to do an internship and just talk with the Americans the whole time.
So I'm bragging about myself here, but I don't want people to, that still happens in India.
Yeah. So anyway, my, that's my sad story. And it does, but you know, it's really crazy about
that story. It's both, we know good teachers and bad teachers. The point of that story is mostly
that even though we have the pressure to learn, we don't have to live in that system. Yeah,
beginner day. Hi, Jen. So we can, we can take control and I did. And so my solution to that,
and I want to tell you, I stood up and I was terrified in that classroom. And the end of the
story is that, I mean, I was shaking. I was shaking because I was so upset and, and everybody could
tell, right? And, and I was, and I, so I pulled out my best Russian and I'm going to say I had
pretty damn good Russian pronunciation for the time. Most of the other people didn't concentrate
on pronouncing things, but I made, I actually found a Russian in the area and, and made him my roommate
and promised not to ever talk anything but Russian so that I could learn it really well. I was going
out of my way to do things that weren't done by the college because I had been so trained growing
up to teach myself things, you know, teach myself how to play Dungeons and Dragons, teach myself
how to do this, how to, you know, and, and I don't know what, when that started, I think I'm
probably going to credit, you know, Mr. Poulsen and, and Mr. Lundquist, which I'll talk about later.
I know it's just me talking here, but, but these stories are stories that, that I hope can,
can inspire others to have somewhere or look back and see if you can draw on that because that was
what powered me through this, despite the system. The system had really put me down in this case,
literally put me, you know, made me stand up and man, I was like, you know, I was,
everybody was like, oh my God, they couldn't look at me. They're like, I do not want to be him. I
am so glad I'm not him right now, except for this one. I'm trying to stay, you know, rated G here.
There was this one girl on the front row, of course, who had horrible Russian, by the way,
it sucked. She had the worst Russian in the class, as far as I'm concerned, but she was really good
at answering all the questions and writing all the things and she was a total suck up.
And by the way, suck ups like that are not autodidacts. They've learned how to play the system,
but they don't learn. They're like my ex-wife who cried to her Spanish teacher and changed her
grade from a C to an A on a test, just because she cried. Yeah, I'm calling you out, Alicia.
And so, you know, and she couldn't speak a word of Spanish, any of it, six years of Spanish,
couldn't speak a word of it because she didn't care. She didn't care. She just wanted to go
through the motions. So anyway, I'm standing there defending myself and I pull out my best Russian
ever. I'm so proud of the Russian that I spit out, given the fact that it was my first year and it
was a five credit hour class. I had more credit hours than any other class in the entire campus,
including physics. And so I pulled it out, pulled it together and I just said, you know,
you know, well, how about this? This was on here. This was on the test and you didn't cover that.
And then it was a fight. And then she was like, well, how about this thing? This thing was on
the test and this thing was on the test. And I, but I stuck with her. And because the reason
I stuck with her is because I wanted to show her that I could speak to her and I wasn't afraid of
her. And that's how I feel like we have to be with people who would put down our independence
when it comes to our own learning. I don't say you need to be violent or anything, but we need to
just take control of our learning and not be sad and apologetic for it. And by the way,
that person in the front row, yes, Galina da Galina da da da. It's just like, just totally
sucking up. I mean, it was just, it just infuriated me. Honestly, I think it was because
for other reasons, but I don't want to go there. It's kind of a negative sentiment. I want to
kind of stay positive here. So anyway, the story is that you can do it. You can fight against
the institutions you're in, not to take them down, but to learn despite the system. And there's
going to be a lot of good things in those systems and you have to learn to identify what those things
are. And that goes for coding. It goes for anything. You've got to be able to work around the system,
even though you're in it. So for example, I learned the best computer programming, possibly could,
not from the computer science department, but from the linguistics lab, because that's where
the learning was happening. They were applying computer science and applications development
to make software to educate in the learning languages. And they made these laserdiscs,
they were applying the computer science. And so, but if somebody told me, what do you mean,
you've got a job as a Webmaster or whatever, and you're a Russian major. I said, yeah,
because I was, I found a way to learn the skills no matter where I was. And I got around to those
things. And I'm going to not take all the credit here. I want you to know this gets, the credit
for this comes from primarily Mr. Lunkwist and also Mr. Poulsen. So I'm going to read some
comments and I'll tell you a couple more stories. This is going to be a long night, by the way.
So a lot of this is going to be chopped up into multiple sessions. So feel free to check out,
you can come back and watch the video later if you want to, if you don't want to hear all of my
stories. But I try to make the stories have a point. And if, and if I were with you in person,
I would be drawing out your own stories as much as I can and chat. So feel free, please, to share.
If I know you don't have much room, if somebody would like to also send me a story of an opportunity
that they've had to learn despite the system or anything that's related to this, if you'd like
to talk about it in Discord or send it to me, we can make a chat about that. And I can bring it up
and I can share what you guys are going through. That's more of what I want to do. This isn't just
all about me talking. I really would like to hear some of the ways that you've gotten through it
and found, you know, your own internal motivation to learn despite the system,
which is kind of sad that we have to even say that. Let's see. School doesn't care about their
students. It wasn't nightmare. I was bullied for no reason and school did nothing, me too.
And, and, and Oreo, I was with you. I was, I was beaten pretty regularly at the locker every morning.
Yep, I was, and you probably can tell. My, my personality is a little bit, yep. I used to wear
a hat actually, ironically enough, right? I would wear a hat and the bully would crumple my hat,
throw it on the ground and yell at me. I'm pretty sure I looked him up. His name was Tim Hansen,
by the way. Yeah, we'll never forget it. And he, I'm pretty sure he came from a home where he was
beaten. And so I never fought back. I just, I just, you know, just took it. And, but I found
other, other ways to do, but I also found myself turning inward and doing computers and, and things
like that. And, and, and found, again, educators who helped me, Mr. Bevins, the, the librarian,
the media specialist who let me in the library early and let me work on computers and I would do my D&D
things from a very early age. And so there are definitely teachers and good people out there
watching out for you. It's almost like a, like a John Landis movie, you know, but they, they are
there and it's just a matter of identifying them. And I think finding those people and, and, and
figuring out your way to navigate through the system that you have and take advantage of what
you have. We have a lot of people in the, in the chat who, who come in here and, and talk about
the, the horrors of their college and the things that they're not learning and their frustration.
And, and some of it, I mean, I can't begin to judge every single situation, but, but a big part of
it is actually finding a community, I believe. And, and, you know, we have that we, we didn't have
that when we were growing up, you know, or if you were getting beat up all the time, you know, you
didn't have someone to reach out to. So you may have, you may have had more people on the internet
to reach out to. And now, and there's people getting beat up on, there's a whole new thing
with like getting internet bullied, but that's, that's again, finding the motivation to learn and
to perform and to, to dry yourself out of that depression. And I will tell you this, learning
and creating and doing something successful, even if it's a small step is a real good antidote to
depression. If, as soon as you start to do that, in fact, that's one of the reasons we get so addicted
to computer games, and which is another topic I want to talk about here. One of the reasons we
get so addicted to computer games is because every time we have that little bit of improvement,
we get that dopamine hit from success. We have learned something, we've mastered it,
and we've gone forward. And if you're looking for motivation to do other things, try to associate
your challenges for what you want to learn. I'm going to set forth the challenge for myself.
I'm going to write Hello World and C or Assembly for God's sake. You know, I'm going to set my
fourth challenge and you're going to learn it, and then you're going to get that hit. You're going
to get the same hit of creative success from that. And the more hits you get of that, the more it
will displace. You can't just give up an addiction, by the way. You just, the more you have to replace
it. So set up for yourself and your pattern and your path, multiple tiny successes that you know
you can be successful at, but that challenge you and then challenge yourself again, maybe have
your friend challenge you. And it's much more fun with the community, just like it's much more fun
to do multiplayer gaming instead of versus a computer. If you've got somebody you compare
program with that you found in the Discord chat or something, you can say, hey, let's try to make
a thing. Let's try to make this. Let's just see if it's possible. What could we do? I just want
to make a platformer for no reason. What if I do? I want to make a really crazy overengineered
resume. And then you end up finding people that want to participate and the fun of it
and the challenge of it ends up motivating you to go on to do more of it. And then you're more
and more and pretty soon you go a full year without even playing a game. And you're like,
well, I really liked Witcher once upon a time, but you know, I got these other things that are
really, that really fulfill my, my, my need that hit for creativity. So, so that's, that's how you,
you do that. And, but, but the reason that we do like games when we get depressed a lot of times,
and it sucks it, by the way, if you're bad at the game, I used to, I used to get depressed too.
And I would play a lot of Quake, actually. And, and I just, I had so much lag, I could
not pull off railgun shots. And I would be so mad at myself at 6am, you know, just trying to get
off some good railgun shots, because I knew that it would make me feel better. And it didn't.
So it's always about finding, you know, some, and you want true success, true creativity,
meeting a challenge, learning a skill. There's nothing wrong with gaming, but those kind of
things, when they finally, when you finally get successes with that, they pack way more of a punch
in terms of like making you feel good about yourself and, and just addressing that depression head
on than, than any of the, the, the small scale replacements that we have created,
because they're easier. Sometimes it's easier, you know, to, to do that game or to do those other
things and to check out. And, and by the way, the world needs those things. So, you know, it's,
it's, it's a process, you know, but that's part of finding the desire to become an autodidact,
is you've got to be able to let go of, of not necessarily completely let go, but slowly,
you know, add in something, maybe you say, I only want to do 20 minutes a day, I'm going to work on,
I don't know, code combat, which is a very fun game and, you know, sort of engine,
and it's gamey. So, you know, you can still do it. Then you're like, you know, I wonder if I can
actually use this JavaScript to do something else. Well, let's see if what it takes to make a webpage.
Well, let me see if I could actually make a game with Phaser. Well, let me see, you know what I'm
saying? You can kind of build up on your own challenges and you can write your own book about
it. Then there's even double the benefit when you win, when you actually get it, because not only,
not only did you do it, but you set up your own plan to accomplish it and you've accomplished that
plan. And we all know that if, that accomplishing something you set out to do instead of it being
yet another thing you didn't finish, which is, you know, I do a lot of law actually,
because so many things get in the way. But when you actually finish something and you wrap it up,
in addition to the success of doing the thing in the first place, the fact that you follow through
is really, really satisfying. And it's not only satisfying, it's good for you because people
see it and then it shows up as a line item on your brag sheet. And we're going to talk about a
brag sheet eventually. A brag sheet in short is just an ongoing list of one line and bullet point
successes that have measurable metrics and demonstrable success that could go on a raise
of me. It doesn't have to go on a raise of me, but you keep yourself a brag sheet, whether it be
a Google doc, we're going to talk about how to keep documenting all this. It's a piece of paper.
And then when somebody asks you, well, what did you do to deserve this job? Or what were your
successes this thing? Or maybe you just want to look at it and say, nobody really cares about my
accomplishments except for me, but I know what these are. And you can go back and look at them and
you can reassess that you are good and you can do things and you can slowly move forward that way.
And if all of that sounds too exhausting to you, then you're probably in the wrong place.
I mean, I really want to help you achieve that, but all of this has to come from inside. Nothing I
can tell you is going to ultimately make you want to do anything. And that's, Ferry talks about that
a lot. It's more about us having a dialogue and then you finding your own place. It's not like
you can convert somebody to a church. It's not about you. It's about the person finding it.
You can maybe expose them to it, but it's up to them to follow through and see if they want to do it.
All right. So after three years, let's see, after three months, the command was so basic.
Yeah. Oh, right. Get pushed and all that. It went pretty fast, didn't it, Jen? Yes. Once you use the
Git commands every day, it's just like using any of the other programming languages. It is,
isn't it? And I was actually, I didn't even know how to branch until like two months ago.
And I've now started to learn how to do that. Rob said for me to make alias for Git clone to Git
steal. Who said that? I didn't tell you. Did I make it to do that? No. Git steal. Git steal.
That's a cool alias, but yeah. I don't, Jen, I don't think I was the one who told you. I've never
used that. So I did say I would get saved. It was probably somebody in the Discord. If I did,
I don't remember it. I think maybe we were joking about it. Anyway, look at me. Good to have you.
Team games are a cancer whenever, whenever, whenever, whenever, when everyone is toxic.
Have you talking about Dota 2? Yeah. I believe me. I lost 4,000 hours of my life to Dota 2.
I do a bad MMR system and a bunch of toxic people. I wish I had that time back.
I was a straight up Dota cocaine addict. I just could not leave it alone. I just love
that game so much. I still love that game. Go a level beyond, don't play video games,
automate them. Yes, you could, or make them, right? And yeah, look, I'm not, I'm not bagging on games
here. Witcher 3 to this day is the most phenomenal work of art I've ever experienced. And I'm looking
forward to Cyberpunk 2077, even though I might not relate to the plotlines as much as I did
Witcher 3, which is fantastic. I had the best learning experience with friends when we tried
to understand something. We came prepared to discuss the topics. It was so rewarding. And
even if the topic wasn't my highest interest, it motivated you. Yeah, Dota 2 after 30 minutes.
Yeah, that's, that's what we're talking about. And they, that's sometimes got a fancy name. They
sometimes call that a flip classroom, where what they'll do is they'll flip classrooms are really
hard to pull off because if people don't prepare, they, they come to class, there's nothing to talk
about. The idea is that when you come to class, all you do is discuss and collaborate and have
dialogue and, you know, and all of that about the stuff that you learned on your own. And then
you bring it to class. The problem is with flip classrooms, eventually they'll pull off, they'll
become popular, is we have been so beaten into they tell me what to do. And I'll just report on it
when I come in that, that it's very hard. I tried to do that. And I just, it just failed every time
because people are like, I didn't have time to do this. I didn't do this. I didn't read this. I
didn't do it. But I tell you what, they, they successfully overwhelming success is the people
who got jobs at 18, the people who got the $100,000 junior jobs. The, these people from my community
were hungry constantly. And when they came to me, they had at least a half an hour, usually
an hour worth of content to talk about stuff that they had hit, the, you know, mistakes that they
had made, cool things that they had found that they wanted to just share with somebody who
wouldn't understand it. I was in, in, you know, in fact, their peer who just had happened to
gone through this stuff a little bit earlier. And sometimes I brought new things to me. That's
how I found out about Rust, actually. I found out about Rust, actually from somebody who was
really good at Rust, who taught himself Rust as his first language, frankly. Actually, no,
he learned Python first, I helped him with that. And then he, he picked up Rust and really loved it.
And on his own, decided to learn Go and then ended up getting a $100,000 job learning, you know,
doing Go and Rust together. So, but again, all of these people were internally motivated to really,
to really do these things. Some would say, some of them, a few of them actually had a version
for computer games for some reason. And I don't know if that came from their parents or, or what,
I don't know, I didn't do any real querying into that, why that would be. But so anyway,
we're kind of, kind of had a break, I'm going to go ahead and take a quick little break and
stand up, walk around, I've been talking for an hour. And we're probably going to do that about
every hour, I'll take a, I'll take sort of a break and then we'll chop that in the final video.
If any of you have any questions right now, let me know. I'm going to go ahead and restart my
string key, because I don't want it to be up all day. So let's see, pkill, screen key.
So, does anybody have any experiences? Please send them. Otherwise, we'll start talking about,
if you, if you want something to start to do, you can go create an account on GitLab or GitHub,
if you don't have another one. I'm just, I'm just gonna, it's like five or 10 minutes. I'll,
I'll put the exact time. Anytime I take a break during a formal session, I'll tell you the exact
time I'm coming back, not just I'm going to be on for a while. So I'm not going to, right now,
I'm just, just here. But let's say, I don't know, let's say, let's say 10 minutes. How about that?
So, I'll put a thing here back, back at 110. I'm going to be working on stuff, but okay.
And you can look on the screen there and see where, what time I'm going back.
I'm going to reset the screen key too, though. Yeah, I see. So technically, I'm just working.
So if you guys need to talk about anything else, let me know. If you want something to do during
a break, you can go create yourself an account on either GitHub or GitLab and create yourself an
email. If you have a Gmail account, that's fine. But I'd suggest you go create a ProtonMail account
and use that for everything before, and I'm going to talk about that when we come back.
We're going to talk about the basic tools that are associated. They're kind of under the umbrella
of being an idle direct and the practices of email and following people on social media and all that.
But those are the main services that I'm going to recommend people get.
ProtonMail for email and sign up for GitHub or GitHub with your ProtonMail. If you've already
done something else, that's up to you, but I'm going to talk about why that is.
So, all right. I don't think we need to sleep that long. I think it's probably more like,
let's say five seconds is pretty long. So let's do like a seven seconds sleep. How about that?
Screen key. Screen key is what's doing this little thing here. One, two, three, four, five,
six, seven. All right. I'll talk to you in a bit.
Oh, that's right. I don't have mute on this one. I swapped the board out.
Thank you. I'm still new at this. How about now? Is that better? How are you guys doing?
You guys from all over? Anybody drinking coffee this morning?
All right. So, yeah. Okay. Thanks. Hi, Peter. So we have, I have a few other stories and
then we're going to jump into the techniques. I kind of want to get to the, I know, if you guys,
if it's really early in the morning, I apologize for that. You don't have to be here during the
actual session, but I appreciate you guys staying up. I do want to talk about two inspirational
teachers and how I believe they, they taught me to be an autodidact very early. And best thing I'm
going to do is I'm going to, I'm going to try to convey what they told me, at least in some way to you,
so that maybe you can internalize that and find your own way to, you know, lean on your own memories
of teachers who are good for that. All right. And then after we do that, we're going to start
getting into the actual details of nitty gritty of what do I do every day? What are the, what are
the skills I can practice that are going to like actually turn me into, you know, magically into an
autodidact or something? And, and so the first story is Mr. Lunkwist. I should probably tell
Mr. Poulsen's story first. So I got to, I just got a warning right now. When I tell the stories
about these, these, these men, it's very hard for me to stop from getting teary eyed. I'm already
doing it. They, they completely changed my life. I mean, I was raised the oldest of eight kids. I
was coming from a hard, hard place. I was someone intelligent, but I, you know, were glasses and
massive bug teeth. This is the part where I'll actually go find a picture of myself and insert
it into this story at this point. You know, I, I was quirky from day one. I mean, that's why
I kind of celebrate it now on my thing with my crazy hat because I'm not ashamed of it anymore.
I've always been that guy and a guy and, but, but it was hard. It was hard being a kid like that. And
you know, Mr. Poulsen in sixth grade identified that in me and, and he nurtured it. He, you know,
he, he went out of his way. And let me tell you about this human being for a second, just to let
you know, uh, you know, we're, we're living in a time of 2020. It's not, it's not the year to
celebrate amazing humanity. Uh, if anything, you know, we're, we've seen some of the worst of humanity
that's we've ever seen, uh, come forward and hopefully we're not going to see worse them. But,
but so I think it's, it's worse dwelling on the amazing humans who aren't necessarily in the news
all the time. And Mr. Poulsen was one of these people. Um, he was a retired policeman and, uh,
had a limp. He had been wounded. Um, I don't know the story. He never gave him, I mean,
he became a family friend, actually, uh, as a Mormon even. I even gave him a blessing once at
once. Uh, I'm not Mormon anymore. We're not going to talk about that tonight. Um, but,
but yeah, I mean, he became a family friend, but so both fixed fifth and sixth grade,
I had him and this, this guy had won awards for creating this, this judicial system, uh,
within the school, within elementary school and fifth grade. And I mean, it's hard to
say what age group that is. I think it's God, what is that 10 years old? No, no, it was,
well, how old is that? How old is that was fifth grade? I don't know. It's probably 10 years old.
I'm thinking 10, 11 years old. And anyway, I mean, we were just young kids, right? And I mean,
but he always had hands-on things. I remember, uh, besides the judicial system, which I'll
talk about, he had a kid, he ran the chess club. He had a judicial system. Uh, fifth is 11 for most.
Okay. He had, um, he, he would bring in limestone and acid for us to play with. Uh,
you know, sulfur and just basic, um, it just, he just went out of his ways. One of these teachers
who did this, right? In fact, he was so renowned in the, in the district that he had been given awards
for his creating these, these court systems and he was really proud of him. I mean, you know, he,
he, you could tell that he had really latched on to this, to this part of his life. And you know,
I, I, to this day, I regret not having, as an adult sat down with him and just asked him about
his actual past life as a, as a police officer. And, um, you know, it's, it's funny because we
just, a lot of, you know, this and that about police officers right now. And you know, it's,
it's not as black and white and simple as that's a bad use of terms. I don't mean to do that, but
you know, that's, that's, it is sort of an allusion to, you know, the black and whites of the, of
the police cars. But you know, it's, it's just, it, so he was one of these perfect examples of a
fantastic human being who was wounded in battle, trying to do his best thing and he became a teacher
because it's the best thing you can think to do. And, and he went on to be, uh, like awarded all
kinds of things because he would create these, these, these systems for, um, within the schools,
the schools that he was in actually gave him judicial authority over the school and he would
hold courts, real courts. And, and he would have students represent themselves, uh, and be judges
and, and, and trained to be lawyers and they had to get certificates. I still have mine.
Um, and, and, and he would award these things. And so when there were disputes in the classroom
in fifth grade, he would, he would put them into a judicial format and we would, we sure we would
do other things in the classes and stuff, but, but we would, we'd also participate in these,
in these things. And I also remember the chess set he had because he had one of these big
chess sets where you could move the pieces around, you know, all these carpet things.
And, you know, I, I, it goes without saying that I just really latched onto all of that and
because everything he did, I just really liked. Um, and he, you know, I, so I became a lawyer,
actually I actually got sued. Yeah. By another fifth grader. This is the true story. Uh, I was,
I asked Vicki Adams, Vicki, if you're out there, God bless you. Uh, she, she's amazing. I mean,
I, I was with her all through high school too. So she, I knocked over her pencil case, uh,
accidentally walking by it in fifth grade. And I promise it was a point to this story,
but it's more fun if it was a little drama. So, and I knocked this pencil case off and they,
they, um, they sued me. You know, Vicki and her girlfriends decided that, oh, we have a lawsuit
here. And they did, they sued me. And I was like, oh, you litigious little fifth graders.
I didn't know that word back then, but, um, you know, and sure enough, I had to defend myself.
And once again, I was like, on the defending end, I was like, oh crap. I mean, I could,
this is like serious. If they, if they win this, it doesn't matter if I'm right. If they win this,
I can like be facing some serious punishment for doing this. And I didn't break anything. I
did wasn't like, you know, they just wanted an excuse to have a court, which, you know, kind of
parallels reality more than we want to admit. Um, and so I, um, I, I had to defend myself. I studied
up on everything and I remember having to go in front of the judge. The whole class was watching
and I, you know, I still have memories of some of that. And, you know, thank God I won.
And, and Vicki was, you know, she smiled and we had fun with it. She, I think she knew that
she wasn't going to win. Uh, but it was just really fun, but I was terrified. I was like,
you know, it was like, what's going to come out of this? And it really caused me to just
question my worlds and, and, and, and, you know, how, how my place in it and what,
how I was going to participate. And I had to create arguments and thing. And,
but the reason I'm telling this story is because Mr. Polson
saw that if people engaged in, in activities that were real, uh, that they would learn more,
that they would internalize it, that it would, that, that they would auto, it would automatically
promote them to want to learn on their own about things, particularly if, you know, if you're,
you're your five year old life is on the line, right? And reputation. Uh, we'll talk about reputation.
My mom dressed me up as a, as a, as a, as a belly dancer with this and the eyelashes and
everything. And nobody knew I was a guy. And that's another, that's another story I'll tell
another time. So yeah, I talk about reputation and it was, it was hilarious by the way. But anyway,
so, and, and we, so we, we put forward these, these arguments and we, we won the case and,
and we all, I learned, you know, in the process that it was, you know, that this is thing that
happens and I learned a lot. And so Paulson promoted, uh, the autodidactic learning in me
so much so that I slashed onto that. And I only wanted to be a lawyer after that because I had,
because I had experienced this kind of learning, um, in the raw immediately, that was what I wanted
to do with my life. And I find that this is pretty common. We, um, when we actually participate in
some sort of autodidactic activity where we are successful, we successfully train ourselves, um,
and feel, and feel good about what we've accomplished, it somehow becomes the thing we
want to do in life sometimes, uh, perhaps to a fault, you know, maybe there's other things
you haven't been exposed to. And, and so anyway, I went on to be, uh, uh, a judge, uh, that took
a long time actually. And then I got appointed to be an appellate judge, actually, as one of the
few, uh, and I'm bragging about my fifth, my, my, my career as a fifth grader, but,
but mostly I'm trying to make the point about Mr. Paulson seeing the opportunity to have,
to have young children engage in their own lives and then their own future, that they
could be as, you know, participants in their own fate. And, and by doing that, I had a very
early exposure, I believe, to, to what it means to be, to be self-aware, to, to know that I'm
a part of this society, that I am here. I'm not just, you know, somebody's son or somebody's student
or somebody and, and, and it made me connect. Um, and there was a lot of things that I,
they were wrong with that time of my life too, but I don't want to get into those,
but, but that particular thing, uh, really stuck with me and it was because of a teacher
when I was away. So, you know, fast forward a few years, um, and, you know, junior high,
double headgear, uh, you know, all of that and getting beat up regularly, computers and stuff,
and they identified me. Um, and I really feel this, again, this is going to come off wrong. I don't,
when I tell these stories, I have to use the facts and that means the facts are going to involve me.
Uh, you know, I'm really, if, again, if I was in this setting, I would, I would ask people to
share their stories if they had them, um, about these particular things. Uh, but, uh, I, I realized
it's going to sound a little arrogant because I have to tell you that professor long was, was,
was the gifted and talented teacher. I hate saying that GT quest, right? I just, can I just,
I have to rant about this. All right. I, I have to rant about this. This might make it in the
video. Maybe not. But why do we have special systems for the gifted and talented?
Do you know, do you know, do you know where all of the phenomenally awesome learning is happening
in the system right now or broken traditional system? There's two places that really amazing
learning is happening. And I happen to be really fortunate to have been identified,
to have been placed in one of those in a public school, despite my absolute poverty as the oldest
of eight children. Uh, yeah. Uh, looking down on terrible certain students. Yeah. Uh, on the
terrible, right? Okay. So there's, there's two groups that don't fall within the purview of the
regular system. Anybody know there, at least in the school that I was in growing up in may have
changed by now, there was the gifted and talented or the accelerated or whatever. And you couldn't,
you couldn't enrich and gifted, right? You couldn't say, I want to be in the gifted and
talented program. You had to be identified by somebody until this day, I don't know how I was
identified. Somebody just decided to put the nerdy kid over with the gifted and talented. So it
doesn't get beat up by all the football jocks or whatever. You know, and, you know, there's nothing
against football jocks, even though they're all literally brain dead because it kills your brain,
go to the research on that. Um, and so, you know, and the others, there's another group too.
There's another group and my ex-father-in-law was over this group.
Uh, you probably heard about them because they make movies about them all the time.
They're the ones, there's a throwaway kids. They're, they're the kids that are,
are sloughing school and they've got family problems. They got all kinds of problems
and they're, sometimes they're really violent. And so they say, look, these people have to be
at school and, and, and they, because they have to be at school, we have to put them in basically
a jail at school. And so they put some, you know, really jovial guy in my ex, you know,
father-in-law, he, he's one of those guys, you know, he's very, very tall, you know,
he used to be a sheriff. Um, and, you know, and they put him in charge of these dead beats,
you know, and that they're, they've just been qualified. I said,
be some of them have problems at home and everything. So guess what? They don't have
to, but they don't have to play by any of the rules either. So, so the people, the two groups
that don't have to play by the rules are the gifted and talented and the dead beats. And if you
look at the innovation that happens in education in those particular areas, it's crazy. It's,
it's astounding. I can't tell you all of the different studies and different things I've
randomly run into. I mean, in this one, uh, he actually got funded from the local people to
buy basketball jerseys and then they had, they made a basketball camp so they could do the thing.
And then, and then they started bringing in other, other angles of it because it was all about the
camaraderie and building, you know, building associations and friendships and, and, and
stuff, uh, uh, polyglot on the tactically polyglot kind of actually we'll talk about that. But,
um, so, you know, and, and then what were the GT quest people doing? You guys see Malcolm in the
middle? Anybody know that? It's an American thing. Anybody know Malcolm in the middle?
It's, it's pretty old. It's pretty funny though, because it just nails this issue. So Malcolm is
one of these kids who can pretty much do anything. And it turns out to be a problem because,
anyway, so, so I was identified and I, I got put into this, this group with, um, a lot of people
that I, that I, that I went on to do amazing things with later in life. Uh, that, yeah. And, um,
uh, yeah. And, um, I mean, one of the people that I was with is now the state attorney general,
uh, in Utah, uh, John Huber and, uh, John Pierce, who I was never with went on to, he was one of
these types, you know, I was never with him. Uh, it's actually kind of competing against him for
my, one of my first really serious girlfriends, Jen say, hi, if you're out there, a good old Jen
Apier, I think she's running the Tribune these days, uh, in Salt Lake. Um, a lot of great, great
people, uh, Jeff Davis, I'm using names here, uh, because I remember these people because I went
through the GT program with them and bonded with them. I didn't, it wasn't a tight bond, but it was
like, Oh, we're all in this. Jeff was obsessed with vampires and, and, you know, I read every book,
and he became a great artist. He's a director. Uh, he beat cancer and a bunch of other amazing
things. Um, I mean, I'm still, I've still got associations with people. I don't follow on
my Facebook or anything anymore, but my point is, is that, that part of becoming, uh, an autodidic
wasn't just professor longquist, but it was the opportunity to connect with a certain group of
peers, uh, that you may not have chosen to be friends with, but that you respected and that
we're always there and consistent and, and it's the community and that's what I'm getting at.
And that's what I've strived to do with skill stack and I strive to do with the stream and
everything is as much as possible to provide, uh, an opportunity for community to just organically
evolve. Because when you start to make connections and, you know, teaching each other or whatever,
you know, and they, we had a mutual respect, you know, Jeff's off doing his art and I'm like,
Oh, Rob's over on the Atari right in his code, you know, and it's just, we just kind of knew,
you know, and that community is a real serious part of becoming an autodidic. You can't just
do auto self. You can't just do it by yourself. Um, you know, learning has to happen because
knowledge is someplace else. You can do experimentation and stuff like discovering,
you know, energy or something, but, but for the most part, you are seeking out the knowledge
of others or your, your, your, you know, arm in arm supporting each other to go forward and, and, and,
and, you know, take on a deck, whether another challenge, whether you take on the same challenge
with them or you, you participate with them. So the point of one of the main points of that story
is that, is that you have to be, um, you have to seek out a community for support, um, of some
kind. And it does, I mean, it can be just, you can do it just by yourself, but it's always better
if you can find somebody that you truly respect, you know, and, and working on this. And a couple
of people come to mind recently, um, LTN Bob, who is also a streamer. He's here, uh, Bob Tyson, and
he's a, you know, he's running part of the show over there at the community college, as is a
different person, by the way. It's different community college entirely from my other stories.
So please don't, uh, project my story, brother. Um, you know, and he's the one who pushed me
to start streaming and we don't, we don't, you know, go out for beer every day. But, uh, Strager,
yeah, Strager is fantastic. Strager is someone that I would probably have befriended in that area
too. Um, you know, I, I really respect Strager. We might seriously disagree about specific
technology when we give each other a hard time, kind of indirectly, uh, see them riffing. There's,
there's, there's, there's a lot of people at Dennis. There's a lot of people in science and tech.
In fact, I'm going to put this out there. I have not found personally, uh, this level of camaraderie
in real, in real life, you know, and with people around here very rarely. I mean, Rob's one of
those people, uh, Ricardo, a couple, a couple of people, but, but the miracle that we have right
now, we complain about being locked in our rooms and stuff, but we actually have the opportunity
to reach out and identify other people, particularly through Twitter. Uh, I found an entire network of
teachers that were willing to help me, uh, get, you know, what I needed to maybe consider getting
into teaching. We have great opportunities now and, and I'm just trying to get back because I feel
like I've gotten so much from those things. So the story about that is, you know, you don't have to
have a GT Quest program, maybe identified to be an autodidact and find a community. You can build
your own community. You can build your own Discord server. You can join ours and then find a friend
or two and start pair programming and then, then, you know, fork off your own communities. There's,
there's no rules here. That's like this, but, but it will help you as you go forward. So, uh,
another, another big piece of that story is, is specifically, uh, Professor Longquist, um, and
is, he, he called himself Professor, even though he was, you know, just a high school teacher.
He probably, the, the amazing thing about this man, uh, I'm almost positive now looking back
that he was gay, but I don't know. And that's not really relevant, but I just, I'm just remembering
his manners and stuff. But when I look back at him, uh, I, you know, I never had any dealings
with him after I went to those classes, but I, I, I just remember thinking to myself, uh, later in
life that he could have done anything. I mean, he, he, he was really, really smart. And here he
was, uh, teaching a GT Quest program and kind of a, you know, uh, kind of a, wasn't a minor town.
It was a copper, copper, you know, smelting town, you know, in Magna, Utah. Uh, and, and, and, and
he chose to be there. And for some reason, you know, looking back, I look at these teachers
and this is one of the things that, you know, gets me emotional because, because the fact that they
chose to be a participant in, in this activity, uh, directly affected me and, and, and they
didn't have to, they could have done anything else. This, this, he could have clearly done it,
but he called himself professor. I remember that because, uh, I want to say doctor even, um, because
I think it was because he could have done that. But, um, but, you know, he, he, he, you know,
it just, it's very, very dim memory because it was, you know, it's middle school. Um, but, but,
so here's some other memories of that that are relevant. Um, he sat us down on one of the first
days and, you know, it did some things that would, that would seem really new agey to, to us now.
Uh, it was the seventies after all. Uh, and, but he, you know, he was a student type kind of guy.
He didn't, you know, he was actually a sweater and tie kind of guy. And, um, and he would have us all
sit in a circle and put all our desks in a circle. Um, and there's lots of reasons for that, by the
way. Um, you know, this whole rank and file shit. I mean, stuff is just not how learning should
happen. It's not. And, you know, cause you have a, as long as you have a back row, you're in trouble
because there'll always be so many in the background. And, you know, and you had to be a participant,
you know, you can't check out, you know, and so we all had to be there and he, he did a lot of
simple things that you might be able to take into your lives as habits. Like very simple thing.
He would, he would just, you had to be holding like the, um, what was it? I want to say it was a
bone or something. It was like a cow bone or something, but you had to be holding the, the
thing, the rock or something, or you couldn't talk. And so he would guide these debates. And if you
guys see me debating in this stream, that's one of the very first places that I learned it. Uh,
he didn't never have any formal debate training. We didn't ever go through that,
but he would have us talk about a topic. He'd put the topic out there, you know,
very secretively and he would say, okay, you guys, we're going to talk about this. What do you think?
What do you think? What do you think? And, and we, we would get, you know, we were, you know,
11, 11, 11, 12 years old and we had opinions and, and that he gave us permission to have those
opinions. He gave us permission to think. He gave us permission to debate, you know, without a formal
debate team. He, he let us, you know, and he taught us how to do it. He said, you know, okay,
you have the mic now, now you have the mic. And we would like laugh because somebody was like,
I'm going to take it back because it's like, they wanted to talk and everything,
but it did a lot of things. It, it, it created this, this, this, this dialogue that I now know
from many other sources that I've read was, was the natural way to do learning. There's many,
many people who have been very successful at helping others learn, including Socrates and
Frey, Paul Frey, in, in producing, you know, verbal dialogue about, about a topic and then
finding, and that's kind of what I'm doing here. If you can't tell, I'm, I, I do have notes and
stuff and I've done this a lot. So the, the stuff's kind of coming out in that way. But,
but yeah, there wasn't a lot of scripted stuff. It was just conversation. And then we would,
we would move around the topic and he would guide it and, and he taught us how to do that skill.
And, and so, but let me, a couple of the things he used to do.
One of them was he taught us Bloom's taxonomy. And I actually am going to look it up.
It's been a long time since I've looked it up. And it, I know if you're a teacher,
you probably know it. It's probably a little bit dated at this point. And
you might not be interested in it, but Bloom's taxonomy, Bloom's taxonomy is a set of three
hierarchical models used to classify education learning objectives into levels of complexity
and specificity. The three lists cover the learning objectives in cognitive, effective, and sensory
domain. The cognitive domain list has been the primary focus of most traditional education
is frequently used in structure and to structure curriculum learning objectives, assessments,
and activities. Now he would, he would bring forward Bloom's taxonomy, but he wouldn't just say,
do this. This is what I've been told to do. We would talk about it. It's like,
do you think this makes sense to have this much structure around your learning? How can you
structure your learning? And I'm going to let you do that. I'm not going to go tell you what
Bloom's taxonomy is and we're not going to talk about it. I'm not going to recite it to you.
I'm not going to deposit into your bank. You are going to go do that. If you care, again,
you're the boss of you. You're the boss of your learning. You don't care about Bloom's taxonomy.
Fine. But if you do, go read about it. Go read about it and see what you think about it. See,
see what other educational pedagogies and all these other, you know, the other thing I hate
about academia is they invent words for stuff that doesn't need an extra word. In fact, one of
the things that really annoys me about Barry's book is it's so high-minded. You know, it's like
using words that aren't necessary to communicate the point. I think Socrates would really hate it
actually. He was very, he used to play the fool on purpose because he wanted to, to
put all the attention on the person to find their own discovery. Really amazing. I wish,
I wish I had, Socrates is probably the one of the people, Socrates, right? That I think of all the
people in history, I think I probably would have wanted to meet him even more than Da Vinci. I
think, I think Da Vinci was another autodidact. Like he's a very good example of an autodidact.
And we're going to get into more examples of autodidact. I promise at the end of this, I'll
list them off and you can go study. You can study them and you can, I would also like to have you
suggest some people that you think are autodidacts. Bill and Ted meets Socrates. You know, it's really
funny. I learned about, this is true story. Talk about, you know, Socrates' separation. I learned
about, I learned about Paulo Freire and Pedagogy of the Oppressed from a recent Wisecrack video
that was, and it happens to be on my mind because I'm reading it right now, from a recent, you know
Wisecrack, right? It's a recent Wisecrack video about is Bill and Ted deep or dumb? And I cannot
recommend it more. It basically takes through Bill and Ted, which is this kind of, oh, Stoner,
hey man, hey Ted, you know, and, and it talks about how, in fact, it was possibly a commentary
by somebody who was Freirean about our education. Because what does he do? They, and there's some,
there's some lessons in there about, since we're on this, let's just go with it. There are some
lessons in there about how to be an autodidact. So Bill and Ted are not traditional students.
Yeah. Bill and Ted are not traditional students. They don't fit into the normal model.
And the story is about them. It's not about it to Stoners who can't play guitar. That's not what
it's about. It's about, it's metaphorically about two people, two humans who can't fit into the
current education system, who have to, who end up learning in a true way the way that, you know,
the creators kind of hid from us. And if you, but if you unpack it, it's really amazing because
what they do is they don't, they're about to fail, right? Their whole lives are on the line. They're
going to be sent to military school. There's references to all of the things that are broken
in our education system today. It's a commentary on the learning process because, because why?
Because if he doesn't go there, not only is he not going to make it in this traditional
military-esque, you know, public school, he's going to go to the absolute worst possible learning
experience, military school, which is absolutely sit down and shut up and do what I tell you.
So, so instead they have to save themselves by following a different learning path. And that
learning path is a hundred percent farian. And that's why they pick up Socrates first.
So what they do is they, they, because, because Socrates was the champion of this original idea,
you know, and he's very, he's very quiet during the whole thing. But, but what does he do? So the
farian idea is, is, you know, you, you give them an opportunity and the Weisskraut covers this way
better than I ever could. So go watch the Weisskraut if you want to. Great, great videos over there
guys. By the way, if you ever see this, I strongly recommend, you know, watching all their videos.
And by the way, my stepson, you know, who is completely unschooled, completely unschooled,
has learned about a lot of this stuff and brought it to my attention. He's the one who told me
it's the robot for God's sake. I mean, I'm really grateful to him for that.
That's another thing. You just don't know where you're going to learn from. But when you open
your eyes, there's lots of opportunities to learn from all kinds of people. And, and so, yeah, so,
so this commentary is, is, is more about what are, what does, what are Bill and Ted, you know,
up to? What do they got to do? So, so it's the perfect model. So Rufus, who could have told them
everything they needed to know to pass the test, doesn't. What did he do? He gives them enough
information, puts them in this scenario and says, here's the basic thing. Here's what you need to
do to survive. Go learn. And that's what Socrates would do. That's, he would teach them, you know,
logos and rhetoric and stuff, and then go out into the world and ask the questions and do your own
learning. And it was a big deemphasis on, on structured learning and more of an unstructured
learning, the organic, you know, being able to follow a topic down to it. That was my biggest
complaint about college is that I got really into a thing. I ended up writing a 25 page paper
instead of an eight page paper for some Russian topic on, you know, particularly like, like the
Levin, for example, and Brothers, Brothers Carmoso, I mean, in particular, that was one that I wrote
really long. And, you know, because I wanted to, and then I ended up getting a C in another class
because it didn't interest me. But because the natural learning process doesn't always fit into
a nice structure. And if you can't tell, that's why I have such a hard time putting structure
around these boosts, because they're, they're organic. They are more like the web, which is
where the web came from, because that's how humans think. We don't think in these linear,
you know, pretty paths. We're, we're organic creatures. So we like to, to, to link around
to different things. And there's nothing wrong with that. It's not OCD to, you know,
or, or, you know, to, to want to do that. So anyway, so that's a commentary you can go look
into as to, because ultimately they save the day. How do they save the day? They went to get all
these people. They have a very verbal thing. There's nothing written, which is that it's
Socrates all the way. He hated words because not words, he hated the written word because he said
it made it impossible for some people at the time to achieve, you know, knowledge because,
because they couldn't read. And so he didn't, he felt he was really down on written word. In fact,
it took Plato to write it all. I didn't know this until I was, until I was 52. You know,
I don't know how many times I studied Socrates. I did not know that. So, so we live in an amazing
time where you can like learn things from multiple sources, but that was a real, and then I watched
the Socrates documentary and I said, just finished last night. So, but yeah, you know, and, and for
that he was ultimately killed, right? He had, he was forced to drink poison because he was just
messing with, talk about an amazing time. So I could go all day on that particular topic. We
want to come back to pull it back to Professor Lundquist, but, but Socrates, you know, his,
at his time, he lived in a time when it was massive war going on. And there was rampant
religiosity that was, you know, that was just not tolerant at all. And that's why he ended up dying.
That's why he had to, because he ultimately used him as a scapegoat. They made, they made, was it
Aristophoeles, which was an entire play about making fun of him and everything. And so if you
want to study somebody who really understood learning and the auto-directing form, in fact,
you could probably say Socrates is the, you know, the sort of the model of, of, of auto-directing
learning from the very beginning. He was probably the first one to get all the credit for, we've
been doing it in all our lives. It's how humans learn, but he was the one who really, really
championed it from the very beginning. So you don't know what you don't know until you don't know.
Exactly. Yeah. And he used to say it all the time, right? The unexamined life is not worth living.
That whole, all those quotes that come from him. So, I mean, he's, he's somebody that's really
interesting to study. If you want to, if you want to do that, if you want to have fun with it,
you know, you can also, you know, watch Bill and Ted over again and say, wow, is this
deep or dumb? What's going on here? You know, because ultimately they saved the day by using
all of these methods to, to produce the most amazing presentation. By the way, their presentation
affects the entire crowd because, and they're making a point saying, you know, you don't have to
have a book here. You can actually have a video. You can have a dialogue and you can have a play
and you can affect change and learning at a massive scale. And this is why I definitely
don't throw games under the bus. One of the most amazing educational moments I've ever had in a game,
if you know Witcher 3, is when Deekstra goes, in fact, it got me really emotional.
When Deekstra, I can probably pull it up, but I'll let you go look at it. Deekstra is there
and he's calling on, he's calling on Geralt to, to make a stand and he can't be neutral anymore.
He has to stand up and, and, and it's just so powerful. It's just as powerful as any,
as any play I've ever been to. And the point is that games and art are, are a form of, of, of
these kinds of things. They're basically big Bill and Ted presentations if we do them right.
So, you know, we have, we live in a time when the myth and the art are kind of mixing and,
and we can, we can learn from that. And, and we, that's largely for the non, you know, hard skills,
you know, learning, learning about what the world is about. But that's a big part of being an
autodidact. Why the heck am I learning PHP or Pearl or whatever or Java? What is the purpose
of me learning how to code in general? Why am I even doing it? Right? You get, you get slapped
for asking that question. My wife talks about how she used to ask why in Catholic school all the
time and get slapped down all the time. She's so great. I love her so much. She's asleep right now,
but, and, you know, so I'm reading some comments here.
This is some of the most interesting homework I've been assigned in a long time.
Well, you know what? Why does homework have to be boring? You know what I mean? You know,
in Finland, you know what some of the homework is? Go study caterpillars. In fact, one of the reasons
they give them more time for resource, recess, is because when they're out intergaging with nature,
they're more prone to encounter a caterpillar. When I was growing up, you know, we were latchkey
kids who were not latchkey kids, but we were, we didn't have a lot of things to do. But when we're
given more time to explore the world, we care more about learning about the world. But if all of our
time is filled literally so that we are exhausted, and that includes all the extracurricular activities
that aren't necessarily pushing you toward forwards, why I'm not so, look, I was, I was in sports
forever. I was in soccer and tennis and cycling and, you know, I did all the sports, but, but
we are so exhausted. We don't have a time to look at our world around us and ask the questions.
You know, what's this about? Why was, you know, what was soccer to his point? What, why is this
tomato caterpillar so big and green? You know, and, and these are all questions you can't ask.
So this is why, you know, I come back to Mr. Poulsen who brought in to teach us geology,
brought in rocks. He brought in rocks. I was, I was, I had a huge rock collection after that.
And my grandpa used to bring me a different rock every time because I got so into geology just from
this class. He brought all these rocks in and he would bring this little bit of sulfuric acid and
he would let us test it. It's probably illegal now and he would let us test what it did on everything,
what it reacted on and stuff. You know, and he wasn't a physics professor, but he just saw an
opportunity for us to engage with our world and made it really interesting. That's why I've learned
us through example and interaction. Yeah, because you're a human. That's how, that is how humans
learn best. And the thing that's really frustrating is that for some, somehow those methods of learning
are largely, you know, devoid of, of, we don't have those things in our system anymore. I mean,
we do, but they're, but they're always kind of like the exception that you remember, right?
That's not like the norm and it could be the norm. And you can make it the norm. That's the other
major point I'm trying to tell you. This isn't a complaint about the system. This is a statement
about how to work within the system to find your own autodidactic opportunities. The learning stops
with you. You are responsible. It's not your teacher's fault. It's not your parent's fault.
It's, look, you can live in horrible conditions and I cannot, I am not going to presume to understand
who you are and what you're having to do with. Please do not take it that way. But I guarantee you,
no matter what you have going down, you can change your stars. And that's, that's a,
that's a nice cell reference, which is one of my favorite movies of all time.
You know, but you really can and, but you, you got to take control and, and that means you don't
have to go yell at everybody. You know, I'm, I tend to yell about things a lot, but, you know,
you have to take control. That's all point. So on the new Bill and Ted, I didn't understand the
mom married the two dads and then the brother. Oedipus thing, maybe? I don't know. I don't,
I don't think that was a reference. There, there's still some debate about whether it was actually
intended or if it was just accidental. You just watch the West cracks pretty good. You're right,
though, like you'd have to stretch really hard to have that make a reference to anything.
But it was very a Shakespearean. I mean, the Shakespearean, there's, there's, you know,
a Greek actually, there's a, there's a lot of Greek plays that have like incest and I don't know
if I even want to go there, but yes, we are natural observers. And so I, if there's one
goal I have here in the auto-detectic thing is to help activate what's already in you,
help you find it so that you can drive yourself because, and this is why I'm talking about this
very first. This is the most important thing because everything else I talk about, you're
like, I can't learn that. You know, if you, if you recite all the old scripts you've been taught
and you've taught yourself and all your, you know, I just can't and all this thing,
you're not going to be able to move forward. So you've got to start out with the right frame of
mind. And that might take some time to get. It's easy to say again, but there's some,
some specific things you can start to do. First thing is to just own it. Just own it. Just own
your learning. Just say, I'm responsible for my learning. I ain't going, I'm going to stop blaming
my college. I'm going to stop blaming my parents. I'm going to find a way to make it work no matter
what. I'm going to learn Russian despite Victoria McLeil of that. And I'm going to go to Russia
and I'm going to come back and I'm going to speak the best Russian ever. And she's going to,
she's not going to be able to deny that I fucking learned Russian better than anybody else in the
whole department. Sorry. I swore there. You see what I mean? You can use that, that energy and
apply it. Don't get mad. Get busy. Right. It's one of my code of conduct things. Don't get mad. Get
busy. A big building, different clothes until I entered a school and entering out of room,
he sees the chairs and the chalkboard and realizes that he is in earth and fundamentally
has nothing to change. Wow. That's pretty nice. The history, let me read that whole quote.
I just pay that. Kanabalvi. Kanabalvi. The history that my teacher always gave us was that
Socrates' time travel to our era and started getting, start getting crazy, not knowing where he is,
so he can see cars, buildings, big buildings, different clothes until he entered a school.
And as he entered, as, as he entered a room, he sees the chairs and the chalkboard and realizes
that he is in earth and fundamentally nothing has changed.
Yeah. I mean, that's what he fought against, man. He died for that. Yep. It's pretty amazing too,
the technique. He, he, he, children and were not allowed into certain things. So he'd wait on the
border and he would, he, it sounds creepy, but it wasn't. And he would stay there and he would,
he would engage in dialogue his whole entire, he was this crazy man walking around town all the
time, engaging in Socratic dialogue with everybody to wake them up. And it worked. In fact, it worked
so much that it started turning the, the, the, the opinions of the populace against the, their
established gods and, and stuff. And not, you don't want to do that. Not then. And Sparta beat
him to crap. Sparta beat him all up. And then they blamed it on Socrates. See? See? Socrates made
us weak. It's happening right now, by the way, people. See? See? All this touchy feeling like
international trade and open borders has made us weak. We need to shut our borders down.
You know who else said that very thing? I am not trying to make a comparison here that's direct,
but I'm going to, I'm all I'm going to say is study the rise of fascism in Germany.
There are a bunch of amazing human beings who, who had been beat down after depression because
of all the stuff that they were, that was taken from them because of all of the, the stuff that
the world put down on them after World War One. And they were hurting and they didn't feel like
they had a soul and they, they were, they were struggling and they, they were like, we matter
to, you know, and, and, and families were being punished because of, and they couldn't eat because
of these things that they had to have that the people who had done the wars and World War One
had done. And so the entire population of Germany practically was in a state of like, no, we
matter too. And along comes the guy who says, you matter, we will be all the same. We will
shut down our borders and we will prove to everyone that we matter. The rest is history.
Anybody else saying that right now? Yeah, this is the same message. I'm not, I'm not saying he's
him if you know what I'm saying, but the message is the same. And it, by the way, if you want to
understand this dynamic fully, watch the documentary called capital. It talks about the economic
trends in our industry and where they go. And this is, this is a fun topic. If anywhere, it's,
it's suitable to talk about this topic now because, you know, learning to learn is, is a thing that's
going to change your ability to progress. It's going to, if you learn how to learn, you, you become
more in power of your own social mobility. That's, that's another way of saying that if the, if the
economic model is going to let you, not always, that's not always the case. But if the economic
model is going to let you, you're going to, you're going to make your own destiny. You're going to
create your own social mobility because you are in charge of your learning and you never can forget
that. If somebody tells you, you don't, you're not allowed to learn that, or you can't learn that,
or, or, or you go too stupid to learn that, or you don't have time to learn that. Those things
are designed to keep you down. They're designed to keep you in your spot because that keeps the
ruling elite in power. And you just need to find a way to, to learn it. And then, and then over
time, you know, small successes, you, you will change, you will change your starts. You really
will. And I've seen people do it. I've helped people do it. I've had people do it. I keep talking
about this one person who got a hundred thousand starting salary. And I'm, this is a perfect example
of somebody who came to me, didn't even know Linux at all, at all. And I'm, this is not bragging.
Please, please understand. This is someone who was, had got a major in college and was like,
oh, there's no way I can do that. Hadn't even heard the word Linux. And within, within two years,
with, with a lot of personal commitment on his part, he totally changed his stars and his social
mobility. And, you know, now he's doing very well. That's not always the story for everyone,
but, but it can be, it can be the story. Some people don't have the social mobility because of,
because of issues related to their economy. And that is a whole topic all by itself,
which I would love to talk about, but it's not really relevant to this, to autodidactic stuff.
Don't you dare say, okay, I'm just one anecdote. Okay. There was a study done,
this is in the documentary capital. There was a study done. Don't you dare say that I worked for
this ever. Okay. It's, I mean, it's, it's one thing to say, I work hard. It's another one to say,
I deserve this because you, because I did all the work. So they did a study and they did a study
in Stanford and you can go look it up. The guy, the interview is within the capital. And they had
a whole bunch of people play Monopoly, which by the way, I've talked about before, Monopoly is
totally not the game that was really created to be. Monopoly was created by a woman to illustrate
the dangers of capitalism versus, you know, socialism, not, I don't like socialism as a word,
but, and it had two parts. You could play it two ways. You could, you could contrast the two together
and some asshole found it and stole it from her and sold it. And I mean, that's the story I've
been told and remember. And, and then you just play the Monopoly version. So here's, here's the
study. The study found that when they, what they did, they did one thing differently. They flipped
the coin and one of the players got double the resources to start with than the other one.
They could move twice the spaces. They could do twice as much stuff that meant they would pass
go more often. And they, you can see the video that the people who started out with twice as much,
just because of a flip of the coin internalized that they were better people. It's crazy. In fact,
at the end of the whole session, you can see the video. They're starting to make little jabs and
stuff because you can tell that they're starting to like get the confidence saying, yeah, I made a
pretty good decision there. They really believe they deserve it. And it's just a stupid Monopoly
game. And, and after the end, not a single person attributed their success to flipping the coin in
the beginning. All of them said, well, yeah, I got the beginning edge, but obviously the rest of it
was me. All of them, every single person in the study, that means that the idea that you don't,
you're going to get rich and you're going to think that nobody else deserves it. You're going to,
you're going to convince yourself that you earned where you are, no matter what. And that's human
nature. And so we just have to be aware of that. But don't, you know what I mean? Yeah. Yeah. So
look at the study. It's a pretty amazing study. When you're pushed to a wall, you get desperate
and cling on to anything you really do. What's the documentary capital? Yep. That's the one. Yep.
Really good. This is the most interesting lecture I've ever gotten coming from the Bahamas. Totally
worth staying up past 1 a.m. Thanks, Paradise. I always get confused by doing, by doing it in
traditional way and by doing it the other way, like people who got really successful Elon Musk.
He always advised people to work hard, put lots of hours in because that won't prove your chance.
Well, you can't not work. All right. So don't, don't, I tried to, to put that into words there,
but it's, it's not about, it's not about, oh, just let it happen to you. That's not what I'm
saying. It's going to just have a lot of work. And there's, there's a lot of priority shifting
that you have to do to learn. You can't just learn the code by, you know, doing an hour a week.
Somehow people think that you can, but you can't, you have to put the time in. So don't,
don't misunderstand. I don't know if Elon would agree with the traditional system.
I'm not, I'm not saying the traditional way is working hard.
No, I'm saying the traditional way is through our existing rank and file public education systems,
which are, everybody admits are broken. And if you want to read a lot about how they're broken,
read anything from Ted Dintersmith. Ted Dintersmith, he's, he's, he's a, he tweets and stuff.
And he's got a really good handle on this as well. Sir, Ken has passed on. He's not with
this a couple of years back. And, you know, and very, of course, has been gone since a long time
ago, 70s. So, but yeah, if you, if you care, Mr. Professor Lundquist has instilled a lifelong
interest in learning how to learn in me, not just, not just anything, but learning how to learn
and, and studying people who have studied epistemology, how to know stuff and, and how to
learn. And because of that, I have taken it with me my whole life. And I cannot, I, I, you know,
I get, I get kind of, you know, emotional because if it hadn't been for them, you know, I don't,
I don't think I would have been as interested in the things that I was. I don't think I would
have had the courage to leave the Mormon church, for example, and all the other many things that
I did in my personal life. I've really screwed up in my life in many ways that I could get into
very personally. And I'm not ashamed to talk about them. It's not like I'm trying to hide them from
you. I just don't know if it's appropriate right now to talk about it. But my point is, is that I
had that base and that took me on the way through everything else. So everything I can do today
to help you through, you know, stories or reflecting on your own self. And we're going to
get into now the techniques to take this, this dialogue and these feelings that you're having
and, and put it to action because that's the next step after you maybe, maybe partake in some of the,
of the, of the inner of some of the, some of the motivation. Capital of the 21st century. Yes,
it's fantastic. It's an hour and a half or so. I'm not sure to follow someone says, get enough
sleep and don't overwork. Well, Jen, you know what, it's you and your body and don't let anybody
tell you differently. Every human has a different physiology. And, and, you know, we don't talk
about that. One specific case is we all have a different glycemic index response. We all have a
insulin response. It's called some of has some of us have, you ever know somebody who can eat
all kinds of sugar and nothing happens to them as because they have a blunted insulin response.
They don't produce insulin, which causes you to put on fat. And I could talk about that topic
forever if you want to talk about it sometime. You have to identify what your body needs at a
given time and you have to adjust it all the time. There is no one recipe. There's no one diet.
Occasionally there's principles that'll help you. Some people need more sleep. Some people need less.
Some things have been established by science pretty well. You know, I talked about the REM sleep
stuff the other night. You know, I personally believe that you need to get at least three hours
in a block in order to hit REM properly in order to produce growth hormone, which most of your
growth hormone as, as Peter pointed out yesterday is produced during sleep. Okay. So that's a
different topic, but hopefully it is a part of becoming an autodidact because you got to
learn how to control your own body and your own learning habits and all of that is a part of it.
But, but if you're, if you're practiced in the skills of an autodidact, you will study
and learn about your own self, about your body, apply your own scientific method to yourself,
and then you'll be able to use that to push yourself forward, you know, in your way. And I
just can't say that enough. This is the problem with education. I eventually had to give up.
I had one to three and with three people were too many, three people's a class. And the best thing
I ever did, even though it cost me financially is to move to one-on-one mentoring because when
we're one-on-one, you're free to address the direct method of intelligence and interests of that person.
And, and that's the, if you're just a body of one and you're teaching yourself, then you're,
you have to kind of learn about yourself. So that's, there's a big, I know there's this
whole know thyself thing. And I know this sounds really new agey, but you can't do anything until
you understand what you like, what you, who you are, you turn inward. And this is very Eastern
philosophy kind of thinking, you know, the Western philosophies of the world and the
religions of the world are, you know, outward thinking, you know, and we can, we can talk
more about that later. But understanding who you are, I don't really have a module or anything on
that. It is a part of becoming an out of didact is because you can't learn until you know, it's
set up as a strategy until you know yourself. And a lot of times that means you're going to
screw it up. So look at here, see this. So here's my little piece of paper that I just made for
myself this morning while I was, you know, drinking coffee. It's like, well,
this is the schedule I'm going to try. And we're going to do a scientific method on this. I'm
going to, this is my hypothesis. And I'm going to give it a shot. Let's see if it works. If it
doesn't work, I'm going to change it. And there's no shame in changing it. Right. So, you know,
if you learn to do those kinds of things with yourself, you'll come to understand who you are,
what you're capable of doing, how much sleep you need, and you'll be able to control your life
better. And this isn't a self-help talk. This is a, you know, understand yourself so that you can
apply your strengths to learning. All right. I'll never claim that I did anything 100%. I can admit
I'm standing on the shoulders of giants. Yeah, well, we all are. I mean, we all are. Let's be
honest. It's all, we've all just learned from somebody before us, right? Lennox is my God.
There you go. On the other hand, people who are really, really successful, they advise,
their advice is very different. Absolutely. And, you know, if there's one thing that I could,
you could say about that. So, like Steve Jobs, he did LSD and yoga, got really famous. You know,
Steve Wozniak, like locked himself in his room and worked his solder the whole time,
breathed in the fumes. You know, everybody is different. Everyone has to find out what their
method is. And if, honestly, I think that the reason that they're so successful, and it depends
on the definition of success, by the way, Stalman, for example, not a lot of financial success,
but one of the most financial influencers of all time, even though I have big problems with many,
many elements of Stalman's life and personality. You know, so it's all about identity. If there's
one thing all of them had in common in this, is that at some point during their life, and that's
why I told you the story about Professor Longquist, at some point during their life, they looked inward.
They identified that they were the boss of their own learning. And they followed that. They learned
how to navigate the system of dogma and traditional, you know, whatever, and, you know, religion,
whatever tradition, they learned to navigate that system. But despite that system, they still stayed
in control of their life. They stayed in control of how they learned. They can stay in control of
pursuing their own interests. In many cases, they had to just listen to their own internal compass
and not listen to the people that were telling them they were wrong and stupid, and they shouldn't
do it. And so the one thing that I think all of those successes have in common is that that's what
they did. And so, I mean, that's, you know, there's lots of them, right? So I promise I was going to
mention a couple other autodidacty since we're kind of moving off the topic of, you know, the teachers
that I'd had, that, you know, you look at Thomas Edison, you know, these kind of scientists,
they're the ones who come to me as people who worked on a lot of things on their own.
Another amazing autodidacty who is, it's a huge tragedy. And here's some homework,
is Aaron Schwartz. And I, this is another human being I can't talk about without getting emotional.
And I'm not going to give away the ending. Okay, please don't give it away.
But if you really want to understand an autodidact who changed the world, you use his tools all the
time. He co-invented Reddit. He invented, co-invented Markdown. He co-wrote the Creative Commons license
at 15. Yeah, so complete autodidact from a very early age, from a very early age, like from,
this is, he's a good example, if you watch his, if you watch about his life, he's a very shining
example of an infant or a near infant who discovers their autodidactic nature from a very early on
and never looks back until he has to. And it's really sad. But, but he just went, he would rather
teach everybody and organize things. He invented Wikipedia five years before it was even a thing.
So there's, there's a, there's a, there's a show you can write down a note here.
Please write down the note. I'm not going to write all this down for you. But if you want to, the
movie is Aaron Schwartz, the internet's own boy. And it's amazing. It's really amazing. It's, it's
really sad though. It's really, really sad. And hopefully you can watch it and let it motivate
you. All right. So, you know, you know what I'm tired of? I'm tired of tragedy related to,
to people who have, who have become as Nietzsche called ubermensch. You know,
yeah. So there are a lot of, a lot of people who slam Nietzsche for many things and he, he, he,
he deserved it, I think, many things. But his notion of ubermensch, which in the time was very
sexist to say, but whenever Superman, uberman was not that they were above everybody else,
but that they had, it was, it's crazy because this came from Nietzsche, even though he had very
little in the contact with any Eastern philosophy. It's the ubermensch is one who realizes their own
potential and looks inward, understands their own Dharma or their own mission and, and finds the power
within themselves to act despite society. And, and that, that is my, my favorite
idea from Nietzsche. I mean, there's a lot of other really nasty things in there and his life is
very tragic. You can watch the geniuses of the modern age. It's another documentary if you want
to get into that. These are all people who were also very, very autodidactic people. There's been
many of them in Da Vinci, of course, was another one. He's the, you know, the go-to. Everybody
thinks of him and only him, but there's many others. I like Aaron Schwartz's story because it's,
it's, it's, it's, it's relatable. It's somebody from our time and it's somebody usually from the
age of the people I'm talking to. And I, but I, I gotta warn you, it's very tragic. So that it,
you know, served to motivate you to, to, to push forward in, in his honor, if nothing more.
Okay. So on the other hand, people are, yes, Luke, mind you, Elon is the,
is a hell of an autodidact. Oh God, yeah, definitely. Elon is the definition of autodidact and,
and he also has a fair amount of narcissism. You know, this is, this is another thing that I've
noticed too, is that just because you're an autodidact doesn't mean you're awoke and you're,
you're empathetic and you're nice to everybody. There are autodidacts or, you know, straight up
assholes and, and, and elitists. And the reason that they become that is because they become so
proficient in their skill of learning anything as fast as possible. Like, oh, there's not a neural
mesh. Okay, we'll make one. That's Elon. Oh, no one's going to Mars. We'll do that. You know why
he does that? Because he is so full of confidence because he knows if he sets his mind to something,
a.k.a. Steve Jobs, yep, he can set his mind to anything and make it happen because he's been
doing that. Isn't I'm sorry, but he's been doing that very thing his whole life. So that
confidence has been reinforced and it ends up becoming narcissism at some point for some people,
but not all. And so when I say, you know, the thing that's going to build confidence to you,
if you're struggling with imposter syndrome or something is the very thing that also turns
Silicon Valley people into overwhelming assholes because there are elitists and stuff, you know,
and they need to be, it doesn't mean they're hurting our world or anything. So I'm not saying
this is all roses here. You might end up, please don't, by the way, I've rented to more than one
Sith Lord that I taught my skills and how to become aware and how to use the force, basically,
their own force, and then they use it for evil and they believe me. I have stories about those
you don't want to hear because as soon as they get tied into that thing, they start to see that
they're better than everybody else. And then rather than sharing it with others and being a
community, a communal learner with everyone else, they're seeing how much better they are because
they've learned the skill. Has anyone seen a streamer who goes by Yagushi or something similar?
I have not. No. I'm going to have an autodidact. Yeah, there's many good ones. You guys, I think
after this, you may have already known them. And this is, if I were with you in person,
this is what we would be doing. We would be identifying moments in your own life where you
feel like you've done this and then reinforcing those. And we would also be identifying people
that we've witnessed to do this. And we just watched them. Usually they called hackers and
tinkers and makers and stuff like that. But not always. Sometimes they're not even involved
in a technical field. They're just really able to look out for stuff. Marty Lobdell,
study less, study smart, my favorite video on the subject. Ooh, I have to look at that one.
Elon's must God. Elon's is God is the next two. Agree, agree. Sleep is really weak.
Science says otherwise. Sorry. Cannibal, sugar and carbohydrates make more hungry,
make more hungry and sleepy. This is true. Yeah, it's true. We were talking about
and glycemic index and stuff. Yeah, we could talk about diets all day.
No, Michael says doesn't really fit the topic, but it's really nice to watch your streams before
attending school. I appreciate that. Appreciate that a lot. That's definitely the goal I have.
The reason I'm doing these and again, just seeking enough
renumeration for to keep alive and keep doing it is for that reason, because no one's covering
this stuff and no one will cover it. Do you think if Socrates has waited around
to share what he knew and what he had spent his entire life studying? Talk about an autodidact.
Socrates came to his conclusions on his own and he's like, and one of those conclusions is,
no one else is going to come to this conclusion unless I help them.
And so he set out to do that and I'm trying to follow in, I am not Socrates, but I am trying to
follow in that tradition of not asking permission. If I had to try to go through
the traditional way, I could probably be effective and some people are, but
live streaming is no brainer. Salman Khan, he started Khan Academy. He's a stock trader or
something. He's like, why are people not teaching math online? It's like super easy.
And he wrote a whole book about it. He's super famous now, never trained in education at all.
So you don't need permission to do this. I do not want to take away from the
achievements of those who have put the time in to do this, particularly now that I'm reading
a lot of the books and material that I normally think I would probably be reading
if I were in an education course, but you don't have to do it that way. You can just read the book.
But then you don't get a grade, Mr. Rout. Then I can't get a certificate. So you have knowledge.
You know, that sounds really cliche, but
because he can't. Da Vinci. Da Vinci was also supposedly somewhat narcissistic,
but he was Da Vinci after all. I'm interested in honing my asshole superpowers
for a well said word. And believe me, I can be that too. And it's,
if there's one thing I need to check, it's not, I do have an ego. I won't lie, but it's,
yeah, it's a constant challenge. It's a constant challenge to keep,
the one I have a hard time with is when I run into people who don't even have any interest
to learn anything. And I just, I should pity them and I don't. I'm angry. And so I suck. I
need to do better. I imagine Socrates had a problem with that too. So obviously I'm not him,
but I looked at him and think up to myself recently because I just saw the documentary I
think about, what would he do here? You know, would he give up? You know, would he, and he's
crazy. I mean, he would, he would, he would push people to be pissed off because he would keep asking
peppering those questions. He'd go, what did you mean by that? What about this? What about this?
What about this? And actually, Rarity, you've done a little of that to me once and I love it.
Right. And then they would say, well, I told you about it. And they just get upset because
he keeps asking him to redefine their own definitions and find their own truth.
And it's just, it's really unnerving and it really angered a lot of people.
But the people who were affected by it, you know, changed. But it wasn't Socrates changing them.
He just led them on their little path. It's basically the best troll of all, right?
As the best like ethical troll of all time is to get somebody to actually ask themselves
their own questions. And if they engage in a dialogue with you without the intent of like
freaking them out or spinning them up and triggering them, triggering them in the best way
and the way where they have to like examine their life. The unexamined life is not worth living.
So his, his goal was to get people to examine their lives, get people to examine their careers,
get people to examine their beliefs. And that made him a dangerous enemy of the state
because the state don't want you questioning things. So at least you're honest, right? And yes,
science says otherwise says the man sipping coffee at 2am. What are you talking about me?
Did I say science says otherwise? I'm all the three. Are you talking about the 3am stuff?
No, you're talking about the sleepest for the week, right? No, I sleep. I sleep a full eight
hours a day. Yep, I do. I make sure I get eight hours a day every day.
Elon Musk and PayPal did outdid my first business. Wow. Yeah, and you've done quite a few businesses,
haven't you, Jim? But second to Elon at the start of the 2000s was still a good start. Yeah.
Second to, second to Elon? Holy cow, Mr. Yeah. Yeah. Mr. Jim is in, it was real estate,
your first business, if you don't mind my asking. Just go do some projects and make your own company.
Absolutely, right? You don't need permission. So it's scary though. And I tell you what,
it's scary. I don't have insurance. I don't mean to tell you guys, be careful. I mean,
you guys have been, those who've been following my ongoing saga, I am actually required by my family
need to go get a job despite my fact that I have a relatively good career as a mentor,
making enough money to pay the bills. And I have done so for eight years, but I don't have insurance.
And talking about the woes of American economics, I have to go get a job. So this is another thing.
I don't know how that falls into the autodidactic conversation, but sometimes we are forced to
do things we have to do. And I'm just accepting that it's really, it really sucks. And now,
thankfully, I've had a number of interviews and opportunities for things that entertained me,
and I will enjoy doing that actually make a difference. It'd be really hard for me to do
something that didn't make a difference, unless it was just like watchmaking or something.
So yeah, but those are very, very real. It sounds like a failure of the schooling system. Well,
look, you gotta be careful. The blame thing, I'm just going to suggest you don't, I, yes,
I'm agreeing. I'm not challenging you, but, but let me ask the question. So,
why is it the failure of the school system? Who created the school system? There's a
Socratic question. Who created it? Where'd it come from? Who's responsible for the school system?
Right? So it's, it's usually a bigger question, usually. I feel like my current employer does
this all the time with new hires. What? It does what? Throw them into the fire and let them fall
and build them to self-spec. I was very effective. Absolutely. I have a story about that. And how
are we doing? Okay. When I, my first, my first job was a system administrator when I was at IBM.
This is related. I, I was getting, I'll tell you the short version. So I was getting you home for
the night and I was really proud that I put Linux on my laptop. And so I, you know, and I was, I was,
I was, this is, this is the time that you guys have heard me tell the stories when I was playing
chess with Brent. Um, I won't tell you his last name is one of my favorite people I've ever worked
with. Brent, if you're out there, man, I miss you. And, uh, and we would, you know, I taught him Linux
and, you know, he taught me system administration. He'd been trained in the military and we played
chess every day and everything. And I remember that night getting ready to go home and get on the
bus and, you know, or the train and max and Portland organ. And I went to shut down and I
typed shut down and I was like, Oh, my laptop's not turning off. What's up? Like, am I in the
right window? I look back and some of you know the story. Uh, and I look, I, I suck guys. I suck.
You know what I did? I had happened to been working on the, the mail server for the enterprise
and, um, I shut it down. Yep. I did. I was logged in to do some system administration on the,
on the corporate mail server. No, it wasn't post fix. It was send mail and I didn't look at my prompt.
You know what I'm talking about, right? So Mr. Terminal, all the things Rob didn't look at his
prompt for the day and yeah, big pain in the ass. And, and I shut down the corporate mail server
and in order to get the mail server back on, which was in Boulder, uh, this, I'd only been a system
administrator for two months and I mean, I was a developer before that. And I mean, I'd had a very
successful career at Nike before I went to work for IBM. I got, you know, and I was, I was sweating.
But this is almost like the universe saved me because, um, uh, you know, I, I, so I was like,
his mail's still flowing and I checked it really quick and everybody got home for the day. Um,
and except for one, uh, I believe it was Ross and he was still there. And God, I remember, I remember
that the color of the cubicle I was in when I realized that, I mean, it was one of the part of
my French. It was one of the biggest, oh shit moments I've ever had. If there's, you know, like,
because you can't understand, I was trying to make a name for myself. I was young. It was, I was,
I mean, I, I, I, I'd done all kinds of amazing things that already been, you know, in my mind
anyway, I'd already been, you know, Nike's webmaster, internal webmaster and, and, you know,
help start some internet service providers and been a cruise director in Russia, blah, blah, blah.
But, but the one task that I hadn't done is become a really good Linux system administrator and,
and, uh, so here I was shutting the mail server down. Ironically, uh, so the end of that story is
that it didn't go all the way down. Yeah. I don't know what it was, but something made it hang on
like an it zero or an it one. So it lost remote connectivity, but it didn't stop sending mail.
Yeah. The send mail process stayed up. So it kept sending all this, you know, thousands of mail
messages. And I really lucked out. I really lucked out because that meant because I had to go a full
night because I couldn't get anybody's attention. I think if I remember right, I could get that
beginning at wrong. But, um, yeah, it sounds like something system D would do. Yeah. And,
but it stayed up. It didn't go down. And, and I, um, uh, I, I don't even remember if it was that
night or the next day, but I, cause it, cause the mail was still flowing and, and there was no way
we were, we were going to have to wake up an operator, you know, an operator is a computer
person who works in the room with all the, you know, the race for with all the computers who
goes in there and flips a switch for you. Uh, that's basically an operator's job. Um, and,
you know, you have to call them and wake them up and make a big deal of it. And I was, I was so
scared. And I honestly, I don't remember if I contacted somebody that night or if I just waited
it through because I knew mail was still flowing. I'm free. I don't, I want to say I call somebody,
but I don't know. Cause I was really scared. And, and I called my boss, uh, my new boss really.
And he wasn't, I, the thing was that I hadn't been, he hadn't been my boss for very long. He took
a chance on me because I was a software developer and I had been tinkering with Linux, Linux on my
own. So I guess this does have some auto-didactic relevance because I had been teaching myself
Linux in my garage. I was running, you know, tucson.net and I, it's not there anymore, but
then I had all these amazing things because I had worked for internet service provider and I'll
let, and I'd always wanted to do system administration and the job friends, Java coding,
it went away as soon as I got hired at IBM. So I had to find a new job within IBM. And I said,
I always want to do system administration. And Ross says, okay. And he gave me the opportunity
and I, he really put his neck on the line, letting me, without any formal system administration
experience, take this job. But he was desperate and he saw the other software development I had
done and let me have it. So, and here I am like two months in shutting down the mail server.
And, and I, so I got to them and again, salt of the earth, probably my best manager I've ever had.
He turned to me when I told him about it. And how's it going, doppelganger? He turned to me when
I, when I, when I, when I had that, that problem that I, I said, Hey, bye. And, and I said to him,
I have, you know, I have some news. Oh, no, it had already gone down and we had already
called the operator and everything, right? And, and because, because when we found out it happened,
it was just like, boom, boom, boom, we had to get it back up. I remember that. And I didn't have
time to like regret anything. I just knew that we had to do it. And, but after the dust itself,
I, I, I got in the cubicle with him and I can remember the little kind of space then too. He
had, he has this kind of beard. He was Scottish. You would actually wear a kilt and, and go back
to Scotland all the time. He's just this kind of poorly wonderful man. I just, I love him to death,
Ross. And, and, and he would, um, he's out there probably still somewhere. I just lost contact.
Um, and he would, um, I said, I said, you're not going to, I kind of trying to cut the tension
because we hadn't really talked about it. And I'm sure he was nervous too, because he didn't
know how to talk about it either. And so I went to him and I said, I said, oh, I said, you know,
uh, not going to fire me, huh? And I said, and he looked at me and he paused and, and it just
also gets me a little emotional. He said, why would I fire you? And I was like, well, I mean,
I took the mail server down, you know, for, it wasn't a small thing. It was kind of a stupid
error. You know, I might make an error again. He goes, you're not going to make that error again.
And it just, it just hit me. He's like, you know, and he's like, and he's like, why, if I hire somebody
else, how do I know they're not going to make the error you just made? You're never going to make
that error again ever, right? It was, it was just, it was just such a good moment. It was just really
amazing time. Really, really great moment because I was just, I was totally destroyed. And, and yet,
you know, yeah, time for me to take a break. So that took a, took down a whole day at AWS
data center. They won't fire him because he won't make that same mistake again. No, he will not.
So, so yeah, that was a good story. I'm going to take a little break. We'll be back and we'll
decide what we're going to do for the next round. Okay, talk to you soon.
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
How's it going, Tony? Well, welcome. We've been talking, I need to take a break there.
All right. So, I actually think we might be able to cover
most of these other didactic habits and practices tonight without having to do more than this,
this four hour session, which is a good thing. Because I kind of want to move on to the actual
coding and stuff at some point. So let's pick off where we're left off.
I told you my story about my big script and a lot of things there, right? So I learned through
failure. I, my manager allowed me to fail and to learn. And that's a big, big thing. I think we
should all give each other the benefit, the doubt and allow them to learn in all ways. And that
goes to people that are close to you. Sometimes we love to pin people through the wall because
they're wrong on something and we need to give them, and God knows our world needs this right
now, right? We need to look, I'm not, I'm not saying to forgive people for some of the atrocities
that have happened, but, but we, we definitely need to learn how to figure out to find a common
dialogue and, and, and, and let people progress, let people move and learn. Whether it be about
technology, you know, I actually think Emacs is a good thing for some, for some people in
some circumstances, right? Because I've been allowed to change. And this is just one example.
And so yeah, let's see. So the, the last part of this session, I think I want to focus on for
the next 90 minutes or so is all, is taking all of these, you know, ideas and kind of brainstorming
several ways of, of putting these habits down to paper and starting to do them. And a lot of it
has to do with identifying how to learn, what to learn, and, you know, what are the steps to,
to making it happen. And there are lots, of course, there's lots of ways to do that and every answer
is different for, for everybody. But I do want to say, I want to start with going through some
services. So some specific practices. So reflection, we've already talked about that. We've talked
about reflecting on who you are, you know, know thyself and one specific thing you can do there.
And I'm just going to go ahead and just write a quick little note here.
In that, give me a second and I'll put it up. I don't know what we should, what should we call
this one guys? Make directory boost. I think I'd probably going to call auto-didact,
I intact. Yep. All right. So if you, I, and so one of the things I'll just leave it as item number
one up here is reflection. So you know, personal reflection. And I, that's a better way of saying
know thyself, right? My grandpa used to tell me, doesn't matter what you learn. He says learn,
learn an industry before you learn the code and then learn the code to go, that goes with the
industry. And that makes sense for anything, you know, learn what it is you want to do,
but you can't know what you want to do unless you know who you are and what you're built of and
what you like. And sometimes it's going to take a lot of experimentation. So some of the ideas for
personal reflection that I would suggest is just, you know, it's just going to sound really lame,
but going for walks, just going for walks and thinking, you know, a lot of Oxford professors
are famous for doing this. They would just go out, you know, Tolkien used to do this
and just in Socrates, you know, they would go out and just walk and just be and then kind of,
you know, give themselves time to think about what it is they like. And then try a lot of things,
try a lot of stuff, you know, don't rule it out. You need to fail a ton, right?
So try a lot of stuff out. A lot of people come to me as mentors and they can't, when I'm mentoring
them, they don't know, this is one thing I wish I had done that's a little bit of regret. I was
never exposed to electronics as a kid. For no reason of nobody's fault. I just wasn't. And I
absolutely know that if I had been exposed to electronics earlier, I would have been an
electrical engineer or something. I would have gone that route because I love it
because I don't understand it. But I really know that if I were to get into it, and by the way,
I kind of selfishly put some electronics stuff in the dive out of the boosts near the end there
with the Gulligan boards because it's something I've never really fully mastered assembly.
And I want to master not only assembly, but I want to do it on some boards and
understand how those boards work and stuff. And that's like a personal thing. My point is, is that
you know, try stuff out. You don't have to go deep in anything, but you need to. And largely,
I think school is going to be one of those opportunities to do this. This is supposed to
be in my, in my middle school, they had a thing called module shop. Is there, are there any,
is there any other person randomly out there who actually has taken module shop?
Do you know what I'm talking about? And what they did is they, they had all of these little
shop, like little, little stations and you can make a, you could take a buffalo head,
you know, nickel and make a ring out of it. It was one that did electrolysis. Is that a thing?
I want to say, I might be getting it wrong. What's the one where you like,
you can like change the color of the, of the metal. I don't know the name of it. That's why I
need to do it. Anyway, you just got to sample everything, right? You could do this one with
plastics. You had one with, I remember there was one with epoxy. It just could very smell the glue
all day and split water. Yeah. Electroplating. Yes. That was it. Thank you very much. Electroplating.
And that's the one. Yes, it was. That's exactly what it was. And I don't remember any of it.
But the point is, is that it was a shop class, anodizing. Yeah. You could go through each one
of the, of the, I remember because in one of them there was metal, metal shop and I made a blow gun.
I was like, can I make this? And they're like, yeah, that's fine. You know, and they had like the
standard like ammo can that everybody made with the TIG welder. It was really fun. My wife is a
licensed welder, by the way. So the reason I bring that up is because the surveying of all the
different skills was a way to find something that you really liked. And, and I wish I had
done that a little more. So personal reflection is an active thing. It's not just walking around
thinking, what should I do? It's, it's trying stuff out and failing like, you know, Raritan says.
And, and seeing what those things are. Yeah, I've been actually been going through the,
the Nantetetris course mainly because I have not been able to get assembly to low-level coding.
I've been learning so much on the way Nangate's work and how to build it for my first principles.
Yeah. Yeah. And, and I actually have my personal approach is going to be using something called
the gulagum practice board. And I've had several people go through it, including one person who
was employed at 18 as a solar energy programmer and engineer. And so, yeah. Oh, she did. She did
actually for a long time. She decided she didn't want to do any further. And she's just tiny little
thing. So she just, she's so badass. It's total lover. So many reasons to love her. She's just
fantastic. Don't tell her to send that though. No, I tell her all the time. She's sleeping
peacefully in the other room right now. I didn't dare. I can't wake anybody up because they're
all asleep. No, she's fine. The problem was is that she had to, she had to do the exact same
weld. She complains all the time about how people would get because some of the welding jobs,
they had to do the exact same aluminum weld like a thousand times a day. And that was it.
There was never, there was never any, so they got really good at that one weld and they
didn't ever do anything else. You know, and that's, you know, that's a problem all around.
So try stuff out and personal reflection and then, and then capture it, capture your,
capture your thoughts and ideas. And that, that means write it down. And you can call it whatever
you want. I'm not going to tell you what to call it. Okay, I'm going to talk to you about some
specific techniques for keeping notes and stuff. But that's largely up to you. As long as you are
writing it down, I, I'm a big fan of paper every morning. I, when I was with coffee,
I used to do a lot of drafting. So, you know, at, and I had a drafting table and pencils and
everything. So I still lend myself to that in the morning. I'll like capture my thoughts.
And so that's going to be the first part for auto-detecting. You have to reflect on things. And
a lot of this comes from the scientific method, actually, you're just kind of doing it to yourself.
You know, what is, what am I, what's my hypothesis about my own future? And let me test
that hypothesis and let me see how it's going. You know, the scientific method keeps coming up.
It's like, it's like one of the true paths to happiness and truth, because everything is
subject to analysis and, you know, compare against the control. Let me, let me, okay, here's my control.
I'd like to do this thing. Well, let me compare this thing to the other thing I was just doing. Oh,
like that, that new thing says I'd like anyway. So he's also great in real estate, GM's here, right?
So in real estate, when you're going to buy a house, my, we had a very wise real estate agent,
friend of ours actually, he said, and by the way, you can use this technique,
if I should probably put this in here, actually, capture, I should probably put this right here.
Evaluate, evaluate your preferences. And I'm going to put another one here. So there,
and you can say, well, I don't think I'm going to do that. So the real estate agent would do is you
would say, you only have to answer one question when you're going to look for houses. Do you like
this house better or worse than the last house? That's it. You don't have to remember anything else.
This isn't too hard. You just, you have to make that one decision every time. You can't
go look at 10 houses and then decide which one you like better. You have to look at each house and
say, I like this one better than the last one. I like this one better than the last one. I like
this one better. And then, and then that way it's just one decision every time. Now, if your criteria
change along the way, and actually, I wanted to talk about that. Yeah, if you live in a nice,
if you live in a nice neighborhood, yeah, it depends on where you live, right? Sometimes you
don't need to go for a walk and you can get the thinking done on your own, right? You can go for
a pretend walk in World of Warcraft or something. I don't know. Figure it out. So, you know, I might
be too loud, probably being too loud. What else we got? So basically, you have to start with
something. So you have to start thinking about what is you like and then write things down.
And then you have to start, you know, writing things down. And part of your personal reflection
is you're going to have to start saying, you're going to have to make some decisions. This is a
hard part. Decide what you enjoy. Not what you want to do. Not what you're being told to do.
Not what you think you have to do. And those are all things that are really important. Like,
I have to get a job to get insurance. I can still evaluate what that is based on what I enjoy,
right? And we live in a time where we're really fortunate to be able to choose careers that are
related to things that we actually enjoy. What do I got? I got stuff on me. And so, you know,
don't pass up that opportunity. What do you enjoy my change? There's no, you know, recipe here.
But you have to decide what it is that you enjoy doing. And so, and then so write that stuff down
in terms and in terms of daily activities. And this is something that I've noticed really,
really helps people clear themselves from the confusion of so many things that they enjoy.
Another way to do that is be focused on what you don't want to do. Focus on what you
don't enjoy. I should probably change the, this is a little bit hard to read.
Let me make it a little darker. Give me a second. So, a little bit darker there.
Focus on what you don't enjoy. So, yeah, your passion, that kind of thing.
To watch the little guys on the internet turns out, can it help? I think so.
Keep in mind that nobody is hiring for your passion too.
Now, they, well, okay. So, that's why I don't want you to focus entirely on singer songwriting.
Here's a little bit of homework if you want it.
If you, if you are going to, believe it or not, you can find a job that's doing something that
you enjoy. I promise it's just gonna, it just takes longer, a lot longer. And you might not
have that kind of time. If you want, and it's a sacrifice, right? If you want to be a singer
songwriter, you can. So, a little bit of homework. Go watch, you can do anything. Yeah, search for
that. It's an NBC skit. She was passionate about welding. You kidding? And then, and then, and then
she did, she wasn't passionate about the career of welding. So, she changed careers. So, and you
can, that's the other thing. You're in control. You can change. It doesn't feel like it, right?
It feels like we're, particularly once you get responsibilities. When you have children and
stuff, it's like, I feel like my choices are being made for me. Like, I really feel right now,
that my choice to go to work is being made for me because I have a family. And I wouldn't mind
if I died without insurance if it was just me. But I want my family to have insurance. So,
so yeah, I get your point. But um, so let's focus on the skills. So,
look, even, even if, even if you know that you're not going to get a job that's your passion,
you end up taking something, you take a waitress job so you can eventually get to some other goal.
Or a steward job, I should probably say it's more appropriate term. That's fine because you know,
at least you have taken stock of what it is that you really do. If you don't know what your daily
activities are, you can't, you don't even have a start. Something from absolutely not my career
about it. If you, look, I went through it. I went through it too. It actually sneaks up on you,
doesn't it? It doesn't start out like that. You'd start loving your job. And then it kind of changes.
There's actually, there's a really good, um, uh, Billy Crystal is in, uh, City Slickers. Anybody
seen it? It's one of the best movies ever. Uh, it's really good for people in their thirties.
People in their thirties and forties, they all should be mandatory watching City Slickers
because it goes through that very, all those questions. Uh, it goes through the questions
about why I've lost interest in my job. I'm not doing it the way I used to. I'm going through
the motions, you know, that kind of thing. Um, uh, another one that's, that's, that's pretty good.
Uh, how do people recover from burnout? Well, that's what we're kind of talking about here.
Um, it is, I believe a lot of the recovery stuff from burnout has to do with rediscovering
yourself and going through the autodidactic stuff again. And I can tell you from personal
experience, I went through that. In fact, I founded skill stack, uh, on that, uh, skill stack, the
name skill stack was the name of a, of a tiny little app, uh, that I made for myself only, uh,
that was going to do what I'm going to talk to you about. You can do on your own without an app.
It was a way for me to evaluate what I want to do, what, what had happened to me and I'm going to
get there. Um, but, but the, and, and I'll tell that, I have a little story about that that I'll
be able to tell tonight that I think is, it's very embarrassing story from my part. So I can
tell the good, you know, shiny stories, but I'm going to tell you a couple of stories that are
just like totally embarrassing, but they're related to that. They're relating to your,
to making a problem like that. So let's go through the process though. So, um, so in fact,
let me back up and start, I'll tell you the story and then I'll tell you why these steps, uh, relate
because these steps are exactly what I ended up doing after I got out. And, and, and so I'm just
capturing, uh, sort of the results of this story. And, and you can, uh, I haven't, I have no problem
with you disagreeing with it in any, a lot of you probably, it's, it's hard when you're in the middle
of it. Uh, Mr. Robot comes to mind. The whole movie is about the cynicism of you don't have control
of your own destiny anymore and that kind of thing. It's all being driven by the invisible hand, blah,
blah. So, so I understand where that sentiment is coming from, but I still believe that you can
take control and you can actually, and this isn't self help, by the way. Um, so, okay,
let me tell you the quick story. Um, I, I'm a big story guy and hopefully I try to relate the stories
to stuff that'll make a difference and hopefully that'll be something you can remember. Um, so this
is the story of how I left IBM and I'll try to make it as quick as possible. Um, but I, I started
out, uh, flying high. I was headhunted out at ike.com. I was on top of the world, you know,
they had sent me to Nagano to cover the Olympics. I'd done conferences and technology. Uh, they
were bringing this caviar on our cubicles and pretending to lock us in them. Uh, because we
were, you know, so important. Uh, CEO was, was, was, was doing new spots about Nike.com and Nike ID
where they put, they put ID on the shoes and we made the whole supply chain and make that happen.
Um, I mean, I was really flying high in my twenties in my thirties on that. And, and then, um, I,
you know, I had young kids. So this is how the story goes. I'm sure many of you know this.
Uh, I had young kids and, um, and it wasn't making a lot of money. It was really exciting.
Uh, in fact, they were only paying me 30 grand. Yeah. Looking back now, I'm like, how the,
did I go for that? And because Nike, I found after a while, I'm sorry, Nike, I'm going to throw
under the bus here. Nike praise on young, active, excited people. And it has, there's
Thursdays where I get free beer in the beer garden and it doesn't matter because they're
going to pay you 20 grand less than you're worth. In fact, this is what happened. So I was getting
beat up. In fact, I was getting beat up by all the work they were putting me through.
And, and, but I sort of liked it. What we were doing, it was very exciting and it was
young and had a lot of energy. And, but my, my wife and the kids at the time at home,
she was, you know, getting really burned out raising young kids by herself and, and, and,
and having them take over, take me over on Sunday. In fact, she came in, uh, one Sunday,
we went in to go pick something up and, and they asked me to stay. They said,
you need to stay. We have an emergency. And I went out to the, to the van and I told,
I told my, my, this is a really hard memory to replay. Uh, I, I, this isn't even in the
bad one yet. So I told her, I said, you know, I, uh, they really want me to, to stay. And
this is my ex wife, by the way. And she started raging. I mean, she, her face just started raging.
And I've seen that rage in many other forms. And she just, she came in and she freaking ripped
him a new one. She started screaming at everybody. She went storming in the door and she started
screaming at everybody. She, I'm taking my husband. I'm sick and tired of you guys controlling his
life and not letting him be with our family. We've been planning this family thing. We're going to
my grandparents because we were on my way to my grandparents and they told me to stay there.
And it was on a Sunday and we were Mormon and, and she just let him have it. And there was,
there was one woman, uh, I would say who, but she, she, she raised her hand while she was getting
yelled at by my ex wife. And, and she said, she said, I have, she goes, you don't have any idea
how hard this is to raise children because you don't have any. She seriously, she went there
and, and this one girl says, I have a dog. You have a dog. It's just like, oh my God, please
no, don't just let her get it out of her system. And then we'll move on. And, and she just, she
she just let her have it. She had been having all of this rage build up in her. And, um, you know,
and I, um, we can probably let this one go. And anyways, so I promise this has a point. Okay. So
it's more fun with the stories if there's a point. It's, I, she, she stormed out, she stormed out
and all of these peers of mine, I thought I was totally gone. I thought I was going to be the
next day I was going to be out of there. I kid you not, I was so scared. I mean, I told you,
this is all my scary story. So, um, uh, and, and she, um, I looked around and I, I went to sit down
and I had to make a decision. I either had to decide to get, she, she didn't ask me to come
with her or anything. She was basically, I think she was kind of testing me. And, and I, I, I sat
down and I, and I said, and I got her, said I was Mormon and I said, fuck this, it's not worth it.
I said it out loud. And for me at that time it was a huge deal. And I, I, I stood up and I walked
out and I thought I was saying goodbye to my Nike.com job. And, um, uh, the next morning,
boss calls me in and the manager, um, the woman, and she said, um, she was, you know,
she was relatively nice. Um, um, I never really bonded with her or anything, but I walked in and
she said, um, we, we understand that you're going through a lot right now. And I was like, okay,
here it comes. You know, I thought the ax is coming down. And, um, you know, we understand from,
you know, what happened. And I forgot to tell that part, but my ex was telling them all about
all the problems with our car and everything. And, and we understand that your, your car,
you know, has got some trouble and we'd like to buy you a new transmission.
The kids, you know, that actually happened. And I was like, what? You're not going to fire me?
And you're like, no, we'd like to, you know, we'd like to, we'd like to show that we support you.
And, and, uh, so I was like, totally flabbergasted. I was like, what? And, and I mean, and they
still worked us to death to work me to death, but, um, so they bought me a new transmission.
And, and then, and then we got the car taken care of and it bought some, some favor with her for a
while. And, and, and we, uh, you know, I, I didn't last very long though. And this is where the
story's going. So, um, eventually, uh, they, they pulled us in because I was flying high, you know,
and, and, and I was excited about the job. But then I, I let that turn into being overworked.
And then I kind of lost my priorities and I had two young kids at home and, and, um, and,
and then I started to make it. So here's where it goes. I started making decisions based on my
family. Uh, uh, yeah, they, they got the message. And, and, um, so we, I only lasted a few months
after that mostly because Nike brought everybody into a room, uh, because everybody was getting
burned out, not just me. And, and they brought everybody into a room about 60 people. I wasn't
there. And, um, they, we thought we were going to give us concessions. They were going to do
something because they were really burning everybody out. And they, they put him in there.
And then the statement was more and more or less, this is a startup mentality. This is a
startup culture. Uh, it was the middle of the.com boom, right? And if you're not up for the demands
of a startup, it's probably time for you to move on because this is how we operate. So rather than
saying sorry or anything, 30 people quit the next day, 30, and I'm pretty sure that they wanted
them to quit and I couldn't quit. And so everybody else left. Um, and, and everybody else, um, left
including, and I've told this story before, including one guy who I didn't even really,
he was in acquaintance, but I, he wasn't really, I mean, he wasn't really a close friend. I, I,
I think he probably got a little bit of a referral bonus for mentioning me. Um, because
within a week I got a call from a recruiter and I told the recruiter, I said, I don't have time
to talk to you. I got to get this deadline. We don't have anybody here anymore. I got to do all
the work. I said, I don't even want to talk to you unless you can, unless you can do an extra 35K.
And I was joking. I meant for it to shut the conversation down. And, which is by the way,
a really good technique. If you, if you really want to shut down a recruiter, say, look, I,
I don't have time to talk to you unless you can get me an extra 35K is what I'm making.
So if you can't even hit that ballpark, I don't want to talk. And, and the recruiter said,
no problem. Can you be to Dallas next week for the interview? And I was like,
what? And, and, um, long time lurker. And, and so I went to, I, I flew to Dallas and I,
I interviewed with all these other newbies who were just starting and I was like the,
the senior, I was only in like upper twenties and, which is always really weird, right?
And I ended up getting hiring me, um, and I ended up getting another, uh, like 10 or 15 grand
than, than everybody else there. And then I went to this like months long training and per day,
you know, with an $80 per day in New York, which was amazing. And while I was there,
the job they hired from went away. So I had to find another job and that's where the system
administrator job came in. And that's where the mail problem came. The point is, I mean,
by the end of all this, you're going to know my whole career, which I'm sorry that there's just
too many stories in there that relate. Hopefully they can help. Um, but, but the reason I'm telling
this story mostly is because I was on top of everything. I made a choice to move based on
money. Uh, IBM lied basically and told everybody that it was all about peace, love and Linux.
Anybody remember that? It was a bunch of bullshit, by the way. But now it is because they just
bought red hat. Now red hat runs a company. So I don't know, maybe I was wrong. So,
you know, and, and then fast forward, you know, I, my career kind of happened to me.
Um, I got the system into job that went away and then I had to find another job and now I was
taking whatever job I could get anything in IBM. And, and pretty soon I was working for a company
where I was really, I was working for a boss who really latched onto me because I was his, you
know, bread basket, wouldn't let go of me, even though VP's asked me to work on different projects
and he wouldn't let me go. And then pretty soon, all of a sudden, fast forward, somebody made the
comment about what happens when your career starts, when you get, when you've lost interest in your
career. And what ended up happening is my career happened to me because I didn't have the courage
because I had young kids at home and a wife to take care of, um, to make really tough sacrifices.
I mean, scary sacrifices. They probably weren't as scary as I, as I anticipated they would have been.
You know, if I had, if I had known, right, I didn't have any idea I was worth another 35K.
Um, how'd I know? And I would have jumped a lot earlier than that, but I don't, I think we don't
always give ourselves credit. Sometimes imposter syndrome versus done in Kruger is the thing.
And I have a video long time ago, I made about that. Um, so the bottom line is I was now
looking for needles in a haystack memory bugs, um, and, you know, and third level support for
Tivoli on the software that TattleTailed on people who didn't pay enough for how many CPUs they were
running on. And I had gone from being this 90.com person. I still had the same skills and I kept
myself up for the most part. Um, but it was, you know, very C-specific thing. And so here's,
here's the really embarrassing part of the story. I mean, you think that's pretty embarrassing. So
now all of that stuff in this story is to tell, is to just demonstrate to you that you can have
the best of intentions. Uh, and eventually at some point, um, because of demands on your career,
uh, on your, on your family, uh, by having children, uh, for needing insurance, that was the insurance,
the insurance thing has controlled my decisions at least three times in my life. At least,
we moved from Arizona out, out, out East because the IBM doubled our insurance costs.
Um, and we were trying to find a way to survive. We had to, we had to cut our costs and get a
smaller house. And so we tried to move, uh, to do that. Um, and it forced a thing. So the economy
in America, and here I am again, looking for a job just for the insurance again. Um, and so anyway,
your job starts happening to you. And as soon as your job starts happening to you, instead of you
controlling in the fate of your job, then you get in trouble. And then there's some ways to avoid that.
And we talked about the brag sheet thing. And I want to hit that again in a bit here. Um, but
that's how you're going to get your bonuses too, by the way. Um, and you know, it was,
the point is talking about burnout, right? And it was like one day I woke up and I was like,
I'm working for this horrible manager who, who talks to me down publicly every time I bring
up a bug and says, I boiled the water and instead of, you know, actually responding to the bug and
being doing the responsible thing, um, you know, and, and, and pushing stuff out. This is, this
got major bugs in it and I can't do anything. I was just so done. I was like, I'm done with
this career. I didn't want to do anything. I was just put in the time and, and so I started
interviewing and, um, uh, I interviewed with a company that I thought I really wanted to work
for. It was a gamification of education company. Uh, and they were doing, you know, full stack
developments, what you would call it now. It was all, you know, web stuff. It was backbone back
then. It was no react yet. And it was, you know, very CSSC and all of this stuff. Um,
and, and, you know, it was, it was this, it was this very modern job. And, and of course I've been
Nike's webmaster. And so my hubris was still pretty high. I was like, I can do that. You know,
I never, you know, I hadn't done any JavaScript at all for any reason anywhere,
uh, for 10 years. Um, actually, no, I played around with some PHP for a week there. I made a,
I made a Yu-Gi-Oh clone with my kids, you know, just to learn PHP. Once again, fun projects for
education, don't discount them. Make sure they go on your resume, even if they're a fun project,
because that shows you a passion. And, and I learned a lot of PHP doing that back in the
time when PHP was necessary, also around my own mail server, which ended up funny. The ironic thing
is I crashed the mail server, right? Turned it down. Then I, I, so I was so sensitive about it.
I ran my own mail server at home. So I would never do that kind of thing again. And then they needed
the same manager, needed somebody who knew mail servers some two years later. And, and so they
called on me and I was the only one in the room who could raise his hand saying I had mail, mail
server experience. And so they put me in charge of the managing the send mail gave me. And I wrote
my own like scripts to do proc mail and send, you know, checks on it all the time. It was almost
like that, that failure that I had had drove my improvement for the rest of that life. I had to
become the guy in charge of the mail server later. Um, separate story, but so, so, so anyway,
I want to talk about, so I started interviewing and I interviewed, this is a really, really,
really embarrassing story. And it's almost time for me to go to bed. So I'm going to talk about
you got a promise not to judge me too much on this one. So you said about burnout, right?
And so the way you protect yourself from burnout, first of all, and, um, if you break, it becomes
yours. It's true. Um, as I, if, if you, if you suffer from burnout, one of the ways to avoid,
I had, I first of all, I'm going to tell you the advice that, uh, a guy named long bell gave me.
And once I was very frustrated after this really awesome project that we had been involved in kind
of started dive, I talked about the other night, but, you know, till we bought it out and we were
not being respected. We weren't being innovative and all this stuff. And, um, he told me, and I
don't know, I still to this day, I don't know if I agree with this advice, but he actually started
a bar in his basement and all kinds of amazing things. And, and he was, he was a decent manager,
but he was largely checked out a lot of the time. And, and he once told me, he goes, you know, you
can't, you can't, um, uh, in a good way, I suppose, he says, you, you can't, you can't, you can't
put your, your life values and your source of entertainment and fun and, and, and your value
on your job is that that's a mistake. You have to, you have to find something you can be passionate
about. That's where you put your passion and then your, your job's a job and then you have your
passion over here. And so this is kind of to Reardon's point that, you know, his advice. And
so I'm, I'm trying, this is not just a Mr. Robb's view of the world. This is the only way to do
things. There are many, many views of how to get through this, this world and this life. And so
I please encourage you to, to, to listen to lots of, lots of people in the, in the community
and to kind of share information because I don't have all the answers. I can just share
what I've experienced. And that was his answer. His answer was put all of his time, energy and
money into his bar and get drunk pretty regularly and, and just do his project leadership, leadership
job at IBM and just call it a day. And it's not how I was built. I was, I was built to like really
have passion, you know, for the, whatever it is I'm doing. And, and, and honestly, I think that's
a little naive. I agree with Reardon on that. But if you can do it, it's awesome. And you're not
always going to be able to love everything you do, obviously. But so fast forward a few days,
years after that. And, and so now I'm, I've, I've got an interview with this, this gamification
company. And I am talking to them and I'm saying, and they, they, they, first of all, the first
thing I thought was really weird. And the reason I knew I was kind of out of touch, you understand,
I had just done a whole bunch of VMware integration with big fix and, and I, you know, some highly
technical things, rewrote this, you know, whole pro module and, you know, did the seed debugging
and stuff. So I had skills, you know, I, I didn't feel like I was the dummy or anything that I
hadn't been studying. I'd had to bone up on C to do all that stuff. And, and, but I didn't have any
of the web skills anymore. They had vanished, but I hadn't quite internalized how much they had
faded. And that's the point of the story. So here it comes. So I'm, I'm, I'm at an interview.
And, you know, a vetting interview. And it's basically the equivalent of a whiteboard, right?
They put me up, they got, they got me in front of a screen and I've got to type into it and I've
got a code. And it goes, and we had this nice talk and it was, it was obviously 20 something. And
yeah, I think I was in my thirties or forties at the time. Forties, actually. Yeah, forties.
And, and he said, he said, okay, well, we're going to start something really easy. And the whole
way he talked to me, kind of just say, just totally put me off because he was the interviewer
and I was the interviewer. And, and, and honestly, I, I, I probably had some ageism. I was like,
who is this pipsqueak? He's going to like give me this interview and tell me what my worth is.
And, and, you know, I, I, that was probably not appropriate, but I definitely felt that way.
And, and I have a hard time telling this part. So, so he asked me a question. He said,
can you parse, I said, we're starting something easy. Just show me how to parse some JSON. Here's
some JSON right here. Just show me how you would parse that. It's just an easy task just to get
going. And I was like, hmm. Anybody know how it's one line. I don't know what the worst part is.
I knew it was one line. I knew it was one line, but I couldn't remember the line before we go on.
Does anybody actually know the one line to parse a certain amount of JSON that's been assigned to
a variable? So you don't ever have that question. You can't get past it. What is the JavaScript
to parse all of the JSON that's contained in a given variable?
The one line is DNA.
It's just JSON dot parse. That's it. Yep. And I couldn't remember.
It's JSON dot parse. JSON dot parse. And then you put a variable or whatever in between parentheses
of string in there and we'll turn into, well, in this case, we were using JSON dot parse.
You're talking about parsing. Yeah. JSON dot parse. Well, the answer was JSON dot parse.
Yep. There we go. There's somebody who knows. Yep. JSON dot parse. And I knew of the significance
of JSON. I could tell, I could talk up and down about how important it was for communication.
I had all the architectural knowledge. I could tell you the JSON format.
I could tell you why JSON beat XML in the long run. I had tons of knowledge,
but I could not parse JSON. And so you know what I did? I wrote the most amazing, you could probably
guess what I did. If you see me write Pagan, right? So what am I obsessed with? Yeah. I wrote my own
parser in Perl. And it took me like five, 10 minutes, right? No, I'm Perl. I didn't have bash
skills at the time. I had shell skills, but not bash. And there was no regular expressions.
So I wrote my own Perl parser. And because he said, I don't care, whatever language,
whatever language is fine. And yeah. And so I wrote my own Perl parser with a really
fricking awesome, like regular expression. And it was, yeah, it was longer. And it was,
it was totally chicken stretch. I mean, you can imagine it's Perl, right?
And because I had to do it fast. And this, you know, front-end engineer who was interviewing me,
this pedantic sort of superior aired, you know, kind of dude, he kind of patiently waits for me
to finish. And I, because I started out saying, I know there's one liner to do this in JavaScript,
but I don't remember the exact line. He goes, that's fine. That's fine. What, you know, what,
what can you do it in? Could you, could you try something else? It was more about him at that
point. I'm pretty sure he was like, I want to see how much superior I am over this dude.
Inside, at least that's what I was telling myself. That was my script. So I was like,
I was like, no, God, no kidding. So, so I was like, I'm not going to let this little
asshole get away with making me feel small like this. So, so I wrote this really awesome Perl.
And it parsed it and it was the right thing. And I said, so this is a general idea here.
And I started to explain it to him and, and it kind of pauses and he says to me, he pauses and
he says, do you think there's a simpler way to do it?
Just like that. Oh God, it probably took me, I don't know. I don't remember. But it was,
it was more than five minutes. You know, it was, it was supposed to be an easy opening question.
And, and, and I knew I had failed the interview. I knew it. I knew I had filled the interview in
that second because all their software was based on JavaScript. And, and yeah. And so I, you know,
I knew it was over as an exercise to the interview. I know, right? And he didn't care about how awesome
my Perl was. He still thought I was this old relic who had no business working for that company.
And I got this, the recruiter called me the next day and I, oh God, it was just so,
look, I had prided myself on my career expertise my whole life. And I'm telling you this story
because I want you to know about everything that happened after that day. I, I was definitely the
most astute, you know, kept a person on my team. No offense to anybody who might be watching.
Um, you know, I actually researched new things. Um, so many people at IBM did not do that. They,
they would, it's, it's kind of a sad state of affairs. People were worse than me.
They, they literally didn't learn anything unless they had to. And this goes back to the
autodidactic thing, which is why I'm going through this. And, um, so that autodidactic
tendency is with you, but it can also be beaten out of you when your job starts happening to you
and life starts happening. And then you don't seek out opportunities to learn. Uh, you know, I
hadn't, I've been working so hard that I, I hadn't set up a web, a mail server or try to hack anybody
or any of these amazing fun things I had done in my twenties to learn, you know, um, to learn things
because I had slowly kind of just gotten sort of at ease with it and was more interested in the
business of living with my family than I was in keeping my skills sharp. And, uh, although I had
really sharp skills, it just weren't the skills they wanted. And I kept telling myself, well,
you know, they'll see how good of a coder I am. And they're obviously going to be
woken up to know that I can learn this in a day because I could have, because I was coming at it
with that, that, you know, that sort of arrogance that I'd been instilled in myself from, from being
an autodidact my whole life. I knew I could learn it, but I had stopped practicing that.
I had stopped practicing the autodidactic thing. I had, I knew that the autodidactic skill was in
me and then I could execute on it when called on. I'd done it over and over and over again.
They asked the whole team of people, is there anybody here who can code C to make, to make
a fork bomb so we can take the performance management of this application? And I said,
and they're like, nobody can raise their hand, including a bunch of people from Romania and
Bulgaria. And I was like, if nobody here wants to do this, I'll do it. And you're telling me you're
going to pay me to write a fork bomb? I'm in. That was a fun project, man. And do you think,
do you think that, do you think the guy who gave me my interview, would he gave a shit,
I'm sorry, about my fork bomb program I wrote? No, because all he wanted was to establish trust
with his company that I could make really awesome front end applications so that we could gamify
education. And it was a completely, it was a wrong position for me, obviously. Ironically,
I would go on to make skill bots and skill stack and, and all of these other ways of gamifying
education. And, and I would actually rewrite all of code.org and Python. So it could be executed
from the command line using TK and it would draw the little guys even use the, the images right
off of code.org. So I would end up writing way more code for education and gamified education
than I ever would have for that tiny little company. But that company put the fire of God
under me because I was like, I was like, how dare I let myself get this beat down. How dare I get
my, let myself get this, you know, I was so mad. I actually sat on an email that I wrote to my
manager, I never sent it, it would have been instant firing if I had sent it. But, and so I,
I, I created skill stack actually invented the name right there. I said, I'm going to make a skill
stack. And, and here is how you make a skill stack. And this is going to be the last thing we're
going to talk about. So whether or not following your passion turns out to work for you and you
have to make, you know, sacrifices, going through this exercise will help you. I've seen it help a
lot of people and help me. And I mean, let's put it this way, it's, I'm putting it out there,
and you can make a decision to decide yourself. I don't want to say this is a recipe for this. No,
so, so here's how it goes. So we're going to assess your skill stack. So the first thing
to do with, and you don't need to have an app for this, although I do plan on making one again
someday. The skill stack you make boils down to, because there's a lot of technologies, the whole
point of, of, of creating your skill stack and managing your own skill stack is so that you can
get over that feeling of, I don't have control of all of the things that I'm supposed to know.
It's like drinking from a fire hose, being a technologist, there's so much stuff. And you,
if you don't come up with a way, and this is one of the most important autodendactic habits you
will create, period. And this is why I'm going to wrap up on it, because this is your homework,
you know, to kind of do this sort of thing. And you can't do this skill stack activity until
you've gone through some personal reflection and decided kind of what you want to enjoy.
And I bet I forgot to mention that your daily activities in terms of, what do you like to do?
Do you like to be with kids? Do you like to work with kids? My son decided he likes to teach,
but he doesn't like to be around kids. Do you like to be on a terminal? I actually don't like
sitting in front of a computer hunched over for 10 hours a day. I kind of wish I'd evaluated that.
I think I might have gone into becoming a forest ranger or something. And then if I had, if I had,
because I was a, you know, river guide and stuff, if I, if I had actually asked myself these questions,
what do you enjoy doing daily? Okay. And this is kind of a pre skill stack activity, which I
didn't quite flesh out before we got to this point. But so what do you enjoy doing? Do you like to do
my wife loves to cook? She will cook something new every time. She's not like, you know, a house
frau, you know, she's, she likes to knit, she likes to work with her hands. She can't be in one place.
She absolutely hates staring at screens. You know, it's, it's, it's, she likes to be creative.
Yeah, she's just, she's creative. She's 100% creative in everything she does. And, you know,
I, I like, I like languages. I love communicating. I love writing. I love speaking. I love meeting
people. I, when I was in second life, I, I love building in second life, but I didn't love building
as much as I loved getting to know the people in there. I had some nine 10, you know, nine to
nine hundred to a thousand friends and I couldn't get anything done building. I would sit in sandbox
with AM radio, if you know who he is, he's very famous, very famous artist from second life.
And he and I would sit next to each other in, in the IBM sandbox and we would build things and I
built this really awesome, like 89 primrose and, and stuff. And I'd sell it in the shop and everything
and I'd make stuff for the ballet and all this 3d stuff. And I'd, you know, get my blender out and
went on to, you know, make ed tech retreat and build an island for teachers and everything. It's a
whole separate, you know, career, uh, sub career that I had between, um, it's, it's a rocky story.
I'll tell you something. My point is that, you know, it's this engagement and so I know that
about myself is that I really, really love people. I just, I, but I'm not very always good with people
and, um, and communicating, but I love parsing languages, uh, and that kind of thing. So I've
come to know that I really love those things and I can do them every day. I'll do it. I love
terminal UIs, which is really funny because I just got a job, um, posting, come through that's
actually a job doing terminal UIs and go and I'm like, wait, they're going to pay you just to make
go UIs. Okay. I'm in or whatever. I mean, it's one of the many. There's another one that I interviewed
to before that I'm considering, but my point is find out what those activities are. Not,
I like to play guitar. That is one thing, but, or, or like, I, I, I don't like to sit. I like,
you know, the more specific you can get the better and just, you know, just like write it out in a
journal or write it someplace. And, um, it will probably get to some of those specifics, uh,
on our next round and I might have to add another session for structured data and markdown. That's
probably going to be, um, uh, a series that I'm going to inject after this rather than making
a part of this series. Just, you know, but that's one way to take notes very effectively. But for
right now, let's not worry about that. You have to know what those daily activities are. And then
here's the next step. The next step is to write down, um, you know, create, get a piece of paper
or spreadsheet or something like that. And, uh, any time you hear, so after I had to continue the
story, I guess, um, after I had that interview, I realized that there was a lot of stuff that I
had been keeping tabs on that I didn't have a higher level of knowledge for. And I'm going to
say something here. I hope it doesn't get me in trouble with Google, but because the guy that
I interviewed with when I interviewed for Google, actually asked me, uh, you know, not to tell anybody
about it, but it seems kind of stupid now. So I hope I don't get in trouble. Uh, but it was,
it was Google's evaluation scale. And when you hear your thing, it's dumb. But so on a scale of one
to 10, uh, rate yourself in this thing. So here's your columns. You have a column and this is,
this activity was not from Google. Just the, the, the rating point system was, was the scale itself
was, was inspired by them, but it's not really unique. Um, but the idea is, is it just make one
column and I'll just write all the buzzwords down, right? Everything you can ever think that you've
heard of and just maintain that. So, so you're, you're on the internet and we need to talk about
that too. Um, I'm gonna have to, I'm gonna have to do that a little bit next week. We need to talk
about how to connect to hear about the technology, uh, how to stay prescient. And I'm, I gotta remember
to make sure we talk about that next week. So, but the point of the skillsack activity is that
you're, you're putting in the column, you're putting down, you know, SQL, GRPC, uh, protobuf,
you know, uh, Kubernetes, you got, you hear all these words that are flying around, right?
And you just, just write them down so you don't have to panic. You can say, okay, I've got these
words down and you'll get a pretty big list actually. And, and the reason you're doing this is so
that you can isolate which words are important to you and which ones aren't and Docker, right?
Um, and, but there are so many words and acronyms that it just becomes acronym soup at some point
and you don't know what you're supposed to learn and how they're interrelated and stuff.
So in order to get a handle on this and order, and then convert this into your marriage, yeah,
incorporate this into a skillsack that you can focus on. You just, you just, you're,
you're removing the stress and just writing all of it. You're just writing it all down
and getting it out of your system. What's this? I don't know. I don't have to know what this is
right now. Okay. And that's the second column. Okay. So the second, the second column is,
is, you know, on a scale of zero to 10, uh, and I'll tell you what the scale is in a second.
I wrote this down somewhere. Um, what is your rank on that thing? How do you assess yourself
on that thing? Uh, and zero is you, you just, you just, you just heard of it. You don't,
you don't even know what it means. You know, it's an acronym. You don't know what the acronym
stands for. One, you know what the acronym stands for and you can tell you the words,
but you really can't speak more than two, I can describe it, um, to somebody, uh, but I have no
hands on experience with it. That would be, that would be me and GRPC last week, right? Um, you
know, uh, proto buff, so four, uh, wait, I'm sorry. Three is, three is, um, I can, I sort of
know what it is, but I'm not really proficient in it yet in order to work with it. Um, four is,
I know it and I can work in it and it's a part of my task. I can, I'm almost there. I'm probably a
three or four on proto buff right now. I don't know though. I might be like, could I be effective
using proto buff without a lot of help doing it, but I have to go look a lot of stuff up,
you know, and, and I, I have this scale written down so you can go look it up. But
the idea is, is that the big points and then the scale, which this is sort of from Google,
is that five means I'm giving conference talks on it. So like Taniwa, if he's still in there,
he's a five in Kubernetes, right? He's, he's giving conference talks. He's, he's, you know,
he's helping people. He's the go-to person. Uh, a four is like, uh, okay, I can do this
and I, and I'm also the go-to person on the team. Three is I'm proficient. Two is I,
I'm getting proficient. One is I just barely know what it is. And, and everything from six to 10
is all like I am a rock star. So, and that's why it's a Google scale, right? Ten is I'm
Guido van Rossem. I made Python, you know, Guido is the only one who gets a 10 in Python.
You know, and then, and then six is, you know, I'm, I'm writing books on it, you know, and every,
and every layer. So, so there, that's, um, you know, that's, that's the scale that they use.
So it's, you can understand that though, because you look at the scale and you're like,
what, you're saying you're only a three in, um, oh, I was just talking that you're probably a
five in, in Kubernetes based on, I was using it as an example because you've given conference
presenting, you're kind of an authority on it. You got, you know, you got, you got some expertise
in it beyond just, I can do this for my daily job really, you know, and, and I'm the go-to
person. So four is kind of like, you're the, everybody comes to your cubicle if you're,
if, you know, if they have a question about it, right? Um, and, and three is you're just,
you're proficient in it. And two is, two is I'm still kind of getting there. So, and, and one is
I barely know what it is. I guess I would kind of give myself a two and proto buff and GRPC right
now. You don't have to fully know it to be a two. You can go, you can say, I have to look at this
up a lot, right? And by the way, there's nothing wrong with looking stuff up at all in tech. It's,
it's like, how fast can you look it up? Um, which gets into losing links and everything
else, which I'll talk about later, but, uh, it's around five out of 10. So just, just around five
of 10. Yeah. So yeah, I'm at three in part, so I'm just still learning, right? So three is pretty
much I could be paid to do this, right? I'm, I'm, I feel confident being paid to do this.
Obviously I'm going to have to look some things up. Uh, two is like, I'm not quite confident
being paid to do this yet. I'm still becoming acquainted with it. And you know, that kind
of thing. Uh, four is like, no, I'm, I'm the team expert on this thing. And, and five is I'm, I'm
the conference expert on this thing, et cetera. And, um, I know how to turn the computer on.
Is that a zero minus one? Right. So, um, so this is, thanks for the compliment there, perfection.
Um, so that is the basic idea of scoring yourself. And, and then there's a third column. Okay. So,
um, this is where you have to decide what you want to do. And, and basically, um, uh, I, I should
probably put this on here. And then I have this written some other place too. Uh, identify
occupations that do those things. And this is a big step. This is all part of good to gig as well.
Um, and this is going to, uh, the eminently qualified person, uh, making knowledge based
blog myself. Nice. Like you taught me. Good job, data. Uh, I know it's the most understood
fundamentals to have a concrete base. Yeah. Right. So that's the kind of idea, right? Um, and, and
by the way, I don't get credit for this. I'm just kind of putting thoughts around what, you know,
other people have suggested. I haven't heard of this idea specifically, but this is just how I
survived. Um, so the third column is the really important one. Uh, the third column is where you
want to be. Okay. So, and you don't have to fill these in and you can change them however you
want anytime. So you end up with this piece of paper or a spreadsheet and you've got, you know,
the random buzzwords all over the place. And by the way, they don't have to be big. You could
have go there, but you also have go, go routines or go contexts, right? And, um, and that's just
when you hear about them. It's, and you're going to be adding more to it as you sort of identify
what's needed for a job. Another way to actually fill this thing out, if you're a job seeker,
is to actually read a lot of job postings and that's where this identifying occupations
comes from. If you identify the kind of occupations that are in the industry that you
want to do, people say, I want to get a job, you should, you should identify what you want to do,
what kind of industries you want to be involved with, uh, which have the occupations that you want
to do that contain the daily activities that you want to do. And then you identify companies,
and I would suggest you actually identify three specific companies that are, you know, primary
companies that these are, these are companies that, that like for me, um, you know, GitLab comes to
mind, uh, GitLab Netlify is another one, um, got, you know, Hashicor, I've dreamed of being able to
work there, you know, identify companies that you would just dream of working for. And I actually
did this, and this is another story I'm going to tell really quick, um, uh, because this is related
to building your skill stack, right? And filling out that chart. Um, when you're evaluating companies
and you're looking at job postings, you can mine the data out of those job postings and say,
well, I don't know, I do what that is, you know, and you can put that in the column and put yourself
as the zero. Uh, but you can see that it's a position that you might be interested in. You
might even understand the title of the position. And so this just puts, this just puts parameters
around your auto-deductive research about what you use, you have to learn. And this is helping
you build your skill stack and start to establish an academic plan for yourself, uh, learning plan.
Um, uh, Jacque Wilcox spoke about this a while ago, having a framework to evaluate yourself,
right? There are no wrong answers as long as they are truthful. Cool. I'll have to read that. I haven't,
I'm not, I'm not aware of that. Um, you can ask yourself a few questions. Where are you currently?
Did you do anything this week to improve yourself in the field? Is that okay to say no?
What do you want to do to prove on? What do you can prove on these areas? Please,
FK, please send me a reference to that because I'm about to say those very things. Um, and so,
so let's stick with that column three. Okay. So column three is where are you, right? And you
can't, you, this is, this is, gets, gets into self-assessment, which I don't know if we're
going to have time to talk about tonight, but you have to learn to be your own best self-assessor.
And this is where my whole concept of open credentialing comes in. And I, I've done other
videos on open credentialing. They don't have a place in here. Uh, I want to see a world where,
where one body, you know, like Lennox foundation, controlling certification or Pearson goes away
and that we build, uh, an entire open credential system based on trust. And that starts with being
able to assess yourself and then ask your buddy to assess you and then ask your mentor that you
pay money to assess you. And then yes, it has Pearson to assess you in addition to your own
assessments because you have the list assessment is for you. Assessment is for the individual.
It's not for the organization. And I don't know where we lost our way with that, but that is
a really bad thing. You can't even get your Pearson results. So how are you supposed to
self-assess if you don't even know what you fucked up on? I mean, I think some of them you can get
it on, but not at all. So, so this whole skill stack activity is, is driven by discovering
what it is you like. So that's assessment and then discovering what you need to learn to get
there and then how good you are at those things. And then like Tony was says, how to get there by
isolating one at a time. And that, that's the next step. So you've got your column of, of, of
things. You've got your column of numbers of, of, of where you think you are at this moment.
And those numbers will change. You'll, you'll, you'll, you'll improve. You'll, you'll start to
learn that you actually know more about something than you thought you did. You're going to be,
it's very organic and be changing at all time. And then the, the, the third column is important
because that's the one where you start to establish, what do I have to be to achieve my goals here?
Do I need to be a five? You know, do I, to, in order to write a book about, like,
I would love to write a book about go, right? Do I have to be a five to write a book or can
I write a book at four? You know? And so these are all your own questions. You have to do this.
But once you start to get those columns flushed out, it's very organic and changing all the time.
But the next step is to circle two of them and, and have only two of them circle at any one time.
And, and this is hard. This is really hard, but this is where, this is where the focus comes from.
And if you, if you probably, if you watch my other streams during the week,
you can probably tell what mine is, right? My currently circled boxes are GRPC and Protobuf.
Those are my two boxes. And actually I'm kind of cheating on this because the reason I say two
boxes is because, um, frankly, probably one of them is probably WebSockets, if I'm honest with
myself. Um, the reason that you should circle two of those things is to make the best use of your
time. And this is, this is kind of my idea that I've just kind of arrived at to save my own self
from waste of time. And so one of the boxes is the most important thing that you know that you need
to learn that is really hard to learn. It's like you have to learn calculus for AI or something,
you know, and you know, you have to leave it, we'll learn it because it's going to get you to
where you need to be, but you don't particularly like it and it's really exhausting. It's hard work.
And so that's the one you save for when you're really, really, really fresh.
And then, and you know when that is, right? Like when you wake up and you've had coffee.
And then the other box is the fun one. The other box is the fun one. Now sometimes they're the same,
right? But the other box is designed to be something that is just, you feel, you feel
like you're cheating by learning about it. Like for me, that's like writing bash scripts that,
that talk to, that talk curl to, to get lab to manipulate my repos, right? So it's still on my
list, but it's way more fun, right? It's, it's, it's, it almost feels decadent working on it.
But you're still learning. And the reason that that, that I suggest you have those two
is because the one is when you're fresh. And then if you have the other one,
then you can take a break and you can do the fun one. And then you don't lose two hours to Witcher
or four, six, right? Because you end up totally kicking out. And then you don't do,
you know, you lose some learning opportunity there because you're getting so exhausted on that one,
you push yourself on. So your reward is working on the one that's fun. And, and you see me do this
on the stream all the time. So, you know, I'll be, I'll be really burning my head on like,
on like my Pagan project, which I know I need to do. And then I'm be like, well, gosh, you know, I
need this, I need this other thing, right? I need to work on this. I want to work on my scoring
system. So I'm going to write a little bash here for that. And I'm still learning. It's just, and,
and I'm using the best use of my time. I'm just doing that. And so how does that get you to where
you need to be? It's just, you know, just maintain the thing, you know, right? Keep, we're going
to talk about this later probably, but also you can need to keep a log, a learning log. And, and
we're going to, I don't know if we have time tonight to talk about how to make a learning log.
I think I'm going to save that for next week. So next Friday, we'll pick up part of the left
off here. But I want to leave a little bit early today, because I've been talking straight for
it's a little bit harder to do than just code a little bit. So the, the end results of maintaining
your skill stack. And by the way, don't get hung up on, this is why I don't have an app for right
now. Don't get hung up on the logistics of how you're doing this. That's not the point. There's
people who will, you know, who will bike shed this shit forever. And bike shedding is the act of
working on the thing that's unnecessary because it's easy. I mean, it's, it's, it's at least a
less priority. So you, you work on the bike shed because it's too hard to design the main building,
you know, and so you put off the hard stuff till later. So you just get all the easy stuff done.
So don't bike shed this, you know, just make sure that when you do it, that you don't overdo it.
You can get really, you know, OCD about the whole thing. But if, when you start to do this,
the one thing that the reason I do it is because it, it frees my mind from the stress of, of not
knowing something and, and being afraid that I'm going to forget about it. And as I age, it's even
more important that I, that I remember the names of things that I need to search out later and,
and then start looking for resources on that thing and build myself a plan to increase my numbers.
I think I'm going to, and that's completely up to you. We'll talk about methods of doing that. But,
but how do I get from being, you know, a two to a three? And next week as well, we're going to talk
about comprehensive versus challenge-based education and how I believe you should have
those two prongs together in order to fill your gaps, but still, still maintain your interest.
Challenge-based learning is way more fun. It's kind of gamification of learning
than just slogging through a book with a bunch of exercises in it. And you find me doing that all
the time, you know, like overengineering my resume and having fun. Those are challenge-based,
sort of fun-based projects, but they're notorious for leaving gaps in your learning. So, and then
you don't want to go into an interview thinking you have gaps or actually having gaps. So
you need to supplement that with some sort of comprehensive learning, which is either a book
or, you know, usually a course or something like that, something that takes you top to bottom.
It could be just in my case, Kubernetes, just going to the site and reading all the documentation on
the site. That's all it takes, you know, and then making little mini projects as you go through
the things of just so you can remember them all the while working on some, you know, major
fun project that involves the technology. So I have been talking for a while. I'm going to go
ahead and read now. Are there any questions on the skill stack thing? You don't have to do any of
this. Of course, this is all up to you. The takeaway from this is just knowing where you are
and where you need to be and knowing what you want. You have to know what you want
so that you can assess where you are and then where you want to be. And I'm going to actually,
I'm going to end with one story that is, I've talked about, a lot of people have heard this
story, I tell it a lot. Forget to mention that I discovered y'all through Dennis. Dennis is awesome.
And so Dennis is, you know, he's a natural autodidactyl. Oh my God. It's funny because,
yeah, he's one of our arrogant, smart autodidactyls. How to turn a computer off.
So I'm going to end with this story because this relates to one way to help you.
This relates to this skill stack endeavor and how you can do it. It also relates to the
whole job postings thing. And actually, Steve Jobs did the same thing. And we'll talk about him too.
You know, I feel about him. I've got mixed feelings on him, actually. I've got his biography
there. I'm going to read it just so I can say I did it. Big thing. It's mostly because the author
is so amazing. Yeah. I think he's amazing. The innovators, you should definitely read it.
So here's the story. While I was at, there's been a couple of times when I've had to change skill
sets. So I obviously, I was a Russian major. I was a cruise director. I still love tech and
everything, but I had a baby in an apartment. I didn't have the baby and I wasn't in the
apartment, but I was my wife at the time and a very young child. And the internet had just
kind of happened. And I actually found it in the computer science department. I remember the day
because I pulled somebody from the hallway out and I said, you've got to see this right now.
First time I'd ever seen a picture on a webpage ever. And it blew my mind. I knew at that moment,
I wanted to do nothing more than be involved with that. So I taught myself HTML from the spec
and from reading other stuff that was out there. And I just, I couldn't do anything but that.
I was completely and totally obsessed with the web when it came out. And I'd been using Gopher
and Yudora and I'm dating myself here. Some of you might know what I'm talking about.
And all these other things. In fact, I bowed down to Mel, who's one of our professors
in the language lab where I worked, who had written the Telnet connection protocols at
the library. And I was like, what, you wrote, you wrote, you wrote a network protocol that talks
to the library. I went, yeah, he goes, yeah. I was like, I was so blown away by that. I thought
that was the coolest thing ever. Of course, I've done it several times now myself. So it's like,
I was just so I thought that was the, I thought he was a God that he could make a computer talk
to another computer by writing a protocol. I was like, that is next level shit, dude. I was so
impressed by him. And, and so it really motivated me even though it wasn't in the computer, none of
it was in the computer science department. It was all in the language, it was in the humanities
building. And yeah, I mean, at that, at that age, it was, right? I mean, he wrote, so anyway,
I did everything in my power to learn the web. And actually, there was a, there was an
ophthalmologist friend, still a good friend, actually, I haven't talked to him in years,
but still Doug, Doug, if you're out there, you know, still playing hockey, dude.
Amazing, amazing guy. You know, spoke Brazilian, was in the language lab. A lot of we Mormons
were in the, were in the language lab, you know, teaching and doing things, because we had learned
languages on our, on our missions and stuff. And get a B project, a Q basic, talk to my C plus
plus program. Oh, pretty cool. That had no idea. That is pretty damn awesome, dude. That is pretty
cool. And B, you got a B on that? They don't, they don't know what they're talking about.
So, so yeah, so I was really obsessed with learning, again, the autodidacty thing,
right? I was like, I was like, seriously, I was ripping apart pages and looking at what they were.
I was like, what's this tag here? In fact, I learned about the Netscape blink tag before anybody
else. And I actually got a job off of it. No, I learned it was not the blink tag, it was the
background tag. I learned to have put background, background. This is a true story. I went into an
interview. So I got a, I'm getting ahead of myself. So, so we're doing all this stuff. And I, again,
because I shared, I was so excited about this new discovery, I told everybody in the humanities
lab about it. I was like, this is the future. This is where everything is going. And I told Doug,
I was like, Doug, this is really cool thing. And I just got really passionate and he got
roped into it. And now he couldn't do anything else. And so there's your basic. And so he put,
he was an ophthalmologist. So he had a real practical example from this, for this immediately.
I was so impressed by it. So he took what I had been learning because I was, I was so obsessed
with learning the protocol, but I didn't write a lot of HTML because I was more interested in
learning all about how it worked and everything. There's no CSS back in these days or anything.
And, and he took it and he goes, oh my God, that's so cool. And he's like a language major,
just like me. And he ended up, well, no, he was, everybody back then was language like Marquis.
Marquis didn't come for like a year after that. So, but he, it's still on the test, by the way.
Marquis is still on the AP tests. I mean, the HTML tests in our school district here.
Even though it's been deprecated and stuff. Anyway, so, so we, we were doing them the thing.
And the Brazilian, my Brazilian friend, he was actually not Brazilian. He had gone to Brazil
on his mission. He was very white, very white hockey player. And, and, but he saw potential in
that. So he started putting pictures of eyes with needles in them and stuff into web pages
onto the internet. And he became, I swear, we don't have any proof of this, but I swear to God,
he was the first ophthalmologist to put actual content on the web. I swear he was the first,
I swear to God, because it was in God, it had to been, it had just come out. The web, the web,
there wasn't even, there wasn't even a single book on it. There wouldn't be a book on it for
another year. And there's a whole auto didactic thing, right? And it's very infectious. And he
was one too. And so I showed him that and he just went with it. And he got all kinds of praise from
his professors. He became a teacher's pet. He, you know, they were trying to get him, broke them
into doing projects with them because he knew, he knew how to do tech, even though he was an
ophthalmologist. Once again, you know, tech skills always supplement whatever it is that
you're doing, even if you're a doctor or something. And so he was doing this. And then I'm struggling
because I'm back and forth to Russia and St. Petersburg and doing all my cruise director stuff.
But I could tell that there wasn't going to be a career in Russian, you know, forever. I'd
interview with the FBI and some other things that I won't get into. But that didn't seem to be the
path for me. So, or was it? And then I I'm trying to chop some stuff out here. So anyway, I'm walking
past my wife is pregnant. Yeah, that's what it was. The Soviet Union fell while I was this while
it was a junior in college. So the Soviet Union fell while I was a junior in college. And I changed
my mind. Actually, that was when I was backpacking back back rolling a little bit in my story.
But I quit my computer science degree and I immediately signed up for Russian
because I wanted to be a part of it. And I got to be front and center in the middle of all of it.
And I there are just lots of stories there. I knew that Russian major Mormon is golden for
CIA. Yeah, it is. I mean, be CIA more BYU is known heavily recruitment agency for CIA.
And I met several of them, I could say that I can say that I met several,
several agricultural attaches. Sometimes in church, actually. Yeah, I would be in church and run into
anyway. So but there was no there was no work in at America, which is a company that I worked for,
which brought Americans and Russians on ships together. And I gave a lot of talks there and
business classes and and stuff. And we would do culture and and I got made cruise director,
blah, blah, blah. This the point of this is that I had to do the I had to adapt and and
and make changes. And the internet thing came around and actually Fibernet opened right next to
me in our apartment. I walked past it walked in there. And I showed them a web page. I actually
I called Doug and I said, because I didn't have a web page of my own finished. And I said, Doug,
since I pretty much helped you learn all of this and showed it to you, do you mind if I use this
as an example of a project that I contributed to that I have to tell us how you did that right now?
I kid you not. I got I became the web developer, the lead web developer and director of sales for
this tiny little startup called Fibernet and Provo is still there. You can go find it. I still have
stock, by the way, it's just contested. It's just a big hairy mess. And because it got the company
sold after I had moved. And it's just a mess, mess, mess, mess. I wish I could cash that certificate
in. But I have to sue somebody to do that. And it would be a big chunk, actually, because we were
founding members. Anyway, I'm not going to do it. Don't worry, Fibernet not coming after you.
And because it couldn't pay me. While I was at Fibernet, we had to go on an unemployment because,
believe it or not, nobody wanted to get on the internet. So I had to quit. And I moved on to
a job for another internet service provider in Portland. And so that's the small story of how
that happened. But I had to retool. And that's why I'm telling you the story is because
there was clearly not an opportunity to stay in the Russian major that I was in.
You know, the company that employed me for that kind of stuff,
wasn't going to be able to employ me forever. And I knew I had to change. And so,
you know, again, taking the reins and like controlling your destiny. And I taught myself,
you know, the web. And it's again, it's not bragging. It's just an example of how
if you are going about, you know, examining your situation and sharing and all this stuff,
you'll stay on top because you'll have that set of skills. But the number one piece of this
of this equation, the reason I was able to work for teleport later, who apologized for paying
me 30 grand more than I had been making for this tiny little startup at Fibernet,
was because I called. So this is what started the whole conversation.
Ask, right? Ask around. So I, there was another more, more successful, more established internet
service provider, which is still there. It's called X mission. You guys ever heard of it?
It's in, it's in, it's in, I don't even remember the guy I talked to. I would love to,
to meet the person who answered the question when I called them. So I called up X mission.
Actually, this is before I found the Fibernet job. So I had to backtrack a little bit.
So I knew the internet was a thing and HTML was a thing. And I had internet access using PPP.
If any of you remember that, and I had my 56 K modem and I thought I was all that. I actually
posted the sound of the 56 K modem on my Twitter this week. If you want to go look at it, sound
but here's the point of the story. So, so after I'd gotten all connected with the internet,
I knew I wanted to be involved. And before I got the Fibernet job, which I missed this part.
Yeah. Before, before I got the Fibernet job. And this is the, I had learned the background
thing, but more importantly, um, I, I called X mission and, and I said, I know I can't work
for you right now. Can you tell me one thing that I could learn that would make me absolutely
indispensable to work for you? And the guy, the engineer said Pearl. And so while I was on the
ship in Russia, I bought Pearl in 21 days. There was a book and I read through the whole thing
and I coded it on my little crazy terminal using text mates on my Mac, my Power Mac. It was actually
called the Power Mac. And I had my little, and I coded Pearl and I taught myself Pearl on that.
And so then, then randomly when Fibernet opened right next to us, I was able to show them that
I did HTML and then I was learning Pearl. I hadn't learned it enough yet, but I was learning it.
And I wrote FB.pl, which I believe was the very first form processing, uh, application service.
I actually did software as a service in 1997. I ran it off my Mac on cardboard boxes. I kid you
not in my apartment. We had one couch. My wife and I were dirt poor because the startup couldn't
pay us and, and the cruise thing wasn't being very good to us. And so I had to shift and I called
and, and I, I, I got my wife to be okay with me buying a computer so that I could get the skill.
But I literally made a desk. I, I, I've, she's got pictures of it. I don't have them anymore, but
I made a desk out of cardboard boxes and I put a, a piece of like drywall or not drywall,
you know, the other kind of board on top and I put the Mac there. And so it was my only thing.
I actually got the company to buy the Mac for me, which is real. I was really lucky because they,
they bought the Mac for me and, um, but I had to pay him back or something like that was really
crazy. So I put it up there and I, I taught myself Pearl on that thing and there's pictures of me
with our very first newborn. And I really, I miss him. I was back when I had contact with
my son and I rocked him and all that. He's, you know, 20 something doesn't know who I am anymore.
But, um, so, you know, off is his mom. Um, but so I was doing all this code and I was writing
and in that can be, I had a 56 K modem and I left my computer connected as much as possible.
And, and I, uh, how, what was it? No, I think I had server access to the, to the thing. So I
wrote this FB.pl program, which you can't find anymore. It's not anywhere. And, uh, you guys
are expensive. Are you steady? There you go. There you go. You're doing cardboard boxes. There you
go. And, and I was, and I was, um, but I ran the script and all it did is process forms because
I was like, I bet people out there want to have their forms processed, right? And there was nobody
to process any forms. There was no, there was no software as a service provider to process the
forms. So on my little Mac, I, I would go online and, and I would process the forms for, I'm pretty
sure I had a server at that point. I did. I had X server access. So I would, I had this little FB.pl
script, uh, answering. So I told everybody on the mailing list, I said, look, you guys can send your
forms and set your action form items to, you know, Fibernet.fb.pl. And I was like watching
all of these talk about security. I was watching all of these unencrypted flat text forms come
through my system and be relayed as mail out, out to send mail. Yeah. I mean, I couldn't,
I couldn't have orchestrated a better security, um, breach if I wanted to, but I wasn't, I didn't
intend to do that. Yeah. It was a total afterthought back then. And, but everybody was so, I mean,
being able to brag that your form was actually being processed, CJ script security by obscurity.
Yeah. And so they would, they would set through the mail or were in it back then, send mail,
send mail had no security on it at all. It's still, I think it's still no DKM and everything
are protecting us from that now. But back then, if you set the recipient, you could make it anybody.
So we would send love notes to people from other people at Nike and stuff, but
so all it was is this form where you click on the action button. It's, it's funny because
Netlify does that for you for free now. Do you guys know that? Yeah. Netlify, Netlify for free
will process your form for you and they'll give you, they'll create a spreadsheet for you and
they'll give you, it was exactly the same thing as FBWP. The only difference is, is that mine used
email and use send mail. So you would fill out the form, you hit send, and then it would, it would
translate into an email and that email would land in their box. And back then that was a big deal
because there's a lot of common people who wanted, who using the web who didn't have email. So they
couldn't say, I know that sounds crazy, but yeah, there were people using the web who did not yet
have email. If they had email was like AOL or something, you know? So, so using the web and
being able to submit data through the web was a big deal. And so I was able to use this FBWP
to leverage myself into a job at Teleport making 30 grand more and becoming their CGI guy. And so
that was just a story about the main point of that story is that I, when you're filling out your
skill stack, I know this is the TLDR, right? When you're filling out your skill stack and you don't
know what goes in the column, you don't know what is needed, reach out, reach out to your community,
reach out to those companies that you've identified that you think are really awesome.
I mean, you might, you might just reach out to them on Twitter now. Like, you could even ask
somebody on Twitter to say, Hey, I'm, I'm really interested. What is the specific technology that
you would recommend? And they'll answer you. I mean, I've talked with Brendan Eich before about
JavaScript stuff, you know, just through Twitter. And I'm sure he doesn't remember, but you know,
you can do that. You can reach out to them. Steve Jobs is the same thing, right? He would,
he would he sizzle the time you get, you don't know until you ask. So you reach out, you ask,
you learn about what they want. You never know, they might offer you a job later,
but you're not calling for that. And that's really important. It's really important that you don't
call a company, cold call a company and say, I want a job with you. And I want you to tell me
what to do to get the job with you. That's a little bit different than I know I'm not worthy.
Can you name one thing that I, that I need to focus on? And they're like, Oh, focus on this,
right? Yeah. So, and that's, that's all I really have for tonight. It is almost four.
A number of, this is all, as you can tell, it's all going to be much cleaner after I edit it and
put it on Vimeo, which is not going to happen until the entire series is finished. The series for
autodidacty habits, which is going to sounds like it's going to continue into next week. So I don't
know how much of next week is going to be dedicated to, to this particular series, but I saw the
number of things that cover specifics about how, how to take notes, how to, how to do learning
logs, how to create a code book, how to stay prescient with connections to social media.
Those are all topics that we still haven't covered. And I know this is a lot to take in,
it's already four hours of the stuff. And you can decide how much of it is valuable for you.
You know, maybe put it in a podcast and just, you know, listen up on it. If it gives you a
couple of ideas. So I'm going to read the chat and then I'm going to call it a night. So we've got
CGI scripts by security, security by security. If security a regular Perl code is quite sufficient
then it kind of was. You know what? No, Perl had taint checking and I don't see node without.
Do you guys know what paint taint checking is? Yes, I did. Actually, Luke, I got ahead of myself.
So here's some homework for next week. If you guys want to do this so you can follow along.
The same thing with email. Yeah, net messages, fake email, be humble. Yeah, you can you can
connect right to a send mail port and do all kinds of fun stuff. It actually says hi to you.
Actually, hello, it's yellow. There's some TP protocols, pretty fun. It's pretty cool.
Hey mouse potato, I'm just about to drop, but hello, there you go.
This is a long session. You know what? You don't have to say for the whole thing. Now I'm,
you guys know, I told you before, I'm burning through these sessions so that I can prepare them
as you know, really long things that can be digested in smaller pieces. I just find it easier
for me to do a marathon session and then chop it up later. But check your discord. Oh gosh,
that's right. Thank you very much. Yeah, I'm up early and you're in my list of links I checked
when I, when I get to my PC. So, so here we go. Somebody asked about homework-ish kind of things.
So next week on Friday, actually Friday at midnight. Yeah. Oh, right. Oh God, really?
I gotta watch what I put in there. So, so Friday at midnight, which is a week away,
we're going to be covering, sometime during the night or either, if not Friday, one of those days.
Sometimes we're going to, we're going to cover some specific services that I recommend above all
others to kind of fulfill some of these practices for your skill stack and for something we haven't
talked about yet, your code book and your, you know, your learning log or your notes,
whatever you want to call them. It's not a blog, by the way, it can be a blog, but it doesn't have
to be. I call mine notes. That's what actually mouse potatoes talking about my notes on robbs.io.
By the way, if you go to robbs.io, please know that it is extremely personal, unedited,
ungrammar corrected. It is just raw, random Rob's view. That is, I just, I've just chosen to make
my notes public. So I'm not promising anything. It's like reading my brain. But it can be rough.
You might end up with five pages of ranting about the Mormon church. Another time you might end up
with just a bunch of links about GRPC. You just don't know what you're going to get. I'm not going
to try to make sense of it for anybody. It's just, but if you want to watch my notes, and I, because
I fully believe that sharing our brains with each other is a good thing. So if you want to prepare
for next week and ahead of time, and you want to start experimenting with some services where you
can start, you know, maybe like writing your skill stack and stuff, get lab, get lab.com
is the, is the, my, my personal preference for providers for lots of reasons that I'll talk about.
Nice mouse. That's good to know. I should probably start reading yours. This is why we need to make
the knowledge net because then I can just get notified, right? People say, Oh, that's our
assess. They've already done it. Nope. I want to do better. GitHub is another option, of course.
You can use it, but you need to cancel both of them anyway, to be a technologist. You might
as well create, cancel both and decide which one you want to use. I personally like to push to
get lab and then have get lab sync to get hub because you can't do the opposite. It's impossible.
You can't push to get hub and have it sync together. I don't think I have to go look.
Um, pro sound mail is all one word and that's the safest email on the planet right now.
Major email. Um, uh, just around personal notes, which I do. Yeah. The, the, when we talk about
blogging, everybody immediately thinks like WordPress and money and, and, and like lots of
like filling in this and that all it is is just writing markdown. So if you want to jump ahead,
you can actually go read about markdown. Um, but I want to suggest you, so this is prep for next week.
I, I, I'm going to strongly urge you to not dive too deeply in markdown that you're going to
encounter on the web. Um, markdown is all over the place right now. And, uh, um, I, I, you don't
have to. It's obviously you're the boss of you, but, but this approach, uh, simplifies
markdown in a way that's less cognitive overhead early on when you're learning it.
So it's like learn the, the one best way first. And then if you want to learn
all the many different ways to do stuff, you can add that on later. Uh, so we will be talking about
markdown. Uh, we're going to be talking about YAML and, and, um, I'm probably a little bit of
JSON as well. So those things sometime, I don't know if they're going to fall under their own
series or not. Um, but they are definitely involved because you can't take notes. Uh,
you can't just write text actually, and, and we'll talk about how to do that. But,
but learning basic markdown, which will take you 20 minutes, uh, is worth it because then it
can be rendered. And then your read me on GitHub and GitLab is already readable as if it was a
webpage. And it's just one extra step to sync that to Netlify, which is what we will do next
week for sure. Uh, so we're going to cover JAMstack next week as well. JAMstack development.
We're not going to get heavily into the HTML of the thing yet. We will, that'll come later.
But, um, I'll show you the process for publishing because you can start doing that today. I mean,
it's, it's, it's that easy. It's totally free. And, um, it's a really easy way to, to publish your
thoughts or just stay private even. And if you do it on Netlify, you can actually make your blog
private. You can even put a paywall up for free, uh, or you can add a form processor. And we're
going to be doing that method, uh, to produce our portfolio when we talk about good to gig,
which is, um, you know, getting yourself something more than just LinkedIn out there to,
to show off who you are. So that's, that's all coming in, in weeks to come. Uh, some of it that
is in a different, it's in a different series currently. And some of it will be under the
autodidactic stuff for next week. So next Friday at midnight, see you again. Um, um, reading the notes
here. Uh, make it, make it look nicer. Yeah. And that's, it's not too, so the HTML challenge
already, you might be ready for it. Um, the, I give everybody that I mentor an HTML challenge,
and it is this make a, a simple CSS and HTML only page that uses flexbox and CSS grid to lay out
the page a lot like skill stack, like rdbx.gg. Now look, I got problems with mine right now.
I got to go back and visit it because I was looking at Firefox is busted,
but it's a, it's a very basic skill. It's, I think it's the most fundamental skill
of web development. If you want to become a web developer after that, fine,
but everybody should know how to make a basic portfolio web page using, using RSS. And anyway,
it's crazy about that as you went all the way through college and computer science, never
learned how to make your own website. Is that true? I'm not, I'm not bagging on yet. I'm just
noting it again. Cause if it continues to be something people say,
it's just, it blows my mind. I can't, I can't believe people.
Oh, did you? Oh, did you? Okay. Yeah. Then you're fine. Then, yeah. So if you've,
if you've done those things, sorry, I misread you. Sorry. Um,
my newbie developer hired just discovered Markdown and blew his fishing.
You know, this is, see, there's something wrong here because the language of writers,
I love the, the Markdown speech. It's going to be hard for me to not launch into it right now.
Markdown was, was, was what the internet could have been if it, or the web could have been,
if it were invented by writers instead of scientists. HTML was a bad idea. That's,
that's that talk. We're going to talk about that. I don't want to get into it right now.
Stay tuned. Um, yeah.
What do I use for a domain registrar? I'm a name cheap kind of guy right now. I,
I love Joker too. If you want something outside of the United States,
I used Joker way back when I had somebody actually from Oregon back when I was working
for a teleport suggested Joker to me. I mean, they, they've been around a long time.
It's a German domain company.
Yeah, those are, name cheap is, name cheap is by far the easiest to use. And then I,
I, I usually park my domains, my, my DNS entry, you know, servers on digital ocean or Netlify.
Depending on, they're both good. Netlify didn't have an offering for a while.
Yeah. Yep. Network, network management on, on digital ocean is just so amazingly easy.
Their interface, digital oceans interface is so amazing.
Best Markdown interpreter. I, I believe Pandoc is the best.
Now I'm going to talk about why I think that eventually. Pandoc Markdown is my favorite.
I do discuss that on that, on that site. If you go to rdbx.gg slash lang slash md,
I justify that a little bit.
Um, uh, college nowadays should be time you spend making a portfolio website. I can't
believe they don't have you do that. It's just insane. Sorry for the aside, anything else to
look into you for next week? Can you get some shot? I, I definitely am too. Thanks for hanging
me. Please look all this time. You're like a trooper. Everybody's all like powering through
this first session. Everybody's going to, including me, is going to like wind down.
But I, I want to get all these videos done and they're not going to get done unless I give them
at least four hours, you know, three days a week of attention. And then there'll be a big
full pantheon of videos in, in Vimeo at some point where you guys can go refer to it in a,
in a faster format and on your phones. Let me ask you guys, um, there's no more,
Luke, you can sign off and go to bed. I'm going to do two. Um, is this font looking okay to you?
I mean, I really went up on scale on the font based on requests. And I plan on keeping this,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to keep all of my editing. So it's about 80 carats,
about a hundred characters per the, per the whole thing. But the idea is, is that even when
you're small, like when you're in a kind of a thumbnail format, you can almost read it
in your old eyes. Yeah. I have, I have pretty old eyes too. So I went ahead and really bumped it
up. Um, and I feel like, I don't know, I feel like it'll be worth it. It's not normally what I
would do during the day. I can turn it back down and, you know, have five pains or something. But
when I'm doing educational videos like this, I'm going to keep it probably as font, just asking.
Best is definitely relative.
Yeah. Well, mouse is good to see you. Good morning. And, uh, goodbye. I'm, I'm, I've got a,
I've got a bounce because I'm going to kind of some cleaning and then I got to go to bed.
Um, everybody, thank you very much for, for coming. Um, and, uh, uh, you know, I'm going to
stay with this. I mean, the thing that's driving me here is that I, I, the hope of having everything
up on Vimeo so that it can be captured once and for all and I can rest. I don't want to die with
the regret to someday. I mean, I won't lie. This whole COVID thing and, you know, trying to get
insurance has got me wondering, you know, I got, I, you know, there's some of this terminal stuff.
I've got stuff in my head that I want to get out. I want people to know they don't have to accept it,
but, but I at least want to put it out there. And I imagine a lot of other people having that
emotion right now too. And, and that, I will say something to that, that little fire under my butt
to, to do some of the boost again. It's like, cause you just don't know, you know,
it's honestly, I'm good to see a man or a woman. Sorry, I don't know you. If I have a good night,
is electricity basically free? Basically, infinite, right? What is the vaccine is supposed
to be free? Yeah, I hope. Plus, if you stop doing stuff like this, we'll get more optimal.
Mouse, it's good to see a man. All right. Take care, everybody. Take care of that baby,
mouse. How's that going by the way? Old man.
I mean, I can imagine it probably makes you feel really old running around after that baby.
Anyway, that's great. Yeah, mouse, mouse is very public about his new arrival. So I'm not
doxing anything there. All right, people, take care of this.
