All right, start the streaming. That's what we're doing. All right, you're being recorded for the YouTube. So be nice
lest I find you and
deal with you
Start the stage so we now have a stage
Open on the discord if you wish to come over there and I will now announce that we are doing stuff on
the Twitter
I love saying that
HTTP colon slash rbx rom dot TV. There's no HTTPS support yet. I need to add that live stream
twitch
Pardon me. It's also bear 30. So you're gonna see. Hey, yeah, wave hi to YouTube
And whoa, we have a lot of questions today. Okay, so a couple things I want to show people
So
Yeah, so you can go to
the newly created
URL if
You want to catch all of the questions in one spot
You can go to
GitHub.com slash rbx rom slash
Questions
Dash advice dash conversations very long title, but whatever
And they're all here and as you as you can see you can actually link to
the YouTube videos which now have a playlist for
every day that we do this and
Yeah, my my room just keeps getting incredible and incrementally messier every time
I don't know what we're gonna do about that, but we'll do something about it
Anyway, so if you want to get to all of the questions you can go there and
And can can you unmute me you have to raise your hand if you're in discord you have to raise your hand and not not be a troll
You want to come on in? Okay. All right, we're gonna take a risk here. See velocities coming in here
I don't know how to do this. Let me see if I can figure out how to do this
How do I do it? I haven't done it pretty much wait. I think I have to drag you in
Wait, what do I do? I don't know. It says server boosting view profile
Dang it
Wait, wait, wait, wait. Give me a sec
Kick-man invites a server to save a video invite to speak there. He goes the velocity. Are you here?
Say say hello to the world and to the YouTubes
The YouTubes. All right, so do you want to participate in answering these questions with me tonight?
How do you feel about that? Will that be okay?
All right, let's do it. It's more fun when it's a crowd
You know, I like having a nice one
I mean if I could get at least one or two people and every night it'd be much more fun and be less boring plus
It's more like, you know, we're we're together. I
Can hear crits go?
I
Can totally hear you. Yeah, I'll be everybody else can hear you too
Hmm
I'm drinking
Something I bought last night our IRL on the stream something called a Kentucky bourbon
Barrel 8% it tastes like bourbon in a beer. It's like you took a beer
You took an IPA and took out the hoppy part of the IPA and replaced it with bourbon. That's what it tastes like
But it's pretty good
So so yeah
But talk
Oh, see I IPA's don't like me. I like IPA's but they don't
Oh, you would love this area there's like yeah, if we ever actually have an RWX con
That's what it would be
We would just go to the town that's got a lot of micro breweries and we would just you know
Hang out and talk about tech and whatever, you know
It would be really fun. I really want to do that someday
All right, so we got it like five questions that people have already posted here
So I'm gonna go ahead and and throw these out and we're gonna start talking about them
I'm let people know these opinions
So this would be good. Should I call you Z velocity? What should I call you Chris go or should I call you crazy velocity?
Is it the same Chris go? Okay, Chris
So let's take the first question which
Is it a question that I get all the time? I think it's interesting that this question came in
This form normally I get the question. Why don't you use Z shell and
And you know, I find myself on the defensive trying to tell people why I don't use it
But this question came in from K through shrinky. Why would someone use Z shell over bash and
And I just I'm gonna throw that out to the community. So let's hear from you Chris first
What do you think and then we'll hear from the rest of the community and chat and see what they have to say
Do you have an opinion on Z shell over bash and by the way, I'm not gonna roast you either way. I'm just curious
Why did you start with bash I'm curious as to why you bash was your first shell
Okay, well, all right, I mean I kind of I kind of it was kind of a leading question, right?
But yeah, and and so you just have never felt a reason to have you've ever been a Mac user yourself
Yeah
Yeah screen probably yeah, there's screen before team looks but yeah
Yeah
And
For sure, yeah
It's true. Yeah, sometimes you don't get it, right?
I mean, and that's really the question we yesterday
We were talking about the whole neo of them thing and I don't want to there is a question about that today
We'll get back into but
But the the neo of him question is kind of in the same vein as the emacs question
It's like do you have control of the PC or the machine you're going to be on every day?
Because if you do
Use what you want, you know, but if you don't if you have to be productive on multiple machines
Across, you know, Unix distributions and flavors then, you know, your options are less
Less, you know available to you. So you got to kind of get good with the other stuff first
So that's my main thing what usually I'm gonna I'm gonna
Pick fun
I'm sorry, what was that?
You know what I I am kind of on the fence on auto completion I God knows I love tab completion, right?
I've I've put that into bands bonsai and everything and I
Feel like I could be convinced to use
some sort of tab completion and
A coding environment. I think I could be convinced to do that
I've never done it mostly because it takes setting it up and you have to have a plug-in for it and
You know, I don't want to be dependent on plugins blah blah blah, but if I'm on my own system
You know, I've already given into a couple of vimisms that don't work with plain old NVI like for BSD Unix or you know
and
So if I'm okay with that am I could I be okay with a couple, you know
Kind of luxury, you know completion kind of things
I think I could be convinced to try that. I haven't done it yet though
So so so yeah, but I mean if yes code, it's absolutely a mandatory thing. It's just so amazing
I mean, I had to tell my my students at the time not to use it because they would
You know, they would
They would cheat they would I would say we do the HTML challenge
which is make a web page in a minute or less and
They would type HTML tab tab and the whole thing and be finished
And they'd be done with it all and I had no idea what was in it
But they you know, they did because they'd done it before but still
So so I think I could I the Z shell thing, you know, if you push people who are Z shell fans
Something interesting thing I found out is more than once
If you keep pushing them eventually they'll admit that the reason they use it is because they want to use oh my z-shell
and
I think that's always funny because oh my z-shell is kind of this monstrosity, right?
and it's beautiful and everything but you can do all of that with bash as well and
Yeah, they just don't know that they can do it is nice and ready out of the box
I've read somewhere and I have been unable to find the blog for this and it's driving me nuts because somebody asked me for the reference
I have not been able to find the source
That said the z-shell team recommends against oh my z-shell and
But I read that somewhere on the internet, you know
And I have not yet been able to confirm that
But if that's true
You know, that would be interesting because they're like no, it's not consistent with our goals blah blah blah, you know
Mm-hmm
I agree and that the only the main scary point of z-shell and I've written a lot about it in my set, which I'll
My zonal casting is a completely, you know messy
Just for anybody who doesn't know
Yeah, but if they if they don't know there's no spelling, you know considerations or grammar is just a big mess
It's funny how as soon as something becomes a web page. You're like held to a higher standard
But if it's just a github thing, it's like yeah, okay, it's a bunch of notes. Yeah
But I have written in there about the z-shell
Probably the most troubling thing about z-shell that I've uncovered is that z-shell does floating point math
And that might seem like a good I think and by the way, it's for the record
I spent a good weekend with a z-shell expert trying to convert my
core shell like my base shell to z-shell and
Learning how to use functions properly. They're lazy loaded, which I think is super cool
Unfortunately that requires you put them in a separate file blah blah blah and
My end conclusion was to go back to bash
Mostly because I just wanted to use the standard as you say and I also wanted to
Put it on another system quickly so I could just copy the bash rc and have it work
My biggest complaint against two big complaints I have against bash
One of the number one complaint I have against bash is that it's gplv3 and it always will be
There's just no getting around them
The secondary complaint is about security and performance
bash was abandoned by Debian as the login system shell because it was just too fat
It was too bloated and they went with dash instead and they increased performance quite a bit when they did that
I think somebody mentioned that in the chat
And and that is exactly why they went with that the reason that Apple and they finally owned up to this the reason that Apple
What was e-shell is the same reason that for several years they had bash two point whatever and we're on bash five or six now and
The reason is because of the licensing
So gplv3 if you don't know about that is a license that is very very overreaching
And you can do a search for that to search what what Linus Torwald's feels about gplv3 and that
summarizes my feelings exactly and
So then we get you know, we get this this situation where
Apples like we will not put that on that. We don't want to deal with it. It's too, you know
Poss they're afraid of gplv3 which is basically gives people rights over
hardware
As well as software. It's the biggest complaint against it
At first I was kind of for it and then I kind of got reading and I was like, this isn't the same license
This isn't really cool for them to sneak this in like this
And if you don't know about the licensing involved
You might want to read about that that might be another question topic for us to cover but
So yeah gplv3 is something I cannot get behind it is just too overreaching
And as people that I really respect you disagree with that
But but I just won't and and that to me is the primary reason that Apple went was e-shell
They tell you that it's a better shell, but that's objectively false. I mean, it's I can prove that's false on so many levels
There's no regular expression matching for example
And I've written comparisons of the two
Good
Yeah, I mean I well you could always use these shows your interactive show and then you could use bash for your scripts, right?
I mean, that's one thing. I'm not I'm not opposed if somebody wants to use fish shell, you know
knock yourself out, but I
Don't even know I don't know I do know that
For a long time I thought alpine which is you know lightweight container that uses busybox
Which is a multicoll binary that has?
Ash shell
Compiled into it along with VI and a bunch of other thing
For a long time. I thought it use the show it doesn't it uses
ash
Which is the predecessor to dash which is the debian all on quiz show those are those claimed to be posits compliant
so
You know if you're looking for Unix compatibility, obviously, it's a different thing
Z shell is more Unix compatible
But my greatest fear there is that somebody's gonna actually write a Z shell script and they're gonna use floating point math in it
And then they're gonna say well, you know, it's it's compatible. They're gonna cut and paste that into
You know a POSIX script that's running under Unix on AIX on IBM for example on an AS 400 or something
And they're gonna get burned because they're gonna be you know, they're gonna be
doing, you know integer drops and stuff because of the
The whatever they call what is it called the division that drops it
You've seen path plus a Z in his ego scripts. Yes
How's it going rich
The default wish I was bash on debian. I didn't know that maybe they've updated
But I mean, that's the main reason for bash
I mean, I think we've kind of done with that topic for the most point
Does anybody else in the chat have any other further questions about the whole bash Z shell thing?
I think we answered the question about why Apple picked it
Alpine uses their own version because Alpine. This is something I really love about the Alpine distro
Alpine refuses to put gpl3 in anything
Because of the same and it's important because they're a container OS is designed to be really really lightweight and small
Which is going to get put on devices and stuff. So I'm a huge Alpine fan
What I use it is my desktop distro. Hell, no, it's not made for that
But it is a good good distro good alternative to BSD if you don't and BSD is great, too
So what else we got? I think I saw 10x programmer says debian the last time some months ago the default show was bash
Just like the debian Docker image and yes, it is bash now interesting
Well, that's that's interesting. Okay
Alpine on your desktop for a week could be helpful
In case anybody doesn't know as I said Alpine is a really really really minimal
Unix distro that's designed to be wicked wicked small and it uses
As I said a multicoll binary that fits on a floppy disk called busy box
Um, and there's also a busy box shell
And if you want to get it on Docker all you have to do is this you just do Docker dash
Uh dash it dash dash rm
Alpine and you can get a bash shell
or oopsie
I think I need to do
Oh, I forgot to run
I always forget that so I do redock or run
And you can get you know, here you go, right? But this is what I wanted to show you
So if you go into the bin directory, right, this is kind of fun
Anything notice some what's since we're staying here
Isn't that cool?
So, I mean Alpine we're talking about Alpine because it doesn't use z shell
It uses an even lighter wage shell
And that shell along with some
You know two three dozen other commands are all built into a single binary
And they are called using something called multicoll binary
And they use symbolic links here
Um to call them so every time you do any of these commands you're you're still executing the same binary
Detects the name and operates differently. So all that code is in there
And I've used that same technique to build bonsai
But if you go to busybox, which is kind of fun
Busybox is
Another really really lightweight distro even lighter than the other one
You go into bin and you do ls that shell and you see the same collection
Of commands, but you'll notice something different here. Anybody know what this number means?
What is the number after the permissions mean?
A lot of people don't know this. This is this is some really intense Linux trivia
A lot of people ignore what this number is between the permissions and the user
I'm going to be quiet and see if somebody knows
Anybody out there and user land know what this is what this number is. It's relevant to this conversation. No not process ID
Mm-hmm
So
Looks like a fire. Nope. This number over here by the way is how big it is
Nope, not the inode
No, this is kind of a fun little trivia question here
so
um, so
So I'll give you a hint
This is a fun thing that I found out about three years ago
So because I never paid attention to it either
It's not a server response code. Oh
Darth Unix got it. It's the number of hard links
And let me give you a
An indicator of what that means. You may be asking yourself. Why are all of these exactly? Why are all these files this same size?
Spoiler alert. They're not the same size. They're the same file
They're the same amount of memory on disk
And the this is the number of hard links to the same file as opposed to a symbolic link
The only difference between a hard link, which when you do ln without the dash s
Is that you is that you get an actual inode entry that points to the same exact memory
And you can have multiple inodes that point to the same thing and you can delete an inode
You can delete another file and still have the other one be present
And so so the ls command tells you how many things are still pointing to this file
Uh, it's not commonly known by beginners. Uh, how hard links work
But the the reason I'm bringing this out is this is a good opportunity to show you the distinction between busybox and alpine
Now we've we've debated and and discussed possible g reasons for that
Uh, you can show inode with l l dash i if if that's the alias
I don't think we have that alias set my friend
I think we have to do ls dash li yeah, because l is not aliased over here
so, um, so yeah
So
So there you go
We got so we have a bunch of these so every single file in here is actually the same binary like literally the same binary
And but but what I wanted to show you is that the busybox
Container uses hard links, which are really really really tiny and for some reason alpine has decided to use soft links
And and I don't know the reason we've debated we've we've you know conjectured about reasons
I think our best guess is the limitation of hard links and inodes and inode table
Um
And that symbolic links of course don't count against that so that's that's the thinking about them
I mean this kind of all dovetailed from the conversation about you know shells, but as you can see
sh is busybox
In both
Right, and it's not and you make a little what type of shell is that you know, you know, what's the version there?
Uh, I don't even think there's a help at all
illegal option dash h
man dash h
Man s h nope nothing nothing the man pages anything. This is like the ultimate in tiny so
All right. Well, let's let's let's move on
All right, so so 10x programmer. How much time we got what does this phone say?
655. Okay. We have a half an hour left
So let's move on
We'll cover as many of these as we can
uh 10x programmer, uh aka frank
Uh, one of our biggest trolls and community members and friends has asked why is gpg so huge for unfriendly?
and
The answer is I have no idea
The best I can say is because security, right?
So if anybody hasn't done this and full disclosure when I was working for IBM
I wrote a pearl module
to encapsulate all of gpg's potential options
Um into a configuration file so that it could be used more reliably and easily
Uh, what is gpg gpg?
Um
Chris do you want to take a stab at explaining what gpg is to the community here?
You're gonna go for it or I can go ahead for it
Uh
That's okay
I'm just I just give you an opportunity if you want to talk about it
What's your understanding of what gpg is?
I'm just curious to see what what people think of it out there
I mean a lot of people don't know because it's kind of dates back to the
You know the crypto punk the cypher punks era, which is of course the 90s ish
Mm-hmm, and that ultimately is all it's used for today. I mean that's the main purpose of it
So I guess I'll give a little history lesson real quick anybody out in chat land if you want to correct me
Please feel free to chime in and chat
So the purpose for gpg
Was to create secure email
And the reason for that is because the the send mail protocol smtp, which we still use today
Is 100 insecure in fact back in the day in the 90s
We used to send love letters to each other from random people in the company and there was no way
whatsoever
To tell that that email did not come from that person
Because the only thing it trusted is what you put in the front line and you could type
But everything you wanted to in there back in the days where we trusted everything like telnet and stuff
and
Along comes gpg and they're like, you know, this isn't really good. We need to fix this. Did you do those fake emails too?
I mean a really great thing with this send mail is you can actually talk to send mail
If you ever get a chance, I'm not going to do it here today, but on time
But if you ever get a chance pull up netcat and talk to an smtp server directly
It's hilarious
Like the first thing it shows on the screen is hello, hgl o and then you have to type in some things, right?
It actually has a conversation with you. So the protocol for send mail is to have this kind of
You know anthropomorphic conversation with you
um
Where you actually do that there is a hack track me room where you do that. That's so cool
glad I'll have to go and try that try to do them and you know, and you can put whatever you want in there and
You know, my emails are ultimately
Uh text files that have key value pairs at the com and the header which are called mime headers
And then there's the blank line and then there's the body of the email and sometimes the body has more than one part
And that's called multi part. That's where the m
Mime, you know multi part internet mail exchange. That's where it comes from
And so and by the way the mail the way the worldwide web is a continuation of mail is a bunch of
People in CERN and we're tired of sending emails getting spammed all the time
So they said what if we put all these emails in a big directory and just serve that up and we could go see it
Anytime we want it to and to this day
is is an http request for a web request is a mime
document it has
Key value pairs at the top in the header that has a blank line and then it has the html or the jpeg or whatever
And they're the same and it's because they come from the same
Origins, um, and it's it's kind of fun to think about but so many things that so many headers have been added now
to
mime to
You know ensure that the author is who they say they are and stuff like that, but before all of that
um
Before all of that existed
There was gpg and I if I remember right gpg started with the cypher punks. Let's go find out
Where did
Gpg come from
And this uh or gpg is hybrid encryption software program used in combination of conventional symmetric key cryptography for speed and public key cryptography
Blah blah blah blah blah blah blah. I want to look at the history. I think the cypher punks had a big part in creating this
uh, which some believe were behind the
cicada thing
Which by the way cicada 2.0
Has been released and the u.s. Government is pretty much owned up to the fact that they are behind it
Uh, and they did so on my twitter feed if you want to go free that read that
Uh, I said I knew it and so if you don't know what cicada is
Go look it up. It's pretty amazing
Um, and that's all I'm going to say about that. I'm not going to spoil that for those who want to look it up
um
It's a it's a cryptography kind of thing
Um
gpg elliptical crew cryptography is the only thing anybody should be using these days by the way
Um, most people hear about gpg. I'm not seeing the history
I missed it anyway, so I'll just jump ahead
So most people see gpg as
A way to prove that they've made their get commits
So the the reason we're going to be learning gpg in the boost
And this is the time for me to plug the boost every sunday from two to six
Uh, and we will be covering gpg in a couple weeks. I think
Um, depending on how the pace goes
Um, gpg is primarily known as a requirement to get signed commits
Uh, and by signing I mean cryptographic signing that proves that you're the one who made the commit, right? So
Whether it be a zettle casting commit or let me see something
I'm going to go look at the
The boost vm or any any git repo, right?
So these days, um signing your commits is important because
If you haven't been following the news, you know, the node community has had massive problems with this
Because people who aren't the creators of the original, you know, like lodash and things like that
They weren't the original creators
They had their accounts hacked and because they weren't doing any signing
That code made it into literally millions of of systems and corrupted all of them
and so
This whole idea of code signing. It's interesting because I just watched the episode in season three
where, uh
elliott's friend
Uh
God what's her name? I forget her name
But she has to go do the code signing because elliott's not available before they can get the firmware to run
To execute stage two, which I won't talk about. I won't forget that
But it's what it does is it proves that you are
That the thing is from you some digital asset
Is from you it actually belongs to you and so you're signing it with a private key
and the way I talk about this is like
um
I like to think of it as like the one ring that rules them all right
So you want to communicate with 10 people and you want those 10 people or so to know that it's you who's communicating with them
So you create a private key that nobody ever sees
And then you sign everything you ever send them with that key and you give them a public key
And then they decrypt it with the public key and check the signature and they can see
That you are you that it came from you
And they can send you stuff that's signed with your public key that only you can read
That and then you can you can you can communicate that way. So it's kind of a a one-way
uh method of proving that you are the person who own this data
um
GPG is also used for general encryption as well
um
And so general encryption is more about
You know asymmetric encryption which says hey only with this one person can read it
But public key cryptography is this idea of public and private
I I sign a thing and then everybody else can prove that it came from me
And it's a fundamental part of the knowledge exchange grid which someday I hope to build
Uh to somewhat replace or supplement the worldwide web because right now nothing on the worldwide web has any sort of
Signed attribution whatsoever people can claim to be whoever they want to be on the internet right now
And there's no way to prove that it's not them the stupid little checkbox and twitter saying that they are who they say they are
I mean that entire problem has already been addressed
By using gpg and it was addressed by the cypher punks that people came up with gpg back in the 90s
The reason it didn't ever make it into mainstream email clients is it was too painful to do
You you'd have to like have a key and then you'd have to maintain the key
And then you have to make sure to sign everything and if you lost your private key
And nobody could read anything. By the way, I this is the time when I'm going to make an unofficial plug for my favorite email provider
protonmail.com
Which is now proton on me. Uh, I have nothing, uh, no affiliation with them whatsoever except for i'm a very happy client
Even though they handed over the keys for the french activists, which the ip addresses which really saddened me
Um, I still think this is the way to go because all email across proton mail has the option to be gpg encrypted
And and that way you can guarantee that one nobody reads the thing between you and the destination and two
That everybody knows that it came from you. It can't be faked. You can't spam it. You can't fake it
You can't do any of that other stuff that people do
All right, so, uh, I think that's kind of a a summary of gpg
Uh, probably more than anybody cared to know but um, let's go back to to see why is it so complicated?
Uh
And your commands page
And that's a bit of his of my question. Oh, yeah
mm
No pre-magian thing
Yeah, I had I had some drama with him a long time ago and
I'd rather not talk about it, but whatever. Hopefully we can get past that at some point
Um, all right, so let's keep going. So we on the gpg thing
Warnings a good privacy a good password for your account. Why is this so complicated?
The answer to that question is really clear
It's complicated because it was meant to be a security by
You know being a single monolith file and at the time when I was doing this in the 90s
I wrote a protocol that used gpg to sign
uh, all of the
results of our auditing that we did on our endpoints
Uh machines and I would I nothing of ours ever landed on disk without being encrypted and I used gpg for that
but I had to ship the gpg binary with everything because
That that was the only way to do this
Um, and it's actually horrible. In fact, one of the best biggest reasons that I like immediately latched on to go
Is because you can see that golang has a production quality
Uh lib was a uh gpg
Uh standard
At library built in built into it
And when I saw that actually the first real serious project I did
And go was to generate a password
Uh saver for the young people at skill stack and I would keep it on file
And I needed some form of encryption and that was when I discovered that
Golang x crypto open pgp is a standard part of the language
It's built into it
And that it's in i'm just industry grade security built into the language
And that I didn't have to call out to gpg or wrap it with some stupid thing like I did for pearl and ibm
Because because it was already built in
Um, and you know other languages probably have this but that was one of the reasons that I really latched on to it
Because the people who thought of go in the standard libraries for go in the extended libraries, which is what this is
Uh have really thought through these libraries that people are going to need to do enterprise computing securely
And you know whether they use it or not it's up to them
I mean so much so that you know as I said in 2021 it was a 2000 percent in it was a two or four
thousand percent increase in malware written in go because it has such strong crypto support
It has such strong
I mean ethereum was made of that, you know, and I could just go on and on so I didn't mean for this to be a plug for go
But but I don't use
Any gpg command line stuff
Other than to create my key ring to sign my github, which is what I was trying to show you
So if you go if you you see how when you do a commit here
And go back and see the commits you see how the commits are verified over here
This commit was created on github signed with the signature, right and you get your gpg key there
You cannot have
signed commits
Without gpg on the system and this is one of the greatest
I believe hurdles to beginners committing to open source projects is they you know, they have to sign their commits
Otherwise, they won't accept them a lot of projects won't accept them unless they're signed
And and in order to sign them you have to understand gpg minimally
Uh the truth be told you just have to
Be able to put the key in there just like ssh keys
And then you have to be able to set up your ss your gpg keys
Um on the system, which means you have to learn a couple basic commands
From gpg in order to create your your your signatures and and store those some places reliably so that you can get them later
In case you lose them. Otherwise, you have to create a new set of keys blah blah blah
Um, and this is stuff that we're all going to cover
In two weeks when we get into github. Unfortunately for github you have to cover ssh
You have to cover cryptography a little bit and you have to cover gpg. Otherwise
You can't understand what it means to sign something and you can't really use github and the you know the list of
Knowledge dependencies kind of grows and and gets frustrating for beginners
But you know, we're going to slowly chew away at that and hopefully we'll get there
All right, so we are at 7 11. We have 15 minutes anybody else have any questions about gpg that we might not have talked about
Uh rare useful of blockchain
What's that
Multi-key or single key? What is the rule of thumb?
You know, that's a good question. I don't know
I
I have two or three keys
Uh gpg in the old days we would put our gpg public keys up on a server
And the reason for that is so that you can expire them
You can expire a public key and say no this key should no longer be reserved should no longer be accepted
Um, and that's not something that's built into github or some of these other systems
Um, they just you know, they just use it as a public key method
So I don't know how relevant that is today
Uh, so if I I believe I have two or three gpg keys that that I now have that I use on github
I have two or three of them added
Um, yeah github would have a nice registry for gp keys. Yes
And they do have it and the way you add it. I'm not going to give away anything here
But if I go to my settings down here
Um, I mean this is usually most person's first experience with gpg keys
Uh, is you know, they they they're told that they need to sign their commits and they want to participate in open source
Then like what the hell is that?
And and then they come here and they see ssh and gpg keys right here
And you click on that and that's where you register your keys with github
um
I do think it's worth the extra effort for you to learn how to
um
You can you sign with ssh? I'm not aware of that
If that's true, uh, I I want to know that maluba. We need to practice that
When when we get to that when we we get to that part of the boost if you're there, that'd be nice
We have to go through that
I would rather not
In add gpg to the mix if I could keep it up since ssh is so well established and already used for so many other things
Uh, if you if you don't know the difference between ssh and gpg the bottom line is that they are both public key
cryptography tools
GPG focuses on encrypting content
And signing content and ssh focuses on encrypting and signing connections
Uh, that's a horrible oversimplification
But that's in general
ssh is focused on connections and gpg is focused on content
So the reason I like gpg is because
Content can be at rest and it can be encrypted or signed
Whereas in ssh
You know if you do that you're kind of you know, bending it to do things. It's not supposed to do
It's it's mostly about, you know, securing a kind of remote connection to something
Uh
Sign get with ssh
Wow
Wow, this is new news to me. Thank you for bringing us to my attention
Is this your blog?
I mean, I'm happy to give you credit for that
GPG format ssh
The global gpg format is ssh
Oh my god, this is crazy. You may already be signing or getting convinced with gpg, but as of today you're
November 15th last year. I missed this. Thank you for bringing this. See this is why I stream
This is why I stream who's who brought this up. I'm gonna give you some rep right now
I'm gonna give you rep
I don't I'm gonna give you
You just searched well, I'm still giving you
I'm still giving you rep so there
I'm doing you rep for doing this research and showing us
And that's how I I roll
You know, all right, so that's cool. So we can go ahead and use ssh to sign
Uh
Which just removes one level of complexity for
Becoming productive, you know, I've always hated that
I'm particularly because I deal with young people and a lot of times I'd have to set up their ssh keys for them
And I hated doing that
Because I didn't feel like I was taking them all the way through the process eventually
I realized that even a 10 year old can set up ssh keys
Yeah, they can you just got to give them credit. They can do it. So
um
So, yeah, that's been a big conversation about gpg. We have
How do we still have 15 minutes left? I guess we do
Um, all right, so I'm just going down to the questions in the list
Uh, about the end one. Oh, is this is this the prime agent and vim question?
Is that what it is? Okay, I'll skip that one. Um, yeah, the
I mean, in case anybody's wondering about that, I'll just I'll just touch on it briefly. Okay, so
the the
prime agent
I mean I'll I'll I'll be as fast as I can. Okay, because I don't want people to like wonder
um, the creator one of the core creators of and neil vim used to
Hang out here and he's a great person. I still really respect him as a person everything
Um, but I just you know, really radically disagreed with neil vim and and he's been a traditional, uh,
A substantial amount of time advertising. I mean, I even heard him on go. Let you know go
Uh, you know the go podcast and everything
and
you know doing a lot of things and uh
and um, I was actually
Doing my regular, you know, uh negativity about neil vim and
Uh, another streamer the prime agent just
Bursted into my stream in the middle and said I use neil vim and it's great
Uh, kind of confrontationally and and I was like, well, that's great, but
so
and um
And it became kind of a thing
And and the prime agent I have had have had words before and I've never actually
directly attacked him as a streamer, but then
um
Then I wrote a blog post that was expressing gratitude for
My community and how awesome they are and how
uninterested in you know
Things that that that streamer likes to do and and other streamers
And I got attacked on twitter and it became a huge thing and all of the software and tech picked sides and
and a ton of people banned me and
And to this day, I regret having written anything negative at all
Uh, but I want it known that I never put anybody's name in anything
And that they just assumed it was about them and then they attacked me like very directly on twitter with a huge audience
And then they made videos about me and stuff like that on top of that
And you know, and I don't really don't care, but it's important that you understand that
But but it is related to the neovim thing the neovim thing is the thing that set it off
um, it was because of my
Basically hating on neovim like why are you hating on neovim tons of people put in a lot of time into that project
And and all that blah blah blah right and I and you know, I don't I don't not appreciate that
But I was like it's still shit. I hate it
Do I while I buy you a beer and we can go out and talk about bash or some other topic?
Hell, yeah, but I was like slamming it and they took really really intense personal offense at it
um, and and and you know, they tried to bring other people to
To counter it and and they were really pushing the neovim marketing a lot and and and I was you know
One of the most prominent people saying neovim sucks. I had the same problem with the rust community
um, in fact, they made an entire reddit post um,
just about me complaining about how bad rust is and and uh, I mean totally out of context nobody ever watched
If you look at the video the youtube video everybody drops off after the first 10 minutes
They don't see the end
The end of the video is me saying look, it's good for things like what gamoso does and what you know
Brian kentrell does but they never got to that part
They just got to the stuff
So if you if you if you you know a couple people might be wondering about the drama and stuff
That's that's where the drama has come from when I see a technology. I don't like I say so
and and um
You know and and on occasion I'll say if you use it you're a moron
And I don't ever mean that really but I've since stopped doing that because
That's not the right thing to say. So I apologize to anybody that's been offended by doing that
um
You know, I I I'm trying to be better at that. Uh, my generation
What's that?
If you near your moron, yeah, yeah, I mean it's it's it's you know, it's funny and and I kind of did it for rhetorical
You know, but but it's kind of a sell-out. I mean honestly, I have to admit it's it's kind of a cheap laugh, you know, and
It's you know
I used to say that kind of thing with my best friend in the room and say dude, you're a moron if you're going to use that
You're a total moron. Why are you doing that?
And then we would laugh we'd laugh at each other and punch each other and and then you know do that toxic masculinity thing or whatever
Um, and that's not okay. That's not okay. I'm just going to say that but but that's how I pay
You know, I'm I'm that guy and you do that to the wrong person and
You know, it it can be harassment and you get canceled and that's what happened. I got totally canceled on twitch
Uh in software and they're like, oh my god, this guy
So I don't like bringing up the drama. So let's move on. We got 10 minutes left. Um, eventually I hope we'll move past that
um
I have no intention of ever watching
certain streamers at all, uh
And and I'm not even going to name names there
There are so many streamers that I cannot
Stand even looking for their stream for two seconds
But who cares, you know, there's people don't want to watch me
So that's fine. You know, I don't care about that. I'm going to move on
Uh, every feel like you should stop using the cloud
So I actually I want to ask the person who says this question what they meant
The cloud
Who who is who said this question? I'm trying to find I didn't get a name on this one
Who said this one because we got 10 minutes. This is a great question
The cloud
Yeah
Yeah
Yeah
So so doctors will ask the question. So I'm going to put your name in there if that's okay. So like
What is the cloud? First of all
Uh, there's there's cloud native. There's the cloud. There's, you know, cloud
whatever
Um, so first of all, I'm I've done this before but I'm going to do it again quickly
My definition of the cloud is anything in
On amazon, uh, azure or aws or gcp
Uh
Amazon I need to miss the same thing, but um
Yeah, to me the cloud digital ocean is
A service provider
Who gives you a server and services? That's my definition of the cloud
Um, and I don't use the cloud. I mean I use digital ocean
But I don't have anywhere near the dependence on the cloud and I actually am kind of
I'm not anti cloud, but I am more pro on prem
And the reason for that is because of central point of failure
Um
We've seen this with cloud fare outage. We saw this with the amazon outage this last week
Um, we see this all the time. So the internet was designed to withstand withstand an atomic blast
That's why arpanet was created. That's why the routing protocol does what it does. It's why it goes to its different places
That's why dns is distributed. I mean ds has got problems, but it doesn't have that problem
You know, so cloud fare becomes the only ip address, you know dns resolver
And it goes down for a day and half the internet goes dark or at least a third
Because we have completely removed the redundancies
of
the internet in favor of
service providers in the cloud for whatever reason and and I
objectively
philosophically disagree with that
And the reason people do it is because it's it's cost effective and it's centralized
And they don't want to think about the security of their servers. They want to be somebody else's problem
There's still a server there. Uh, and everyone resolves dns for them. Yeah, so so I am
fundamentally against the approach of the cloud for most things
Um, but there's a flip side to this right because the cloud on the flip side of this is that the cloud has enabled
independent software developers to release software to the world
At scale in sort of a zero opportunity cost
way that we have never seen before
And that is particularly if you like look at kontabo or or digital ocean which have ridiculously low cost or haroku
To be you can make an app and you can deploy it to thousands billions of people
And scale up because of the cloud so it has created a sense of freedom and empowerment
For all of these people that did not exist before and that's really really good
But it's also centralized and so it's that's really really bad and you know, so I
I tend to I mean I have a friend who's solidly anti cloud all they do is you know, uh, what's that thing? Um
They're like own cloud or my cloud or whatever, you know, it it people you know setting up stuff on-prem
um, and and I think that that from an enterprise perspective there is a going to always be
a sharing of the two I work for uh
supporting a very high performance machine and learning cluster if they were to put
Even 10 percent of their processing power in the cloud
They could never meet their bills because the machine learning models that they're running are so complex
It would blow their bills out sky high out of the water
So they couldn't do it
They have to do that on-prem and you start to see this a lot now
You see, uh, I think it's base camp right from amazon that's stuff online
You see oxide which is oxide computing which is focused entirely on on-prem
And you're starting to see a lot more of these cloud providers realizing that enterprise doesn't want everything in the cloud
They might want to put some of their stuff in-house for proprietary reasons as well as
As money and all the other reasons that come so
My focus has been in on-prem and I will
Wrap up this conversation with recommending one thing
If you are trying to learn the cloud
My strongest recommendation to you is to learn
How to create your own cloud at home
Whether it be on a server that's you know, like a thread ripper that's got 32 cores
And you can break them all down in proxmox or whatever like head tennis does
I'm going to do a shout-out to head tennis. He's my favorite enterprise level streamer
Uh, it does this stuff all the time and um
Or if you want to just you know, take a whole bunch of old raspberry pies or whatever
It's really important that you learn how to deal with cloud from an on-prem perspective first
Because then you will learn about virtual machines
You'll learn about kubernetes with all the missing parts, which means
Uh, you know ingress and storage classes and all the things that you get for free
When you use gcp or azure and then you're completely
Clueless when you go to certify in those things you have no idea because it just was on google
You don't know it just worked right because they fulfill those parts of the cloud for you automatically
So if you're seeking to understand the cloud
The best way to do that is to set up your own ikea cloud or whatever you want to call it
And and just start playing around with virtual machines and virtualization
And and and doing all that. In fact, uh, i'm returning to building something called fluff
Which is a stupid little tool to use cloud in it
Images to build, you know on a localized desktop
You know one or two or three vm's with specific configuration and then and then use those as kind of a private network to kind of
Experiment with running your own cuba dm installation
um, and that kind of is why I recommend cuba dm to people for doing
Uh kubernetes training for themselves more than I mean, I was burned pretty seriously by minikube and kind
I love them both
But by doing them
I had to debug a storage class problem at work and I couldn't test storage classes because
You know, there is no storage class the storage class is the base os
You know behind docker and if you use cuba dm and a vm you actually
Have a storage class right whether and then you also should learn things like nfs and stuff
And those are not things that you're going to learn if you use a you know a cloud training server
Or anything like that. So my recommendation on the whole cloud thing is
That you should you should try to create your own internal infrastructure
um to simulate the cloud uh before you go out to
Learn terraform and ansible and whatever else you want to learn
To learn all those things and those are certainly worthy of learning them for sure
They're very much those are skills worth money
But but I I would seek to understand first locally before you
Um before you spend a lot of money on on that kind of thing
Um, we have a couple minutes left. Uh, we have one last question
For front end development, would you still use vm or switch to jet brains?
Uh, that's a pretty fair question. Who asked that if you don't mind I I didn't catch who asked that
Um cloud burst, which is what happens when the cloud explodes and rains down on all of us
Cloud equals somebody else's computer. Yes
uh, so
for front end development, I um, I personally am a fan of vm
And something called browser sync and there's actually a video of me using browser sync on
Uh, my skill stack twitter feed, but let me show you what I mean
Uh, if you haven't found browser sync yet, uh, you probably should look into it
Um
By running browser sync, which is basically it's a server
But more importantly, it's a server that has css injection
um, so
You can run we actually are going to use this in the boost when we do web development
Uh, but the really great thing about running browser sync
Is that you can I've had people use broad it's an npm thing, but whatever
There's actually a go version of browser sync as well. I just don't remember it now
But um, what it does is it it runs a server that watches the directory and it
It injects or updates any any client that's connected to it so that they're synchronous
And even with the same form data, so if you enter form data in one, it will enter form data in everything
um, and actually, let me see if I can
Find it but
I mean, I might have to go back a ways, but if you go back on skill stack someplace
Man, I haven't updated this thing in a long time, but if you go back far enough
I think we might be able to find it
Uh, but what it allows it allows you to have like more than one
Uh client that's looking at this stuff
and
That's important because
That allows you to have a phone
And a web browser. There we go
So this is me doing browser sync development
So i'm developing on
an ipad
and on a phone
And on the web page at the same time
And if you have form data, it's really weird. It's actually kind of freaky
But you can like type in the the form entries and it will synchronize across all of your devices
Which kind of freaks you out. In fact, I showed this to some students and they ended up using it to deploy
Um a sign-in process. They used it as a server in their computer lab, which I wasn't planning on so
um
So if you're going to do vim development
Locally and you don't want to be tied to the preview option from vs code, which I love by the way
Uh, vs code has got a lot of great previewers as well. Um, I use vs code for a good year and a half
Um for web development and I really liked it
Um, I just like how fast you can get up and down through the code
It takes a very different approach for sure
Um, and sometimes that visual nature of it is kind of nice
But if you're going to be doing if somebody reminded me how long it took vs code to start
And and then I went back to vim after that and I haven't gone back after that. So
Um, but if you're going to do that kind of development, it's it's pretty good for you to have a tmux window with
Browser sync or something like it running so you can you can do all your previewing in real time
And that takes us to 732
Chris you got anything else you want to add? I mean, I've been
Chapman running away here, but it's always nice having somebody on the stream with me
Yeah
Yeah
Yeah
Yeah, you have that you have it, you know what to use right? I mean that's that um
It's kind of like if you specifically with kubernetes
If you just learn kubernetes in the cloud
You're missing a bunch of things
But if you
You
Yeah, I mean I yeah, I I very publicly had a ton of problems with it
Um, you know, I don't like when that happens and I have to get kind of negative on a thing but
You know, but it
Is
Yeah
Oh, it is it still is
Yeah, it's funny. It's funny to say that because I've been doing this api generation stuff for the last month
And I feel like I've lost like I feel like I've lost all my kubernetes experience. So I'm going to be live streaming
Uh me catching up on kubernetes by building some clusters using kubernetes
you know, um
Because I honestly don't remember a lot of basic cube ctl commands even because
I don't know. I I can't remember at all. I I
I just can't
You know, I did I had three certs signed up and I
Was supposed to finish them by august and I'm not going to make it. So
I mean it was it wasn't that expensive. I'll probably I'm going to try to
Reach out to them and see if they'll postpone it for me or not
But you know, I got work to do so I can't always spend the whole day
Getting ready for the certs and
Quite frankly, I'm terrified of certifications because I hate tests
So
It'll be fun to to maybe try that eventually
Oh, I love that
It's all like
Oh, I know
Yeah, and I I think I I think I get I think you get like two attempts on their their practice servers first
Which I still want to do as well
Um, but I need to you know review all of the resources and all that stuff at some point
If you failed your cloud practitioner dabby, but passed your second try. Nice
Uh, you scheduled your ccat on october 14th. Good for you
Uh, vmware fusion. Yes. Does vscode openings become slow?
When does it become what situation does vscode become slow?
Um
Well, it depends on your workflow. I mean, I I am constantly opening files and then leaving the file and going out and opening another file
Uh, which drives a lot of people crazy. They say it on the stream like, why do you keep closing the file?
Why don't you just leave it open and open a new tmux window? I'm like, well, you're probably right
Because it's so fast to close files in vm. So
Uh, vscode though with plugins, you know, it's a good three minutes to get us just a basic html file. They even open
Uh, not to mention you ever look at the ram consumption while you're running vscode
anybody
It's insane. It's just crazy
Yeah, vm. I use vm because vm is better than nano
um
nano actually
Creates bad habits because you start to use control for everything and then you start to experiment
I've seen this happen in the classroom. Somebody's mentioning vm and nano. I've seen people try to use
Uh, some of the exit things like control whatever
Uh from nano while they were on the command line and they would end up freezing their terminal
Um, and not knowing what to do. And so I stopped using nano after that actually made a
a program called um
No nano and it when you run nano it kind of blinks at you and says use vm instead
Um, I it we talked about this before but let me just post this really quick. So
Um, it's called rwx.gg vi survive
Vi survive is all of the stuff from nano that you need to do
without that
You
What what are you saying george you saw a man in florida while filming the sunset on the beach when a sand dude buried him
That actually happened
I had trouble with vm on large files
She had to turn off swap for those files. Oh interesting did not know that
Yeah, I don't if i'm opening large files. I don't that's pretty terrifying george
speaking of getting buried by a sand dune
um
There's no sand dudes that probably I could get eaten by a gar off of the pier but
I'm going to go ahead and close this down and then I'm going to be out. Um, filming the sunset for the rest of the day
and um
We'll be chatting about whatever so of course. I want to thank you for coming on in and uh, we'll see everybody next week
I'm going to go ahead and and shut down for tonight
But I'll be I'll be back in five ten minutes and I'll be getting my rl rig ready and going in the car and going to the
Pier really quick
I'm not going to skateboard. I can't I wish I could if there was a sidewalk. I would totally say for there
Otherwise I have I'm stuck in the in the car
um
I don't know if I haven't in me to skateboard later tonight. We'll find out
We'll take a buyer
Oh
Oh, that's fun. It is fun. I I
Oh, well, you know
Oh, that's really nice to say. I appreciate that. I I did not pay him. I swear
Um to say that I um, you know, that's why I do it. That's why I do it
And then I you know, I I used to do this professionally and then you know, go vid and everything
So this is kind of nice to have that that possibility to reach out to people
Uh, I appreciate that but I'm going to cut you off because I want to go to the pier and I'm embarrassed. So thank you
Uh, we'll see everybody later
