So, welcome to Q&A, QCA, Questions, Conversations,
and Advice with Artie Vicks-Rob
and my absolutely crazy community,
which happens to be international.
And so the first question today is,
what is the best way to learn foreign languages?
And we've been actually having fun here
because somebody asked me to, oh God,
what are you sending us?
I'm a little bit afraid.
I'm a little afraid of what this is.
Somebody's sending us random things.
Yeah, I told you I'm not going to be
a sought-paruski-cock-american.
Somebody said, wait, wait, wait,
can you speak French with,
you don't speak French like an American,
you speak French like a French person.
And I was like, well thank you, that's very nice.
And then I proceeded to like try every American accent
I could.
And so this has been like the theme
for like the last five minutes.
And then said he says, now do it like a vali girl.
Je veux te traîbier voire voce voire.
L'un des saisures compte tu es libre.
Cont tu es libre, j'aimerais bien.
J'aimerais très, très bien voir ton voiture.
Mon nouveau ami.
I'm not taking my hat off, sorry.
Cheers.
This is, by the way, where did you get that mug?
How about that question?
This is a mug my wife made me.
Also long ago, when she was barely getting
into the pottery making, like long, long ago.
And now she's, you know, the rest is history.
I should take paid requests.
You should do that.
Okay, so what's the best,
where did you learn to speak languages?
Learn to speak Russian and French.
All right, I'll answer the first question.
What is the best way to learn foreign languages?
The best way to learn any foreign language is to go there
and get immersed in the language
so that you'll die unless you learn it.
That's absolutely the best way to learn it.
So particularly if you're European,
if you're European, just like, I don't know,
get on the train and go to the other country
and live there in an apartment for a month
and don't promise yourself
you're not gonna speak the actual, your language.
I mean, this is a rather short question to answer.
The best way to learn the language
is to put yourself in a place
where you have to speak the language.
No brainer.
You don't wanna, you know, it drives me crazy.
All right, just a small, this is, don't worry.
It's not a huge rant.
But there's one of my, this is one of my biggest rants.
People who learn foreign language will pay $4,000.
They go on a study a program, a study abroad program
and sit with their American roommate
in a tiny flat in the middle of France or Russia or whatever.
And they won't speak any Russian at all.
And they'll be like, all scared.
And they'll like, do things together.
And then they will never learn the language
because they never dive into it.
When I was teaching, I taught, okay,
so this is answering the second question.
I mean, the response you need, create the need.
Create the need, create the need.
You need to create the, and by the way,
you can do that, believe it or not,
you can actually do that in America.
There are certain places in America where you can go,
if you're really committed to learning the language,
I mean, if you're just gonna like dabble
then Rosetta Stone or something like it.
And by the way, full disclosure,
I did create language software in college
where I majored in French and Russian.
French, I didn't get the major in Russian.
I switched over.
My French teacher was very mad at me
when I did that, by the way.
I also taught university level French and Russian
to beginners.
I ran pronunciation camps and stuff.
And I also taught Mormon missionaries
going to the French West Indies,
which is where I went on my admission.
So the answer to the second question,
where did you learn to speak Russian in French?
Russian was my major in college.
Right here, right now, was the most popular song.
The Berlin Wall came down and I said,
I don't wanna learn computer science,
I wanna learn Russian,
and I wanna make friends with Russians
and the rest is history.
And we have a lot of Russians in our community,
which I really love.
And we have Russians and Ukrainians.
Just the other night, actually, Friday night,
there is a video, a Twitch video of me
covering the art gala.
My wife had some art in a show.
And I was there, I was out swinging in a hammock,
and I walked around and I met a group of six Ukrainians
that were playing, whatever the thing is,
where they throw those beanbags into the thing cornhole.
And it was really great.
And I got to talk to them and I,
the Russians, Ukrainians have a great accent.
The reason I mentioned is because,
there's actually another question here involved.
It's like, what do you think of the Ukrainian-Russian War?
I think it's an absolute disaster.
And I don't take sides so much as to say
that what Putin is doing is wrong, period.
I strongly disagree with what Putin is doing.
There are Russians in my community who think I'm,
the devil for saying that I don't care.
There's Russians in my community that are grateful
that I'm saying it because they don't partake.
Judging Russia, all of Russia,
based on a few idiots who think that it's okay
to invade Ukraine, is like judging all of America
based on everybody who voted for Trump.
It would be inaccurate,
that's all I have to say about that.
I actually spent some time in Ukraine as well.
And one of the biggest, most festive, amazing meals
I ever had was in Ukraine,
because they were whining and dining us
so that we would buy a cruise out completely
because we were running cruises over there.
That's what I did.
I was a cruise director in Russia
and I ran tours and stuff over there.
Lots of fun stories about that
that maybe I'll talk about someday.
I met gun runners, I met mobfia,
I got to be an honorary bodyguard to Samantha Fox
who was on tour.
I mean, I have a lot of stories there
that I'll let you guys ask questions about later.
I don't normally cover those in Q&A.
Who in the right mind would agree to what Putin is doing?
Some people do and they're sick.
I look at them as like zombies.
There's people that think that what Trump did is okay too
and I think they are also zombies.
Good people, they've just been zombified.
And I need to remember this, they look at them that way.
And if you feel offended by that statement, I'm sorry,
but that's how I feel.
Anyway, I didn't mean to get a political Samantha Fox,
there's the only man I don't know about.
Samantha Fox in 1998?
No, Samantha Fox in 1996 was like wildly popular still
in Russia.
And she came on a cruise, I'll make a question.
How did you meet Samantha Fox?
Samantha Fox.
And this is true story.
I could talk about this story for way longer
than we have time.
It's one of my favorite stories about going to Russia.
So the long story, the short story version of it, yeah.
So the short version of the Samantha Fox story is,
I was a cruise director and normally that meant I managed
everything on operations on these river cruises we did.
And I got a call from our CEO who said,
hey, Samantha, this Russian group that's doing the equivalent
of the Russian Oscars wants to buy out your ship,
wants to buy out the ship and just run the whole thing.
But we've got like six or seven Americans
that have already signed up for the cruise
and we've asked them if that's okay for they come for it.
And they're willing to go,
are you still cool being there and running it?
And I was like, yeah, sure.
So I ran this one very, very special cruise where Russia's,
and I don't remember all the names,
but I'm sure somebody in the audience right now
would actually know the people that were there.
But I had like the top of the top Russian Hollywood Starlets
and stars and everybody were on the ship with me.
And in fact, Samantha Fox was the guest of honor
as she was like the, you know, the foreign,
they weren't really into her.
And so she was, she was, she was seeing the thing
and her whole posse actually took over the captain's place
up top, which is normally reserved for other people.
And I mean, she had like crazy ass parties
in there and everything.
And I never really got close to Samantha Fox until,
and here is the story.
This is actually an IT story, believe it or not.
I've told the story before, but I want you to hear.
So, I mean, I was running all the back show,
but I was mostly, you know,
coddling these Americans, they were just terrified.
Cause there was, I mean, there was big deals.
There was like fireworks off the shore.
Every time we would come in at any port,
it was completely, there was just huge people everywhere
because it was like, it was seriously,
it was like, it was like taking all of the Oscars
or something like that, the people in the Oscars,
sticking them on a ship and then going to each port
and then having every port be a full blown red carpet thing.
It was really amazing, it was really fun.
And so we kept pulling it and we felt,
it was great because we felt like stars.
We had like full access to, yeah, I did.
Yeah, you're, you're, you're giving us a spoiler here,
but so what I ended up doing was, so they had,
you know, she had IT people, she had her whole posse,
she had her manager, she had these, these two Russians,
this retired KGB guy, really great guy and his son,
his grandson, I think, who were the bodyguards
and they were, that was their posse, right?
And I couldn't get anywhere near her
because she was like untouchable.
She was like the, you know, the most protected,
cool person on the whole ship.
And even though I was a cruise director,
I had no access to her at all.
I was like, and tell, and this is the story.
So until her guy, actually her tech guy had a Mac
and the Mac broke and he couldn't get it back up.
And he was like, it was like, you know,
sad macking and all that stuff.
And he came to my, I was kind of bored
and I was in my room because I didn't really have anything
to do because the Americans were totally taken care of.
They were just playing around doing all kinds of things.
So I didn't really have a lot of work that trip,
which was just fun because I could like actually enjoy it.
And so sure enough, I get a knock at the door
and there's this guy, I know what was it?
No, no, no, that was not the knock at the door.
That was not it.
That was a different thing.
It was in the bar, actually.
Yeah, I'm trying to remember.
We were in the bar and I was always kind of closer
because I kind of wanted to get into her posse
and kind of see what it was like to be a starlet
and all this stuff.
And so I would go, I was in the bar.
It was in the bar in an afternoon, in the middle of nowhere.
And she was there for some reason.
She was like doing a presentation
or a press conference or something like that.
And I was sitting just, you know, with nothing to do.
That's what it was.
That's what it was.
I had my Mac.
I had my Mac, I had a MacBook Pro.
I had a MacBook.
I had a MacBook.
I had a little like roller ball on it
and everything.
You remember those ones, the 30 gigabytes of RAM,
30 megabytes of RAM.
I mean, 30 megabytes of discharge.
And I was like, you know, working on it.
I was typing away and I was working on coding or something.
And I was just there.
I just went there to go hang out because I was bored
and I wanted to listen to the press conference.
And it was her tech guy who saw that I had a Mac.
That's what happened.
And the tech guy came up and he sat down with me
and he goes, oh, I see you have a Mac.
He goes, I'm having a problem with my Mac.
And that was how it happened.
And then we got talking and I got really tight with this geek.
He was a geek, geek nerd, whatever you want to call it.
We talked about it yesterday.
And so I ended up fixing his computer
because, you know, my computer is sad, sad Mac-ing.
Can you help me?
And he brought it down and I helped him boot it up
and get it all fixed up and everything.
And I totally saved the day
and his whole Mac was working about that.
And so I don't remember how it happened
but sometime that day or the next day,
I got an invite from the guy and he goes,
yeah, well, Samantha liked to have you at her dinner.
And so they would take over a bar.
There's bars on each edge of the ship.
And she would take over a smaller bar
that had like a dining area and everything.
And she was locked up and there was like security
outside of it and everything.
And she had this huge, you know, Russian style dinner
with like tables next to each other
and like 20 people around.
And we were on this big, long tables
and she, I'll never forget,
she was sitting next to her best friend
who was also her manager and other people in her group
and, you know, and this tech guy
and the tech guy was sitting there at the end.
And so I sat down, I sat at that time
and I was super nervous.
You gotta understand, I was like a really naive Mormon,
you know, who was sitting there with Samantha Fox
who I had no idea why she was famous.
It was her poopies and her talent,
but kind of in that order.
Anyway, so, you know, and so she, you know, she,
if you don't know, Samantha Fox posed nude
on the cover of a British magazine
and she just went skyrocketed to the top of fame.
She was a talented singer on top of that,
but she got really crazy popular after that.
Anyway, so knowing that, I mean, I was a little nervous
because I was Mormon and everything.
And I, and I, you know, so I sat down,
I just mind my own business, I was just kind of eating
and trying to be, you know, polite and everything.
And out of nowhere, we're just eating and stuff.
And out of nowhere, she directly addresses me
from the other edge of the table, like way down there.
She goes, so, so, Rob, Rob is it?
And I said, yeah, yeah, she goes, I'm just, this is dramatic.
I don't remember all the exact words, but she says,
so, so, so I hear, so I hear you helped whoever,
you know, with his Mac, thank you so much for that.
Appreciate that.
Just want to give you a thank you.
And it was like, yes, here, here.
And they're all like happy and they're like saluting me
and stuff.
And I felt kind of, you know, in the, I felt good.
I felt really good because I had been given this opportunity
because of tech, you know, I, you know,
I, my Russian, everything.
And, and then she says, you know what?
I did not get into around with an apple, no, not at the time.
And so she goes, she goes, so, so, she was kind of awkward
for a second, cause she didn't know how to continue
the conversation.
She just wanted to go on about eating.
And so she goes, so, so Rob, so tell us about yourself.
And I go, so where are you from?
You know, and I'm, I'm getting it totally wrong, right?
And accent and everything.
She, and she said, I'm from Utah.
She goes, oh, Utah, Utah, do you know Jimmy Osmond?
Jimmy's great.
Jimmy's great.
I went to, I went to Jimmy's birthday party.
Oh my, oh my God, that, that party was off the hook.
It was amazing.
And I remember I was Mormon.
If you don't know who Jimmy Osmond is,
Jimmy Osmond was like, you know,
the hellion little brother of Donnie Osmond.
The, the, go back and look at the YouTube on him.
He's really funny.
And he, you know, he was really off the, you know,
and he said, oh yeah, it was a great party.
Yeah, Jimmy threw a great party.
It was a lot of fun.
I went, oh yeah.
Well, yeah, yeah, that's Provo or something.
Yeah, yeah, I think that was where it was.
And she's like, he was amazing.
Thank you.
And I'm like, you know, but she actually like asked me
as if maybe I knew him.
Oh yeah, I'm hanging out with Jimmy Osmond all the time.
No.
The Osmond brothers, no, yeah,
don't confuse them with the Allman brothers,
different, different band.
Anyway, so after that, I got to hang out with him
all the time.
And then, and Samantha was always very,
I mean, she treated me like everybody else in the policy.
She was like in control all the time, right?
But we, the thing was really great is
Jimmy, no, I didn't.
So we would go to the band.
So they would always go to the pub
on the other side with the big dance floor.
And the security guys would block off
a part of the dance floor for Samantha Fox
and her crew and everybody to go out there
and dance and have a good time
and not be accosted by the lesser movie stars.
Cause the crazy thing was, is all the people on the ship
were like top notch movie stars from Russia
that I had no idea who they were.
And so they were like unable to like get to Samantha
to dance with her.
But they wanted to be next to her
because they wanted to know if that was cool.
And they were Hollywood and blah, blah, blah.
And by the way, one of the Americans that was there
was a river guy in his seventies who bought like two bottles
of ginseng and had like two Russian hookers
on both arm everywhere he went.
I was like, I don't need to take care of that guy.
Everywhere he went, he would come out.
I remember I was walking through the hallways once
and he like came out of one of the Russian rooms
and he had both of the girls like right there.
And there was no, I mean, you know,
and he's like, oh, you got to get this ginseng.
It's really good stuff.
The guy had like leathery skin.
It was like an inch thick
because he'd grown up in the sun,
your own owner river guy.
It was so funny.
I love the dude.
He was so crazy.
QA Knights, we are a really off topic, yes.
But how did I meet Samantha Fox?
Cause that was with the Russian thing
and that became another talk about this.
We'll get back to the other stuff.
So the last part of the story was,
I got to go dance all the time.
It was really great because I got to walk
right past the line.
And the guys were like, what's up?
And they let me come in there
and I could like go in there and shake my booty
with, you know, Samantha and her friends and everything.
And I was married.
My wife wasn't there.
My wife was not, she wasn't with me that year.
She didn't go on the ship at all.
Divorce from her now, obviously.
And she, anyway, so,
I didn't do anything bad,
but Samantha kept trying to set me up with her manager.
Yeah, she kept trying to like, you should go,
you should go say hi to, what's up?
And I'm like, she was really shy and I was really shy.
She was really cute and everything.
But I was like, no, I'll marry to Mormon.
I can't do this.
And then the other part of the story is that the guys,
I got to talk to the Russian,
to the guys, so the bodyguards.
And they're impressed I could speak Russian
cause Americans speaking Russian,
you don't really have to do much more than that.
And then to impress them,
and they said, we're going to make you
honorary member of the thing.
So I put on my suit and everything,
and we would do the concerts
and they would tell me what to do.
And I would go like stand at the door like this.
I had no training whatsoever.
I had no training whatsoever.
These dead things I didn't get, yeah.
But, you know, and it's like,
it was really fun because they let me go backstage.
They're like, well, how are we going to get him backstage?
Cause he couldn't hang with her.
I mean, she did huge concerts, you know, like,
cause the Russians were really into it.
And she would do these huge, huge full stage concerts
with like pyrotechnics and everything.
And I was like, well, I kind of want to go.
And I would be up there on stage
and like the five Americans that I was supposed to be
babysitting and taking care of,
they were in the audience and I could see them
and it like huddled together in this little crowd.
And I'm like, yay, go Rob.
And I was like, I was just sitting around the behind the stage
while Samantha performed just like watching the stage.
I would give anything for video of that.
I have looked and searched high and low
for video of that tour because it was a big deal.
I mean, it was a big deal.
I got filmed on national television in Russia and everything.
And I haven't been able to find it.
If anybody actually ever finds the Samantha Fox tour
from like 19, you know, probably 96 or seven, I would say.
If anybody actually finds footage of that,
I seriously, I would pay good money for it.
I would love to find that again.
If I could see any of it, any side of it.
Because I mean, it was a really interesting experience.
That was one of many in Russia that I had.
So learning languages, learning technology,
open stores, that's the moral of the story there.
And that's how I met Samantha Fox
because I fixed her tech guys Mac.
Helped them fix it anyway.
Other boring questions.
Okay, so let's, I have like things
about what your goals of the home lab and stuff like that.
I don't know if you want to hear those.
Do you guys want to hear that?
I'll put that back here in a second.
We have to think about the terminal.
Any other questions?
Let me go.
Actually, we had some questions from the studio audience.
Oh, here's a good one.
When do you put a programming language on your resume?
Speaking of languages, I have a question too.
Do you think it's easier, it's a question for you.
Do you think it's easier to learn programming languages
once you've learned a foreign language,
more than one foreign language?
What do you think?
What do you think?
What does everybody think?
So the question is, is it easier
to learn programming languages
if you know, if you are good with foreign languages?
I think there might be some connection,
but I don't have any proof of that.
I want to, based on English, yeah?
I mean, the whole thing about syntax and order and grammar,
I think the answer is probably no.
I used to think the answer was yes.
And the reason I'm gonna say the answer is no now
is because, hey, how's it going, Walmart?
So if you learned the foreign language
by studying grammar and syntax and predicates
and all that jazz, then I think the answer
is on the yes side.
But if you know multiple languages through osmosis,
like most people do,
most Americans can't even tell you
how their language is formed.
You ask them what a tense is even,
or a predicate or an adverb,
and they can't even tell you what they are.
They just use the language, they just communicate,
they just know it.
They don't have to talk about how it's used, right?
Most Russians, if you were to ask them
about slanjenya, which is a decline
of slanjen, which is one of the hardest things
about Russian, and Latin, by the way,
is that most of them don't know.
They don't know what it is.
They just know how to speak it.
They know it sounds weird if you say the end of the word
a different way, depending on how you're saying it.
It's more of a sort of an AI thing.
They've just heard it said so many ways,
so many times in a specific way
that they just repeat it that way.
They really don't know why.
So based on that, I think that most people
that speak foreign languages,
more than one more foreign language,
have learned it through osmosis,
and therefore that does not impact their programming ability.
Yeah, I don't think that there's a strong correlation.
I used to think that there was,
but I don't think there is anymore.
I do have a thing that people who are tuned in
audibly to things, so like musicians,
musicians, my experience has been
that musicians who learn a foreign language,
the kind of musicians who are tuned in to audio things,
they tend to do better because they're able
to deconstruct the sounds and reproduce them,
things like that, but not always.
But when you put a programming language on your resume,
how about that question?
Somebody said when you write a compiler,
if you've written a compiler in a language,
then you can put it on your know.
I think that's way too much.
Don't know languages like Thai, I would expect, yeah, too.
But when it comes to programming languages,
when are you ready to put it on your resume?
Honestly, I think that if you could write
a minimal program in the language,
the most minimal that it's suitable
to put on your resume.
Because first of all, I don't think you should list
programming languages by themselves on your resume.
I think there's a mistake in there.
I mean, I'm a huge fan of putting no bullet points
that don't have measurable metrics in them.
Let me give you an example.
So instead of saying I'm a fast learner,
saying something like learned the essentials of Haskell
in order to produce a modified Pandoc plugin
to convert 20,000 documents from Markdown into something else.
So the more specific, learn Kubernetes in two minutes,
yeah, one day we'll be beneficial.
We do do that, but the boost,
part of the boost is going to be get a job
and make contacts and all the stuff necessary
from a work perspective.
So the last thing we do in the boost,
it's the absolute last thing we do is a boost.
I'm going to push the boost again.
So the boost is every Sunday from two to 6 p.m.
Eastern time you want to join us.
There is a second playlist on my YouTube
if you want to go watch that.
It's all free.
Of course, I appreciate your support on Twitch
and GitHub and any other sponsorship you want to give me,
but it's just my way of giving back.
And anyway, so that is a piece of resume advice
that kind of precludes this sort of idea
of what language you list, right?
I don't think it's a good idea
to just list out all the languages, you know,
because it leaves the person reading it with a question,
what the hell does this mean?
You look at Rust once and now you think you know it.
They want to know what you did.
And again, the resume is again,
getting a job is all about trust.
I'm going to say it again.
Getting a job is about creating a relationship of trust
with the person who's going to pay you
because you're going to help them in some way.
You're going to do something for them.
And therefore the resume is the primary instrument.
By the way, the resume is meant to be a trolling instrument.
It's not meant to answer all the questions.
The resume is meant to let them wanting more.
The resume is meant to give them really amazing,
very specific, convincing proof initially.
And they're going to read it and they're going like,
I want to hear more about this, come tell me more.
That's the point because the whole point of the resume
is to get you to have an interview.
And if you can't have an interview
because you told them everything about yourself
into things and you're like,
oh, I didn't put everything I've ever done on my resume.
Then you're doing it wrong.
I mean, at a certain point,
a CV is kind of a different instrument, right?
CV is an exhaustive listing of everything you've done.
It's more academic.
It's designed for a different audience.
But your resume is, yeah.
And your resume is really,
if you don't like self-evaluation, by the way,
the best way for you to do it is to get stats.
So one of my bullet points on my resume is,
created a core protocol using GPG and HTML
over TCPIP to coordinate audit compliance
for 52,000 unique systems for Fortune 100 companies.
That's one of my bullet points.
And the more specific, the better,
because then they want to hear about it, in my opinion.
In my opinion, they're going to want to bring you in.
They're going to want to talk to you about it.
And they're going to tell us about this.
Like, what happened?
How did you do that?
What caused you to think about that?
All of those questions are there.
If you say generic things that everybody says,
you're just going to be like everybody else.
Which means that you need to produce activities
that are going to, like, the question is,
how do you put the programming language on your resume?
You put the programming language on your resume
when you have done something in the language
worthy of being on your resume.
That's the short answer.
And not before.
So, and by the way,
there is nothing wrong with saying
explored rust by creating a, you know,
terminal-based application that did whatever.
And that's a very valid bullet point.
That means you're exploring different languages.
You may not be proficient in it.
It may not be your main thing,
but you're showing that you're, like, reaching out.
And you're quantifying the stuff that you're doing
so that you can do what you want to do.
The stuff that you're doing
so that you can get them to bring you in.
What is the big, non-evil corp?
The corp, I can't answer that question.
Please don't dox me if you know.
If you don't dox me, please don't dox me if you know.
I do not share my employer online.
Can I please admit you into the, oh, under the stage?
Where's the stage?
Matt's got stuff to say here.
We gotta invite Mr. Shells.
Mr. Shells, I'm inviting you.
Where are you?
How come it's not working?
All right.
Welcome, Matt, one of our regulars in the house.
Are you there?
You have something to say about that?
Nothing to say.
I just been waiting.
Oh, I'm sorry.
It's good to have you here.
Anybody else who wants to join us that I know,
I have to know you.
You're welcome to come join us so you can get a word in edgewise.
I'm Dustwell says, you still have me thinking
about languages of languages.
For example, opcodes like move, M-O-V mean move.
In Russian, it's close to shug or benavig in German.
And my reason is that I would expect
that they would have used something
similar to the language it was created there for.
Interesting.
Ascii's based on English, unfortunately.
That's very true.
Good point.
Good point.
So yeah, so putting a language on your resume
is a matter of putting a project on the resume
in the language.
And you have to decide whether that project
is worth the space.
If you don't have a lot of, I mean,
if you don't have a lot of experience,
then some of those things you did in your personal,
by the way, I'm gonna answer another question here.
Should I put personal projects on your resume?
And the answer is, hell yes.
Because personal projects are the way
that you demonstrate your interest in a topic.
It doesn't mean that you're not interested in it
if you don't have a personal project on it.
If your resume's, if your personal projects are relevant,
and that means coding for a FOSS or anything like that,
you should definitely put that there.
People all the time say, well, I'm not,
a lot of people are experimenting
with different languages go, Rust, Haskell or something.
Cause I don't do, well, I didn't do that at work.
So I didn't put on my resume, but that's stupid.
Because you want that on your resume.
It shows that you're exploring new things
and that you're willing to learn.
And that you may even get to talk about
your crazy home lab that you built
that is gonna show that you actually like
doing those things.
I don't think you have to like doing things
to get a job doing those things,
but you know, in the tech world especially,
it goes a long way if you do.
Malubit says, ooh, look, I love this one.
Wrap to C++ deformable segmentation algorithm
using a C-sharp into XYZ platform.
Whoa, yeah.
That's a great line item.
See that?
That's a good idea.
Oh, here's a good question.
How much time we got?
Where's my?
Seven or two, we got to 30 minutes, okay.
Question, I'll put this one in here
since we're talking about these things here.
This question is,
can I ask some advice as a guy trying to get a career?
I live abroad, I have no network
and don't know which companies to apply or avoid.
That is such a tough situation to be in.
How far in stuff did we get?
We're not, we're doing, we're recording right now.
We're recording the Q&A thing.
We'll talk about stuff later after this.
We didn't get installed, but we're getting close.
We learned about stuff admin, some stuff.
Do people want to, do we want to make a question about that?
You do have citizenship?
Okay.
So the question right before us now is,
how do I start a career if I am living out of the country,
have no network and don't know which companies
to apply for or to avoid?
What do you do with that?
I want to ask you, this is a question
I'm going to open to the group before.
Do you have any opinion on that, Matt?
Anyone else?
Because I have opinions on this, but.
I don't have anything, that's a difficult question
for me to answer.
Yeah.
I think this is one of the hardest questions of all.
In fact, usually that when I talk about, you know,
networking and, okay, so to network,
just say no, could ask an advice.
If you had, the jobs are created through trust,
and primarily, and I'm the only one saying that.
There's a lot of people who say that.
Leon, learn with Leon comes to mind.
You still, many hundreds of people get jobs.
And you can't do that without a network
of people that you meet.
So you need-
I agree with you 100% on the trust thing.
My current company, they started me off part-time
and within two years, they've trusted me enough
to promote me up twice.
So yeah, trust goes a long ways.
Yeah.
Yeah, because they know you're gonna put the concerns
of the company first and,
I mean, it's much easier to manage a person that they trust.
Bottom line.
Let's see, it almost says it's not about what you know
but who you know.
It really is.
I hate that that's true.
I really hate that that's true.
Every job I have ever gotten,
except for the cruise director job
and the river guy job, was from somebody new.
I knew, and that includes my bike shop job
and my IBM job and all of them.
They were all people that I knew, Nike, the Nike job.
Yeah, so I think that the answer is as hard as it is,
if you want to work abroad or in America
or wherever you want to work,
you have to have a network with people who work there.
And I don't know how you can figure that out.
There are a lot of places you can go
and you can look for that job,
but it's hard to find a job that you don't want to work for.
But it's gonna take time
for you to make those connections.
It's particularly hard to give this advice
because I know people, I've worked with people
over eight or nine years trying to open good jobs,
many of whom did not deal well with people.
They didn't like people.
They didn't want to be around them.
And so I, as a private mentor,
I would organize groups.
I would literally stick them in my van
and that sounds weird.
And we would drive to these Linux meetups
and we would meet these new people.
And I made friends with Q Software,
which is an organization here in Davidson.
And I actually meet the CEO and everything
and I got to really meet them.
And I was like, I'm private mentoring all these people
but they have a hard time making connections and everything.
And so I was able to sort of form that bond
and say, well, pick from any number of my kids here.
It was mostly kids.
I mean, they were all under 30 and they did, they did.
They picked up three or four of them.
And a couple of them were not really able
to express themselves.
One of them actually, I invited,
I presented on some things into the Linux meetup
and I invited him up to present with me.
And so he went up and he presented with me
at the meetup right next to me
and I let him do the talking and stuff.
So if you are not one of these people who likes a group
or who likes to talk to people, who likes to present
and create those networks and all that stuff,
then get a wingman or a woman.
You know, get somebody, perhaps somebody more senior than you,
who has a, you know, not your mom and not your dad.
You can't, I mean, that doesn't usually work.
I mean, sometimes it does work for Bill Gates.
It worked for Steve Bezos.
I mean, I mean, Joe Bezos, Jeff Bezos and a bunch of others.
All of them had their parents help seed their capital.
Bezos got a $250,000 loan from his mom.
Gates got the Microsoft contract
because his cutthroat mom forced IBM
to give him the opportunity, go read about it.
So sometimes it is the parents
that are like breaking the barriers down that are doing it.
But if you're on your own,
sometimes it's easier to team up and find somebody.
And, you know, through Twitch,
through Twitch and through YouTube and these places.
I mean, this is the way we meet people now.
So true story, I got into Second Life
because I didn't want to drive 60 minutes to a Ruby meetup.
I didn't want to.
I didn't want to drive to a Ruby meetup.
And so I, hey, Vera, how are you doing?
You can come on in on the chat if you want to, Billy.
And speaking of getting jobs, by the way.
Billy, do you mind if I share the story?
Vera, do you mind if I share your story
of how you helped me?
Do you mind if I share that?
I want to ask you before I do publicly.
I mean, he might not even want to share it.
But go ahead, okay.
So we're actually blessed by the presence
of one of my favorite streamers of all time,
and human beings, Billy Vera,
who is a great person all by themselves,
but is doing really crazy amazing things right now
that I will not dox.
God, I want to though.
I want to dox you so bad.
I want to say all the awesome stuff you're doing.
And oh, Billy's got his hand up.
We'll have him come on in here.
I'm going to give him a hard time.
Come on in, Billy.
You there?
Hello.
Hello.
So we're talking about,
people are talking about being,
the question before us is trying to get advice
from people who live abroad and have no network.
How do they get a job?
And I go through my normal spiel.
Networking online.
Networking online.
And to that end, as luck would have it,
Billy was a little bit fashionably late to this stream,
got me this job.
Please don't say the name of our company, Billy.
I don't know the name of the company,
and why I haven't worked there in so long, I forgot it.
Okay.
So Billy and I were up late just doing random things
and tech things on Twitch,
and Billy's been one of our regulators for years.
And helping me set up my chat server,
all these amazing things.
He's been a really great help.
And because he knows so much more than I do
when it comes to so many technology operations.
Well, I mean, I think we compliment each other,
but yeah, I mean, you know, when it could,
so it's been really fun to be friends with Billy,
but more than that, Billy's like,
because I needed a job because of the little COVID thing.
I was like, yeah, I'm going back to corporate again.
So, well, let me help you out.
And Billy put in a good word for me to the manager.
I had an interview with the manager,
which was relatively informal.
The only formal thing about it was I had to have my camera on.
And it got the job.
Surprisingly, both that manager and the person
who did the interview with me are gone now.
They went on to other things.
And Billy's since gone on to other crazy, amazing,
awesome things too, which I can't talk about.
And so I'm kind of left behind.
It just so happens that Billy's replacement
that they hired is also gone now.
So, but I really love it.
I think my replacement was awesome though.
My replacement nailed it,
hands down, knew more than I did, it's great.
Well, I mean, I've done what I can over there,
but it's, I've said this many times openly,
that the team I'm on now, the dynamic of the team is,
it's changed quite a bit actually.
And it's relatively, I've been doing a lot
of the batch side by the way.
Please don't, we won't get into details.
Let's don't use names, but yeah, it's gotten better.
Yeah, I mean, there were challenges
when we were there on the team and we worked through them
and some of them were harder to deal with than others.
But I really, really, I talk about all the time,
I really love my team right now because of the atmosphere
that we're in and we have going on now.
Mostly because of that.
I'm actually not even working right now.
What's that?
I'm not even working right now.
Oh, you're not working right now?
I mean, I thought you were doing,
okay, I'm not gonna talk about that.
No, no, no.
So I was doing a lot of work like we talked about before,
but I stopped working because of,
we're dealing through a huge custody case
and that actually affected my security clearance.
And so I just, I talked about it, I was like,
well, I have enough money, I don't need to work right now.
I can take off the next month or six months or a year.
And so we decided I'd take off the time
and spend the time with the kids
and get to know her better and, you know,
and just get through the damage work.
You're getting recorded for YouTube.
I just wanted you to know that, so.
Yeah, it's funny.
Okay, yeah, but yeah, I mean,
I remember that part of your story
and I remember that you didn't need to work
for reasons we won't get into.
Yeah.
Yeah, which, you know, I mean, yeah.
Considering the offers that you've had
in the past, I think so.
Bottom line, people are their best way to get a job.
That's what I'm trying to say.
95% of my jobs through knowing someone
and I usually take jobs once a year.
Me too. On average.
And you're not particularly a personable person.
I mean, I love you, but.
No, I'm not personable at all.
Even my fiance says that.
I know, so that's what I'm trying to say.
It's like people don't, you don't have to be, you know,
an extrovert and a great people person to get a job
and meet other people.
You just need to find your people.
And there's lots of ways to do that,
but online is really the way, I think.
And Twitch is literally the way I got my last job.
It's kind of cool that we get to talk about that.
So.
And really when it comes down to Friday's official,
I had one of my really good friends.
He now is in front of my time.
I didn't know him that well.
I met him through IRC.
And he lived in Egypt.
IRC, really?
Yeah, and so I had hired him at the company
that had to do our night support
because I was doing his daytime.
So things like that, especially with startups
are a great way of finding jobs to work at
because you never know who you're gonna find.
And on top of that, you never know who they're gonna know.
You know, I've had people before
where they needed jobs.
I don't know them from overseas.
But I'm like, hey, I don't know anything at my place,
but you know what?
Here's a buddy of mine who's looking for something
that might fit.
Absolutely.
It happens that way.
Yeah, and that's how it's been
for the people that have helped place everything.
It hasn't necessarily been the direct person.
But then I make friends and then they call in
and they go and get their job.
But here's what I want you to remember.
Do not expect any friends online
to put their word out or their name out for you.
I didn't for Rob and I wouldn't for anybody.
I sat there and said, I know a guy who's pretty good.
This is what he knows.
You review his credentials.
I'm not going to be there
because I don't want to be seen as changing
the interview process.
Yeah.
And that's the way it should be.
You interview him on the merit.
Yeah, and that's the way it absolutely should be.
Yeah, I think that you should do that.
It is a little bit hard too
because sometimes you'll have somebody ask you
to put your name in for a job
because they know you work someplace.
And you're like, I've had people stress my trust
a little bit on that before
because I felt like they weren't particularly ready.
But my recruiter, same recruiter, by the way, Billy,
and he calls me every month.
He's like, who do you got for me?
And I'm like, I'll send him, raise him.
He says, look, I'm not vetting this person,
but these are people that are preparing
for that kind of job and then you can make the decision.
So, but that-
Yeah, I told you to do it.
And it bypasses the HR process.
Don't expect anybody, anybody to vouch for you.
I have talked to you online.
I will vouch that, you know,
maybe you should send some good pills and this and that,
but I don't know that you know them
because I don't know what you are doing behind the scenes.
Oh, right.
That's why you have to be able to do it yourself.
You can't expect any of us to do it for you.
Right, and that's-
That's a bad thing.
And I told people that if that's for me,
don't vouch for me.
If that's that you know me, whatever else,
and I can hold my own or my marriage.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But all I need is that first foot to get past HR.
That's the hardest thing.
Exactly.
To get past HR to the hiring manager.
And that, I believe, in helping anybody out.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's like, you should give this person an interview,
let them show you what they know.
You know, and I've seen what they know to some degree
and enough to like tell you that, but that's all.
And you should make your own decision.
And we've talked to other people who have hired actually.
I'm not here today, but we've had a lot of other people
that are in hiring positions
and they've said the same thing.
Almost all of them have said the most important thing
to get yourself a job is demonstrated experience.
If you can show, in one specific case,
someone said that they would take,
someone who ran their own home Kubernetes lab
over somebody who had a CKA certification any day.
I would in a heartbeat.
Yeah, and in a heartbeat.
Yeah, so I mean, it's good to have both,
but the actual experience in going through the hard work
of like putting things out there and stuff.
Roger for you, Rob.
Do you think that certifications
are coming back around?
I think that certifications in the operations space
have always been more beneficial than some of the other ones.
I wrote a white certify video.
I was talking about just straight experience, sorry.
I'm sorry, straight what?
Experience.
Just experience?
Yeah, reverse experience plus certification.
I do, I think experience is still gonna be a thing.
I think I don't have any reason to know.
I don't have enough information,
but I do feel like hiring has gotten lazier lately.
I do, and that's the reason.
I've actually, I've started to blow through the AWS again,
and I'm gonna blow through the Google ones.
Well, I had time off during the day now.
I've already taken three of the AWS and passed them.
And I only did, I said about a week studying for them,
but I did it because I literally told me
that I talked to a recruiter who said that they do,
they're adding 20% on to any initial job offer
if you have a certification.
Yeah, I believe it.
I believe that.
Well, in that case, it would not do it
because I could have it in a month.
And I'd expect everybody to have it in a month.
Remember, I actually used EC2 since the day it came out.
I was actually one of the very first people
that got on the public board.
So I've used AWS for that long.
So I'm gonna blow through all of the three major
cloud providers and see what I can do.
Yeah, I think that's probably wise.
I, the hiring people are getting lazy, honestly.
They, in the operation space,
I think that they've gotten a lot lazier.
And so anyway, yeah, I don't think,
I used to, especially in operations.
Now, if you're gonna go get Java certified as a developer,
instead of making a bunch of Java code
that shows you no Java,
I agree with that woman who posted that thread
who was the Google hiring manager
that said that can actually work against you.
Maybe not so far as to say that,
but that means that you believe that,
getting a cert over learning Java
or showing people you know Java is more valuable
and that's stupid.
So it just depends on, but in operations
and in hacking and security and stuff like that,
I mean, security, they're required.
There's a lot of companies,
a lot of, most of the security jobs,
particularly the government-y kind of stuff,
they have to have it.
So I absolutely hate certifications.
I still, I let my laps, my CUBE certifications laps.
I didn't go for the tests.
I think I could probably do the tests,
but I just, I absolutely despise tests.
I'm so terrified of tests.
What's that?
In the early 2000s, in the early 2000s,
we used to actually have it be a negative
if you had a college degree in computer science.
Wow, yeah.
Yeah, I don't know.
I mean, I know according to the stats
from Adam Ruin's college that people
with a college degree in America
make 30% more at every stage in their career.
So the advice, which was surprising to me,
is to actually get a college degree.
If you're not gonna go to $250,000 of the debt, by the way,
and, but to not go to a big-ass college,
but to go to a local community college or anything,
because they don't care, because in places like Bosch,
which I happen to know directly,
because I talk to people at work there,
they won't even look at your resume
unless you're a graduate from college.
You have to have a college degree.
It could be the local community college,
and you could have a basket-weaving degree,
and that will count.
And then you prove yourself other ways,
through all the other stuff.
But there's this like HR filter
that says that they won't talk to you for IT.
What was that?
What's that?
Penny, what?
I was thinking, hey.
No, and I completely agree with that.
You know, I'm actually pushing my fiance
to get her degree and everything.
I'm putting her through that.
But one of the things like, I agree,
and so everybody knows too, I don't have a degree.
I think I had a half a semester in college.
The one thing I did happen, I was prior to military,
and a lot of places will take that.
And my understanding for talking to HR people
was that it's not so much that it shows
that you can do the degree good for anything,
it shows that you can stick it out for the time.
And military or the degree is kind of equivalent in that way.
And it has only had the experience on top.
Yeah, I don't like that that's true,
but I've heard that so many times at this point
that they wanna see that you've completed
that phase of life, that you've shown
that you're an adult enough to do those things.
And I think it's BS, but it doesn't matter
because that's what the perception is.
And that's the perception from HR too,
not from hiring members.
Yeah, and that's the thing.
You get networked past HR.
Networked past HR, you're okay.
Yeah, I think that's so important.
I'm so glad you said that.
The stuff that takes to get past HR
is 100% different than what it is to get the job
and produce trust with the person
who's actually gonna hire you and work with you.
A lot of these techniques to get past HR are just that.
I remember to this day when I interviewed actually
for the position you helped me with
that they said, oh, don't worry about that.
And because the manager behind the scenes
was manipulating HR to get it to all jive
because they have their own HR rules.
And he said, well, don't worry about that.
I'll make it happen.
Because sometimes there's a lot of friction
even when you know somebody in the company
wants to hire you and then there's places
where they have to also post it.
HR can't tell if a candidate is good.
No, they can't.
They have no way of knowing.
So, and their job is to filter candidates out.
They'll get yelled at if they give you candidates
that are not there.
So, the certs and the degrees and they'll say,
the HR is not, they can't, the algorithms that they use
are not gonna allow them to go through
and read your personal projects
to see if you're a good candidate.
They can't do it.
It's really hard to get in.
I mean, Khristanova, for example,
very publicly on a Twitter thing,
I'm gonna say this because she was public about it.
Khristanova did not get a job at Google
because she didn't have the academic qualifications.
And she openly tweeted about this.
But then she went on to be one of the most well-known,
most recognized people in all of the Kubernetes landscape,
an author, a presenter, an all-around great person
in the whole cognitive world.
And like you, Billie, she didn't have any background at all.
I mean, she didn't have any academic background at all.
And, but some people think that's a plus
and she also probably didn't have the debt.
You know, I mean, Nova is amazing.
She is amazing.
And one of the big things,
this is where we feel like the academic background.
And I'm not saying it's the correct way to look at it,
is how we use to look at it early on,
is that if we had somebody coming straight out of college,
it took us a minimum of six months to a year
to untrain them so that it would actually work properly.
Because, especially for programmers,
you have this thing that you have to document every function
and you spend as long documenting this,
you've been writing it.
Well, if your function is to add two numbers together,
you don't need documentation to say that's what it does.
You need the headers, you need that type of stuff.
You don't need to go into full documentation on it.
But people that are coming out of college are doing that
because that's what they've been taught to do.
Yeah, yeah, they are.
They're learning things.
They're learning single inheritance and Java
and things like that too.
Not all of them, but there's a great comment here.
Let me read this.
So,
God So Master says,
Google used to be really strict with this.
I remember reading that they only hired from Ivy League
with 4.0 GPAs.
They have loosened up a lot since then.
You know, it's funny you say that
because they actually,
I remember reading something that said
that Google and a number of other companies,
and what not fan companies,
but a number of others signed an affidavit
that said that they no longer required a college
to work there.
They just required a sufficient experience.
IBM, of course, very famously said that.
So, yeah.
I do have a question here.
So Google is on the way down.
I'm sorry?
I'm actually, I think Google is on the way down.
I actually live, and I don't mind saying this out loud,
I'm the record guy's data everywhere,
but I live in Seattle.
And I have, within a quarter mile of my house,
I have Amazon, Google, Facebook, and Starbucks headquarters.
Oh, wow.
And so all of them,
and they all hit me up at least twice a week
trying to hire me,
and I don't have a degree,
and I'm very, very specific.
I don't have a degree,
and they don't understand that.
But they look at the background and they say,
we don't care about that anymore.
So it used to be very, very specific
that you had to have a degree and not anymore.
Yeah, my wife made it.
Yeah, they do, they do.
And that's good, that's good.
Again, the question is for this expat who's got it.
So I hate to say it, but you've either got to move here
or you got to like make friends with people who are here
and one way to do that is online.
Another question, last question for tonight.
How do you stop all of the random recruiters
from contacting you on LinkedIn
instead of actual companies you wanna work with directly?
You don't.
You don't.
I get on LinkedIn, I still get anywhere from 10 to 15 a week.
And I have, so I have that, I have a job,
I'm not looking everything.
Every one of them says, if you are looking, let me know.
Yep.
This says here that this person gets 30 offers a week.
I feel like I have a job to respond to each
it's like getting junk mail.
I don't like recruiters anymore.
So let's talk about the recruiter question for a second
because I wanna really talk about recruiters.
First of all, I think every IT professional
needs a recruiter myself,
particularly if you have problems with social skills
and you don't like proving yourself
and making your own thing.
And the reason for that, and I wanna tell a quick story
about my Nike experience really quick, a personal story.
So Nike was forcing everybody to work 90 hours a week
and everybody was getting really sick of it
and they put us all in a room
because they knew we were getting sick of it
and they told everybody get used to it.
This is a dot com culture.
This was before the dot com boom in 2000 or bust.
And they said, if you don't like it, get used to it.
That's normal.
And half of them quit the next day.
And one of the people that quit gave my name
to the recruiter.
And the recruiter called me
while I was trying to make up for all the work
that I had to do now because everybody else had lost
and I had two young toddlers at home.
I couldn't quit.
And I said, I don't have time to talk to you.
Can you give me?
I said, you don't even talk to me unless you do double.
And he said, absolutely, can you be in Dallas next week?
And so he flew me to Dallas.
I interviewed, I got the job.
I actually got hired in a wave of new college recruits
even though I was much older than that.
It was kind of fun actually
because I got to hang out with them
and go to training and everything.
And that recruiter continued to just keep access with me.
And he would call me about once every six months or so
and say, you're still having your job
because I got another job at IBM doing something very similar.
And you can go work at that job.
I can get you that job and get you more money.
And so the recruiter was constantly working on my behalf.
He was a good guy.
I really am sad that he got out of the recruiting business
because it was like having your own agent,
like a sports agent or a Hollywood agent.
And they were working for me all the time
trying to find better opportunities for me
while I focused on my craft
and got really good at what I was doing.
And I didn't have to constantly think about
what are the other job opportunities
this person was doing it for me.
I have the same situation.
I think so.
That's not like a headhunter.
They work for the recruiter, not for the company.
Yeah, that's true.
And I think that's the biggest difference.
And I think that's something that you have to make
a big difference about.
The person that works for you instead of the company
is the one you want to keep.
The ones that are working for the company,
they're there because the company needs to fill it.
So you're never going to be able to move up.
You're never going to be able to move around.
And to me, the difference that was explained to me
at least when I started was
that's a headhunter versus a recruiter.
Oh, interesting.
Interesting.
A headhunter works for you.
Yeah.
A headhunter, whatever you want to call him.
I can see, I mean, he called himself a recruiter.
Right.
And of course, everybody knows
I work for Tech Systems now
and my recruiter calls me literally every month
and says, how are things going?
Do you have any people for me?
And actually genuinely cares about life and stuff.
So I think that recruiters get a bad name.
I've had so many bad experiences with recruiters
through LinkedIn, such that I dropped LinkedIn.
I got rid of LinkedIn a year ago.
I think LinkedIn is a disastrously bad company.
I know a lot of people who get jobs through it
and who know their friends through it
and maintain contact and that's fine.
But I actually was, Greg, one of my good friends
that I met through Twitch as well,
said he's never had LinkedIn, doesn't ever want it
and has no need for it and has never been out of work.
He's constantly had people at his door asking him for work.
And if you do it right,
your reputation is going to get out there
and you're gonna get job offers.
You're gonna get people come to you.
You're gonna get headhunters coming to you.
You're gonna get that one or two recruiters
that you have a good relationship with.
And I think, you know, Tony Foss says,
yeah, good recruiters are amazing.
Yeah, and the thing I really like
about having a good recruiter on your side,
and we do talk about this in the beginner boost
near the end of the entire series
when we're starting to talk about getting a job
with these new skills that you just learned.
And having that person work for you,
who by the way, they're doing it
because they're good at selling people,
helping you be sellable, right?
I mean, I actually met with one who checked with me
to make sure my tie was looking good and everything
because they were so used to helping IT geeks be presentable.
I was like, man, you don't need to tell me
what kind of tie to wear and how to wear it.
I mean, you know, this, but these recruiters,
I mean, that's their job.
Their job is to schmooze, is to be good with,
you know, to create these personal relationships
and create an atmosphere
and to help build this trust atmosphere.
They literally are your agents if you get a good one
and they will work as particularly if you're really good.
I mean, if you're really good
and you get the right agent working for you,
they're constantly on the pavement and like,
you know, are you happy?
Because I got this job over here for an extra 20K
from what you're making right now
and it's doing this and acts and such
and it's using new technology
and, you know, we could place over there.
And they're like, oh yeah.
And then they, by the way,
having one of these people represent you
helps you get over your own imposter syndrome
because they, their job is to see you for who you are
and to craft your perception and your management
and what you look like to people
in a way that looks really good.
And IT people in particular, pretty much every human,
but IT people in particular are very bad
at presenting their skills
because it's easy for them.
It's easy for them.
Yeah, it's easy.
It's easy.
If you don't look at what you do every single day
in the skill, you look at what you do.
No, you're like, well, it's easy.
It's like, I don't think it is, man.
And somebody else who's a recruiter
is sometimes non-technical.
Like, no, you don't get it, man.
Do you have any idea how rare that is, you know,
that you can even do X or Y or Z?
And I mean, compared to all the other people,
I mean, you are like crazy, crazy rare.
You need to understand your value, blah, blah, blah, blah,
blah, blah.
And so they're like your little cheerleader.
If you get a good one,
they're like a cheerleader at the same time.
They're looking at your thing.
They're looking at you as they're helping you feel better.
And by the way, if you ever get a chance
to go to a tech conference,
like, you know, where they're recruiting people to hire,
sometimes they used to do this in Portland.
I haven't found one in Charlotte yet.
I really want to go.
I want to-
Do they have them?
Yeah.
Yeah, you just go there and you feel like a rock star
walking around because everybody wants to hire you.
They don't even know who you are,
that they know that you could potentially be the next
whoever, you know.
And so they treat you and you treat everybody
as a potential hire as if you're a superstar.
And it just really pumps up your confidence,
makes you feel good.
And you end up coming home with a ton of freak swag
and stuff.
And you can even take the day off.
I used to take the day off at night.
Can't work.
Tell my manager I'm going to a job conference
and just to see what people are hiring for
and what people are using.
You can use it as kind of a reconnaissance mission as well
to see what's going on.
I've gone to those and brought back people to work with.
Yeah.
Like it doesn't mean, obviously,
like we've met people that are looking for jobs
and they're like, well, you know,
this is what I do with my job too.
You know, are you interested in the McGregor resume?
Exactly.
You know, let me grab your number.
Whatever else.
I'm going to organize it all of you.
Yep.
Yep, yep, yep.
I think that's a big thing.
Question here.
Do you think personal brands and presences social media
are good to get attention from recruiters?
Hmm, that's a, that's a tricky one.
It can be, especially if you're well known.
If you're middle of the field,
middle of the packet, as you know, good, in my opinion,
it would be much better to have a really good GitHub profile.
Yeah.
If you are, but if you are somebody
that people are going to for questions all the time,
everything else, then yeah, it probably does help you
because, you know, people are looking on that name.
Yeah.
It depends on the type of thing you're doing.
If you're presenting, absolutely,
you need a GitHub profile.
And now that you can put everything
that you used to have in LinkedIn in a GitHub now,
especially now that you have the special like landing page
that kind of is an overview of who you are in technology,
I think, I think no matter what,
you have to have a great GitHub presence.
I used to present all the time.
I was actually a very big presenter
way back in the middle of 2000.
And I don't present anymore.
I hated it even when I did it.
But still to this day, I have people that come up to me
and will say, we saw this presentation you did online.
Are you interested because of that?
And yeah, so that's great.
But the other issue is that if you're not going to presenting,
it makes you look really bad.
It makes you look like you don't know
what you're talking about.
And I used to stand before I would do a presentation.
I would spend six months writing
because I know I'm not good at that episode.
And so I'd have multiple people review it,
multiple go over with me.
So it's like, I had the technology for it,
but the way that you present to people
is different than how you are.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
And that's a big piece of it, the whole presentation thing.
Yeah, it really does depend.
I do think you need to manage your social media,
but I want to be careful on this one
because I think that there are,
I mean, I talk about it all the time,
front-end engineers in particular
are really good at making great portfolios and everything
and overly presenting themselves on Reddit
and Stack Exchange and all these other things.
Meanwhile, you've got really solid,
crazy, amazing engineers who are virtually
non-existent on the internet in terms of social media.
And they're obviously capable and qualified
for any, I mean, Dennis comes to mind, right?
Last Miles comes to mind.
Who is the great streamer?
Who's building a rig over on his channel?
And, you know, so I think that,
so Tanya Fawcett says, I've hired people
where the decoding factor was seeing good code on GitHub.
Would have found another way to vet them
if they didn't have GitHub
because not everyone has a luxury, yeah.
Yeah, and again, if somebody's introducing you
to somebody else and then they're getting past that thing
and then the next thing is, well, show me your stuff.
Most of the best code that I've ever written
that had really significant impact on the enterprise
happened at IBM and I can't, I don't have any access to it,
including the best fork bomb I ever wrote, you know,
and I can't show it to you.
You know, it's enterprise proprietary stuff.
So.
And the agent, PIR, all the thing in that regard.
Yeah, and it's really sad because, you know,
I have to say, well, you just have to trust me,
it was really awesome and, you know,
but then you can work on other stuff
and of course, I've done that, you know, as passion projects,
but those, even the best passion projects
are not gonna be as great as your magnum opus
you did for, you know, some proprietary company
if that's what you're doing.
So, yeah.
Question, what's your take on generalist versus specialist?
How do you know when you're spreading yourself too thin?
This is such a great question.
I feel this question in me all the time.
Recently, even I went through this
when I decided to eliminate some technologies from my stack,
my personal skill stack,
and that's a plan words that I've named my company after.
I think it's more important that you be the best
at what you do than, and I mean, you know,
top of your game, the best,
than it is to know a lot of things,
unless you're an architect.
So, if your job, what, go ahead.
I disagree.
Okay, explain it.
And here's the reason why, I think as an architect,
you should be the best at what you do.
Yeah, okay.
And the best at everything that you're doing,
and now I think that the reason for that is,
is that I come from an old school mentality,
and you kind of do too, Rob, but I don't believe in architect
is something that you are able to just join out of college
or out of getting, you know, the couple jobs.
Oh, I get you.
Yeah, absolutely.
You've got to be an architect until you have 20 years experience.
Right, when I, yeah.
Yeah, when I was speaking architect,
I was meeting someone who came up for the engineering ranks,
learned all of that stuff,
was the specialist for a very long time,
and is the specialist in several things,
and then has slowly gotten out of being the specialist
on a specific thing.
They're not working with it every day, perhaps,
but they did work with it every day for a long time,
and then they're pulled in more into more meetings,
et cetera, et cetera,
and they become a little bit less of a specialist
and more of an SME who's being called in.
This is the thing I used to call manager suck,
which is just, it's not really a bad thing.
It's just, when I was at Nike,
people have, you probably have experiences like this too.
They start to recognize you as a subject matter expert,
an SME, and so they want your opinion on everything.
What happens is you start getting,
as an engineer, you're an engineer,
you're getting paid to keep something running
and make new stuff,
and then they start pulling you into these meetings,
and sometimes you'll get pegged as a pocket specialist
for a CTO or something,
and the CTO doesn't have any time to do anything,
but they need a couple people that they really go to
to get, to do the bullshit and tell them what's up,
and so they'll identify them,
and they'll, they can, you gotta be careful,
because they'll burn them out,
and they'll also take their ideas,
and then look at all the credit.
I mean, that's another thing.
So you have to decide, at some point in your career,
whether you wanna stay an engineer,
and I had to fight back against,
I mean, I actually took the IBM job
because they have a title called Distinguished Engineer,
which is total bullshit.
That means you have more patents and everything like that,
but I, when I saw it,
I'd kind of maxed out my game at Nike,
and I was like, okay, I wanna make more money,
and you can't make more money unless you go into management,
I hate to say it.
I mean, that's changed a lot lately,
but I think it's still somewhat true.
If you wanna progress in your tech career,
at some point, you cross over into management,
and you start presenting, or you start joining boards,
and you end up maybe to be an architect CTO,
or something like that,
and pretty soon you're so removed from the technology
that you need your own team of specialists
to help you do your job,
and I've fought pretty hard to stay in the trenches
and to not do that.
Now, there are some rare cases where people who do both,
and-
So, I think I am one of those rare cases.
Yeah.
I used to do it for startup.
Yeah, yeah, and it was kind of,
there's a-
Go ahead.
I would always, I would work through everything
until I had a big enough team,
and I'm not saying this is usually anywhere
from two to three years.
Yeah.
I would have a team that would be anywhere
from 20 to 50 people in the team,
and then I would go out
and I would find my replacement, myself,
and I would hire them into a position
that was under me,
and it would be just a DS title,
whatever it may be,
but I needed them to be there,
and the reason being is that
I would actually start having them run all my meetings,
I'd have them start running everything,
and what I would do,
I would take all the lessons I've worked for myself,
and I would deal more with the board,
I would deal more with the CEO,
the CEO, the CFO, the CTO, whatever else.
Basically, I get to a point
where I would actually walk into the CEO's office one day,
and I would go, okay, so I'm putting in 30 days,
here's your replacement, he's already been trained,
and for the next 30 days,
don't call me for everything,
call on him, if he can't do it, he calls me,
and I don't want to hear from you,
I don't want your, you don't want my things,
because I'm going to be gone.
This is the best way for you to go through that,
where I'm still available,
and it will get you to that next level,
and the usual question I got was, why are you leaving?
Because I'm now full.
I've realized I've backed out what I can do
in my knowledge here,
and I will not be a good employee.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, we could do,
we really could do it a whole hour,
just on, I mean, the company that I work for,
the startup internet service provider,
it was one of these cases where the engineer
who started it held on to control the company,
and he was an absolute horrible executive,
and everybody knew it,
and he hated being an executive,
and he was always trying to do the engineering things,
and so the executive job role kind of went unfilled,
while he, because he didn't have the presence of mind
to say, hey, somebody come in and do this other stuff for me,
while I do this other thing.
I actually think, I don't know,
but I think that IBM Red Hat went through the same thing.
The Red Hat president guy stepped down and said,
no, I'll just be here.
Oh, look at this.
What?
I knew that for a fact,
because I knew the president when it happened.
It actually did.
Yeah.
They moved to Red Hat Enterprise, yeah.
That's exactly what happened is he realized,
well, they also had the board that basically talked to him
to realize that he didn't have the knowledge,
but he had the people around him that tell him,
no, you don't have the knowledge,
and he fought it for like a year and a half,
and finally went, okay, you're right,
but I don't want to leave.
That's fine, we'll make you another position.
We'll just give you another position.
But it's not going to be running the day to day,
and you're going to like it more.
And I talked to him years later,
and he's like, it was the greatest thing that ever happened.
I loved my job.
Yeah, yeah.
And that's, you know, and that's kind of the,
that's part of this.
This is part of the question about
whether to be a generalist or a specialist.
It is somewhat related to the whole
where you're going to end up later.
Yeah.
I have read, I wish I could articulate it better.
I, somewhere I read about the secret
to being permanently employable,
and it has something to do with always being
the absolute best at what you do without exaggeration.
In other words, picking one thing that you are way better
than everybody else at, and focusing on that thing
and selling that thing to other people,
because that's what's going to get you in the door.
So it's going to get you hired.
And then, and then, but you know,
sometimes you can't always do that.
You got to have, I mean, they, you know,
so it's better to, I think it's better to be,
if you're trying to break into the industry,
I think it's better to be a specialist bottom line.
Depending on the industry though.
And if you're trying to become an intern, you know,
at a company and they want to mold you,
then maybe they want you to be a generalist.
I don't call myself a specialist in anything.
Yeah.
Is that, you know, I mean,
and we've worked together in part of before,
where people would always sit there and say,
I'm a subspecialist, is that I'm really going,
no, I'm not, but I do know more than everybody else here.
Yeah, and operations is really hard here
because it's hard to specialize in anything in operations.
I mean, I, but that said,
I do think you should chop things.
For example, I recently chopped terraform
from my list of skill stack stuff.
I'm not interested in learning it at all.
It's important to learn.
What's that?
Because it doesn't do its job
like I said at the very beginning.
I don't want to go there.
But, but it's, you know, it's,
there are certain things that I'm giving my permission
to not worry about not knowing in order to focus on it.
I call it managing your mind share.
It, you, every day you're playing the stock market
with your brain.
You're, you're like saying,
where am I going to invest my time today in my brain?
What technologies am I going to invest my brain
in learning and maintaining?
And you only have so many dollars to invest
only hours, whatever.
And you can't learn at all.
I mean, you can't, I mean, you can try,
but physically, maybe some people are so fast at learning
that they have, they have much capital to invest,
but other, so other people don't have that
and they have families and stuff.
So you have to pick carefully
what you're going to do with your time.
What technology are you going to learn?
Are you going to learn?
If I, if I spent all my, my time learning,
Ansible and Terraform and all that stuff,
it's going to take away from time
that I could learn Kubernetes raw, you know,
and it's set up on prams, storage clusters
and stuff FFS and NFS and, and, and all those kinds of things,
those system and kind of things that I want to do.
And God help me if I want to actually do anything
with security, because that is an entirely different field.
It's related somewhat, but it's like,
now I have to, you know,
figure out how to break into this stuff and everything.
And that's also back to the thing we were talking about.
Yesterday was health.
You know, you, I can speak from experience.
I'm pretty sure you can too.
I was, and you can ask Rob,
I worked about 20 hours a day, seven days a week,
and I would do it for years on end.
And you know, I got married when I was 30 at the time.
I think it was, no, 28 or something like that.
And it killed my marriage without a doubt.
And I had no, I looked back now and I realized it
when I was younger, I had to choose,
just like you're saying, you only have so much time to spend
and I chose it all on my work.
And so you have to decide what do you want to be?
Do you want to be that family man?
Everything else, do you want to work when you're early on
and then decide later on to have the family?
Yeah.
But you know, you only have three hours in the day
and you will burn yourself out very quickly.
And if you burn out, it burns out everybody around you.
Yeah, it does.
And one of the dangers as well,
particularly when I was working 90 hours at Nike,
that was when my wife, it's a sad story,
but my wife at the time, she actually,
we were supposed to go out to see my family,
we have a dinner and on the way there,
I said, they paged me, they want me to come in
and at least say something or pick something up.
I picked something up and they tried to get me to stay there
and to just drop me off and then have her drive the kids
off to the thing and my, she's not my ex-wife,
but my wife went ballistic.
She went in there and yelled at the top of her lungs
at everybody in there.
And I had to make a, I mean,
because we really pushed it to the maximum.
My wife was raising two young toddlers by herself at home
and barely ever saw me because I was working
90 hours a week trying to push out Nike ID
or whatever the fuck.
And, you know, and I said right there,
and I think I said, and I was Mormon,
so for me to swear it was a big deal.
And I said, fuck it.
And I walked out.
I walked out and directly against my manager
and the next day I thought I was gonna get fired.
And instead of getting fired, my manager's true story,
my manager brought me to the room and said,
we understand that you need a new transmission
for your car because it was one of the many things
that my ex-wife launched on this huge tirade.
And so they said, they said, we want to pay for it.
So funny story, I was at a startup,
I had the same thing happen where I had to cancel
one of my best friends, actually her kids,
I think it was for their birthday.
And I had to cancel it on, we supposed to go on Friday
and I had to cancel it on Thursday
because we had a huge project.
And I felt like absolute crap and everything else,
but I did it because the company needed it.
But the company actually, the owner of the company
came up to me on Monday, handed me a card
and said, I know what you did this weekend for the company
and I really appreciate it.
Here's, you know, he's like,
you're supposed to go to Disneyland and all that type of stuff.
He had kids, so he kind of understood.
But they bought me new tickets to Disneyland
with all the park pass, everything else.
And he's like, and he's like,
because I mean, I made the company like 40 grand that week.
Yeah, oh yeah.
I mean, it's like, no, no, no, no.
I need you to do it, but he's like,
you could have the entire week off, whatever you need,
go take care of the kids, everything else.
And I told him I was like,
and I stayed with the company for another two years
because of that.
Yeah, yeah, and I had a great manager
as this manager was not the best,
but I have other great managers who, you know,
I got paged and had to go in late nights
and that was not so much an issue
because everybody's asleep,
but they would send roses to my wife after that
for taking me away and stuff.
So, but yeah, you have to decide.
I mean, some jobs like doctor jobs,
they've had to deal with these things their whole life.
So you got to decide how much you want to be involved in
and what you're going to learn
and whether you're going to be on the top of your game
or you're going to be mediocre
and be able to do the minimum, you know,
these are tough decisions.
These are really tough decisions.
There's no easy answer here.
Everybody's different.
But when you're young and you're trying to break in
and you got your health
and you haven't really got ties down to people
and stuff like that,
that's the time to just, I think,
to be really aggressive in your personal learning plan
and, you know, your networking and all of that stuff
because you are at that moment
where you're really breaking in, you know,
and the tough part about that is you might not end up
spending any time finding a spouse if that's what you want.
And so then you'll end up, you know,
and a great job and you won't have made any,
you won't give any attention to your personal life,
which, you know, may or may not be somebody
that you want to, you know, live with or whatever.
And that's up to you.
Everybody's got a different take on that.
So hopefully that'll help you.
I appreciate the talk,
but I have the little one that you need to take a look at.
Yeah, I also have to go.
We are overdue as well, so.
Great talk, but thanks everybody and have a great night.
Yeah, see ya, Billy.
Okay, and Mr. Matt, Mr. Matt, how are you doing?
Are you, are you like?
Just here listening to the legends, make it nice.
Well, there are quite a few stories going on.
I love it.
I love having you here to listen.
And there's so many, so many lessons learned.
So many lessons learned.
Some good ways and some in bad ways.
Thank you for being here, everybody.
We're gonna go ahead and stop the YouTube video.
So goodbye, YouTube.
Cheers to you.
Bye-bye.
And we'll see you tomorrow.
