Hey, you want to see a really great way to copy a file between two systems, even if those
systems don't have a SSH installed?
Yeah, we found it, I mean it was suggested, to be completely fair, ChatGPT suggested it
because I was looking for alternative to baseband and they said, yeah, just use Netcat.
So the answer is use Netcat.
And it's actually really cool, we actually had some contributions from people in the
community who suggested that this is a way to, I'll get to that later, you have to wait
until the end of the video.
So anyway, so NC-U, we'll talk about that later, it stands for UDP-L, this can be separate
if you want, and then the port number, 666, because we're going to be really mean and
various.
This number is over, it was a 1024, so I don't need root access, right?
If I was anything under 1024, I don't know, say 53, spoiler alert, then you could do that.
And then this says, hey, just copy all the outputs to Tempu.
So to show you that it works, let's actually zero out Tempu.
Hey, did you know you can zero file out by just piping it to it like that?
Yeah.
That's right, or redirecting to it.
So now let's, we'll do our command again, it's going to start up a listener, it's listing,
and over here, this is a Mac, by the way, this is my laptop.
And then over here, I'm on one of my Proxmox servers with my case controller, and I actually
was like tinkering away on a script and I have read-only Git cloning happening.
So I wanted to be able to transfer between, and I could SCP it, I could start up an SSH
server, or I could run SCP from my laptop and I could copy it over, but what if I didn't
have SSH, it's just so much cooler to do that.
So I went ahead and checked it out.
So I have this Installer script to install QVIP, which if you don't know what that is,
watch another video.
This is setting up a virtual IP from a Kubernetes cluster, and it's a script I want to run
on all of my nodes, all my control play nodes, but I wrote it and compiled it here, composed
it here, and I was like, I didn't want to Tmux copy it, because then you get the extra
extraneous spaces and stuff in there, and so how can I get it over there without having
to have any problem?
Well, you just run Netcat, and we're setting it to UDP just for fun, you could just leave
it without that if you want, and then we pass the IP number of my laptop and the ports,
and then we give it the file, and then we can wait around for that, but when you control
see it, it'll actually close the connection down.
On the other side, because we're doing UDP, it doesn't close the connection down.
If you want to leave that off, it'll do the same thing.
Let's try it without UDP really quick, just to show you.
Same idea, a little bit less to type, and if you're just doing a simple thing like this,
and then you can just control C, and when you feel like it's there and it will shut down
both sides, because TCPIP has this idea of a connection, and then you can actually cat
this file or VI this file tempu, and you can see that my script has come over perfectly,
and it's completely binary compatible, so that's kind of a cool little technique.
But I'm going to end you with this, this was suggested by somebody in our community who
is in the security group, in the security land space, and you could do this, you could
do this here, and 53, and then run UDP-L, and now you are sending, as long as you put
53 on the other side, you're now sending your traffic as DNS traffic, so your packets are
completely disguised as DNS traffic, and the port 53 is likely not going to be blocked
on any path along the way, you can just use an HTTP server and a source directory.
You can fire up an ACP, there's a lot of fun ways to do this, this is basically just
all completely in the open, and you don't have PaySpin available, or you don't have
Eeks.io, which got shut down, which was my favorite, and you're not giving any of this
data out to any external entity, so it's kind of a cool little way to copy stuff, you got
to be careful though, if you're doing this in an enterprise environment, and your admins
find out that you're opening up, you're exposing ports on your login servers, that's like a
firing offense, be careful with that, make sure you don't do stuff like that, but that's
a fun little thing, make sure you learn about Netcat, Netcat is good for all kinds of reasons,
you can transfer binary files, and deep packet inspection will absolutely get you, any Palo
Alto router won't allow this, we used to use the trick of tunneling through SSH ports,
or HTTPS 443, we would set up a list of SSH servers on 443, which is normally HTTPS web
traffic, so that board students and their school classrooms could actually log into
Skillstack and do their coding, and stuff like that when they were bored in their math class,
and that got shut down, as soon as they've got a Palo Alto router, they started detecting the
traffic packets were not, they said, oh, this is an SSH packet, so packet inspection is getting
more common, it used to be expensive to have devices that would do that, school districts
didn't have the money, but they do these days, so yeah, so if you try to do this and you try to
just send random data over 443, and there's a Palo Alto router someplace along the line,
it'll shut it down, it might even flag you, so if you do that, at your own risk, bye.
