And there is no transition going on in the energy markets, it's just not visible in the data.
So in my world also data, data matters.
And the idea that we're in the middle of an accelerating transition is not showing up in the data.
In fact, if we then go one step further and talk about aspirations, which is the aspiration,
that's when you get to the delusion.
My guest today is Mark Mills.
Mark is a physicist, senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute,
and was named energy writer of the year by the American Energy Society.
He has written several award-winning books, including his latest, The Cloud Revolution,
and the Convergence of New Technologies will unleash the next economic boom in a roaring 2020s.
The Bind Administration plans to eliminate fossil fuels as a form of energy generation in the U.S. by 2035.
Not so, says Mark.
He recently sat down with him and he shared with me why the administration's transition to green energy is a delusion.
In fact, impossible.
And here we are going to need fossil fuel for at least the next several decades.
Mark, thanks so much for coming on the show.
Greatly appreciated that you used your second time.
I remember the first time you came, it was about a year ago or so.
It seems like yesterday.
Yeah, it's our anniversary.
We're going to have to get a cake.
What's the first anniversary?
I think paper or something.
You didn't send me any flowers, any chocolates.
I got nothing. I got bupkis.
Wait till after the show.
All right, so you were on the show about a year ago,
and you totally enlightened me as to fossil fuels,
EVs, green energy,
and I remember at the time you just went through,
how green energy isn't so green or clean,
especially when we talk about electric vehicles.
So before we even begin,
I want to bring you back to the State of the Union address.
President Biden is giving the State of the Union,
it was February 7th, so not too long ago.
And he goes totally off script.
It's not on the transcript. It's not anywhere.
And he says we are still going to need oil and gas for a while.
And then he tells the little anecdote,
an oil executive asked him why his company,
why his company should invest in fossil fuel projects
in light of the negative business atmosphere for oil and gas projects.
And Biden responded,
we're going to need oil for at least another decade and beyond.
You coined this a while ago,
the energy transition delusion.
Tell me why.
Well, in the world that I live in,
and this is not universal,
I like to believe words have meaning,
so let's start with,
and I recognize that words are elastic
and we change their meanings over time,
but usually it takes a long time.
So a transition means going from one place to another,
it's a transition.
And there is no transition going on in the energy markets,
it's just not visible in the data.
So in my world also data, data matters.
And the idea that we're in the middle of an accelerating transition
is not showing up in the data.
In fact, if we then go one step further and talk about aspirations,
which is the aspiration,
that's when you get to the delusion.
It's not just that it's delusional to call this a transition
because there isn't one.
And to restate what I mean by that is we're 20 years
into what we could call the era of climate awareness,
at least 20 years into it.
The Western world was spent directly about $5 trillion,
and I believe probably indirectly another $5 trillion.
But let's say rounded up to about $10 trillion
to avoid using hydrocarbons over the last 20 years.
And the share of the world's energy coming from hydrocarbons
has indeed gone down in those 20 years.
It's gone down from 86% to 84%.
So that doesn't look like a rapid transition
after $20 trillion of spending.
It doesn't look like a transition.
In fact, it's not a transition
because over that same time period,
the quantity of hydrocarbons consumed in absolute terms has gone up.
And to put it in sort of relative terms,
it's gone up by a quantity equal to adding
five or six Saudi Arabia's worth of oil production
in terms of energy equivalent.
So the world's using more of everything.
So that's not a transition.
I feel like the better word would be transformation.
We're adding new form of energy to the broad energy mix,
which is a lot of windmills and solar arrays.
This is true.
We're adding new kinds of machines like electric vehicles.
This is also indisputably true.
And then we're going to add lots more of them.
But that's not a transition.
In fact, all of history,
the development of new ways of producing
and delivering energy to society have been additive.
In fact, there's a sort of a last point
that I made many times I should make again.
It's not that I like windmills.
I've been in wind farms to stress the horizon in China.
I think they're abrasive.
I like solar arrays.
In a way, my first patent was a solar device.
It actually was a photo detector for guiding missiles.
I was a cold warrior back in the day.
So I like the technology.
I think I understand the technology.
I'm a fan of the technology.
If I were making a prediction today,
I would say that the share of the world's energy
coming from wind and solar in the coming decade,
well, at least double, at least.
We're going to,
setting aside all the money being thrown at it foolishly,
even without that,
we're going to increase the use of it.
Because it's more cost effective than it ever was.
So it has an enormous role, really important.
But here we are today,
to make the point again,
all this excitement about wind and solar.
And as of right now,
after trillions of spending,
wind and solar combined
provide the world one third as much energy
as burning wood globally, burning wood.
Wood is the oldest energy source known to man.
We still get triple the energy globally from burning wood
than we do from wind and solar combined.
That's not because wind and solar won't take over wood.
It has an America finally.
So we now get twice to three times more energy
from wind and solar than we do from burning wood.
But it just takes time.
It costs a lot of money.
So the point of the delusion language
is not meant to be an invective.
Although I guess it's obviously provocative.
It's not there in the data where we are.
And the more difficult thing to answer is,
well, why can't we get there?
I mean, so we heard it from the president.
The president in a,
I guess you could call it a form of social Tourette's maybe.
I mean, I'm not sure why.
Why Trump had social Tourette's
even more epically than this president.
Any president goes off script.
So he says something that he has to know is true.
And his energy secretary has,
since he said that off script remark,
been running around the country,
repeating that statement.
And actually went to the biggest energy conference in the world
a zero week that my friends,
Dan Jurgen, you know, pioneered and created down in Houston.
And it brings people from all over the world
and all forms of energy, not just oil and gas.
She went there and secretary of energy said,
again, we're going to need oil and gas for a long time yet.
And she sort of modified that, not just 10 years,
when the reason she modified it with sort of more open ended,
how long we'll need it is obvious.
If you thought, if you thought as a business,
pretend it's your money,
that you have to make multi-billion dollar investments today
and the government is going to ban your product in 10 years.
Would you make those investments?
Well, of course not.
And of course the current level of investing oil and gas is at a epic,
if cyclical low, maybe lower than in relative terms
that it's ever been in modern history.
And why are the investments down?
Is it because the oil and gas industry is afraid of competition?
I don't think they're afraid of competition.
What they're afraid of is regulation and taxation.
And so you slow down and wait to see when things calm down.
I'm being simplistic.
There are lots of factors,
but if you're on a board and you're sort of thinking about these things,
you're making a lot of money now at current prices,
even at current soften prices.
What's the hurry?
Let's just wait and see how things settle out.
Let's see if they're serious.
I mean, I guess I would.
This, by the way, this is already the same phenomenon
as already in utility scale wind and solar,
where investments are down as subsidies get complicated.
Nobody knows what the rules are as real costs have risen,
both for the costs of the machines and as the financing costs have risen
because of interest rates.
And as uncertainties have risen with respect to if you're the developer,
going to put billions to work,
you might begin to worry about the tolerance of markets to high cost energy.
And one of the things that is sort of central to the trope of the energy transition
is that wind and solar are cheaper.
It's just central to the thesis.
It's baked into every forecast.
And yet there is no jurisdiction in the world, in Europe or United States,
no state and no country in which the increased penetration of wind and solar
has led to reduced utility grid costs have all been associated with higher costs.
So if they're cheaper and we're at epic levels of spending,
I'm waiting for the cheaper power if you're a consumer and the inverses happen.
So I think cooler minds setting aside the hyperbole around all this stuff
and the anxiety about why we have to do this, which is beyond obvious what the motivations are.
The combination of scale imposing real costs,
the combination of the exposure of the fragility of energy systems
that the Ukraine invasion illustrated,
because what Europe did was build a more economically and structurally fragile energy system.
And by that I mean both by depending on an unreliable source of cheap energy,
but also failing to build in their own borders reliable sources of cheap energy.
So all of this, you threw out a lot of great information there.
I just want to go back to one thing,
that the Biden administration was talking about being going to zero missions
totally green energy on 2035 or 2050.
All those dates really have been thrown out the window.
There were just dates probably just to get out, right?
The numbers and the facts and the data didn't support any of that, right?
No, there's no.
I think what we have is the Energy Information Administration,
which is the Department of Energy's, I mean, tautological information agency.
It's pretty apolitical.
They've been very good over the decades in providing data based on what's actually happening
as opposed to policy aspirations.
Their goal is not to make the policy, but to make forecasts, report data retrospectively,
make forecasts based on stated policy.
And they just issued their latest analysis and they show that pushing out to 2030, 2035, 2040,
we don't get anywhere near zero missions.
If you implement everything in the Inflation Reduction Act, set aside the Orwellian name for that,
but all the spending, which is hundreds of billions,
literally probably direct spending and mandated spending,
because a lot of these things have mandates that are off book spending.
So there's probably a trillion dollars of spending in the two pieces of legislation,
the Inflation Reduction Act on wind solar transmission and electric cars.
And what you get is, you know, something like 15 to 20% reduction in US CO2 emissions by 2040 or so,
which, okay, I mean, that's not zero, but it's not zero missions.
And more importantly, as the EIA points out and others,
that reduction, which is about a gigatonic carbon dioxide, by the way,
we've already gone down about a gigatonic carbon dioxide in the last 20 years,
mostly because of the cheap shale gas replacing coal, of course.
But that's wiped out by three to four years of increased coal consumption in China alone,
never mind India, Indonesia and other places.
So there's sort of this bizarre, it's almost surreal ignoring of what's really going on in the world,
which is CO2 emissions are going up as countries expand and chase energy that's cheap.
And the CO2 emissions reductions coming in the United States come at staggering costs
and have no effect on the overall global trends.
And even Bill Gates at the last great gathering that gets vilified in Davos
gave a private interview and talked about all this stuff and he said,
and I don't think I'm going to get the quote wrong, he said two things which are important.
One is that even if we get to zero emissions by 2050, he doesn't think we can,
thinks we have to try, obviously he said that a lot, but we're not going to.
But even if we got there, then that would not mean that the world's warming won't continue.
The models would show the world will continue to warm roughly as much as the models purport it will do now.
Whether you believe the models or not, it's not the point.
The models don't show any material change going out for the next century after that,
even if we spend that kind of money.
The thing that really bothers me what animates most of my work is not,
it's not just that it's a delusionary to think that we can get rid of hydrocarbons quickly.
Not never.
Never is different than quickly, but quickly meaning in the foreseeable future in decades,
is that the cost of doing this is economically and socially destructive.
It is, in my view, immoral.
And it's immoral for this reason.
The whole world has from really all of history pursued the goal of increasing wealth for the maximum number of people,
increasing productivity.
Productivity is always defined very simplistically, but 100% accurately,
getting more outputs for fewer inputs of dollars, labor and materials.
The energy transition aspirations get the same outputs, if you're lucky,
with increased inputs of dollars, labor and materials.
This is, it puts more simply, this is wealth destroying.
And at the scales we're talking about, I don't mean having a few percent of electricity from wind and solar,
and 100 million electric cars, that's irrelevant.
It's in the noise, frankly.
But the scales imagined, it's profoundly wealth destroying.
And the people who were impacted by that are not the wealthy.
So the wealthy are less wealthy.
Okay, no one cares.
It's the wealth destruction of the middle class and the people who are poor.
That's, it's indescribably offensive to me to have a path that's doing that,
which is not the same as saying, because it always gets one labeled as all,
then you don't care about what we have to try to do.
No, I care about changing energy systems.
I may not agree with you.
It was like, it's like an interrupter.
I haven't met anyone who would say they're pro-pollution.
They want more pollution in the future.
We're all on the same side.
It's just, as you mentioned, how much it's going to cost,
and how much benefit are we going to get for each dollar spent?
It's beyond obvious the money matters,
or symmetrically follow the money,
as the old ad is about saying who benefits from different policies.
But here's the problem.
It's not really the rest of the world increasing its carbon dioxide emissions
as the West tries to reduce it at extraordinarily high costs.
It's that it's not doing what people claim.
I mean, it's dishonest, intellectually dishonest,
to pretend, for example, that electric cars are zero emissions.
They're not.
They're elsewhere emissions.
What you'd want to know is how much the emissions are today,
and how much they will be in the future as you push harder
on getting more EVs in the market to result in the higher emissions to make the vehicles.
Obviously, it offsets emissions from combusting gasoline.
This is beyond obvious and infantile observation,
but it's not zero emissions.
It's other place emissions.
People know that reflexively when you say it.
I mean, they say, okay, yeah, well, I have to have a power plant
and everybody jokes about how the power plant could be coal-fired.
Well, that's no joke.
I mean, it depends on where you charge the car,
and when you charge the car, how you're filling that battery up.
I mean, this may be obvious,
but most of the calculations that purport an electric vehicle is zero emissions
are based on average emissions from a grid.
Well, there's no average emissions in filling the vehicle.
When the vehicle is fueled is when the emissions occur.
So if you fuel the vehicle at night in some parts of the United States,
you're filling it with hydroelectricity in other places.
Let me just drill down on this.
We're on the same page and our listeners could get this.
True, there is nothing, no emissions coming out of the vehicle.
But fuel...
There's no tailpipe.
No tailpipe, so apparently there's not.
But fueling by plugging in your EV, you are creating emissions by...
Somewhere.
Electricity, which doesn't come from magic dust.
No.
So you would...
And the EV focus is important because it's the preoccupation of governments these days.
We've moved beyond mandating 100% wind and solar.
That's sort of old news and we can't get there fast enough.
So we have the grids that we have.
Grids take time to build out, but it gets that.
There's lots more wind and solar on grids depending on where you live.
The most is in Texas.
The second most is in the midcontinent of the United States.
Lots of windmills.
How far that can go is an interesting separate discussion.
And they too don't have tailpipes, so to speak.
They don't emit anything when they're operating.
They do cause emissions when they get built because windmills are built from concrete and steel,
which require metallurgical coal and coal and oil and natural gas to make and fabricate.
But measured over the lifetime of the operation, it emits less CO2 than burning natural gas.
That's true.
How much that costs you is what matters, not whether that's true or not.
But the EV has sort of become the monomaniacal preoccupation.
I think at last count, I think there's now a dozen states.
The number may have gone up in the last month.
I think the state of Maryland, where I live, as the governor said, they're going to pledge
a dozen states that are proposing by 2035 or 2040, depending on the state,
to utterly ban the sale of internal combustion engines completely.
I think the number of countries that have made such proclamations or planned to make them
is now the dozens.
So this is all predicated entirely on that these are zero emissions vehicles.
The entire predication.
I want you to hang on right there.
I want you to hang on right there because when we spoke last time, you pointed out,
Charles, these cars don't show up in the showroom by magic.
It took something to get there.
And you pointed me in the direction of Volkswagen, who had it on their site,
which showed the crossover between an EV and a, I think it was a diesel powered car.
I'm not sure what their thing was close to seven years before the 70,000 miles,
70,000 miles, which is 10,000 miles a year, let's say.
So you're talking about seven years on average.
Seven years before the EV makes sense in terms of emitting CO2.
Is that more or less right?
Yeah.
There's their study.
Others, they're not alone on this Volvo publish a similar analysis.
So what they're doing is they're doing two things.
They're counting the emissions that is needed to make the EV and its battery and the emissions needed to make the internal combustion engine.
And so these are these are the noble processes to mine minerals at copper and aluminum and refine them and assemble them into electric vehicle.
And you do the same with the steel to make an internal combustion engine.
So you count that it's called embodied emissions or embodied energy.
It's our body.
So you count what it takes just to get the vehicle to your driveway, the emissions for that.
And everything has emissions associated with manufacturing because hydrocarbons are used everywhere.
So that's the world we live in, not the world we aspire to be in in the far future.
And then then you look in the case of both these studies at the average back to the average is the average emissions from the electricity you have available in Europe.
Over the coming five to 10 years to operate the vehicle because the grid that exists is the grid that you're going to use, not the grid your imaginable exists in the future.
And yes, so what they determine is that for the first seven years of driving, if you're driven that these old vehicle you would have admitted less CO2.
That's why you bought the EV because a combination of the two emissions, the battery beam, the mining and the battery being fabricated and the power plants took you that long to pay off your carbon debt.
Now, this is important.
The Volkswagen study was based on a small EV using a battery less than half the size of a Tesla battery.
What was the range of that?
It was a really small range on that battery, right?
Yeah, it's a 250 mile range, but for a light vehicle for round town use, which is a lot of people use them for, that's fine, perfectly reasonable assumption.
But most people aren't buying those vehicles at the moment.
The biggest sellers are the vehicles with the big batteries and the range of three to 400 miles.
So, or put it differently, that means you have a battery twice as big, your carbon debt is double.
So the crossover point shifts up from seven years to 10 or 12 years, which for most people that's never.
Assume that the vehicle has a second life and in its second life, it's submitting less CO2.
Okay, but the point is the illusion that you as the owner of that vehicle have saved CO2 is totally shattered by those assumptions.
Now, here's the rub.
We actually don't know exactly how much CO2 is emitted by a specific EV because we don't know exactly where the materials came from for that EV.
We know exactly how much CO2 is emitted by an internal combustion engine vehicle because it's the same every time you fill a tank up.
There's no change. There's no mystery. It's transparent. It's obvious.
What we do know about the emissions associated with manufacturing and EV is those emissions are going up, not down.
And I guess it's not me saying this. This is the International Energy Agency, International Monetary Fund.
This is a geological, if you like, fact that the net new ton of copper or steel or aluminum or molybdenum or zinc are coming from what are called lower grade ores.
You'd have to dig up more rock to get the same pound or ton of metals.
Digging up more rock means more energy and grinding more rock more energy.
Let me stop you there one second.
You put in one of your papers that you have to move 500,000 pounds of dirt in order to mine enough metals, minerals to make one, one EV battery.
Could you just break that down for me?
So the way you sort of think about this is as you start with the point, how big is the fuel tank in an electric vehicle?
If it's the one that everybody buys, not everybody, the majority that would be purchased, they're about a half a ton or 1,000 pounds, the battery, which is a digression tells you why the electric vehicle uses a lot more aluminum on average than a regular vehicle
because you're trying to offset what used to be an 80 pounds of gasoline with a 1,000 pound fuel tank.
So you offset that by more aluminum, which also causes a lot of emissions.
It's a very energy intensive, emissions intensive metal.
And that often is not included in the calculations, by the way, it's just left out and ignored by some of the analysts.
So you have a 1,000 pound battery.
Then you look at the various components of the battery.
It's copper, it's steel, and it's aluminum has lithium, of course, because it's a lithium ion battery as cobalt.
It has far more graphite, by the way, than it does lithium or any other element.
It's the most common element, and it's a very intensive material to get to make all forms of lithium batteries.
And then what you do is you chase up, this is all findoutable, if you like, in Magic Google Machine.
You could look up, what's the average ore grade for copper?
What was it 100 years ago or 10 years ago?
What's the average ore grade for aluminum, the ore grade for nickel and all the different metals?
I don't explain it, it's clean ore grade. That is what?
So ore grade, when I was in my impetuous youth, I worked briefly for a mining company, so I have a certain affection for mining and miners.
I like a Canadian uranium gold and silver mining company.
Ore grade means the percentage of the rock that you found or that contains the stuff you want.
So the richest ore grades in metals world is iron.
Iron can be, you can find iron, which is the rock that you're digging up that contains iron can be 20% iron.
So you can do the math here, that means for a pound of iron, you dig up five pounds of rock.
Copper, however, and a lot of the other metals are much less common in the earth crust.
So the average copper ore grade now is well below 1%.
So a pound of copper, you have to dig up 100 pounds of rock, and it's declining.
This is true for every metal, the percentage of the rock that's the metal you want,
typically the single digit percentages or fraction of percent.
And if it's the rarer metals, that's all called rare earths, which aren't rare, by the way, they're actually very common.
They just, I mean, in the geology of the earth they're common, geography of the earth, they just aren't, they have rare properties.
They're called rare earths because they're properties, not because of their, we know where they are, we know how to find them, we have to dig up lots of dirt.
So you have to dig up two kinds of dirt. You have to dig up what's called overburden, you have to get to the ore body.
So if you're lucky, it's an open pit mine on the surface, you don't have to get a lot of dirt out of the way.
So you have rocks and dirt, you have to get out of the way, dig that up, it's just waste.
Then you dig up the ore, and then you're digging up again.
If it's a ton of copper, you're digging up, not 100 tons, right, you're digging over 100 tons of ore,
but you then have to crush with big energy consuming machines into powder.
You have to crush rocks, then you have to dissolve the rocks with sulfuric acid.
We're dissolving rocks, and the more rock you have to dissolve, the more acids you have to use.
The more acids, the more energy to make the acids, the more energy to keep everything clean.
It means this is a beyond obvious do loop of very energy intensive activities.
And then when you get the refined metal, you have to ship it, this is a refining process like everything else is separate from the mining.
Then you have to go to the chemical industries that convert the refined metals or chemicals into the nature of the specific material you need for the battery,
which is another chemical and energy intensive process.
When you put that all together, that's where you get this, you know, not only does it take 500,000 pounds of rock extracted for your one battery,
but all in, if you mentioned oil terms, you're going to consume between one in 300 barrels of oil equivalent in energy to make a battery that can hold about one barrel of oil equivalent of energy.
Amazing. I looked at two points I just want to share with you, I don't want to hear you keep talking because I just keep learning so much.
These earth moving machines, huge, huge, huge machines that move all this earth you mentioned.
I looked up and the average one is 237,000 gallons per year, 12 feet high off the ground. These are huge.
And that's why I guess, you know, in mining, energy costs are such a big factor, you know, you have to move this stuff.
And it just boggles my mind that people do not take this into account.
They think it's fairy dust that it comes here and I did too.
I got to admit when I got two of my two Teslas and I traded and I thought I was doing something great for the environment.
And then now every night that I plug it in, I realized that it didn't come here by magic.
All of the fuel that was needed to do that.
The second thing I just wanted to touch on for us is that most of this refinery is done in China
because who the heck wants a refinery in their backyard, is that right?
Yeah. Well, back to your machines, by the way. I love these big mining trucks.
They're literally the size of a house, these trucks.
Huge.
The size of a house. They're great.
And the idea that we're going to convert those mining trucks to not using diesel in their future is...
What are they going to do on solar? You know, these things are huge.
You can make them, you can run them on batteries too, if you make enough batteries.
But to say it's impractical to do it is a breathtaking understatement.
We're not going to be running these trucks anything other than big diesel generators and diesel engines for a very, very long time.
And by that, I mean, you know, many, many decades.
The machines themselves have a life, useful life of 30 to 40 years.
What you spend millions of dollars, tens of millions on a machine.
You can run it for a long time.
But, you know, back to your question about where the refineries are.
I mean, so they're elsewhere. They're not in America or Europe by and large.
There's some, not many, very, very few.
So what we're doing is we're making an interesting trade.
The United States in particular is domestically self-efficient.
In fact, in hydrocarbons, we're a net exporter of hydrocarbons, if you count all in.
We were almost, we were briefly a net exporter of oil and oil products.
2018, wasn't the 2018 or so we were a net exporter?
Well, it was 2019, 2020, into that year, we were still, if you count, you know, we still import because it's an arbitrage.
You know, you import crew, you export refined products.
But we are functionally independent of the need for imports functionally.
I just remember back in the 70s during the energy crisis and going to school there.
And it was always a dream that one day America would be self-sufficient.
And we had OPEC with a gun to our head.
And after the Arab-Israeli War of 1973, when they placed an embargo, the oil was there, but they ship it to us in the United States.
We were, we didn't have production, we were way, way behind.
And now it seems that we traded off OPEC for China.
We're now reliant on China refining our metals and lithium batteries.
And this whole green energy seems like to be playing into the hands of China.
Am I being a little crazy on that or is that those are the facts?
You're just stating, let's put aside the geopolitical implications and you could just look at the facts first, right?
I mean, the U.S. is a net export of hydrocarbons.
China is a net importer of hydrocarbons.
China has a market share in refining what the IEA, the International Energy Agency, calls energy minerals, the things like copper and lithium carbonate.
So the refining of energy minerals, that capacity in China in terms of global market share is double OPEC's global market share in oil.
So China by itself is the OPEC on steroids of energy minerals for refining.
Hey, if you're a reasonable person would say, well, can we do something about that?
Can we do something about that?
Couldn't we reshare those refineries?
Of course we can.
First, you have to want to.
You have to put in place the kind of regulatory environment that makes it possible to build them economically.
That hasn't happened in any of the legislation by any president, by the way, in decades.
So we don't have the appetite politically to do that, and we're not doing it, even if tomorrow we decided to do it.
The velocity of demand for those minerals, the mandating batteries be put in cars instead of gas tanks,
fastly exceeds the velocity with which we could reshor the supply of those minerals.
So the mining is elsewhere.
You can't open mines easily in America.
The administration last year reversed permits that were millions of dollars in years in development for copper and nickel mines,
three of them in the United States, just reversed the permits after many years of trying to get the permits in place and passing all the tests, if you like.
They passed in flying colors.
They were failed anyway.
So the path that we're on is unequivocally one of increasing dependencies on foreign sources for the premier materials and the refined materials.
But we're sort of hiding behind the fig leaf of subsidizing what are called EV factories or battery factories.
These are assembly plants, which are still dependent on importing metals and materials and minerals refined elsewhere.
It would be no different than the symmetrical equivalent, as you described, going back to the dawns of the energy embargoes, oil embargoes,
is that we were assembling cars in America, and we in fact had very few foreign cars sold in America at that time,
but we were very dependent on gasoline and oil imports, the fuel cars.
So what we're doing now is replicating the exact situation we were in, 50 years ago.
We just replaced refined minerals and metals with the lithium coal bolt, I think with 17 or so of minerals that we need,
are none of the friendliest places in the world for us.
We used to be one of the primary suppliers of many of these metals and minerals.
U.S. is geophysically rich in all these metals and minerals.
There's nothing wrong. Count me in the free trade camp.
I'm happy to trade with other countries.
When you get trade concentration is when you get geopolitical risks and problems.
And of course, the risk with China is beyond obvious.
You don't have to be anti-China or pro-China to observe the fact that we're in an economic conflict with them for sure.
I hope it stays just an economic.
We're certainly in political conflict with them.
And so we've handed them and they've made this decision 20 years ago was public information.
They published the fact of their goals.
So we knew what they were planning to do.
So now we have this sort of odd balance to pick up on what President Biden said and his secretary of energy have said,
world's going to use oil for a long time.
Another point to make is China is going to be dependent on oil and gas imports for a long time too.
They can't match what we've done in the oil and gas world.
They're not anywhere close to it.
So they actually have a bargaining chip now.
I mean, if you think about it in simple geopolitical terms, they had no bargaining chips.
They were very deeply dependent on vital energy imports to keep their economy running.
We could cause them a lot of pain both directly and indirectly in oil and gas markets, natural gas markets.
Well, you know, they could cause an awful lot of pain to the world as the world increases its dependency on energy minerals
to build windmills, solar arrays and electric batteries.
So it's not an accidental strategy.
It's actually a brilliant strategy, especially when you consider they now have price control over those energy minerals
because they utterly dominate the market, again, far more than OPEC.
And we don't have any effective way to offset that price control except to do the equivalent of what we did in the gas industry with minerals.
Turns out that's a lot harder.
I mean, the velocity of opening a mine versus the velocity of getting an oil well in place are profoundly different.
They're just different.
This is like, I mean, to put it very simplistically, it's like the difference in the velocity of building a mining truck and building a go-kart.
I mean, mines are huge.
They take decades to build typically.
The average in the world is 16 years to go from discovery to...
I recently heard you speak about a copper mine.
How long does it take from start to finish?
To start to digging was 16 years?
Yeah, the average IEA says is 16 years.
16 years.
But it could be 10 years in some jurisdictions if you're lucky and it could be 30 in others.
Infinite in the United States, apparently.
But if you wanted to compare that to the oil and gas world, the slowest, the most difficult projects in terms of velocity are offshore rakes, offshore oil projects.
And one of the most remarkable accelerations that's occurred, sort of untold stories, is that that's been cut in half from a decade to five years, roughly.
But still five years to do a billion-dollar offshore oil platform to go into production from discovery to production.
A shale well from...
You don't have to discover a shale.
We know where it is.
We've always known where it is.
But the decision, let's say decision to production in a shale well depends on where it is.
But six months to a year, it's very, very quick.
So you're looking at velocities in the oil and gas world that are literally 10 times faster than the velocities in the minerals world.
And the minerals world's velocities are all attached to foreign jurisdictions, which are opaque, often corrupt, subject to bribes.
To labor practices that we would, when we know about them, find offensive, child labor is rampant in the mining minerals world in Africa and South America.
To say it's not a nice thing is a breathtaking understatement.
But it's generally ignored.
And as you know, I reviewed a book for the Wall Street Journal recently called Cobalt Red, in which the author, professor of human trafficking and slavery in England, was pretty gutsy.
He went down to Congo into Eastern Congo and went visiting the minesites, which you're not supposed to visit, to try to document the extent to which the cobalt mining in particular has done what's called as euphemism artisanally,
which means by hand with a shovel, and how much of that's with children.
And of course, he reports that he thinks that the percentage that it's artisanal and child labor is vastly higher.
In official estimates, something like 20% of the mining in Congo for cobalt is artisanal and maybe half that's with children.
He thinks it's far higher, but even if it isn't far higher, it's pretty grotesque when you think about it.
Does that matter? Well, yeah, because as he points out correctly, pretty much every lithium battery and every portable device has cobalt because you need it for the energy density.
A majority of the world's electric cars still use cobalt.
And of course, those that don't use cobalt and their batteries, you can switch up the chemistry.
There's lots of different chemical soups you can use.
You use typically more nickel, for example.
So you're shifting your demand for one metal to another, which still takes you on the same path of foreign mines, foreign refining, questionable labor practices,
all of which in principle can be fixed and made transparent.
In principle, it's just, it's not there right now.
It's not where we are.
So, yeah, Siddharth Rathkarra, are you referring to cobalt red?
I'm going to have him on the show.
He's just fascinating.
He read his book.
It was just unbelievable what he did exposing.
And most of those mines in Congo were in partnership with the Chinese.
They were there in 1809.
They saw the opportunity right there that the world's going to need cobalt in every lithium battery, I think it is.
Cobalt is part of it.
Well, in every high performance device, lithium battery.
But the big, you know, one can make lithium batteries with no cobalt at all.
There's lithium iron phosphate batteries.
There's nickel manganese batteries.
There's lots of different chemical formulations.
But as you change the chemical mix, you trade off things like temperature tolerance, fire, safety, range.
The now favored lithium iron phosphate, which the pioneered in China, is a very clever battery chemistry,
very safe chemistry, relatively speaking, and safer than the cobalt class batteries.
But it has lower energy density.
So you have to either have a bigger battery to get the range.
So instead of a 1,000 pound battery, it's 1,200 pounds, which means more metals.
More aluminum, more FIFI, everything.
Yeah, more copper, more aluminum.
Or you have less range, and everybody's trying to sell range.
So in China, you don't have to sell range because there's lots of people without cars.
So really small cars with okay range, which is what's going on.
As a first vehicle, with arguably features and safety standards that most Americans won't buy and would tolerate,
it's a big market for them in China.
So that'll be true in India.
So I expect there's going to be lots more of those cars.
In fact, China's export of their electric vehicles, if you track that data, they have become a powerhouse.
And not just producing electric vehicles, but exporting electric cars and vehicles in general.
Not to us. We're not buying them yet here.
I think that'll happen, but to emerging markets, of course.
I think BYD just put a showroom together somewhere in the United States with their electric bus, which looks unbelievable.
They're going to get a foot in the toehold here.
I think probably one of the best engineered batteries for a car in the world is still a Tesla.
I think Elon Musk's focus in this early before everybody else gave him a huge head start.
Terrific team.
The engineering is absolutely brilliant.
It really is the level of the energy density and safety and quality on the battery.
I'm not talking about the car overall.
The car is fine, but it's not a standout in terms of quality.
It's just fine.
But the battery is impressive.
And the rest of the world is catching up.
They'll probably get to pair up a suit with him in due course.
And I would say BYD's batteries probably pretty much on par with Tesla's engineering, getting there.
Chinese engineering on this stuff is very good.
They've been at it a very long time.
I've traveled to China several times.
I've been in maybe, I think, 12 or 14 Chinese cities, visited battery factories there and electric car factories and bus factories.
This was pre-epic lockdowns, of course.
It was the last few years.
It's a little more difficult lately.
A friend of mine just went there and told me he was put into quarantine 10 days anyway, despite negative tests, passports, visas, vaxes.
He still had to be quarantined.
I hope it was a nice hotel.
Probably was, knowing him.
Here's the thing that's sort of puzzling to me about, and I think it's in people's heads about electric cars.
I'll come back to the mythology of this.
There are elsewhere emissions and lots of emissions.
It's elsewhere dependencies, elsewhere jobs.
All those things are all true.
But there's this sort of naive belief that it's a simpler vehicle.
I mean, look, it's just a battery and electric motor.
What could be simpler?
Look at that.
It's got to be inherently cheaper to make eventually.
Okay.
If you thought, if that were true, if it were inherently simpler, it might be true, it would be inherently cheaper to make.
But it's not true.
The battery is not like the little AA cell you stick in a child's toy.
This half-ton engine, it's actually an electrochemical engine, has thousands of parts in it.
If it's a Tesla battery, maybe tens of thousands of parts, but lots of batteries,
thousands of parts, tens of thousands of welds, cooling systems, electronic control systems, structural systems.
It's a complicated, multi-thousand-part electrochemical engine.
The motor is simple.
Electric motor has two moving parts.
In an internal combustion engine, we just flop the complexities.
The fuel tank has two moving parts.
It's an electric motor that pumps your fuel, two moving parts, a little tiny one.
The tank has nothing in it.
I just flew it.
The engine, on the other hand, instead of being an electrochemical engine with thousands of parts,
it's a thermochemical engine with thousands of parts.
We just swap mechanical, thermo-mechanical complexity for electrochemical complexities.
They're both complex.
They both wear out at the molecular level.
Wear and tear on an engine with reciprocating parts is literally at the molecular level.
It's all batteries wear out.
Electrochemistry wears out at the molecular level.
They both have performance characteristics that vary with temperature.
They both have safety issues.
The difference between them is that the complicated fuel tank in an electric car is made of expensive minerals
as opposed to cheap iron ore and steel.
The mineral costs that go into a battery constitute about 70% or 80% of the cost to make the battery.
Once you know that we now are making batteries so efficiently,
in other words, if I took all the labor out and said the labor was free,
the capital and the overhead for the automated machines is free,
that would reduce the cost of a battery by 20%, 25%.
That's it.
It's not game-changing.
What you're left with is, put differently, is the future cost of batteries for electric cars,
which dominates the cost of the electric car, is entirely dependent on the future of the mining industry.
So what we're making a bet on when we tell people they won't be able to buy internal combustion engines
is a bet that the mining industry will cooperate and provide both enough minerals and metals
and cheaply enough to keep consumers happy.
Are the mining operations in parts of the world which are not the friendliest to the United States?
Well, they're not here.
The most important point, of course, is that the cost of these minerals has been rising.
A lot of the 2022 price spikes in everything have come off of the highs, including inflation overall.
Inflation is still at a 40-year high.
In fact, it's a 50-year high, but it's below the peak of last summer.
Mineral prices similarly are still at highs, depending on the basket you choose.
But the kind of metals that go into batteries, electric cars, nickel, copper, aluminum,
they're all about 200% to 300% more expensive than five years ago.
Aluminum is at multi-decade highs still.
The lithium is still, instead of being 1,800% more expensive, it's only 900% more expensive than it was five years ago.
All the minerals and metals are going into making electric vehicles and solar arrays have become more expensive,
which is driving up the cost of those machines.
The last year and this year and next year, batteries are getting more expensive, have gotten more expensive,
wind turbines are getting more expensive, are going to get more expensive.
Same with solar.
All of them have the same characteristic.
They all depend for their price forecasts on the availability and price of the input minerals and metals.
So the most important thing that's being missed in all the ambitious plans to make this energy transition
is acknowledgement that every one of the plans, there's no exception, all plans in all countries,
all the aspirants to this transition, a certain belief that the costs of these machines will get cheaper,
not a little bit, by a lot in the future.
All of them are asserting and model all of their forecasts on every declining cost for electric cars, their batteries, windmills and solar arrays.
That model, those claims are profoundly and completely dependent on the cost of the metals and minerals.
And about that, I would take the bet.
Those are not going to go down, but I just want to know on what basis they're assuming these things will get cheaper at the rate that they're claiming.
That is, put differently, for the battery to go down by 50% in price, electric car batteries about $10,000 to make, roughly.
So for it to become, and that's about what the average price premium is for electric car over a conventional car.
Setting aside the really expensive high-end cars which comprise 5% of market, we're talking about the cars that people drive every day,
the $22,000 Nissan, the $22,000 Toyota.
To make that an electric vehicle, you basically increase its cost by $8,000 or $10,000.
The input costs.
To get the cost parity, the battery has to be free, essentially.
Because internal combustion engines don't cost much.
The government has to give a subsidy.
Well, okay.
But what's going on, and we've already seen this, is when the government gives the subsidies, the car doesn't get cheaper.
The automaker keeps the price at that, and they raise the price and extract the benefit for themselves.
But you're right.
In principle, you could subsidize it enough to make it cheaper.
Sure.
I guess the real question is, what percentage of cars are governments willing to subsidize?
100% of them, apparently, because if we ban internal combustion engines entirely, unless the electric car gets cheaper,
then we're going to have to subsidize every car everybody buys.
But Mark, do we have enough minerals in the world to make these cars?
Do we have enough copper to replace 1.4 million light vehicles?
I'm sorry, 1.4 billion light vehicles throughout the world.
So the question has to be phrased carefully, because for this reason, and this is not to criticize you, Charles,
is because the answer to the question, are there enough minerals in the world is unequivocally yes.
Because I've been accused recently of something that was the deepest cut that's ever been leveled against me in my career.
I was called a Malthusian for saying that we don't have enough minerals in the world.
As if I'm the anti-Malthusian.
Anyway, there are enough metals and minerals in the Earth's crust.
This is not, in fact, that some researchers recently in MIT put out a study to prove the obvious.
There are enough minerals in the world to finance all cars being electric.
Yes, of course there are.
That's not the point.
The point really implicit in this is, are we now mining enough?
And are the world's mines investing in enough expansion to provide that quantity of copper and aluminum nickel?
And for that, we know the answer.
And again, courtesy of the International Energy Agency, we want to have to increase the mining of things like copper by nearly 300%,
things like lithium by, I think, about 500% for graphite by about 800% or 1,000%.
The increase in mining required to meet this are numbers that have never been seen, I mean, literally in modern history.
But more importantly, even if you naively thought you could expand mines that fast enough,
you would want to ask the obvious question.
Are the world's mining industries announcing plans and investments in the coming decade that are even close to what's required?
And, you know, there are businesses that follow this stuff.
Reistad does.
They're mining and analysts that follow this stuff.
Wood McKenzie has put out very good data on this.
Roughly speaking, the world's mining industry is investing about 10% of what's required to meet 2330 goals.
10% of what's required.
We're going to miss the availability of the metals to make enough electric vehicles by 2030 by a factor of 10.
Amazing.
Absolutely amazing.
And by the way, just to close with this, even if we got rid of all of the 1.4 billion light vehicles on the road today that suck up gas,
what are we saving in the world's fuel consumption?
Because, like you said, the fuel is going to have to go somewhere.
We're going to need fuel in order to make all these other things.
So what would be the net savings?
If you could wave the wand, which we sort of did with lockdowns.
We stopped people from driving as much.
If you could wave the wand, you could eliminate about a quarter of the world's oil use.
If you did it overnight, no more driving of internal combustion engine vehicles like duty vehicles, small trucks.
And from a viewpoint of overall hydrocarbon use, oil, gas, and coal combined,
your total reduction is about 7% of the world's hydrocarbon use.
But remember, the wand waving is not happening.
We're looking at 20 years.
20 years from now, the increased consumption of oil from the mining machinery for aviation, for heavy trucks and delivery,
shipping, all the other factors would mean that even if you could get to 100% electric vehicle penetration 20 years from now,
you'd eliminate, by my estimation, about 12 to 15% of the world's oil use at that time.
So that's something.
I mean, it's a lot of oil, but the more important question that you'd have to ask if your strategist or an analyst is,
who's producing the other 80% to 90%?
Where's it coming from?
Who's investing in that?
We know OPEC is.
Russia will continue to do that.
China is investing in oil and gas expansion in their country and offshore on their shores.
I saw the last eight quarters.
On average, the U.S. oil industry has not been spending in due to the administration and political risk into capital expenditures and to drilling.
So that's eight quarters.
So our supply is greatly lagged.
I suppose you put a big frame around this.
We're talking about 100 million barrels a day is what we're sucking up, right?
So even if I take the world consumes 100 million barrels a day, so even 30 years, let's say 20 years out,
so with 10% reduction, we're still going to be using 90 million barrels or so a day at the best.
But who knows?
Maybe we'll 80%, 80 million.
It's not zero.
Anyone who thinks it's zero.
Well, that's the problem.
Even if you imagine the scenario is wildly optimistic as you get to all the bans, in fact, electric cars are at price parity or subsidized to be a price parity.
And you get you get rid of 20 million barrels per day of oil.
You still have to produce at least 80 if nothing else grows.
And since other things will grow, you're still going to have to produce closer to 90 million barrels per day.
So the question that's important because it's only 20 years away that we're going to force this quote transition.
It's back to where we started.
This is not a transition.
This is not a transition away from oil use.
It's a reduction in oil use, even if it were to happen, but it's not a transition away from the need for hydrocarbons.
And to make it apolitical to your point under this administration's hostility to oil and gas, which has been moderated by the president's temperate off script remarks.
And good, you know, okay, I'll give him credit for doing it because he had to have been realizing as soon as he said start saying it, what he was saying.
He's not whatever other people think he's, you know, he's pretty aware of what he's saying.
He may he may have loose lips, but a lot of presidents have had loose lips and when they're talking.
Here's here's the thing is that it's not just under this presidency or the previous presidency where it was much more enthusiasm oil and gas.
But if we look at the global oil and gas industry, so we get out of the United States and we look at the behaviors of capital markets broadly, where the investments come from both both the private markets,
banks and public banks, if you like the international banking system, especially the European banking system.
It's been hostile to oil and gas investment for about 15 years.
And so if we charted the total capital expenditures of the oil and gas industry globally in new production, it started started going down like it like off a cliff 15 years ago.
And then when COVID hit and then this president was elected the combination it accelerated down.
So we're now at epic lows that began predates US US lack of enthusiasm.
Let's call it and let's give the administration credit for for giving a permit to conical Phillips for dealing on the in Alaska, even though the jury is out as whether or not they've also put it into place.
We'll call it the expedite rules or at least arbitration rules so that they can get it built as quickly as they built the original in oil production in Alaska as they don't.
It's just it'll never get built under litigation to bring in 180,000 barrels when that's up and running.
It's but it's a huge it's a huge fine right I mean a really a really productive shell well and that's like putting a couple hundred really productive shell wells in place all at once I mean it's a big deal when they get when they get it when they get it going.
So we have this general antipathy in the investment world, private and public and a lot of social and public pressure a lot of overt pressure, not to invest net new money and oil and gas globally.
And it's had the effect that was intended the investments gone down it's had it's had the effect.
And the fact that sort of everybody knows if you're an analyst but it's you don't have to understand the only gas industry to know this important fact.
You have to just like food you have to plant crops every year in the only gas business when you consume energy for oil from a well or gas.
The the well eventually is exhausted its its capacity so you have to plant new the exploration each year and development is the equivalent of planting planting new food each year.
And we know the decline rate the global decline rate for all the world's oil wells if we stopped investing in new ones tomorrow with the zero every year we'd have about six or seven million barrels per day less oil available to the world.
So put differently we we have to find and put into production oil output pretty close to what Texas does every year.
So globally without without making a prediction because I know that's not what you're doing.
I hate predictions because they're my episodically get into the game predicting I get trapped into and have to make predictions the case that we all do.
This is this is simple economics one on one supply is shrinking and being crimped and not being replaced even at the rate of seven million barrels a year.
We're consuming even if we stay at a hundred million but we know that's not the case.
China was reopening India other development countries want the same benefits we all have is electricity twenty four seven or the availability of that.
Even if that stays the same we're in a situation the way I see it where five years or so from now how could oil prices not be higher.
Yeah I think if you know the thing about oil prices is the if you're really good at predicting them especially in the mid short term you're a very you're a very wealthy person as we all know it's true for all commodities.
So come on commodities are impacted by lots of variables but the oil it's easy oil is still utterly deeply tied to our economy.
First of all since this to state an obvious fact ninety ninety eight percent of all the world's movement of goods and people is moved by burning oil ninety eight percent.
And if you get all the EVs to happen in the next twenty years maybe you get maybe you get it down to ninety percent.
Right. So the world moves people and goods things we need and things we want by burning oil.
So if you if you have a recession people move less and buy less stuff.
So you're reduced to and simplistic terms moving only the essentials food right and things you have to have and have to replace you just put everything off.
So a really deep recession can really really put off the day of reckoning.
And I think we're on track for a recession. I'm not a great predictor of things but you know given inflation and interest rates and market psychology and the banking challenges sort of feels like we're already in a mild recession at least the world doesn't like recessions.
Always comes out of recessions even the Great Depression we came out of it eventually.
So the bet you're making to your point is when whatever the recession is however long we delay the oil consuming impact of growth again because all growth including the enthusiastic world will result in more more oil demand not less for the near future.
Let's forget whether we're going to 20 or 30 years for the near five years five years or so. Yeah five 10 year future.
So this is what you'd look at. You'd look at the decline curve and the investment numbers and those are two public numbers.
The decline curve we know the investments down so we know for a fact that a day in the in the not distant future could be 18 months could be as soon as 18 month could be could be if we dodge a really bad recession.
It's a geopolitical event. It could be even sooner. So who knows.
Can I give you can I give you a scenario. Here's a here's an optimist scenario with a pessimistic outcome. Peace breaks out in Ukraine and Putin leaves office doesn't have a heart attack.
He retires his depot whatever so that Russia gets out of the penalty box and the world wants to buy its oil and gas again.
Here's here's a factor that's not being threaded into the discussion about future oil prices. Russia is one of the world's biggest oil exporters.
They export seven million barrels per day. They export much more than we do there. They are like OPEC the big dogs and oil export.
But their oil is being sold at about a 40% discount to market because they're in the penalty box. We sanctioned them so everybody else is buying a discount.
If you're you don't have to again be an oil trader or an economist to know if for the first time in history.
The biggest one of the biggest exporters of a commodity in the world market has having to sell its stuff for a 40% off a prevailing price that has dragged the world price down.
If you add to that a mild recession which is where we're sitting.
If you get growth so growth will come back a piece breaks out in part because people be enthusiastic the animal spirits all which would be great.
Let's pray G negotiates a piece pray that Putin is you know exits the world stage of some some fashion that we're all comfortable with whatever that is and oil demand goes up and they start trading oil in the market again.
Wow.
The real price it just do do the math here. I mean take take seven million barrels per day which gets you to sort of a what's about three billion barrels of oil a year going at a discount of 30 to $4 a barrel.
So there's a hundred billion dollar a year discount in oil going on now because of the current price.
I mean you could argue it's a good thing that there's less money flowing to potentates who sell oil including Putin.
We're doing fine and miss record profits for Exxon and the shale guys are making a lot of money at these prices.
But the bigger economic and political question and the one out of scare politicians witness is growth comes back and piece breaks out.
What we don't want and this is what I think Chairman Powell knows by the way I think he's a very smart guy when he answered a question that he was put to him last week and Senate hearings about inflation the tool he has which is interest rates.
And we're talking about what the other things are that might push inflation.
Well the Federal Reserve has published pretty good academic papers on the other things like systemic increase in commodity prices not an episodic increase.
If you push oil back to a hundred dollars a barrel leave it there for I don't know four or five years instead of instead of four or five months.
I mean this is inflationary if it's high enough it creates recessions by itself.
This is this is when we had a high oil prices it acts like a tax on the American people.
Driving your car you have to now figure out if I'm traveling 50 miles a day to work it's going to cost you X percent more.
And I remember back last year in February time when there were calculations that I don't remember ever thinking about and hearing about that.
I heard in the 70s of well I could fill up today and here's what it cost all of a sudden energy became a big factor.
I'm in New York and I'm seeing what my gas bills are my natural gas bill each month and my electric bill they've gone through the roof.
And this is at a discounted price of crude oil.
So let's use the language that everybody now understands if they read papers systemic risk right that when you have policies that create systemic risk.
So what do we what do we do with the policy of zero percent money we create an inflate a systemic risk inflation when you inflate the cost of money you have a systemic risk and you end up with bank bank failures.
So we understand that the the the the bludgeoning of markets with ham handed tools that have systemic impacts create systemic risks.
So let me just use that language when you when you create an environment in which the world is under investing in its primary source of moving goods and people oil.
You've created a systemic risk in that systemic risk is calculable.
We know we have lots of data just like in the financial markets of what happens if you create an environment at which the markets demand for oil exceeds its supply.
Systemically not because there's a brief war in the Middle East.
But this is this is a long term trend and that's what I've been going over my numbers and looking at this for the past year.
And I'm saying myself how could oil not be higher five years from now.
And I'm glad I'm glad you just laid out the facts.
Mark we got to have you on again.
I can speak to you for hours and hours and hours folks.
Mark Mills the name of his latest book really definitely worth reading.
Even though it's let me just say the name of the cloud revolution how the convergence of new technologies will unleash the next economic boom in a roaring 2020s is a fantastic.
I think about six or 70 pages there about energy right in that book.
Yeah really great stuff.
Yeah well worth well worth reading.
And I think it's really really enlightening because you go into research and no one ever everyone talks about but no one thinks about.
I appreciate that.
I mean I'm you know I guess the reason I'm frustrated at us creating systemic risk of high cost energy is that we're sitting on the cusp as I try to outline in a book as you know of one of the greatest economic expansion opportunities in a century.
And a growth brings energy demand.
If you make energy expensive you constrain the growth you won't it's not that it will never happen is that you push it off in time.
And of course we all know time value money matters.
I mean if somebody tells you I'm going to give you a raise in 10 years you're not as happy as getting in a smaller race tomorrow.
Amazing.
For obvious reasons.
All right Mark I want to thank you once again man best of luck to you and keep doing the great work that you do you.
I follow you when you when you're speaking on YouTube but you write tons of papers and really amazing stuff.
Keep going for the next 20 years.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Good to be good to be on and I'm as you know my podcast is the last optimist.
I'm I'm still a stubborn optimist.
Oh yeah.
Last optimist by the way folks definitely worth listening to.
Mark thanks so much.
Thank you.
Take care.
Thanks for listening to this episode of the Charles Mizrahi show.
If you're a new listener welcome.
If you've been listening for a while we're glad to have you back.
Either way we'd love to know what you think of the show.
Please leave a review if you listen on Apple podcasts reviews make it easier for others to find the show.
You can also see the video of the interview on the Charles Mizrahi show channel on YouTube.
