Today we visit Antioch's, a copper mining ghost town in a remote part of British Columbia
Canada, located on the shores of Granby Bay. In 1910, the Granby Consolidated Mining, Smelting,
and Power Company, Granby Consolidated, started buying land in the area. It would become one of
the largest copper mining operations in the British Empire during this time. Granby Consolidated
started construction of the town around 1912, and by 1914, with the mine and smelter in full
operation, the town had grown to a population of around 3,000 residents. Or from the mines was
transported by rail to crushers and then processed at a nearby smelter. Health and working conditions
were very poor and a major issue. The fumes from the smelter stack were so toxic that the surrounding
forest was killed off for many kilometers in all directions around the town. Every day life was
linked to copper prices and as they slumped so would the safety and workplace accidents would
increase. The town was remote and served by steamships as there were no road or rail connections
to the outside world. That meant the town of 3,000 had to be self-sufficient and have all
the amenities to attract workers and their families. There was a general store, a post office,
hospital, a bank, a movie house, and more, and every home was heated and had running water.
In the early 1920s, a hydroelectric dam was built by engineer John Eastwood
to supply electricity to the town and mining operation. It stands at 44 meters tall and at
the time of completion was the tallest dam in Canada. For safety reasons, the dam was breached
with holes in several locations to allow water flow and to prevent overtopping of the dam after
abandonment in 1935. The current owner has plans to refurbish the dam and put it back in use.
The Great Depression drove down the demand for copper and was the beginning of the end for
Antiochs. Operations continued while a company stockpiled 100 million pounds of copper over
the next three years that it was unable to sell. The mine shut down in 1935 and the town was abandoned.
Salvage operations in the late 1930s and early 1940s for the war effort removed most machinery
and steel. In 1942, there was just a small crew remaining and a fire tore through the town and
burned down all remaining wooden structures. In total, Antiochs mines and smelters produced
some 140,000 ounces of gold, 8 million ounces of silver, and 760 million pounds of copper.
Since 1942, besides a few mining exploration companies that come and go and a company that
mines the smelter slag pile for industrial abrasives, Antiochs sits mostly forgotten.
The concrete and steel structures that still exist are being reclaimed by nature.
Join me on this adventure with my friend Mike and her guide Rob as we explore for two days to
discover what remains.
There was a stack on that steam plant we drove right in front but if you look closely you can see
there's a building that's all intact. That was the mess hall. So today I'm in the ghost town of Antiochs
in British Columbia and I'm here with Mike, Mike the Urban Explorer, good buddy of mine.
We came up here to explore this awesome place. We're here with Rob. He's showing us around.
This is the mess hall. It's one of our first stops.
You can still see the old stairs right there.
It's going to be a pretty big explore. There's lots here to see.
Lumber and stove, I've looked at these online. Stove, there's a field oven that's over there.
There's a Husqvarna meat grinder over here. I don't even know Husqvarna made meat grinder.
Quite a bit left.
Let's look at the ceiling.
The basement of it.
There's a big building, this one here, massive building, three levels.
And then if you look right behind you, concrete posts out here.
Twyford's LTD, Panley, England.
Pretty big structure.
Well they took fire very seriously with all the wood houses, everything. So what they did was
they made these fire buckets like this with a point so they're no use to anybody.
So these hung on every corner around town and they had a big barrel of water sitting right
below them but they were always on a hook so they're no use to anyone to take home because
they just tipped over. You put water in it, boom, it falls over. So people wouldn't steal these
because you know they're useless. But for them when they're on a hook on the edge of a road,
a wooden plank road, now they're valuable. They always had water in it. The kids were taught
don't touch, don't mess with these things. Yeah because fire was a serious business around the
town. So is that like the stolen light bulbs I heard about? Exactly the same thing.
The steam plant is located across Falls Creek from powerhouse number one.
During cold winter months, Falls Creek water flow was too low to fully power the mine site.
This steam plant was built to handle this shortage of power.
Yeah, very cool. These places always look cool, especially when you see nature taken back over.
Look at that moss over there. Little trees starting to grow up through.
We just started our tour but it's already just amazing.
Very cool. I love seeing all this stuff, learning all about the history
and Rob's really knowledgeable.
So this section that we're looking at basically was full of like a gyrating crusher, a ball mill,
a rod mill, a roll mill. So they had six inch rocks came in here. The train tracks were on top of
this thing. Trains came in and dumped all their ore in there. And in there it would have been a
six inch section of rock that came down and they put it into a powder through a series of mills.
So same thing they do today. They got big crushing units, gyrating crushers, balls, you know big
steelies and they put rocks in there and it just pounds it into a powder. And what the concentrator
did was take that powder, so the rock powder, took it up there and there's these big flotation
ponds in here and you'll see one of them up here and they basically add oxygen from the bottom
and then they add cyanide and other chemicals and the cyanide and the oxygen bind to the copper
and the gold, all the good stuff and then float it to the surface. They scoop it off, they dry it
and then it gets sent to the smelter and they burn it off there and that's how you get your copper.
So there's three train cars that flipped over here down the bank.
Flipped upside down. They're still in pretty good condition actually.
So did they have an accident and they just left them?
I guess. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. It's the story.
It's just the three rail cars. Weird.
We've got the wood siding and everything's got top down up.
Yeah, look at that. The grease and all the bearing hubs.
I think that's cold and cold.
So I just put quite a bit of cold and they made a real high
previous kind of cool flood of it. They burned off a bunch of stuff.
So
Originally this was a they put all the dynamite away from the mine and away from the town and then in between the railway tracks
it was easy access so we're kind of a ways away from the town away from the thing big steel door there
okay guys we're continuing on our tour of any ox and we're going up to one of the highlights here
and that's the dam it's a very impressive structure
the number two hydroelectric dam is located up falls creek roughly five kilometers from
the town site and around 2.5 kilometers above the original rock and log crib number one dam
it was built between 1922 and 1924 to meet the demands of more power and water that was
needed to operate the new concentrator and other expansions at the site the number one dam did not
have the capacity to hold back enough water in the cold winter months to meet this new demand
they needed this consistent year-round water supply that the new number two dam could now
provide john eastwood designed and engineered the dam who built the world's first reinforced
concrete multiple arch dam at hume lake california in 1908 he saw it new ways to innovate and be
efficient with minimizing the amount of concrete necessary to reduce costs which was perfect for
remote sites such as anneox the anneox dam is a remarkable example of this multiple arch design
his designs face strong opposition from engineers that were advocates for massive gravity dams
most arguments concerning eastwood's design did not necessarily focus on technical issues
but more on public confidence in this thin arch design they believed it did not provide a proper
visual assurance of strength in a 1924 letter he celebrated the anneox dam's performance and
was standing and overtopping through an uncompleted arch he was proud of the anneox dam and had said
it was the most beautiful dam in the world the dam was abandoned in 1935 and as you can see
almost 100 years later the dam is still standing and intact which is a testament to this design
if you guys know me i don't really care for heights too much
but i actually don't mind this up here
still working
yeah it's very impressive for so when was this built
seems like a very unique design too just with how the arches are just the curves isn't it or is
that yeah it is very unique this guy was very artistic and thin concrete was this whole thing
like remote places like this yeah as little concrete as possible but using all the engineering
principles you can see some stairs down there yeah this is an impressive structure
very cool
now we're just walking down to the bottom of the dam
you get a better look at it from down here very impressive structure
yeah look at the curves and the construction very unique looking
okay we're just finishing up here at the dam we're going to head on down the road
yeah very cool structure all of anneox so far is just amazing there's so much here to explore
highly recommend coming here on a tour if you can so great stuff
that's cool nine holes yeah oiled greens
yeah look at that view
so this is the slag pile it's left over there's actually a company that comes in here
and take some of this out still
very impressive building
especially when you see some of the pictures from when it was in operation the inside was just pristine
so here in anneox they mined for copper and it shut down in 1935 I believe
because the markets collapsed price of copper went down
so
yeah this building still has some wood on it so the fire didn't get this that went through in 1942
it pretty much wiped out the whole town that fire all wooden structures were pretty much burnt to
the ground there was also salvage operations too that came in and removed a lot of metals
construct it in 1911 powerhouse number one sits at the base of falls creek to take advantage
of its water source the steep hill behind the building was an optimal location for the water
pipes and penstocks this powerhouse provided electricity for the smelter mining operations and the town
that has a very cool look in here just that industrial mixed with nature
always looks cool there's a mic up there getting some photos
trees growing up moths everywhere
so
Wow, there's so many valves over here, it's like you don't even really know where to
look here, there's so much stuff.
Wow, this place is cool, huge building.
Something pretty cool that Rob told us about here, you see the brick on the end here,
how there's white brick, and then it changes to the other color, this end here was actually
added on at a later date, so they made the building a little bit longer here, I think
to fit some of this equipment in here, so this is what's called a pelton wheel, water
came in there and yeah spun this generator right here, and back over here right in the
middle there, that's actually a vertical one, good flow.
Very cool, what a place.
This is a 15 ton crane.
This concludes our day one exploration of Antiochs, next time we spend our second day
exploring the town site, cemetery, and much more, then we will conclude our trip by going
back to the source of where it all started for Antiochs, the copper.
I will take you underground to a section of the hidden creek mine where few have gone
since it was abandoned, this and much more coming up, I will see you next time.
