Imagine that you have a solid object, say, a bar of steel.
This is quite solid, I mean, it's a piece of metal, 5 eighths thick, you know, three
foot long, can't bend it with my hands, certainly, and it's sitting here on the table.
Surprising absolutely nobody, if I were to push on one end of the bar, an observer watching
the other end of the bar would be able to see it move right away.
Can confirm.
Saw it move.
But what is right away?
To help think about this, let's scale up the bar from just under a meter to about 300,000
kilometers or one light second.
Wait, what?
Anyways, let's assume that the person at the near end of the bar is infinitely strong
because now the bar weighs almost a half a million metric tons and we need to be able
to get it moving.
So now the question is, once you push on this end of the bar, how long before the observer
at the other end of the bar sees their end of the bar move?
Does it happen instantly because the metal bar is still a solid object?
Does it take the length of the bar divided by the speed of light or one second because
the speed of light is the fastest that objects can travel?
Is it C, the length of the bar divided by the speed of sound in the metal, if the material
properties are most important, or D, does the delay depend on how you hit the bar along
with some choice material properties?
So do you have a guess?
Did you leave a comment with your guess for bonus points?
This is a really fun question because it completely depends on your choice of model and almost
every physics model that we use is technically wrong, but as a general rule, the more correct
a physics model is, the more painful it is to use and implement in the real world.
One of the most common responses to my last video about the speed of electricity equated
a wire full of electrons to a water pipe full of water.
I didn't even realize I had props.
Imagine that you have a water pipe like this and it's full of water.
If you put more water in one end of the pipe, water has to come out of the other end of
the pipe immediately because otherwise you've got a full pipe and you're packing more water
into it than will fit, so it feels like something's breaking there.
But when I did this with electrons, I pumped electrons into one end of the wire from the
battery and it was a good long while before the electrons came out the other end of the
wire.
I could measure the delay.
So what gives?
To make a much more extreme version of this experiment, I decided to skip the liquid and
just go with a solid metal bar.
I mean, this thing feels quite solid.
I can't even come close to deforming it like this.
Actually, I think I might have, whoops.
Okay, yeah, it's really hard to deform.
But if I push on the end of this beam, the other end moves too, right away.
And I can use this to transmit force long distances, like pushing on this switch from
across the table.
So now we need to ask how fast that happens.
When I start pushing on this end of the bar, how long does it take for the rod to exert
force 91 centimeters away and flip the switch?
What we really need in order to start answering this question is a valid, useful approximation
for the physics that describe this bar.
The only accurate way to model the behavior of this bar, given our current state of the
art understanding of physics, is to create a quantum mechanical wave function for every
subatomic particle in every atom of this entire bar and then probably add in the complicated
things that we don't really know how they fit in, like gravity, and solve all of those
equations simultaneously.
So imagine how many atoms there are in this bar, how many particles there are in each
atom, that many equations with a few unknowns each, and solve them all at once, easy, right?
There's no way that you're ever, ever, ever even going to come close to solve that equation.
There's no computer that we could build that could model the behavior of a macroscopic chunk
of metal like this sitting on a table.
There's just no way.
So how do we ever actually do physics?
If we can't do physics accurately, well, we approximate.
So at the other end of the spectrum, from the really, really complicated quantum mechanical
description, we have the rigid body approximation and Newton's laws of motion.
And then it's really easy to say, this is one object, this object has a mass.
I apply a certain amount of force, which makes this object accelerate.
And we can even model the force of gravity as a single force on this object.
And we can model the friction against the table as a single force acting on this object.
And with math that is no more complicated than pen and paper math, you can, with great
accuracy, describe what's going to happen to this bar when I push it across the table.
And that's because all that quantum mechanical stuff just sort of averages out and doesn't
matter in the final result.
But that approximation also says that the other end of the bar moves instantaneously
when I push on this end of the bar.
And if you try to combine that with other pieces of physics like relativity and the
fact that the speed of light shouldn't really allow that to happen, it starts to be weird.
So let's do the experiment.
Now is your last chance to update your guess.
Is that delay zero seconds if it's an ideal solid object?
Three nanoseconds if the speed of light is relevant.
180 microseconds if the speed of sound is relevant.
Or about three and a half milliseconds if the speed of the hammer and the yield strain
of the steel are relevant.
Okay, so of course this is scaled down from the 300,000 kilometer long beam, but 91 centimeters
is a little easier to work with.
I have it sitting here on the table pushed up against a force sensor.
You can see that the yellow trace sort of freaks out when I push it against this backstop.
And on the other side here I have a wire clamped to it.
And this wire is actually attached to a battery or resistor and a hammer such that when I
make contact with the wire there's actually a circuit completed here.
The moment that this hammer actually touches the metal bar, if I hit the metal bar here,
that's going to start our timer of sorts.
And then as soon as this pressure sensor detects that the bar is actually pushing into it as
in the whole bar has moved a little bit and pushed into the pressure sensor, that's going
to stop our timer.
And we'll know exactly how long it takes for motion or force to get from this end of the
bar to that end of the bar.
So without further ado, zero out the cursors.
There we go.
First of all, there is a delay which is interesting in and of itself.
It means that this metal bar is not an ideal rigid body that you would use in like freshman
physics because this end of the bar can move when this end of the bar isn't moving.
So this end of the bar starts to move when this blue trace goes from low to high right
here.
And then you can see that the yellow trace is pretty much flat and then all of a sudden
it spikes way up and that spike up is when the bar starts to push into the backstop at
the far end.
And if I actually measure that out, very first bit of signal is at 100 and wow, it is exactly
180 microseconds, which I believe is the answer that I put at the beginning of the video
script.
That couldn't be more perfect.
So it's the speed of sound in the bar.
So you can see that the hammer itself only actually makes contact for about 150, 160
microseconds and then that current falls off again.
But the yellow line is what we care about in terms of the actual force at the far end
of the bar.
And if I zoom in on the yellow line, make the blue line go away here, we're basically
plotting the force that the bar exerts on that pressure sensor versus time.
And as we go along, we're going along, we're going along, there's no force on it whatsoever.
And then here at about, what is this, like 190 microseconds or so, it starts to tick up
and we get this positive force that says the sensor is being really completely compressed
and that's when the bar has actually started to move and it's pushing into the sensor.
Now you'll notice that I measured from over here because this little negative blip is
an artifact of how those sensors actually measure and when you're only compressing part
of the sensor rather than the whole thing, it actually goes negative for a minute.
I think it has to do with the capacitance.
I'll talk about that at the end.
But regardless, this is starting to feel a force exactly 180 microseconds after the initial
impulse with the hammer.
So this is sort of like the speed of motion in the bar and the velocity of this bar is
inhomogenous.
The whole thing is not actually a solid object.
So information about the velocity of this bar is not transmitted instantaneously to
all of the atoms in the bar at the same time.
So why was I so excited to run this experiment and how did I predict what the answer was
going to be, at least a close enough prediction that I knew that I'd be able to physically
measure the answer given this setup, before going out and buying a whole bunch of steel
and buying a bunch of pressure transducers, I wanted to know what was possible.
And thankfully, I have had way too much practice at trying to find useful and not too inaccurate
physics models for various situations.
In this case, because I wanted to do this with something like a bar of steel, the first
thing that came to my mind as a material scientist was the atomic structure of steel.
Now steel is primarily made of iron atoms and those iron atoms are arranged in a structure
a crystalline structure called body-centered cubic.
All of the atoms in this structure have a nucleus that we really don't care about because
we're not doing nuclear reactions and they have electrons which we do care about but
only some of them.
A good number of the electrons are free to travel throughout the metal.
They may move millimeters or centimeters away from their original atoms if you can even
define that they had an original atom.
The rest of the electrons, actually most of the electrons in a metal like this, are trapped,
they're stuck at or in between adjacent atomic nuclei and those electrons sort of act as
the glue that hold the whole structure together.
If you pull these nuclei apart with their cloud of electrons in between, they get pulled
back together.
But if you compress them, they are pushed back apart.
There's a force that always restores the bond length to some equilibrium value.
The common approximation here, the model that most people use, is that these electrons
act like springs.
So this is a more accurate BCC model.
It's hilarious to hold one of these in my hand.
I don't know about physicists but to a material scientist, this is exactly how I picture elastic
deformation in a material.
It's just a whole bunch of atoms connected by springs and the whole material sort of
jiggles around.
Plastic deformation, where the material is permanently deformed, is a whole other ball
of wax.
I actually have a separate video on that if you're curious.
But elastic deformation looks like this.
So when I hit one end of a spring model like this, I'm applying a force to the atoms right
here.
But it's clear that the other end of the material isn't going to respond instantly.
There's a wave that has to pass through the material, a wave of compressed bonds, or in
other words, a wave of pressure, or in yet other words, a wave of sound.
At the risk, or maybe at the dream of this sounding like a 3 blue 1 brown video, I want
to take a minute and appreciate how important of a connection this is.
We don't even care what material we're dealing with and we were able to link the behavior
of this rather abstract question, it is not by any means a simple question to a macroscopic
quantity that you can go look up in a textbook.
Atoms are not balls connected by springs.
We've thrown away everything about the nucleus.
We've thrown away all of the information about a lot of the atoms, the free to move
atoms in this piece of metal.
And we've really, really dramatically simplified the interaction of all the electrons that
are left.
You want to get one end of that material moving by pushing on the other end, then a compressive
wave of scrunched bonds has to pass through that material, just because it's made of bonded
atoms.
And because the speed of sound, the speed of a compressive wave traveling through material
is something that's very well studied and well documented, I just got to this point
in my head and went to go look it up.
How fast can sounds travel through the 3 foot piece of steel that I can go buy at Lowe's?
He's figured out that it was about 200 microseconds and that I would be able to measure that with
the scope and then I started investigating.
Another cool thing is that for a sharp impulse like this, once the hammer is no longer applying
force to the bar, the bar is on average moving with its final momentum.
But different parts of the bar are moving at different speeds relative to each other.
There are vibrations that travel up and down the bar, getting damped out, eliminating extra
kinetic energy as heat without changing the momentum and therefore speed of the entire
bar on average.
This project came about because I used the same balls-on-springs mental model for electrons
and a wire and this equivalence came up while I was thinking about comments on my last video.
I love it when the same models can apply to completely different physics and the underlying
mathematical machinery can be recycled.
Now as to the actual physical test, why the mess?
I initially wanted to just set a piezoelectric sensor at both ends of the rod so the rod
was sandwiched between them and hit the stack, compressing them both at once.
It's cleaner to explain and any delay of the sensor would be replicated on both sides so
it felt like a great simple solution.
Unfortunately, it was also really bad because every time I hit the sensor, I'd get this
weird negative signal before the disc actually compressed.
So and more importantly, the time delay was widely varying.
My first thought was that the sensors weren't completely pushed up against the bar so I
actually super glued them to the ends of the bar but that, weirdly enough, didn't fix
either problem.
The measurements were still all over the place and I ended up lasering out a couple of little
acrylic discs and sandwiching the piezo sensors between them.
Now that the entire disc was getting squished sort of at once, the weird negative pre-signal
was a lot smaller but the time delay is still all over the place.
After the second day of this, trying different bars and different sensor arrangements and
what not, I finally gave up and then had a literal shower thought the next morning that
the first sensor was probably squishing inconsistently and therefore causing an inconsistent delay
between the hammer and the bar so I took it out but I needed a new way to get the start
time and decided that since the bar was metal and the hammer was metal, I might as well
just clip a battery across them and wait for the electrons to flow and although it made
for a very messy looking table, it worked.
After messing with some variations on the piezo placement, experimenting with some really
kluji foil and tape capacitor sensors and running out of battery clips, I had a consistent
result but it was the wrong result and I struggled with this for a while.
It's like I'm getting the same answer every time, what could be wrong?
Maybe it's the squish of the sensor, maybe it's just slower than I thought so I tried
a bunch of different length bars.
I've got a 3 foot bar, a 2 foot bar and a 1 foot bar so I put all of these in the exact
same setup and they plotted a perfect line down to 0 and because the intercept of that
line was approximately 0, I think it was like negative 3 microseconds, that told me that
I didn't have any sensor squish and that the delay was actually proportional to the
length of the bar but it still wasn't the correct delay.
I was getting something in the vicinity of 5000 meters per second for the speed of sound
but the velocity that I was looking up, the compressive longitudinal wave speed through
steel was something like 6000 meters per second and 20% was too much.
I did not want to be 20% off for an experiment like this where I should be able to eliminate
almost everything because it's like benchtop.
My first instinct was that it was just a weird formulation of steel and I looked, the speed
of sound does vary in steel alloys but that wasn't the final answer.
The issue is that these bars are very small as in the diameter is very small relative
to the wavelength of the sound waves passing through the bars.
In general, the speed of sound if you look at the springs attached to weights model is
proportional to the strength of the spring and the size of the mass that is at each
point along the chain.
If you make all the masses heavier, then the wave propagates more slowly.
If you make all the springs stronger, then the sound wave propagates more rapidly.
When you extend these concepts to an actual chunk of material like one of these steel
bars, we can't look at the mass of every atom and the spring constant of every spring.
We have to sort of average these across the material and for an average spring constant
you take the Young's modulus which is basically how squishy is it and for the average weight
of the atoms you take the density, the average mass per volume and when you combine those
together you can calculate the speed of sound.
But there is an important extra parameter in there, the Poisson ratio which basically
says when you squish the bar end to end it actually gets a little bit wider because those
atoms have to go somewhere and as it turns out that has a strong impact on the velocity
that a sound wave travels through a material but for a really thin bar like this it actually
doesn't matter because your transmission of the sound wave is completely one dimensional.
The fact that it spreads out just doesn't have an impact.
So you get this simpler formula where you basically just have the speed of sound proportional
to the square roots of the density and the Poisson ratio and when you do that math for
steel you get the exact same answer that I did with the oscilloscope which made me very
happy once I figured it out.
So I was getting the right answer, I just didn't think I was getting the right answer
and it made me question my methods.
Also you can just go look up this one dimensional speed of sound.
Turns out it has a name, it's the extensional speed of sound as opposed to the longitudinal
speed which would have been correct if I instead had a giant cube of steel that was a three
dimensional object as opposed to these thin cylinders that were basically one dimensional.
So that is why solid objects aren't actually solid objects and also why simple demonstrations
can sometimes turn into complicated messes with electrodes clipped onto hammers.
But all of that included, I hope that you enjoyed this video and I'll see you next time.
Thanks for watching.
