["Pomp and Circumstance"]
I give you Carl Benjamin.
Very good.
["Pomp and Circumstance"]
I feel a little bit out of place,
considering the quality of the speakers so far,
so I will do my best with what I have.
But one thing I wanted to try and do with the time that I have
is come away from the world of abstractions,
because I feel that speaking entirely in the abstract
has a kind of narcotic effect on political action.
We sit there and we say,
well, for the last thousand years this has happened
and therefore this is going to happen somewhere else,
not where we are,
and there's not really a lot we can do,
and it kind of introduces a kind of fatalism into the right,
which I think the right has been laboring under for quite some time.
It's at least the duration of my entire life,
if not my father's life as well.
And so I would like to move away from that kind of perspective
and think about what we can actually do here and now
while we are alive and able to move.
Just to quickly identify why the previous speaker said
he doesn't understand why they're doing the things they're doing.
I actually spent a couple of years just studying
all of what they could call in sectionality,
what you call woke,
which is what's currently degrading and destroying our civilizations.
And there's a short answer, there's a much longer answer,
but it's basically just a communist insurrection against liberalism
to destroy our countries and to degrade you as a people.
And every mechanism that they can find to do it, they use against you.
They're attacking your gender, they're attacking your identity,
they're attacking, of course, the homogeneity of your communities,
they're attacking the borders of your countries.
They're attacking the concept of law and order itself
to make you live under a reign of what someone,
I can't remember who it was who coined this,
as an anarcho tyranny, where you are punished for any crimes you commit,
especially any kind of possibly higher crimes,
speech crimes, thought crimes, all that sort of thing.
But of course, the person who stabs someone else to death in the street
is given a lot of leeway.
And so this is all a part of reducing you,
the project of reducing you,
because the ultimate expression of,
what I'm going to describe as liberalism,
but there will be people who take exception to this,
is the abolition of any kind of boundary or border.
And that's what they're aiming for.
Because it is only through boundaries and borders
that good things can be accrued.
The distinction between the good and the bad is itself a border
and they seek to eliminate that entirely.
This really is what we have to be conscious of defending,
because it's under attack everywhere.
And they have to do this because,
if we were to use terms like freedom,
freedom in a sort of traditionalist sense
has a very right-wing bias, actually.
And we see this everywhere.
Look at the Norwegian gender paradox.
Oh, you're free to make any choices.
Great, what happens?
Well, men become more manly, women become more feminine.
And they kind of self-segregate into masculine
and feminine roles of society.
And it's the same when anyone has the freedom
to say move to a place where they want.
Well, they call this white flight or whatever else.
Freedom tends to create kind of ethnic homogeneity,
makes people fall into habitual roles in society.
Because actually, most of your daily life
is kind of unconscious, really.
You get up, you have breakfast,
you don't really think about what you're going to have for breakfast.
You just pour the milk in the bowl,
you choose a cereal, you use fancy eating.
You get up, you go to work,
you have rational thoughts so far.
You're just operating on habit,
because this is just your life.
And there's nothing wrong with this.
This is good.
This is a safe place.
If you've got to start making rational decisions
at seven o'clock in the morning,
that means something's gone horribly wrong
and there's a catastrophe.
And now you have to figure out
what you're going to do about it, right?
So this predictability of life
is what people will always aim for.
And this is why any concept of freedom we hold
has to be the antithesis of the concept of freedom
that we hold.
They will view this habitual life
as a form of oppression,
and frankly, punishment.
So anyway, I'm going to
dare to drag the conversation down into the
theater of Kabuki politics
that we all play in and we watch.
And the standards on the stage
that I've been reliably informed
isn't really where the decision's being made,
which undoubtedly is true.
But it is a place of power
that actually we could have access to.
And so this is one of those things where
we've been in the wings for such a long time.
We assume that these things are forever locked off
and out of our reach.
But actually, I think that might not be
the case for the very much longer.
Before we start, though,
I think it's worth just pointing out
that things are really grim,
not to directly repudiate a good friend of mine.
But there are actually lots of people suffering.
I mean, physically suffering.
Somewhere in England right now,
a young girl is being raped by a Pakistani gang.
It's not you, but somewhere,
someone is really suffering because of this.
I've seen too many videos of gangs of Asians
hunting down an English boy on his own
and beating him.
I've got sons, man.
I've got sons of that age.
And so, yeah, we're not
directly personally under attack right now,
but there are these people.
And I can't help but notice the quality
of the accents in this room
maybe renders these people invisible to you.
But my family don't come from prestige.
I was the first person on my mum's side
of the family to ever go to university.
My uncle Christopher was the first person
on my dad's side to go to university.
We are the poor men of the Shires,
and actually, I think things are a lot worse
than we might realise in such a glorious room
like this.
Next time, maybe we should hold this in Bradford.
Maybe, no, I'm not joking.
I'm not joking.
Things are really terrible at the moment.
England in particular, I think, is in a very dark place.
And I think I would implore you,
please stop saying good-white.
We're not talking about the Scots.
We're not talking about the Germans.
We're not talking about the French or the Poles.
We're talking about the British when we talk about London
and the people who have been displaced.
There's a lot of depth to the word England.
Because I don't consider myself to be a white man,
but I am an Englishman.
And actually, that's what I'm really concerned about
talking about.
And so, we're trapped in the typical
Blair paradigm
that we've all grown deeply accustomed to.
The stultified, sclerotic, straight jacket
of British politics
that we all feel we can't escape.
And I can see it in everyone's faces.
This is, I think, why we retreat
to positions of abstraction
and why we, in fact,
I recently had a trip to America.
And one thing I noticed was
in the circles of British right-wing thought,
British traditional thought,
we have actually advanced ourselves
to a position far ahead of the Americans.
And I think that's the case
because in America, things happen on the right.
Whether you agree with what happens or not,
they are at the forefront of some kind of motion.
Whereas in Britain, of course,
we are sat on the benches all the time
and it's really insufferable.
And so, all we can do is think in the abstract
because nothing is really happening
in front of us.
But I like to do things.
I like to put things in motion.
I like to make things happen.
So for the last three years,
we've built Notices.com,
which has turned into a kind of privately funded
traditionalist think tank
where we've been trying to figure out
exactly why all these things are happening,
which is why I can tell you exactly
what essays are the genesis
of critical race theory and intersectionality
and how they explicitly say
this is a Gramscian attack on our civilization
and the structures of our civilization
and how they're going to bring together
these other Muslims and women and whoever
to attack everything that we hold dear.
I know these things
because I've gone through and studied them in detail.
It was insanely boring, basically.
It was really boring.
But this has been a long march
that's been on for quite some time
and we have to be aware of their intent.
So, let's begin from the position
that we're in and look around
because something has happened in the last week
and unfortunately has given me some hope.
To attempt to liberate the stage from the stage master
requires a kind of conscious effort of will
to understand that the stage is controlled
by the stage master
and to be able to move in such a way
that even if certain lines are violated
that it doesn't destroy us.
I think, in a way, Britain has an advantage here
of being not really a European country
because I can imagine that in France or in Germany
or in Austria or wherever
where you have essentially full spectrum dominance
of liberal ideology
then you are going to be
the most popular political party in the country
and rendered illegal as a terrorist group
as the AFD are staring down the barrel of.
That, thankfully, isn't likely to happen
in England, in Britain.
So, actually, this gives us a bit more freedom to act
than we may have imagined.
We actually are kind of insulated,
in a way, from this kind of aggressive liberal politics
because we're such an old country
because we are, at heart, a very traditional country.
The only things that are valuable in England
are the things that are old.
Anything that's old intrinsically gains value here
and we can take advantage of that, actually.
However, I'm not trying to unreasonably
give you optimism, of course.
The country is falling apart around us.
The British people writ large
don't have a political voice in Westminster.
I saw it on LBC the other day
two Indian women arguing about what it was to be British.
Fascinating.
Tell me more.
How have you learned, studying us?
Things are dire, but, like I was saying in the beginning,
we're not dead yet.
So, as I said last week,
I believe I perceived a glimmer of light
that something may be changing
because I think that if...
There's one thing that UKIP and Nigel Farage have proven
is that there is no path around politics
in the two parties that we have.
If UKIP couldn't break through to mainstream acceptance
while getting 4 million votes,
then it can't be done, I think.
Because they had the one trump card
that will always stir the hearts and minds of the Englishmen.
I tell you, look at a map of Brexit
and where voted for Brexit,
and, of course, it is England.
It is old England because sovereignty
is the first and highest principle of English radicalism.
It has always been the sovereignty of the country.
And if on that most powerful trump card,
UKIP or the Brexit Party
can't become the largest and most secure party,
then on nothing can it be done, I think.
So, we have to, I think,
accept that our path to our goal is not around,
it has to be through.
And so the question is, which one of the uni-party
do we want to try and take over?
And that's what we have to be thinking about.
I know you don't like it.
I know you don't like it.
But what are you going to do?
Go door knock for reform?
Hang on, I'm not asking the question seriously,
I'm rhetorically asking.
Because no one's going to do that.
And even if you do, you're not going to break double digits
because for some reason the British public are just like that.
They've demonstrated that under the first plus the post system,
they will only vote Labour and Conservative in significant numbers.
It's not ideal, but it is what we have to work with.
This is the circumstance that we're in.
And like I said, I don't like it either.
I've joined third parties, it doesn't work.
I can't see it working anywhere.
So, like the great adversary of Rome, Hannibal,
we either find a way or we have to make one.
However, this time, when we win, we are going to march on Rome.
A bit of history law for you there.
But luckily for us, it seems that the pieces are aligning in such a way
that I think such a manoeuvre may be possible.
Now, I'm happy to be told that this could be a flight of fancy,
that nothing could come of this or will come of this.
And it's entirely likely that nothing will.
Tomorrow, we wake up, things are all exactly the same.
In five years time, we wake up, things are all exactly the same.
In ten years time, we wake up and we're being stabbed to death by an immigrant.
But I would like to at least try something.
Because I think that the political structures in this country
are not as actually stable as they appear.
And actually, if we just start beating on them,
maybe the established consensus will collapse.
Because I think that we can see that the moral legitimacy of Blairism has died.
Has anyone recently had an argument with a leftist,
where they've given you the, again, rhetorical question?
I assume that you argue with leftists, because they're everywhere,
presumably in the Conservative Party.
And you'll notice that their attacks on you and your arguments just fall flat.
They're totally toothless.
And now they're appealing to a past consensus
that held when the world was different to how it is 20 years later.
Because, I mean, it's all the same arguments that are being had.
You can go back and watch debates and statements and things like that
from the late 90s and early 2000s.
And it's just the same rhetoric.
But the world has changed, the world has moved on,
and we should move on with it.
Because while they have been stagnating,
actually, we have been honing and sharpening our rhetoric
and being more clever and nimble than they are,
because we've been forced to, actually.
So I'm speaking, of course, of Nigel Farage going to the Conservative Party conference.
Now, before I go on, can I get a show of hands?
Who is a member of the Conservative Party here?
I was until last year.
Doesn't count.
You know, this is fascinating.
I expected at least one hand.
Honestly, I expected half a dozen hands.
Not one person in here is a member of the Conservative Party, right?
There isn't one.
Well, but perhaps there isn't one.
It is a consequence of nobody being part of one, right?
So in previous years, it was unthinkable
that Nigel Farage would be allowed to go to the Conservative Party conference.
Now, I don't want to try and imply that Nigel Farage is perfect or anything like that,
but I think with politics, you have to work with what you have.
You have to begin in the position you are and use the clay that you have to mould
what you're trying to build.
So Nigel Farage, I think, is the closest that we have to a proper Conservative person
who is a prominent figure and politician.
Jacob Rees-Mogg, maybe, but Jacob Rees-Mogg, frankly, I see as being a bit spineless, actually.
I don't see him having the fortitude.
So I think he's concerned about his own career first
and his own reputation at dinner parties, perhaps.
Which, fine, I'm not judging, but, of course, that means we can't look to him for anything.
But I think Nigel Farage is the closest we have.
And I think this was displayed when, for some reason,
the Conservatives allowed him to go to the Conservative Party conference in his office as a journalist.
Now, I don't think Nigel Farage is a journalist.
And, evidently, the Conservative Party members didn't think that either,
because he was received like a rock star in the Conservative Party.
Like, there are videos of people, Charlie's age, swarming around Nigel Farage
to shake his hand, to get photos with him, to just bask in his presence
because he has been the only successful pro-British voice
that has, on almost every issue I care about, been totally unbending on this.
I mean, he is the only one. I saw him on Good Morning Britain yesterday,
saying, no, legal immigration is the problem. Illegal immigration is essentially irrelevant,
because it kind of is. It's only 50,000 people a year.
My God, can you imagine if 50,000 immigrants a year was the sum total of our immigration problem?
Can you even imagine? Like, that was what it was in, like, 1990.
Like, when London was an English city.
When things that happen now didn't happen.
And so, as he put it on Good Morning Britain,
half the party loves him and half hates him.
And you can tell there's a distinct demographic difference between the love and the hate.
And that's interesting because it's the young people who love him.
He himself also had an interesting response to, I mean, the whole thing was fascinating,
because everyone around us, like, Nigel, everyone here loves you.
What does that mean when the ruling party is full of people who think that you,
one of the most prominent political activists in the last 25 years, is beloved?
It's scary for a bunch of the people at the top of the Conservative Party,
because they're like, hang on a second.
This man could eat us up if he wanted.
I mean, when he just arrives as a journalist, he is a whirlwind.
And the most impressive thing, the most exciting thing is he's all any of them spoke about.
I mean, can anyone remember a single word of Rishi Sonek's speech?
No, of course not.
No one cares. Rishi Sonek is obviously a middle manager.
And it was interesting to have Rishi Sonek's response to Nigel Farage being there.
Because, I mean, what is his position in this?
Okay, I'm purportedly the leader of the party, but of course he's the puppet of the stage managers behind.
But it's hard to believe that Nigel Farage would be the puppet of the stage managers,
because he's been such an outspoken and brash man in his past.
So Rishi Sonek's putting a bit of a bind.
Oh, look, the people I rely on to go knocking on doors and to do the dog work of politics all love Nigel Farage.
Oh, well, I mean, the Conservative Party's a big tent, isn't it?
All of a sudden, even in previous areas, he never would have come.
And I think this brings us to what is likely to happen in the near future,
and what we can learn from what has happened in the recent past.
So Jeremy Corbyn should be an instructive lesson for us, actually.
Jeremy Corbyn actually showed that you can lead an insurgency in a political party, one of the main political parties.
All you need is a kind of will and enough people who will just sing your praises.
Essentially a chorus to follow you around and do all of the things that need to be done for you.
So energetically apply for positions of power, because one of the things that I think a lot of young people don't realise
is that a lot of institutions, and I mean like local parish councils, county councils, things like that,
they're run by old people, and they are thrilled.
And I learned this firsthand when my wife decided to appeal, applied to the local parish council,
and she came home and was like, yeah, I got it.
I was like, oh, well done.
She's like, yeah, I think I got it because I was just the youngest person in the room.
And I think they were thrilled that there was someone under 50 who turned up to do the work.
And so now she's essentially leading the local parish council because she's prepared to actually get involved.
Because a lot of these are aging institutions.
And I wonder, I wonder how they feel about this sort of thing in the Conservative Party.
So Corbyn showed us that you can do this, and this is how he took over the Labour Party.
It was about a third of the party became Corbynite insurrectionists.
And after various defeats, the Labour Party was in a bit of a crisis of conscience.
They didn't really know what to do.
But Corbyn came forward and he had a plan.
I've got a plan.
I mean, don't be wrong, this plan is evil.
It's weird that you can have an entire party that's like, well, I mean, we've got the supervillain there.
So I guess he's promising to destroy everything that we love,
but at least he's got an affirmative plan that moves us forward because otherwise we had nothing.
And Corbyn, as you know, was a non-starter for the British people.
Because he was a terrorist sympathiser and effectively leading a communist jihad against this country.
He was going distinctly against the grain.
And this really was the failure of Jeremy Corbyn.
And you heard it from the activists when they were on the doorstep.
Oh, I'd love to vote Labour, but I hate Jeremy Corbyn.
Why do they hate Jeremy Corbyn?
Because actually if you sit down and talk to him, not that I have,
you can tell that if you sat down and talk to Jeremy Corbyn, he'd be very polite,
he'd be quite genial and probably crack a few jokes.
He actually seemed kind of likable, to be honest.
You could hang out with him, have a beer.
As soon as you start talking about politics, you realise that, oh my God, this man's going to have me killed.
But until that point, Jeremy Corbyn is not intrinsically an unlikable man,
but the British people could sense, he obviously had such deeply ingrained anti-British views
that he elisted a disgust response from the average person on the doorstep.
And even with a candidate that flawed, I mean, like, is there a terrorist on Earth
that Jeremy Corbyn doesn't have a picture next to him?
I mean it, I'm literally curious, right?
Even a man that bad could become the leader of a party and be the wave of a political movement.
And so we can learn a simple lesson from Jeremy Corbyn.
The procedure is quite possible, because it turns out that people in Britain
don't really care about the internal factions of a political party.
They don't, I mean, it's literally you put a red rose out on a pig and they'll vote for it, right?
So they literally don't care who's running the party,
unless that guy obviously is like, look, I'm just going to ruin you and take all your money.
So the lesson that we learn from Corbyn is simply this.
Do not have a platform that the British public despises.
It's literally that simple, right?
Almost, I mean, even Tony Blair's platform, which is,
I'm going to ruin you and kill everyone you love,
just really slowly manages to pass the sniff test with the British public.
Okay, what if, and this is, again, you see this with the Conservatives.
Oh God, we're down in the polls.
Quick, throw out red meat.
Okay, but think about this.
What if the platform was red meat?
All the time, full spectrum, we're going to do what you like all the time.
Oh God, imagine where the Conservative polling would be, right?
But of course, no single Conservative can have this thought
because of the previous gentleman's explanation of the control of the stage master.
Then let's go on to Stammer very quickly.
Stammer is utterly uninspiring and his platform is exactly like him.
He's just promising more Blairism, more social contract society,
more of the same just without the idiotic, incompetent excesses of the Conservative party.
So Kier Stammer will probably get net immigration down to half a million rather than a million.
Wonderful, wonderful.
I can't wait to vote for him.
I went to kierstammer.com and had a look at his 10 pledges.
Number one, economic justice.
Oh thank God.
Number two, social justice.
Number three, climate justice.
Number four, promote peace and human rights.
Oh thank God we need more human rights.
We just need more.
Number five, common ownership.
Oh okay, come on me.
Number six, defend migrants rights.
Defend, like so.
Moreover, where are your rights?
What's the difference between a human right and a migrant right?
Do you come into this at all?
Number seven, strengthen trade unions.
Number eight, radical devolution of power, wealth and opportunity.
I mean, I don't want someone devolving my wealth any further.
I mean, I pay a lot in taxes and I don't earn that much money.
Number nine is just equality.
And number ten is effective opposition to the Tories.
I mean, I thought this was the Tory manifesto when I was reading through it.
But the point being, how does this address any of the issues we actually face?
Like what is he trying to solve?
Like what would any of this actually solve?
It wouldn't change anything.
It's not going to make the trains less crowded.
It's not going down the cost of housing.
It's not going to make your pound worth more in your pocket.
It's not going to make your street safer.
None of this applies to the real world.
This is all liberal ideology that blends into communist ideology.
The more abstracted away from reality it becomes.
But again, Starmer has some instructive lessons for us.
He's actually shown how to bring about, how to bring back a party from the brink of destruction.
Because of course, Jeremy Corbyn left the party, the Labour Party, on the brink of destruction.
And so all Starmer did is take over the party with quite clear mandate.
I wonder if Nigel Farage would have a clear mandate if he took over the Conservative Party.
I mean, I think he might.
I think he might become the Conservative Party leader with quite the majority.
If there were two-thirds were going to vote for Liz Truss.
And he'd come on.
Farage would just, and they know it.
And then Kierstarmer took over and just ruthlessly purged the left.
Entirely.
170,000 members left Labour.
He ejected a few hundred Corbynite NEC members.
And then rejected 100% of their appeals.
100%.
I don't think that's true.
Now get out.
And then he blocked any further Corbynites from advancing.
According to one ex-NEC member, as reported by Open Democracy,
they say, quote, is the party purging the left?
Absolutely.
I don't know how anyone could pretend that's not happening.
Well, that's what the Conservatives need to do as well.
That's what someone with great influence and power in the Conservative Party would need to do.
Because as I said, people don't care about the factional infighting.
Kierstarmer's at what, 45% in the polls at this point?
People don't care about factional infighting.
They just care that the party looks sensible, looks serious,
and has really message discipline.
You come out with the one thing all the time from all of the people in the party,
and you say, look, we're just going to fix the country because we're going to do this, this, this, and this.
And if your message is in line with generally what the people of the party,
the country would like and think that it's in their interest,
then you're on to a winner and you're going to go up in the polls.
It's literally that simple.
Even the manifesto doesn't really seem to matter, frankly,
because I mean, like, when was the last time the party cared about the manifesto process?
And so this brings us to today, where if you look at the polls,
and you look at what is likely to happen in the future,
you realise that the Conservative Party has never actually had such an existential crisis as it is having now.
This is actually historically unique in the 200 years of the, or so, of the Conservative Party's existence,
because they are facing a complete wipeout to a cardboard box known as Keir Starmer.
I can understand how John Major lost Tony Blair,
because you can say whatever you like about the Dark Lord,
but to say that he's not a brilliant and charismatic politician would be wrong.
You can't say those things about Keir Starmer, because that would also be wrong.
And yet, it is likely that this, if current trends hold,
the Tories will receive the most crushing defeat in British history.
So just to lay out the current state of play out of the 650 seats in parliament,
the Conservatives have 352, which means they could do anything they wanted,
Labour have 197 and the other parties have 101.
If a general election was held tomorrow, the various election predictions would have the other parties having 84,
the Conservatives having 148 and Labour having 418, and that's just the sort of middling prediction.
There are predictions as high as the Conservatives having nearly 200 seats,
or as low as 55 seats, depending on just how hard the ball is dropped.
So, and just to be clear, that is when John Major was defeated by Tony Blair,
he had 165 seats, so it would be a more catastrophic defeat.
Brutal for the Conservative Party, but brilliant for us.
I mean, this would be the best thing that could happen to the right-wing movement in Britain,
for literally generations, because it would put the Conservative Party into that crisis of legitimacy,
the people running it ran it into the ground, and then you have a lot of strings you can pull on.
For example, the Conservative Party, whether you like it or not, is 200 years old,
it's a venerable institution, that's how the people inside of it think of it.
Now, like I said, I don't think of it that way, because for my lifetime it's just been a series of stabs in the back
from the Conservatives while they smile at my face, and I'm like, right, okay, thank you, yep, I appreciate it.
Okay, at least Labour are stabbing me in the front, you know, but either way you're getting stabbed, right?
So, I don't think well of the Conservative Party, but it's important to remember that the Conservative voters
don't tend to vote Labour in great numbers, they just tend not to vote,
and they don't vote because they're not interested in being stabbed in the back anymore.
Okay, we'll just sit this one out and let you give the country over to the Communists,
and we'll just get stabbed in the front, at least dishonest.
And so, Farage would seem to be the only person in a position to do something about this,
but actually it looks like the stars have aligned and maybe something could actually be done.
I apologise, I'll hurry it up.
So, he's the only one with political chops for this.
He seems to be the only one I think we can see as a genuine track record of being on the right side of the issues from our perspective,
and he was a rock star, of course, in the party, and soon it seems to be amenable to him joining.
But as Farage himself tweeted, the Conservative Party doesn't actually believe anything.
Well, that's actually a real advantage if you do believe in something,
because that means that we're going to, you know, if we would say move into this space,
we would be engaging with people who literally didn't have a thought in their head.
Well, that's easy, because then they can be persuaded of anything, right?
So, we can lay the groundwork for a series of affirmative beliefs that the party themselves can stand on,
which would be great, and we would have a person there who was able to articulate these well,
to have a public reputation that is generally positive,
and someone we could rely upon to be against the globalist order.
I mean, Nigel Farage was on stage with Donald Trump.
Like, if anyone's not one of their guys, I think it's Farage, actually.
I think he's the only one we've got.
And as I said, the ruling elite of the Conservative Party are about to enter into an existential crisis of legitimacy.
So, right now, we should be laying the groundwork in order to undermine and overthrow them,
because actually, it might well be possible.
We've doubtless got allies within the Conservative Party.
As Farage said, he thinks half of them are his men on his side.
Half of them despise him, okay.
Well, then we should really be trying to support those people who support him,
because he supports what we believe, and we would like to win.
Because I think that's really what this all comes down to.
We have to win.
It is an existential fight for the future of our country.
I have four children, so hearing about the average demography of the various countries,
I was like, well, I'm doing great.
I've done my part, right?
But I would like them to have a future worth living in.
And so we have to win, because I don't know whether anyone knows this,
but it looks like England's dying, actually.
It looks like it's dying a slow death, and I can't stand to see it.
And so I would rather spend what energy we have left,
battering the crap out of the wet Conservatives,
until they literally feel bullied out of their own party.
And so Prime Minister Farage can come out of number 10,
and start doing whatever the hell he wants to do,
then watch them just continue to murder us.
I would rather do something.
So we need, collectively, the right needs to start thinking,
how are we getting power?
And I think that might have to mean,
and I really hate to say this,
it might have to mean joining the Conservative Party.
I can see you've done the very enthusiastic.
But it seems to be the only choice we have left.
And I think that if we follow the sort of Corbyn pattern,
so I think that actually we probably could muster quite a number of people.
So the Conservative Party is not that big.
It's only something like 200,000 people,
which, I mean, that sounds like a lot,
but actually it's kind of tiny considering we get 2,500 views a day
on our YouTube channels and websites and all that sort of thing.
In fact, we're more than that.
So actually, I think we might be able,
if collectively, to spread the word of mouth,
to actually start bringing a lot of people onside into this party,
especially for us, does join the Conservatives.
I mean, that's going to be a massive win for our side.
And so, who knows what we would have to do.
Now, the Conservative Party is a very strange and mysterious beast.
It seems that nobody actually understands how the party works.
Nobody really knows who's pulling the strings.
Basically, it'd be difficult to point at someone and say,
Faraj, you have to purge that, right?
But purge Faraj would have to.
When he was given control of the party, assuming that it's even possible,
he would have to just purge the Blair rights.
They would all have to go.
But like I said, the public wouldn't care.
And in fact, maybe they'd applaud, to be honest,
because I mean, who wants Penny Mordant in your party?
Anyone who writes a book that's endorsed by Bill Gates out, out, out.
Again, if it is the board of the Conservative Party
that actually rules the party, well, we've got to start thinking,
how do we get our guys on it?
We need to make sure that we have an affirmative,
conscious view on how to get where we want to be.
And everyone has to do their part.
And the thing is, the worst part is,
I can't really do any of this myself,
because I'm a controversial figure.
And I wouldn't want to burden them with me.
But I think that I can show that actually,
we the influencers have done what we can do,
because in 2019, there was polling done,
that I was given access to, that 14% of 18 to 25 year olds
are going to vote UKIP in this country.
It's kind of wild, isn't it?
Like, a fifth of, nearly a fifth of young people,
like, yeah, I'm voting UKIP.
Well, it's because I watch our channels.
That's because they, and I can see lots of them
in the audience here.
It's because we were doing what we could
to bring people on side.
And I think that the response to Farage
at the Conservative Party Conference has shown
that if nothing else, at least there is an appetite
that has been generated by the media
that we have been producing.
So we've done what we can do.
And there's also another interesting thing,
which is the reaction of a left to Farage
going to the Conservative Party Conference.
They are the most afraid I have ever seen them.
Don't want to see the news agents clip.
Oh my God, it was like being at a Brexit party conference.
Good.
Like, of course it should be.
They're meant to be the party of Brexit, aren't they?
They took it on themselves.
It should be that the left should feel threatened by the right.
Like, they should feel really afraid of us.
But they're not.
They're afraid that we may gain control
of the Conservative Party, and it may happen.
And this leads us to how they kind of treat Farage.
So I watched a Good Morning Britain clip of Nigel Farage
discussing him being at the Conservative Party Conference.
And it was so strange, because they didn't interrupt him
or talk over him.
They didn't call him names.
In fact, they seemed to treat him with the moral legitimacy
of someone who already was the leader of the Conservative Party,
but also the Prime Minister.
There was a weird aura around him,
because he was just completely in his element.
He knew exactly how to handle them,
and he just dealt with everything.
And they treated him like he was the legislator,
which was so weird, because he's not even a member of their party.
I don't think they give that kind of respect to Rishi Sinak.
So, what we need to do is properly organise.
We should be disciplined, alert, and we should start doing this.
We should assess our strengths,
start making inroads into the party where we can,
be active and vocally attack the David Cameron wing
of the Conservative Party,
dam their memory and make it clear to all that
is Blairism that is killing the party.
That has to be the...
If we're going to talk about message discipline,
Blairism killed Conservatism.
Blairism killed Conservatism.
Over and over, it's killed the Conservative Party.
It's why you're dead in the polls.
It's why no-one's voting for you.
You guys have to go, right?
That has to be the message discipline.
And then what Farage should do,
now, again, I'm a big fan of pie-in-the-sky thinking,
but Farage could use an organised elite of his own,
who he can rely upon in order to get things done.
If he joins the Conservative Party,
what he should do is fold the entire Brexit Party into it
and make all of the Brexit Party MEPs, candidates,
bring his administrative apparatus of that party
and start inserting it into the Conservative Party.
Now, like I said, pie-in-the-sky,
I'm sure there's loads of reasons this won't and can't happen,
but this is what you should be aiming for,
to make sure the party becomes his machine, his beast.
He has structural organisation experience a lot of these things.
And what's interesting is Farage is only 59.
Now, he's been smoking and drinking for many years.
I thought he was a bit older than that, actually.
No, no, no shade, Nigel.
He's only 59, so five years is actually not that long a wait.
So, you know, maybe when he's 65,
it'll come to the election after the next one.
And we'll have the leader of the Conservative Party, Nigel Farage,
possibly vying with Keir Star,
for who gets to be in control of this country.
It is, I appreciate it, it is possible, I'll wrap up now,
it is possible that there could be a Prime Minister Farage.
Now, like I said, I'm not saying it's unlikely,
I'm not saying it's going to happen.
What I'm saying is there are things we individually can do,
and those things would actually involve
small amounts of money and not that much effort.
Join the local Conservative Party, go to their meetings,
do small things, post on social media, all of those things.
I hate to say that this has got to be the path,
but I think it has to be the path.
But on the plus side, the arguments from the right
have never been stronger.
The arguments from the left have never been weaker.
They can't fix the problems of the country,
whereas we actually could.
So really, we need to start thinking about actually moving,
rather than just living in theory.
Unfortunately, that means engaging with the Conservative Party.
Thank you.
