Well it is an honor to be invited here and to have so many people turn up at
this this auditorium filling it up and this is where I grew up this is my old
stomping grounds so it's it's fun comes a little bittersweet but but anyway it's
fun to to be back in general to at Stanford and it's also by the way where
Gürtelescher Bach was not totally written because I wrote some two drafts of
it in in Oregon when I was a graduate student but then when I came down here
I I spent another two years working extremely hard at Pat Supe's Institute
for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences in Ventura Hall which was then
moved physically about a quarter of a mile somewhere else and it still exists
anyway so I like to improvise to some extent I'm today I have a bunch of notes
which is a little different from how I often do but I think the notes will
help me organize myself my title was the nature of categories and concepts and I
do want to try to broaden your notion of what these things are and not that I
know what your notion is but I have a general sense as to how they're used and
and I think that they're used in ways that don't represent enough flexibility
and because of to me the action of categorization is is at the core of
cognition in an interesting way that I hope to convey to you today I think that
cognitive science has been very influenced over the decades not only
cognitive science but philosophy of mind linguistics perhaps psychology cognitive
psychology as well by ideas that were inherited from mathematical logic even
mathematical logic of the late 19th century and I think that that mathematical
logic puts truth and reasoning and such things in the driver's seat or first
place and I think that that's very inappropriate for thinking about the
nature of thinking but it leaves it has it leaves and say it exactly it there
residues everywhere throughout it throughout cognitive science you'll
find people for example using the predicate calculus to represent ideas and
that's one example people talk about people use words that come from
mathematical logic even if those words have somewhat changed in their in their
connotations or in there so I'm hoping to show you that there are lots of things
that you may not have considered to be categories that I think merit that title
I would say first of all that categories as we know people like Wittgenstein and
also Eleanor Roche are things that do not admit yes and no membership exact yes
and no answers to questions is this a member of that category or not but there
are things that can be considered very strong central members things that can
be considered peripheral members things that can be considered maybe marginally
outside a category and so forth and I think that's this set it the sense of
gradation or rated membership is terribly important another thing that I want to
get across in the lecture is that I will probably say I may use a term like
member of a category because it's very tempting and so forth but you have to
kind of you know take it with a grain of salt that if I say that I mean
probably a very strong member of a category or something like that because
it's clear that things can be very dubious members of categories as well
so categories often are labeled by words and I think that everybody is
obviously familiar with sort of the most obvious ones that pop to mind things
like book or chair or table bird or something like that I was things that
that seem to be out there in the world that seem to be physical objects and
you say oh is this thing a member of the category book and like this is that a
member of the category book is this a member of the category book and so forth
so but there are I would like to say that there are categories that are
linguistically named but that are not just single words they are phrases or
they are even longer things than phrases whole whole sentences or long very long
phrases and I will give a number of examples of those okay another thing
that I'm going to say I'm just giving you a kind of a prelude or a foretaste of
what I'm going to jump into a moment is that categorization categories
themselves are very intimately related to analogy making and this is one of my
theme songs that in fact I gave a lecture here at Stanford in 2006
presidential lecture called analogy as the core of cognition and what I'm
saying today will be very similar to what I said then but it will have a
number of different examples and perhaps some some different points of
emphasis so categories usually begin as a sort of a singleton and then they
blur or spread outwards by a process of analogy sometimes I can refer to it as
pluralization when something that's a singular becomes a plural and another
another thing which maybe is more obvious with categorization than it is
with analogy making is that it happens all the time many times per second when
I talk about analogy I often begin by saying analogy happens many times per
second as opposed to being something that happens for that is sort of analogies
are not just tools for sophisticated reasoners that are reeled out in special
circumstances once every week or once every month or something like that that
analogy making is happening many many times per second by the way this phrase
many many times per second it's clear that if you ask me how many times I
would not say exactly 10 or exactly 11 times per second and even if you said in
the last second in just this last second how many analogies did you make I would
instantly say that's a meaningless question and it's tied in with a sort of
a thesis that I have that I that I state humorously but that I state seriously
at the same time which is you can't count anything and what do I mean by that I
mean that well-meaning people often ask questions that sound very sensible but
that when you look at them carefully make no or very little sense I mean they
clearly have an idea in their mind their idea is not completely vacuous but but
at trying to attach numbers often doesn't make any sense people say to me for
example how many languages do you speak and I'm always caught off guard and a
long time ago I came up with a humorous answer to answer it I say I'm pie
lingual where pie is three point one four blah blah blah and what I mean by
that is I I mean I don't really firstly I'll be rather humorous if I'd met it
literally if I meant you know I have a transcendental number you know it's an
irrational number of languages and I could tell you the millions decimal
place obviously I don't mean that I mean perhaps something like well if you were
to add them all up and they all come in different sort of blurry fractions you
might get something around three and so you know various languages that I've
studied at different levels that I've achieved at different times that mastery
and high at one time very low at another time it's all very very hard to
quantify and it's kind of meaningless and and the question is well meant but I
always kind of don't know how to answer it whatsoever because I've always loved
languages and I've studied lots of them and you know I studied a language like
Tamil and you know about 50 years ago and I probably learned about five words
how do you count how do you count that how much of a native speaker of Tamil am I
at that point you know point oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh one you know something like
that it's so how do you how do you add up these fractions anyway it's it's it's
very meaningless so another thing is is that what is a language you can't say
what a language is even if even if you thought well you agreed that counting
and how many of them I speak is blurry what even counts as a language is
extremely blurry I mean Dutch if it weren't for political history could be
considered a dialect of German that many languages spoken in China wouldn't be
called dialects it just the historical thing that they're called dialects and
one could go on and on saying things like that so it's very important to to
realize that that these questions about categories are extremely graded and
blurry okay I want I'm going to I probably I should talk about some nouns I did
already that is a language is an example of a noun that is a what one might
normally consider a category and I've already tried to show that that's a very
blurry thing but I'd like to to extend the notion of category membership to
talk about categories that are attached that have linguistic labels but the
labels are are not nouns I don't know how many people think of categories in
that way but over the past 20 30 years I've certainly come to thinking of
categories in that way myself and so I'd like to to evoke some examples for you
to suggest let's begin with verbs so I've in in this book by the way which has
two authors not one although how you can't count anything a manuel
that is my co-author equal co-author I just wanted to mention that it's very
important to me that we both be counted there we give lots of examples of
children's use of verbs very young children's use of verbs and how they
label situations in interesting ways which are very understandable but which
might sound like mistakes but which we argue are not really mistakes so let's
let me take an example little girl said I undress the banana now that's a
wonderful example of a situation that evokes the word for the verb to undress
it evoked it spontaneously you know if if she had known the verb feel perhaps
that would have been you could say that undress is is perhaps an accident although
of course once again you can't count anything and to say whether she knows
or doesn't know the word peel is is a very blurry thing in itself she might
have heard it once or twice or some indeterminate number
she might have she might have used it once or twice but but but what does it
mean to know a word I mean she might know the word undress far better than she
knows the word to peel my point is simply that when there is a label that's
very available in her vocabulary and that seems to match the situation in a
very reasonable way it's not I don't think it's reasonable to call it an
error even if in her vocabulary there is sort of on the fringes another word
that might might be considered by native speakers adult native speakers to be a
little bit more or more appropriate or my son at age five his first sentence at
school in Italian was I want to eat some water in English he wouldn't have said
that but he didn't know enough Italian to say better he said manjare and so I
want to eat some water it was in a certain sense it was an error in another
sense he blurted it out very spontaneously he may not have even thought
about whether he was groving for a word that he didn't know he just it blurred
he probably just blurted it out and children ask things like do buses eat
gas my my co-author and then your other's daughter once asked her mother
after there was a party in their in their apartment building upstairs and they
had made a lot of noise and mother was very annoyed at the neighbors
Talia woke up and she said are you going to scold the neighbors today and it's
it's a blurry sort of fringe usage of scold and on and on I have lots of other
examples but I don't want to get too bogged down in examples my point is that
each of these cases of evocation of a verb was to my mind showing that the
situation that which is a very large say of a party that takes place in the
evening involving a bunch of people who live in the same apartment building or
seem to be doing something that's somewhat annoying to a parent figure and
all of that gets perceived as one situation and it evokes the word
scold and so it's a member for for Talia was a member of the category to
scold so I'm only trying to suggest that verbs are the names of categories and
that's not just nouns they're very hard to define though and anybody who has
tried to learn a foreign language knows how often not only with verbs with all
words but but in this case just talking about verb how hard it is to select the
right verb for a certain circumstance my wife who is Chinese has the hardest
time figuring out what verb to use to apply to movies and it's interesting
because I I've never I had well maybe I thought about it but I it really became
very apparent that that she was struggling have you seen this movie have
you looked at this movie have you watched this movie and and I had a hard
time figuring out which was the right one I still do occasionally I know that
I'll come out saying things spontaneously without thinking about them and
I'll choose a native speaker verb I know you can say I've seen that movie I'm not
sure if I would say I've looked at that movie and I don't think I would I made my
might have watched that movie let's watch a movie tonight I think we could say
that so it shows it shows that they're that the the kinds of circumstances
that evoke the choice of a particular category are extremely extremely
subtle and of course in Chinese when I try to speak Chinese I have a rough time
figuring out what verb to use to say to see or what verb to use to say to read
or what verb to use to say almost anything it's very very difficult let's
take the the verb to fall I can give you about I wrote down about seven
different verbs that mean to fall in Chinese I can name them quickly for
people who are interested Luo, Jiang, Jiao, Xia, Shuai, Die, Tao, all of those are
different different ways of saying to fall some of them might apply to leaves
falling off of a tree someone some might apply to prices in the or things in the
stock market falling some might apply to somebody falling something falling out
off of the surface onto a lower surface some might apply to toppling over like a
building some might apply to a person falling down and on and on and learning
exactly which of these verbs to use in which circumstance is extremely
difficult so that it seems to me to fall is a very obvious notion but when I try
to say it in Chinese it's not obvious at all and and it's because the
categories that that language provides to its speakers are carved up in a very
subtle way now don't make don't get me wrong I'm not going to say that there
are precise boundaries and you're either right or wrong that's not what I'm
trying to say but I am trying to say that native speakers will on occasion say
no you can't say that or this would be a good to use in this situation or that
one would be to use in that situation I'm not trying to say that the boundaries
are precise I'm just trying to say that they're elusive the nature of these
blurry halos is very subtle so now let's let's move on to some some other
categories a category the set of categories that I think is interesting
is conjunctions you might never think of the conjunction as being the name of a
category but in order to get us into the right frame of mind I'd like to
suggest a category or a conjunction that is a fairly recent one I believe it
probably didn't exist 50 years ago or maybe 60 years ago I don't know that is
the category slash say something slash something so I have a few examples here
some of which by the way I just made up today one of which I heard today when
Adam Katzaf who is in this audience used it so I quickly copied it down and I'll
get up again with that example he said how do these compare with your files
slash prints and these images how do these images compare with your files
slash prints and and so I asked him why he said slash and what did he mean what
does this this thing mean and he thought about it he said well it's kind of like
and but it's a little bit there they're really this it's I don't want to separate
and say that they're they're two different things they're really sort of
the same thing they're one thing they're combined together and so I thought okay
that's that's possibly part of the answer I mean a native speaker doesn't
always know why they choose what they say it comes out spontaneously where does
it come from well from analogy making it comes from this situation is like
other situations that I've heard people use the word slash in that's where it
comes from and we don't know how how our analogy making facility works
unconsciously so I wrote some others down say an electron is a wave slash
particle another one she's a bimbo slash self-marketing genius now here's one I
really heard those I made up but here's one I heard the other day inside you
know just some random conversation woman said I make a really good
avocado dip slash salsa and you know so I can read you some others down to an
avi is a period piece soap opera he's an athlete slash entrepreneur only maybe I
don't know I mean on those ones I made up so I don't know I mean I'm a native
speaker but I didn't blurt them out I was consciously trying to make them up so
I can't claim that these are really good at usages but but my point is that you
if you'll if you open your ears you'll hear slash a lot and you know you've
already heard it but I mean open your ears and send emails if you hear slash
I may be overwhelmed but I'd love to get I'd love to get a collection of slash
usages because it's interesting it's a new conjunction and it defines a certain
set of situations of those situations are recognized by analogy to other
situations that a native speakers use that I've evoked that word in the in
this native speech of native speakers and it's a very it's a very subtle thing
now not only new conjunctions but old conjunctions are are the names of
categories so so one of my favorites is the word but and I will say that this
is one of those cases where mathematical logic had a bad effect on me I
remember maybe 50 years ago maybe more maybe 55 well not quite but anyway 53
54 years ago I was a big aficionado of mathematical logic and I was buying
math logic books all the time trying to learn from them and of course one of
the first things you learn is there are things that they call what they call them
and or logical connected I guess that's what they call them and and or if then
not and these are operators in symbolic logic and so the word and was front and
center and then they had to figure out something to say about the word but and
a couple of the books that I had said oh but is is a synonym of and it's just
got a little flavor but it's some kind of you know smoky flavor to it is what
I like and barbecue flavored and so I believe that I fell for that I thought
okay but as a synonym of and it's just kind of this funny funny quality version
of and and it took me decades to overcome that prejudice because I was so
influenced by the idea that all that mattered in languages things like truth
and falsity and later I came to realize that that's not what language is about
and and and and at that point the word but became extremely interesting to me
and I have a file at home in which I write down unfortunately I don't have
enough examples again I love examples but I have certain examples in which I see
the word and or but used in a way that I think is unquestionable or interesting
and I write them down often I'm writing an email or something like that and I
write and and then I look at it as I look back and I and I say oh that doesn't
flow very well this situation is not an and situation this is a but situation
this is a member of the category but not a member of the category and and what
am I referring to I'm not referring to some object in the world or some action
where somebody is moving their arms in some way I'm referring to a situation
in what I would call discourse space an act of communication an attempt to
communicate ideas from my mind to somebody else's mind and this attempt
often takes place or usually takes place but not completely through language
and and so this chain of this stream of symbols that is coming out of my mouth
or my fingers or whatever this it's it's a it's an event that's taking place in
discourse space and and so it this in this space there are situations and
some situations evoke this the word but more more appropriately or more the
word but is more appropriate than the word and in those situations so I'm
going to give you an example let's say here's one that I read in a bio of a
speaker who was coming to give electron translation Indiana University and it
was a translator from Japanese and that may not seem relevant but you'll see
that I think it is it was the first sentence in his little bio and it's a
Charles Fox was born in Arizona but grew up in Texas and I thought what is this
but what is why but I mean it's dime a dozen to be born in one place and grow
up in a different place I mean if it had said Charles Fox was born in Arizona
but grew up in Japan I would completely understand the the reason that this
situation vote was a member of the but category but when it was just saying
it was born in Arizona I mean we like saying he was he was born on Dolores
Street and grew up on Marata I mean there was something I don't know what but you
know born in born in Minneapolis but grew up in St. Paul it's not a but
situation and I think you recognize that I mean your laughter indicates it and and
I think that we understand that that these things are shaded and I'm not
again trying to say that some things are exactly members 100% and others are
zero there are grades and shades of membership in the but category in the
and category which is why when I'm writing I often write the word and and
then go back and say this isn't as good a member of the and category as it is of
the but category and I replace the word these are judgment calls these are not
yes or no truth statements or truth assignments here's one that I wrote in
an email to somebody it said my friend Cyril was supposed to come to my
birthday but ducked out at the last moment I didn't write but I'm sorry I
wrote and and ducked out at the last moment and then when I went back and
reread it I thought this would be better to say but and so I was changing the
membership of the category that I was assigning this full thought to another
example I did these pieces over 40 years ago and I'm still very fond of them and
I changed it to but after a while and and so on I have many many examples of
this kind of a thing the only idea that I'm really trying to get across to you
is that conjunctions are names of categories too so let's let's look at
some other conjunctions that are related to but I have an example that I think you
will find amusing I find it amusing light waves are transverse nonetheless
sound waves are longitudinal does that sound just does not compute but could you
put your did you have have you ever really tried to figure out what situations
evoke are evoked by nonetheless what is the difference between nonetheless
however but whereas on the other hand by contrast nevertheless and so forth do
have you ever really tried to analyze it no did anyone ever teach you no you've
picked it up by by osmosis and so we could go through a substitute we could
substitute for nonetheless and get some other sentences let's try this one like
waves are transverse however sound waves are longitudinal maybe here's one that
I think works just fine at least see me light waves of track are transverse but
sound waves are longitudinal sounds good light waves are transverse that being
said sound waves are good line remember it you know tell that cocktail parties
I mean it is interesting so a lot of categories that one acquires or that
one encounters in life are very hard to pin down I will always remember I'm sorry
this is a foreign language example but I'll relate it to maybe some others in
English momentarily when I was working with an annual on this book I would go
to Paris every summer for a month or so and I watched his little daughter Talia
grow up and she's now about 11 and I remember when she was about five she was
very proud new owner of a new word and this word was now it's actually not one
word it's actually two words it's par contre par and contre but for Talia who
had only heard it spoken rapidly mostly by her brothers and maybe her parents and
of course maybe some other little kids but little kids her age weren't saying I
mean four-year-olds five-year-olds don't go around saying par contre very much but
you know maybe she was six I don't remember but the point is that all kids
hear words in their environment and they they when the word what they're just
beginning to pick up the flavor of it they use it with enthusiasm with Arder
with with pizzazz I don't know that's the right word I don't know if this is a
member of the pizzazz category but but let me just say what it means par contre
means something like on the other hand so she would say something like my
brother Mika is gonna do this but I'm gonna do this other thing but she
wouldn't say par contre because she didn't know that there was a final RE in it
because when you speak quickly you say par contre par contre et moi par contre je
par contre and it just has this chunk feel to it it's just this chunk and and
she was delightedly using this word and I really noticed it it just was in his
speech all the time because she was savoring it and I think you could make
an analogy to for example an English speaker of English and a kid who's
learning English maybe at about age five using a word like definitely, something like that,
you know, and using and peppering their speech with the word definitely.
I think it would sound a little bit funny, because it would sound like they were trying
to be a little sophisticated, and they would be trying to be sophisticated, they would
be reaching just a little bit beyond the limits of their understanding, and they would misuse
it in the sense that that is adults, they would misuse it, maybe in their own sense
of what it means, it would be dead on.
Anyway, but gradually over time, everybody sort of comes to an agreement more or less
as to how what the situations are that properly evoke this word.
I remember a long time ago, there were a couple of words in French that I was, I think I used
with the same amount of enthusiasm as Talia, if there are native speakers or non-native
speakers of French, people who love the French language, you'll probably, you'll know what
I'm talking about if I say adding the comma quoi at the end of the sentence, quoi at
the end of the sentence, what the hell does that mean?
It's hard to say, but you pick it up by analogy, you sort of sense when it makes sense to put
this quoi at the end.
If you look in, if you read Catcher in the Rye, I know that's an old novel, but it's
still, it's one of my butt, and it's one of my favorite novels, I mean is that a butt
situation?
It's an old novel, but it's one of, why am I saying butt?
I mean, does it mean that old novels are unlikely to be good novels?
You see this, it's very tricky.
Anyway, you'll see Holden saying, and I don't have any examples here, so I can't quote you
many, but he'll say and all, all over the place, and what does it mean?
I don't know what it means, but I know that it's right, that I can hear it, and I don't
have any sense as to what it means exactly, but in discourse space it is really, he puts
it in, J. D. Salinger puts it in at the right spots.
It really works, and it conveys something, but what it conveys, I don't know.
Another phrase in French that I loved acquiring many, many years ago was, it's just an adverb,
normal.
Now, you might think that just means normal in English, but it doesn't.
It means something different from normally.
I have a few examples here.
I don't want to go into French too much because that would throw us off, but if you say somebody
is going home and you say, normalement sera la maison maintenant, it means hopefully he's
gotten home by now, so normalement in that sense means hopefully, or normalement on va
courir ce soir à cette heure, and that means, it sounds like it means normally we're going
to run this evening at seven, but you wouldn't say that in English.
What it means is something like, unless we change our plans, or normalement on devait
passer deux semaines en Bretagne.
That sounds like it means normally we were supposed to spend two weeks in Bretagne, but
it doesn't mean normally.
It means if there hadn't been a hitch.
So when you catch on to this kind of a usage, which no dictionary will tell you, no native
speaker will tell you, no course will tell you, nothing will tell you, you catch on
to it because you hear it in the speech of people around you, and you hear the circumstances
that evoke it, and the way it is used, by analogy, you start finding that you yourself
are feeling it come to your mind at just the right times, and it feels very exciting.
It's a marvelous moment when this phrase that you can't even define its meaning is coming
to you automatically, unbidden, magically, and that's a very exciting thing is what was
happening to Talia with Parc Pont, she was all excited, I mean she wasn't aware perhaps
that she was excited about it, but she was.
These are kinds of examples.
Now I want to say that every word choice is a category and represents analogy making
of the sort that I'm making.
So you might get skeptical and say, well, what about the most functional words, I mean
I understand that book is a category, and that even but, but what about the, and so
I want to argue that the is the name of a category as well, and I wrote up a bunch of
sentences today and I won't spend too much time on them, but just a little bit, because
I thought I was trying to show how subtle it is to know when to use the and when not
to, and I hope this set of examples at least provokes you, I mean you may not be totally
convinced by what I say here, but I was having some fun with it and so again, if you want
to email me with variations on this theme, that'll be fine.
So it has to do with the two phrases, go to school and go to the school, and what circumstances
evoke go to school, and what circumstances evoke go to the school in the mind of a native
speaker of American English, and I tried to find a bunch of examples and to show how incredibly
subtle it is and how it's again shaded and graded, I'm not saying there's an exactly
right answer in every case, but I think we would all say it's wrong to say to a kid,
you have to go to school, go to the school today, that what I think you would say it's
wrong if you meant the ordinary meaning, go to school, you have to go to school today.
So if a kid says, I have to go to school to pick up my backpack, that's a little different
because that is more the place where the backpack is and it's not exactly going to school like
to attend classes, but I think it would still be okay.
Now what if I, as the father of a child were saying something like this, would I say, I
think I would say the in this case, I have to go to the school to meet with the PTA members,
I think I would say the there. What if it were, I was talking to my kid who was going
to meet friends after school, I think I would say you have to go to school to meet your
friends this afternoon, you have to go to school to meet your friends. I think I could
say, of course you have to go to the school, but I think it wouldn't be as spontaneous.
You have to go to school to pick up your gym suit. If I were talking to some other parent,
I thought I think I would say you have to go to this school to pick up your kid's tickets.
If I were talking to my kid, I would say you have to go, I think I would say you have to
go to the school to buy the tickets for the musical. And then here are some more, you
have to go to the school and then, oh this one I think everybody would agree that the
is needed, because you're giving somebody directions. You have to go to the school and
then turn left. You wouldn't say you have to go to school and then turn left. So here's
another one. Again, blurry. You have to go to the school to get the parking permit.
I thought you had to go to the county courthouse. Anyway, my point is not to concentrate on
exactly these examples, obviously. My point is that the word the is selected by some subtle
set of cognitive actions that are allowing you to understand the degree to which the
word is needed in that situation for clear communication. And how its choice would, if
you made the, so to speak, the wrong choice, that is the non-native speaker choice, it
might confuse a native speaker. It would be pretty hard for a non-native speaker, especially
my wife, Chinese, is very, very distant from English. It would be very hard for her to
pick up this kind of subtle message. But we all pick it up as native speakers when we're
rather young. And we polish our mastery of it as we go on through life. So I'm not going
to try to convince you any longer about the, or articles, like, and so forth. I mean, I've
sort of gotten the idea across. Now, what I'd like to do is to talk also about things
that are kind of like interjections. So, for example, there are lots of phrases that come
up in, let's say, television, comedy things, or advertising, that become sort of memes
and they spread throughout the culture. So one that may not be all that current, but
one that I picked up some years ago, and that I think you all know, is, hello. And I, you
know what it means, right? It means something like, what are you talking about? You're off
your rocker. How can you say such a dumb thing? Hello. But you have to say it with the right
intonation and sort of the right sound of doubt in your voice. And when you do it, it
gets across very clearly a certain kind of meaning. And there are, you know, I keep on
coming back to this idea that I want to drill into your head, which is there are hello situations.
There are situations that evoke that. Those situations belong to a category. Again, it's
not got, you know, God-given boundaries that are precise. I'm not saying that. I'm simply
saying that there are certain categories, there are certain moments, certain situations
where I could very, it just pops to my mind automatically without even thinking. And those
are really strong members of the category. And my friend David Moser pointed out another
example of this kind of thing, which I always like. It's again an intonation one. Probably
what kinds of situations evoke that probably kind of thing with that tone attached to the
word. Again, it's a category. It's maybe a subcategory. I don't know if it is, but it
might be a subcategory of situations that would evoke the word probably. I suspect it's not
exactly. But in any case, it's an interesting thing. I've never been able to put my finger
on it. But every once in a while I hear somebody saying it, or I myself say it, and then I
try to write it down and to figure out why is it, why was that particular circumstance
one that evoked that word? Okay. Now, I've covered lots of linguistic examples that
involve essentially choices of one word or perhaps two words. I may have used some others
I don't remember. But I want to now go on to situations that whose name or categories
whose names, they still have linguistic names, but the linguistic names are considerably
longer phrases. We have situations that are very naturally labeled by the label kill two
birds with one stone. I use that phrase all the time. For example, in coming out here,
I could say I was going to Greenville and I was coming to Stanford on this trip, I'm
killing two birds with one stone. I had two visits to two different institutions out here
in the Bay Area, killing two birds with one stone. You probably use it all the time yourself.
So you know how that comes to mind spontaneously. So that's a name of a category that you all
have. It's a very standard category. Proverbs, sometimes are, well, all proverbs are names
of categories, but some proverbs are very interesting. They name subtle categories.
So there are lots of cases where in the last few years I found myself saying, well, you're
shutting the barn door after the horse is out. You know that phrase? I mean, I don't know
if everybody knows that phrase, but it is a standard phrase. And it's evoked by certain
kinds of situations. Those situations are members of the shut the horse after the barn
door after the horse is out situations. And once burned, twice shy. I say that quite often.
And so we have, let me see if I have some of the other examples of this kind of thing.
Yeah, put the cart in front of the horse. Or a couple that I like are, that's the tail is
wagging the dog. You know, case of the tail wagging the dog. And again, these are situations
that you recognize where something that seems very small seems to be taking an inordinately
large controlling role in a situation. It shouldn't be the controller, but it somehow is. And
I, you know, I had to explain this many times and use lots of examples to Emmanuel, because
in French that exact idiom or that notion doesn't exist. There isn't an idiom that corresponds
to the tail wagging the dog. And so I had to give him bunches of examples before he caught
on. Another example that also was similar was the left hand doesn't know what the right hand
is doing. Which is something that comes about, situations in organizations where they have
parts and one division of the organization isn't aware of or is doing something contradictory
to another part of the organization. And so we see these situations, the sprays comes
to mind, it's clearly a category. And how do we, what are we doing when we assign that
situation to that category? Well, we're obviously making an analogy. Now, are we making an analogy
to actually right hands and left hands knowing things? No, we're not. Their right hands don't
know anything, left hands don't know anything. So we can't be literally making an analogy
to situations where the right hand doesn't know what the left hand is doing. We're making
analogies to other instances where we've heard the phrase used. Where there may have been
some canonical instance when we were 14 years old when we heard it and it struck us. And
we might have savored it or delighted in it. And it registered in our mind, maybe unconsciously,
but it registered in our mind. And that moment planted the seed then for a whole host of analogies
that would be made later in life. And they would grow, the concept would grow and grow
and become more and more flexible until it was, this concept, this label could be applied
to situations of many, many sorts. But it is not handed to you on a silver platter, so to speak.
And so you have to acquire it over time. And Emmanuel was the perfect example of this. I had to give him
many examples of left hand doesn't know what the right hand is doing until he sort of caught on.
Now, as a last category of, sorry, category of categories, I guess it is a last category,
but I want to talk about ones that don't really have linguistic labels. Because up until now,
I've just been talking about categories that either are labeled by nouns, by verbs, by conjunctions,
by adverbs, or by phrases, or by, well, idioms, idiomatic phrases. But I'd like to come to categories
that are, that have no linguistic label. I mean, you can always describe them using words,
but they don't have a standard linguistic label either in, either in general in the society or even
for yourself as a private individual. They don't have labels. So in this book, and by the way,
many of the ideas that I'm talking about today are in this book. In this book, we talk a lot about
a particular category, which I now have a label for, but you have to understand that for years
there was no label for it. Now it has become a labeled category, and I'll give you the label right now.
But it was not labeled when it first happened, of course. And that is, the label is Danny at the Grand
Canyon. And this was when my son Danny was one year old and three months, and we were driving
across the country to come out to California from Indiana, and we were making a tour of,
my wife Carol and I were making a tour of certain national parks, and among which was the Grand
Canyon. And so when we were at the edge of the Grand Canyon one afternoon, Danny was sitting
cross-legged on the ground looking at ants. And I found this somewhat ironic, because here we were
at the edge of this incredibly large chasm. By the way, I'll interrupt. I want to tell you something
amusing. Danny is now 20, whatever he is, 25, almost 26, and he loves wilderness, and he recently
had a job in Arizona where he was working, and he was very close to the Grand Canyon. He made
sure that his friend Charles took a photograph of him sitting at the edge of the Grand Canyon
looking at some ants. So I have that up in my study. But anyway, so Danny at the Grand Canyon
was this odd situation of a child so young that he wasn't able, he wouldn't have been able, I mean,
if I had said, Danny, look at the Grand Canyon, it would have just been colors on his retina. He wasn't
old enough to have the concept of even any distance at all, like a mile, even if it were inside in a town,
but let alone out in space and vertical mile and 15 miles across and 200 miles long. I mean, those concepts
were not available to him, and his visual system was not built to recognize things. I mean, at that age,
it was going to acquire the ability to recognize things that were very far away and to estimate distances.
But, you know, at one age, one, nothing like that existed. And so it was perfectly sensible for him.
But as his father, you know, I found it amusing nonetheless. I mean, it was probably inappropriate of me to find any music,
but I did. Well, it registered in my mind, but I didn't give it a name. It was just a memory. It was just a fact,
something that had once happened. But then about, I guess it was 2005, so this was 16 years later,
a group of us were in Egypt, and we were taking a boat down the Nile or up the Nile, whichever it might be,
and we came to the Temple of Karnak, which is, you know, huge pillars, and I don't know what they're made of,
but anyway, lots and lots of huge, impressive pillars with, you know, thousands of years of history behind them.
And at one point, our friend Dick, who was an adult, reached down to the ground and picked up a bottle cap,
and he was making a bottle cap collection of bottle caps only in Egypt, just Egyptian bottle caps in East Ireland,
and he picked it up. And all of a sudden, out of nowhere, spontaneously, my memory came of Danny at the Grand Canyon.
Now, obviously, this was a reminding by analogy. I mean, I don't need to spell it out, but I will a little bit.
You know, Karnak, the big towers, was the Grand Canyon, the big hole. Dick was Danny, the bottle cap, or it was the ants.
And I probably could spell out some other things as well, but I mean, it's self-evident, the basic idea of this analogy.
And so, all at once, these two events were sort of superimposed on each other by my unconscious mind, which made it now conscious.
And I wasn't aware at the time that I was creating a category, that I had begun with a singleton, which was Danny at the Grand Canyon,
and had spread it out. I was just saying, oh, this reminds me of Danny at the Grand Canyon. That's all I said.
But the moment I said that, then my conscious mind started saying, oh, yes, that means this is an analogy, which means the two are superimposed,
which means I'm beginning to make a category, which means actually I already had a category when I had only one member.
It was just a category that had one member, and now it's starting to blur out.
And at this point, now this category has become an explicit category in my mind.
Now it has a name, and it includes all sorts of things. It includes a mosquito biting Albert Einstein.
It includes me and Emmanuel in Paris working on our book instead of going to the Louvre, or doing all the standard tourist things that you would do in Paris.
It's sort of like, what are we doing? We're paying attention to only this tiny little TV thing instead of enjoying the magnificent city of Paris, and on and on.
And eventually it has come to me to mean just the idea that you focus on what you are interested in and what you're capable of focusing on.
And you ignore a huge amount of stuff that other people would think of as gems.
And so it's kind of become a very, very broad category now, which has the name Danny at the Grand Canyon.
And so this is sort of how categories grow and how they are retrieved by analogy.
And that sort of theme of this book, that categorization and analogy making are the flip sides of the very same mental process.
There are really two ways of talking about the same thing.
And I'd like to finish up with just one kind of memory of myself at when I was, I don't know, in my early 20s.
I remember we drove around Italy and I loved the typefaces.
I will always remember my extreme love of the variety of typefaces.
And for each letter of the alphabet, they were so many incredibly new inventive ways of realizing, let's say the letter A or the letter B or the letter Q or whatever letter you want.
And I was in love with all the different, well, not the members themselves, but the very vast variety of members of the categories A through Z.
They were, I was really thrilled by that.
And it's something that I still do love.
And as a matter of fact, it's evidenced by the cover of this book where you can see several A's superimposed, some of which are really very wild.
The most wild one is the pink one, which belongs to a typeface called Magnificat.
But my point is that since then I have always been fascinated by categories, but I would say that today my fascination of categories is a little bit different from my fascination back then.
Now I'm fascinated by the amazing variety of categories that exist, the strange kinds of categories that we use so unconsciously, so spontaneously, many of which have labels, many of which do not.
Danny at the Grand Canyon started out unlabeled and has now acquired a label, but many of our concepts, each person has their own memories that they have stocked over their lifetime and that are capable of being evoked by situations but which don't have any labels, linguistic labels.
So I just, you know, now every culture, but I think American culture very strongly, has a tendency to, just like Talia, was very excited by the new concept par contre.
She was very excited by that.
Our culture as a whole is excited by the creation of new categories.
It lives by the creation of new categories and we have a long list of recent categories in the book and I just read you a handful of them and I think you'll see why it's fun to collect these things and to see how rich they are.
Here positive and negative feedback, vicious circle, self-fulfilling prophecy, famous for being famous, backlash, supply and demand.
I'm just going to skip down here. Internet, web surfing, upload, download, video game, viral video, virtual reality, chat room, data mining.
I'll skip around a little bit more here.
Okay, this is your funny ones.
Hail Mary Pass, sudden death playoff, bungee jumping, make an end run around someone, ultramarathon, pole dancing, speed dating, multitasking, brainstorming, name dropping, channel surfing, soap opera, chick flick,
and sound bite, buzzword, eye candy, fast food, frequent flyer miles, wind chill factor, roller coaster in-joke, outsource, down size upgrade,
fractal shape, breast implant, Barbie doll, trophy wife, surrogate mother, first lady, worst case scenario.
It never stops. These are all categories, and I rejoice in it, and I find it absolutely astounding.
And it is what makes us different from all other animals, because other animals, although they can acquire and extend their repertoire of categories,
they cannot do it the way we do it, snowballing and snowballing and building and building and building and building.
That is what makes us so unique. It is the way in which we continue to accrete categories to our set of categories from the moment we are born to the moment we die.
And I rejoice in that, and I find it fantastic. Thank you.
Now, I know some people want to leave, and that is, we should let them leave, give them a minute or so.
But I was told to ask people who wish to pose questions to use one of the two microphones in the aisles so that we can get your questions recorded.
So, I guess people can leave while we are taking the questions.
Yeah, go ahead.
Thank you for a very stimulating talk. I have a lot of questions, but I am going to implement it just a little bit.
Yeah.
So, you mentioned the word discourse space?
Discourse space?
Yeah, because, and that kind of strikes me as a mathematician. In the more logical world, you have these sentences, and they are supposed to be about models.
And so, I was wondering, you know, can you maybe expand on this idea of what, you know, the discourse space is, and how these categories that you were talking about sort of more apply to the discourse space rather than just that.
Well, let's see if I can say it very well. I don't know if I can say it terribly well. Did you hear the question? Was the question here ago?
It was really trying to define the notion of discourse space.
I guess things that take place in ordinary three-dimensional space are very complex. I mean, if I said to you, sachet, the verb sachet, what is a sachet?
You know, it would be, I could try to show you, you know, I don't know if I would do a good job of it, but I could recognize sachet if I saw it reasonably well.
Now, what about segway? Let's see if I can segway into this thing. Segway is something that takes place in discourse space. It's a sort of a logical follow-on.
It's like there, but it's, maybe there are two things that seem separate, but you're trying to connect them by some, you're trying to establish a link between them that maybe ordinarily there wouldn't be one, but I'm trying to segway from one idea into another idea if I can do it gracefully.
Okay, so that's an element of, that's a thing that happens in discourse space. I would say, as I said earlier, discourse space is the space in which, the space of abstract events that are communicative events where we're trying to communicate, transmit some idea from ourself to somebody else.
And it might even be, you don't even know who you're talking to, that it could be discourse when I'm writing a book. I'm not actually speaking to anyone, but I have sort of an imaginary person that I'm talking to.
And so the discourse is the attempt at communicating an idea, and there is this sense that I have in my head that there is a kind of flow. There is flow that makes things stick together, that you might call it logic, but it's not logic in the sense of, you know, truth preserving.
It's logic in the sense that it seems to make a seamless link between certain kinds of ideas. That is a segway does. But flow in general is trying to do that. And discourse space is the space in which those things take place.
I don't know how to define it other than that. It's the space of linguistic communication.
My point was there that I think that very often people don't. What I was trying to wake people up to is just the idea that the word but is a perfect example of an event in discourse space.
It's music. Choosing the word but and inserting it in is an event in discourse space, which it's the label of a situation and it's choice of a category. And so that's what I was trying to say. I think I haven't said anything that I didn't already say, but I don't know how to say it any other way.
That's as good a job as I can do. You've said as a mathematician and I can't connect it to mathematics because I don't think it's a mathematical space. I might also mention, since you are a mathematician, that mathematicians, there is a theory of categories.
I mean, that's an official branch of mathematics. But I don't think it has anything at all to do with what I'm talking about.
Hi. There's a catch phrase that mostly military officials, military government officials and conservatives seem to throw into their discourse that I've been trying to figure out what category it is. It annoys me, but I'm not really sure why it annoys me so much, but it's at the end of the day. Would you like to comment on that?
Well, I didn't connect it with any particular set of people. I have heard the phrase and I do remember hearing it and probably I've heard it spoken undoubtedly by political people, but I didn't realize that it had any sort of association with a particular political set of people.
And I haven't thought about that category, but I do appreciate the example. I think it's a very good example of one of these linguistic phrases that sound so simple, but what you're saying is that it actually has a lot of depth associated with it.
And in this case, part of the depth is that it contains a kind of a political undertone or subtone, which I think is part of what you're saying. And I think that shows the subtlety of the phrase and the subtlety of the acts of analogy making that are going on in the minds of people, both who use it and who hear it.
But I can't comment on that phrase particularly because I never really thought about it over there.
Hi. I would like to hear your thoughts on highly contentious categories. Slash, what do you think about the category of consciousness and intelligence?
And for example, whether binding of consciousness has anything to do with how you make analogies and identify categories.
Consciousness? Well, is that what you're asking about consciousness? And you mentioned intelligence also.
Well, in my book in 2007 called I'm a Strange Loop, I have a whole dialogue called, I don't remember what it's called exactly, but something like consciousness equals thinking.
And there I try to argue for that idea that thinking and consciousness are the same thing.
And intelligence, not all thinking is highly intelligent, but I like to think that if you want me to try to define intelligence, if that's what you're looking for.
I have a definition, which Manuel and I put into this book, my definition for intelligence is it's closely related to what I said today in a certain sense.
That is, it is the ability to put one's finger on the essence of a situation rapidly.
And that means to categorize rapidly, to make analogies rapidly, to find compelling or strong analogies rapidly.
And that's my notion of intelligence. And that's, let's say, high quality thinking.
But thinking in general might be the same thing. It's just maybe the retrieval of the categories isn't quite as efficient or isn't quite as on target.
But it is still the same mechanism. And I claim that that is indistinguishable from consciousness.
I've started to notice recently that new technological media have enabled, it seems to me, a faster rate of creation of new concepts.
A good example is the Internet, on which, or should I say Internet, on which Internet versus Internet.
Never mind. On the I-N-N-E-R, is that what you're saying?
Internet. The T is often alighted.
Internet.
Yes. Anyway, on the Internet, people have started saying things such as, I skipped class today because Douglas Hofstadter lecture.
So I was wondering, like, what do you think it is about these media in which maybe it has something to do with, like, the fact that we're writing things down that are not intended to be spoken, but then they become spoken at some point?
I have another example which I'll give you. This is interesting. I mean, you know, the, what do they call them, the emoticons.
And at first I really thought they were dumb and I didn't use them. But by God, I use them. No, I only use one, two types. Well, maybe even more.
Basically, I use the colon followed by the right parent. I use the semicolon followed by the right parent. But they're not names of the same category.
They are definitely not names of the same category. And I use a colon followed by a left parenthesis. And maybe I use one or two others. I don't know.
And so these are examples of modern memes that the web or the, you know, various kinds of media have brought into existence.
And the one that you mentioned, I guess, because, used as a shortened form of, because of, sort of, is that it?
Yeah, I mean, I can see that this is evolving. This is happening. I'm not a party to that. I don't, I actually go the other way.
Whenever I do, you know, when I type a thing, I don't use two thumbs. I use one finger and I, and I never use any abbreviations.
I make a point of not using abbreviations. And so, except the dot, the two dots and the thing, that's sort of an abbreviation, but it's become its own thing.
But I see it happening all the time. I agree with you. You're probably right. There is pressure. There's lots of pressure to create new categories and to, sort of, make communication more efficient.
Absolutely. I mean, that's the nature of, of communication these days. It'll probably always was, but it's certainly very intense. I agree with you.
You pointed out how new categories enrich language, but language also is being corrupted, at least formal English is being corrupted.
For instance, it is I sounds bizarre these days. So what does one do? Does one go with the flow or does one try and fight?
Well, your, your question is a very good one because I mean, I, I happen to be a member of the usage panel, the American Heritage Dictionary.
I, I, I, I get questionnaires from them about once a year. They ask me about 50 questions and they say, which do you approve of this?
Fully, you know, informal writing or it's colloquial or disapprove or highly disapprove. And, and it's interesting. I, I have very strong opinions and I fully agree with you.
I'm not one of those people who think that, that we should just be descriptive. I, I believe in prescriptive, the idea that, that there is a correct way to spell something.
And I think most of us do fundamentally. I mean, if you look at the New York Times, you will find that all the words are spelled correctly.
And for words spelled incorrectly, they'll might, they might catch and put a neurotom in, you know, some other time. I mean, there is a sense that it's not just anything goes.
However, to my chagrin, in school, as far as I can tell, no grammar is taught. I mean, when I was a kid, we learned subject and object and direct object and indirect object and present perfect and past perfect and so forth and so on.
We learned the names of all sorts of things. And I don't think that my kids, who are now out of high school or out of college, but I don't think that they ever learned what a subject or object was or even, well, maybe, maybe a verb.
Maybe they know what a noun and a verb is. I mean, probably they do, but that's because I told them, not because, you know, and I, it is, it is very disturbing to me.
And I fully agree with you. I'm in your camp, but I don't know how to do it other than to be a, try to be an example and write books that sound fairly literate and to use, to use language well and to encourage the use of good language.
I'm teaching a course next semester called Writing Structured Verse. And I'm going to, you know, be very strict with my students about how they use language.
And I'm going to talk about their word choices very carefully, but that's, you know, a handful of people. How do you affect the entire world? I don't know.
Anyway, I agree with you.
Inspired by your terrific lecture today, we've had a discourse just recently at a fairly high level of sophistication. Do you think computer systems will ever be able to be capable of handling that kind of discourse?
Of course, there might be a little robot up in the corner who's listening to your lecture and lumbers up to this microphone like me and asks you a coherent question and is capable of responding to your answer. Is that ever going to happen?
Well, I don't claim to know the answer to that question. I have thought about it a great deal and I, you know, the idea that it might happen quickly within the next 50 years or something like that has advocated by people like Ray Kurzweil and others.
First of all, I think it's not likely. It's implausible. But secondly, it disturbs me. It bothers me. On the other hand, I can see no reason that it is impossible.
And I even, at one time, even in a certain sense, kind of bought into the line of Hans Morovac, who is very similar to Ray Kurzweil, when he wrote a book. I don't remember whether it was his book, Mine Children or another book, but it doesn't matter.
He has this idea that we collectively are going to give rise to machines that will be more intelligent and more creative and more empathetic, hopefully, than we are. And he says, what could be nobler? What role could we play that would be more noble than that, you know, to give rise to what he calls mind children?
And as long as it's way off in the future, beyond my horizon, it's okay with me. But if it starts to seem like, you know, my own kids are going to be sort of outmoded, obsolete, it frightens me and it really disturbs me. But I don't see why it wouldn't be possible for that to happen.
Along those lines, have you seen the movie Her?
No, I've heard about it. I have not seen it. Now, I must admit that I was told that we're supposed to stop at 6.30. I will take, let me be nice if I can, and take two more questions, okay? Just one here and one there, all right? And then we'll try to...
I have kind of a big category of questions, but I'll keep them. Can you talk about the sort of semantic drift of categories over time, slash the... Sorry.
Was that accidental?
No, it's sort of, maybe a little bit. But I figured I'd go with it. The other part of that is the difference between, if there is any such thing, platonic categories versus the category that any particular person or set of people has in their mind at any given time?
Each of us is, you know, we house in our minds many, many categories, like, you know, name dropping and brainstorming and vicious circle and stuff, that our culture gives us. And all these other things, you know, bait-and-switch and tail-way in the dog, not to mention Parcon and so forth.
We all have lots of those. They're good in those. But then we all have our own private repertoire of categories, like, I had the category, without even knowing that it was a category, of Danny at the Grand Canyon, which then became sort of more recognized when Dick reached down to pick up the bottle cap and it became...
It started to become very clear. But I have, you know, millions of memories in my mind that are evocable or retrievable. I don't know what the word is, but, you know, where a new event happens and it reminds me of that old event, and those two are then sort of superimposed.
So I have my own personal set of categories that is unique to me. I mean, I remember... Here's an example. I remember I was in some airport, probably in Charlotte, and I was waiting for a plane, and I was sitting around in the waiting area, and a mouse started running around, and people saw it.
And some guy got up with cowboy boots and started running around trying to stomp on the mouse. And it was an unforgettable scene of this guy running around the other thing. You know, that's a personal memory that I have.
Now, you don't have it, but I've just conveyed it to you. But, I mean, each of us has memories of weird events that are unique and that, you know, they're our own private category repertoire. And that's... We're made of that combination of social or public categories and private categories.
Is that answering?
That's my second question, yeah.
What?
That's just the second question.
Okay.
All right.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Last.
So, in speaking of proverbs as categories, I thought of two movies that show what I can only think must also be a category in real life, which is that good people know proverbs, or people who don't know proverbs are somehow untrustworthy.
So, there's the movie Amelie, where Amelie's friend goes on a walk with her new boyfriend and starts asking him all these proverbs in French. And he's able to explain or say...
I did really remember that. I saw the movie a few months ago, and I was very funny, and I sort of remember that.
Yeah.
So, that's one. And she says, for her, it's a proverb that you trust somebody who knows their proverbs or don't trust somebody who doesn't.
The other I can think of is The Thin Blue Blind, which is an Errol Morris film, somebody who is wrongfully imprisoned for murder.
And the rural county sheriff is asking the innocent man all these proverbs and asking him...
And the guy understands what they were.
And it seemed to me, although never explicitly said that this county sheriff had a rule of thumb, which is, well, if he can understand these proverbs, he can't be the crazy person who committed this murder that was...
depicted in the movie.
And that, along with the two questions ago about computers and conversation, there's a certain type of thinking that you have described artificial intelligence is going in today, which doesn't seem to be the same as the type of creativity by analogy learning or thinking that you've been talking about.
Well, I agree that artificial intelligence today is not very close to anything like that, but it's interesting.
It's an interesting notion that knowing proverbs makes you into a, I don't know what, it doesn't seem a moral person, but, I don't know, it makes you more reliable or trustworthy or something.
Well, I wouldn't think that's the case, but I would think that knowing how to apply proverbs, that is understanding proverbs and using them fluently, it is true that I'm impressed when people do that.
I think it's charming and it shows a certain kind of conceptual depth that pleases me.
If somebody says in a situation where they're avoiding something that once caused them some trouble, they say once burned, twice shy, there's something I like about it.
It makes me feel good.
I can relate to that.
I like the ability to go back to the history of the language and kind of draw on wisdom from the past and use it in current situations.
I think that's very good and it shows that you're not just a person of the moment, but you're a person that is a little bit more rooted in the past.
And I think that's good, but I don't think it makes you more moral.
Have you met a person who does not understand a proverb other than a non-native speaker?
Well, I've read that often very autistic people may not.
I don't know if that's true, but I've read that, you know, if I heard a complaint out there.
So I don't know. I just heard that.
Even though the questions are over, by the way.
It may not be the issue of somebody knowing a proverb.
If somebody knows you're a proverb, it's the way you categorize the people.
Yes.
For sure.
If people are like me, I guess the more they're like me, the more I tend to trust them.
That's probably true.
Well, I'm a professor at a pop center for a very human-winning lecture.
This is actually his second appearance as involved assistant speaker.
You're next in line.
And I really think we should have him back more often.
Well, thank you.
Well, that's 22 years from now. I'll be getting up there.
Anyway, thank you.
Thank you.
