The view in our cognitive scientists today is that we construct our perceptions of reality
in real time. The question was, could we be misinterpreting the content of our perceptual
experiences? And what is our current understanding in a biology of science? According to evolution,
what we perceive with our brain and our senses does not reflect the true natures of the reality.
Why should you care? The implications of such radical finding rock the foundations of our
belief system that space-time is fundamental. In this series, we are delighted to have Professor
Meredith of Cognitive Science, Donald Hoffman, and Professor of Developmental and Synthetic
Biology, Michael Levin joining us today to discuss the idea and we are going to look at
what is a conscious agency. Welcome, Professor Levin. Welcome, Professor Hoffman.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks for having us. Absolutely.
How's the new year treating both professors so far? Did you all have a good holiday?
Yeah, sure. Yes, healthy and uneventful, which is good. Yeah, nothing to complain about.
So, any new projects for 2023?
Many things. So, in our lab, we have a variety of kind of conceptual and computational projects
and also a bunch of bench work stuff. So, we have lots of things going on in the areas of,
well, the practicalities come out as cancer, birth defects, regenerative medicine, those kinds of
things. It is our desire to understand collective intelligence, which I think is all intelligence
and how it is that minds are sort of emerge in the physical world. And so, we are finding new
ways to try to communicate with cellular swarms in the body as a kind of collective intelligence.
And we've got some interesting things on looking at the different competencies of things like
gene regulatory networks, in addition to other models like slime molds and things. So,
yeah, lots of new stuff along those lines.
Busy is going to keep you busy. And Don, you?
That's quite a list. That's an impressive list.
Well, we're focused on a number of projects, but most interesting to me is the physicists
tell us that space time is doomed. And they're not just saying that they're finding new structures
beyond space time, right? They're actually finding these structures like the Amplituhedron and
the deepest structure or something called decorated permutations. But these are just
like static structures beyond space time. We've been looking for a dynamics beyond space time,
a dynamical system that would actually give rise to these structures, like the
deepest structure is the decorated permutation. And so, we just published a paper last week
in which we did that. So, we prove that it's apparently a new mathematical result
that you can canonically map any Markov chain to decorated permutations.
And so, that gives us a window now to start to interpret these structures beyond space time
in terms of Markovian dynamics. And so, that's what we're doing now. So, we have the project
I'm working on now is to show we have a Markovian dynamics of conscious agents. That's what made
us look after these Markov chain ideas and see if we could turn them into decorated permutations.
That was the motivation because we already have a Markovian dynamics of consciousness.
And so, that's what we're up to now is, okay, now that we have this map of our conscious agent
dynamics. So, as a model of conscious agents beyond space time into decorated permutations,
that now should instruct us exactly how to port specific properties of the conscious
agent dynamics to specific physical properties like mass, momentum, spin, and energy and so
forth. So, that's what I'm excited to do because that link has told us where exactly to look
in our conscious agent dynamics. And so, we're looking there and we're finding some beautiful
mathematical structures and getting hints about how they project to properties in space time. So,
that's my project to map that out and then make explicit proposals for how
could be tested with the data on the inner structure of protons. So, the scattering
experiments that have been done since the 1960s at Stanford Linear Accelerator and then
much more powerful ones later on. We have given us a tremendous amount of detail about the
inner structure, the quark gluon and so forth, the structure of parton structure of
and their momentum distributions inside protons. So, that's my goal this year is to try to actually
predict those distributions from a theory of conscious agents that's beyond space time. That
would be a good year. On the 20th of December, Professor Levin tweeted, when I was five, I asked
my dad where a certain toy was that I couldn't find. He said, you know how today's clicks over
into tomorrow while you sleep at night? Well, the toy didn't make it. I wouldn't say that's
responsible for my all weird thinking actions, but I spend a long time thinking about how frame of
time and days works. How some object passed from yesterday to today and how that apparently can
fail and how we as minds say in yesterday or successfully make it forward, try to say
up all night to catch the transactions very disturbing at the time. Professor Levin,
would you speak on the toy that missing? Yeah, I remember it quite clearly. It was
some sort of plastic gun or something like this and I remember I couldn't find it anywhere and
I'm sure probably somebody threw it away and my dad, without skipping a beat, he said, oh yeah,
like at night when things go over from today to tomorrow. Yeah, it didn't make it. That's it.
You can give up. It just didn't make it. I walked away thinking, oh my god, there's a thought.
Well, what determines whether things make it and what if I don't make it and what happens? Then
I tried to stay up, of course, all night wanting to catch that moment. I wasn't able to. I would
just fall asleep somewhere around midnight and like, dang, I missed it again. So I don't know
how much that was responsible for some of the strange things I think about, but I do think
that one of the things that I've been thinking about recently is this, which I think it relates
to that, is this notion of, a lot of what we do relates to this notion of selfhood or being a
self. What does it mean to be a permanent or not a permanent but a stable cognitive structure?
Because much like with bodies, which are a kind of ship of feces sort of thing, molecules come and
go all the time, cells come and go all the time, but something stays the same. So what is that?
And what are the policies that the other cells and molecules are implementing that allows
some sort of stable large scale collective to remain while the low level parts are swapped
out at will? And it's not always a policy to maintain status quo. It might be metamorphosis.
It might be all kinds of changes that regeneration and development, but in any case,
you need to maintain some sort of large scale coherence, even though the parts are changing
out all the time. So I was thinking about this with respect to cognition as well. If you're going
to be a stable mind of some sort, you need to allow ID and go and you need to be in different
states, but it can't be something that just completely erases you every time you have a new
thought. Well, that's it. Now you're gone. So that balanced with the opposite idea,
which comes from many places, but among them Buddhist ideas of an impermanent self or perhaps
an illusory, even maybe an illusory self. So I've been thinking about that a lot and trying to play
with these ideas of stability, but changeability and robustness and yet plasticity. And one way
I now think about this is that the self is it's not so much that it's completely illusory,
but it has to be recreated at every moment in time. And what I mean by that is just that
at any given moment right now, everything you know about or you think you know about yourself,
your past, everything else, you have to reconstruct from the memory traces in your brain. You don't
actually have access to anything that really happened before, whether they be molecules or
physiological structures, we actually don't know what it is really. But whatever it is that you've
got hold of right now, you have this narrow slice of now, which is, I don't know, a couple of 100
milliseconds, maybe, and that's your self. And then you sort of have to reconstruct everything
you think you know from whatever memory molecules or n-grams that you find laying around in your
brain. And of course, people have played with this, I think maybe Hume or somebody or Boltzmann
brains, this idea that all your memories could have been created and really hadn't. And I don't
mean this sort of bizarre sceptical thing that can't be disproven. I just mean literally that
at every moment, as a cognitive agent, you have to be constructing a model of yourself from the
evidence that you have, which and where does it come from? Well, whatever n-grams happen to be in
your brain. And so this, you know, you can imagine yourself as these like slices in this,
in this, you know, and I'm sure this is, you know, as Don was saying, this probably an outdated
view already, but I sort of imagine it as these slices of this giant space-time loaf, so to speak.
And each one, you're basically, you have to recreate yourself from scratch. And then and
in that way, what happens is that you can think of everything you've done in the past and all the
memories that were formed in the past, patients from a past self to a future self. And everything
you're doing now are messages that you are in fact leaving for your future self in a way, right?
Because so the memories that you're forming now and the things you're doing now are things that
some future version of you is going to be using those to base their model of what the heck is
going on and when and who am I? And of course, there are medical versions of this. So people with
anterior-grade amnesia who can't form new memories, what do they do? They leave, right? So you wake up
in the morning, you get this notepad. And on the notepad, first thing it says is, hey, by the way,
you've got anterior-grade amnesia. This is who you are. And this is what's going on. And the last
thing is, don't forget to write. And so we all do this all the time. It's just that typically
our pads are internal. So that's all that is the same problem because you must reconstruct yourself.
It's just on a smaller scale and it's somehow internal. So that's my ramblings on that. That's
how I've been thinking about this. Thank you. Don, what did you think time is then? Is it a
space and time? Is it more like a data structure? Could you speak on that, please?
Great question. I'll just say one thing along the lines of what Mike was saying.
I agree with what you're saying, Mike. And it's quite interesting because every time you access
those memories, you destroy them. You have to do memory reconsole. You have to actually rebuild
the memories all the time as well. So you're rebuilding yourself all the time. It's not like
the memory is there and is always there. Every time you access it, you have to rebuild it. So that's
distracting. And the framework in which you're talking like the space-time loaf has been the
standard physicalist framework since Einstein over a century now. But it's interesting how
the physicists realize that that space-time itself is not fundamental. And so it doesn't mean that
those ideas are wrong. It means that that way of thinking about them will have to be understood
at a deeper level. We'll have to have a deeper representation beyond space-time and that of
physics or whatever beyond space-time that projects down to the space-time loaf and projects down to
the processes we see, like memory reconciliation and so forth, the real processes. So space and
time are not fundamental. And the physicists are the ones who are talking about me. It's the physicists
that are saying space-time is doomed. Their own theories, so quantum field theory and general
relativity together, are very clear that it's a data structure that works down to 10 to the
minus 33 centimeters and then falls apart. So it's actually a really shallow data structure. It's
10 to the minus 33, not 10 to the minus 33 trillion, just 10 to the minus 33 centimeters,
the thing falls apart. And so that means that, by the way, time also falls apart,
that 10 to the minus 43 seconds. So I take the physicists up their word. Space-time is doomed
and that means that time is doomed. So your question was about time. And that also, by the way,
means that ultimately the strategy in science of that if you go to smaller and smaller
scales of space-time, you find more and more fundamental objects and more and more fundamental
laws. That's the reductionism. That's precisely the reductionism I mean. That reductionism is
false. It just doesn't work beyond 10 to the minus 33 centimeters. And in fact, it falls
apart well before them. You get these UVIR correspondences that will things up well before
that. So I think that time is and space are merely interface concepts. What we use to get by,
but they're not the reality. And the reality is something entirely outside space and time.
And I'll just mention that our work in evolution of natural selection agrees with the physicists.
Evolution also entails that space and time and objects in space and time are not fundamental.
So that means that neurons don't exist when they're not perceived, but that is not to put
down neurobiology. In fact, what I say is we need more money for neurobiology because we realize
it's a lot harder than we ever thought. We thought, you know, there's 86 billion neurons in the brain
and, you know, that's a hard problem. But that's just the interface representation. That's the dumb
down version. The real complex version is being hidden from us. And we have to really reverse
engineer neurobiology and space-time to something deeper. It's going to be far more complicated
and we'll have to see how it projects down to space-time. So I think that time is not fundamental.
And in our Markovian dynamics of conscious agents, there is no entropic arrow of time
necessary in the dynamics. So we can have a dynamics in which there is a sequence parameter,
but the entropy does not increase. But it turns out it's a theorem that if you take a projection
of the dynamics by, say, conditional probability, that any projected view of the dynamics, you'll
get a new dynamics that's a projection of the bigger dynamics, the fundamental dynamics,
that new dynamics will have an arrow of time just because of the loss of information that happened
in the projection process. So that makes sense. Space-time is just our virtual reality headset.
It's a projection. It loses information. We have the narrow of time because of that loss
of information. In other words, time is not an insight into the nature of reality. It's just
an artifact of the projection process, purely an artifact and not an insight.
There's more to say, but I'll stop there because I don't want to do it.
Mike, do you agree or you have anything to add to that, Mike?
Yeah. Well, I think it's a very profound idea. And I think that I wonder if we can generalize that
to say that it's almost guaranteed that agents will build models of their world that may or may not
agree with other agents' models of their world because as Don has very nicely shown rigorously,
evolution isn't looking for that. It's just looking for expedient representations. And so
it's entirely possible that there are, I mean, so Chris Fields and I work on this kind of stuff
a lot from the perspective of observers and this idea that everything is some observer's
vantage point description. And so I think it makes complete sense to me that from certain vantage
points, things look like there's space and time. But we have mathematical tools, neural
nets and things like that, that will take their experience and project it into some crazy space
where you can't make heads of tails of what the principal components are. And this is what happens
to us all. We make some kind of representation that seems to be good enough for survival and
various other things. But none of that should be taken as fundamental. And the other thing that
this is maybe stepping away a little bit, but I think it bears on this topic as far as space and
time have served well in physics, right? They've done a nice job and everything. But I think we
have to, somebody once said, I don't remember who it was, that if you show me the fishing net that
you're using, I'll show you the fish you're going to catch, which is that we have to think about
what are these tools good for and what are they not good for. And one of the things that I've been
increasingly sort of focusing on this is the idea that the world looks like a mechanical,
mechanistic place when you use tools that are low agency tools. So when you use volt meters and
rulers and things like this, all you're ever going to see is low agency stuff. You're going to see
things that look like mechanism. Of course, it's going to look like mechanism because that's the
lens you're using. And so we can't then assume that, well, that must be right. And just assume that,
okay, it's all got to be bottom up because those are the tools that we use. And what if the things
you're going to find have to be in some impedance match, almost the tools that you're using.
And so suppose you're looking for things like agents or you're looking for virtual governors or
top down controllers, you're not going to find that with low agency tools. What can you find that
with? Well, you find it with brains and you find it with minds that are primed to look for agency.
These things that are, we don't have a volt meter that measures causal information,
the theory and whatnot. These things that Eric Hall and other folks study these high level
integrated information and all that. You don't have a volt meter of that. Of course, you don't.
And so you don't find any of that when you use those tools, all you ever see is mechanism.
But when you look at the world using a tool, for example, our own mind and our observational
system, then we're very good at detecting agency. Of course, we make mistakes in both directions.
We have false positive and false negatives. But minds are really good tools to find other minds,
volt meters or not. And so maybe there's something there. Maybe it's this idea that, yes,
of course, these things have been with us and they do a nice job on the kinds of things that
they're good at, which is describing mechanical mechanistic interactions. And I think what Don
has highlighted very, very effectively is that we cannot assume that, well, that's our fishing
net and that's all there is to find. That's clearly right there. They're letting us find
certain kinds of things and they're also obscuring lots of other important things.
Thank you. So let me summarize it, Don. So you're saying no physical objects, including my body,
it's conscious, strictly speaking, right? So my brain isn't conscious because my brain, in fact,
doesn't even exist. And then space-time is not fundamental. So this standard view that we all
took for granted, objective reality we see with our eyes is not seraving bonkers. So having this
view with the evolution theory, has it affected your perceptions and your behavior when you come
to interacting with the world? Yes. And I think the way you put it is well put and what Mike has
been saying is I completely agree and it's brilliant. And the fishing net example is a really good
example that we don't see the world as it is. We see it through the lens of our own concepts and
the way we, you know, what we do and there's no escaping that. And so in effect as well,
as we talked about, you have to recreate yourself all the time, right? That was Mike saying you're
always recreating yourself all the time. Well, you're also recreating the world all the time.
So I have a body when I look and I have neurons when I look and when I don't look,
they're not there. So every time I look. So this is really quite,
if you're in a virtual reality game, your avatar is there only when you see it. And the avatar
that someone else sees of you is there when they see it and as soon as they turn their heads
at somewhere else, that avatar is gone and they're looking at something else. And so yeah,
we're recreating all the objects inside of space and time on the fly as needed. And that includes
all of my neurons and my body. So these things, you know, it's, and we have the illusion that
they're there all the time because every time I look, I see it. But you can get the same
illusion in virtual reality, right? You know, if you're playing a good game, you can get immersed
in the game. Every time I look over to the right, I see the mountain. So it must mean the mountains
there all the time. No, no, you're only rendering the mountain when you look. The fact is you
always render the mountain every time you look that direction, but that doesn't mean the mountain
was there. You still have to create it all the time. There is something, there is a reality.
But so we get confused. We go, well, there must be some reality. Yeah, absolutely, there is a
reality. It's just not inside space and time because it's not inside the virtual reality
because there you have to render everything for it to exist in the only exists in the rendering
process. So, so, yes, this, this has a personal impact, right? I mean, first,
when I first realized that you just sit down and to absorb it. And that was 35 years ago.
And I'm still absorbing it. And it's a shock to me. And I think it's a shock to almost everybody,
except maybe, you know, advanced meditators and so forth. You know, maybe for them, it's not as
much of a shock, but it's still a shock to the system. And I think Piaget gave us the very famous
child psychologist Piaget gave us some insight as to why it's so shocking. And he pointed out that
we're programmed to believe in what he called object permanence. He thought we got object
permanence by 18 months. Later studies showed that it was probably more like at three or four months.
So, so this is before we're rational, right? We're not reasoning and logically thinking about
things. We're just programmed to believe that that doll exists, and will continue to exist,
even if it's behind a pillow and I can't see it. But what Piaget was doing, so he was looking at,
you know, babies with dolls, when do they think, when are they going to go looking for the doll
that they can't see? You know, when do they believe the doll still exists? And so, so we're
programmed to, so our belief that the sun exists even when we don't look is not, we didn't come to
that belief based on rational, logical, cold logic. We came to it at three months of age,
because we're programmed to believe that. And so, so that's why my merely intellectual
understanding that it's false has not yet penetrated my emotional work. It's still quite,
quite a shock emotionally, absolutely.
Mike, has it changed your perceptions of the world?
Yeah, well, I guess what I want to say to two things, one about things that don't change and
one about things that do. I once had lunch with a philosopher who's a very strong skeptic on free
will. And when the waitress came over and said, so Professor X, what kind of soup will you have?
And she said, well, let me think. I say, hey, what are you doing? Why don't you sit back and see
what soup gets ordered? What do you do? What are you doing choosing a soup here? And so that's
just to say that. I mean, I understand, of course, the argument and everything, but the point is
that's one of those things that you can be, you can be a skeptic about free will,
but I don't think you can live your life. I think it's one of those views that is just impossible
to connect with on a practical level for a strong reason that we can talk about. I think it actually,
that and object permanence goes back to the bacterial microbial level. And so we can talk
about that. But so I think it is impossible for a coherent mind that evolved under realistic
constraints to not believe in being an agent that does things. I just don't think you can
no matter how, no matter what you write about free will, I don't think you can live
the thing that I think does change some of these things is this. And this is just a question
I'll pose to all of you and whoever's listening. I think it's an interesting question. I've done
a poll of all my friends with this. Imagine, and I think people split into two types of people
along this question. Imagine some pleasant experience that you would be willing to pay $100.
It's a nice massage or something, whatever it is, it's a nice, it's a nice discreet experience
that you could have. And so I'm going to give you two choices. You can have that experience right
now, but you're going to have no memory of it later. None, it's white, it wipes your memory.
So let's say, you know, you've always wanted to go skydiving. It's free. But afterwards,
you will have no memory of having done it. Okay, so that's what that's option one. Option two is
the exact opposite. We're not going to do it. But you're going to have a memory of having done it.
But you're not actually going to get to do it now. So which do you prefer?
Right? And what I find is that people have very strong feelings about this,
but about half of the people I talk to, and it's really about half and half, I think,
people that I talk to, half of them say, well, the now moment is going to be gone anyway. All I
really have are memories of anything. You know, I don't care what happens now, but give me the
memory of this beautiful, you know, skydive or whatever. And somebody else will say, well,
who wants to go around collecting memories? I like experiences. I want to have the experience
that everything else is fake. I live in the now. Let's do it. And so I don't care if I don't remember
it afterwards. And so this is a really interesting, I think, division point of how you see yourself.
Do you see yourself as this, like, evanescent agent and then, you know, three hours from now,
that's not really going to be me anyway. So who cares what that, I want the experience now.
That's all that exists. And then you've got the people who are like, no, no, all I am is this,
you know, collection of memories. So let's add to that. And there is no now, it'll be gone shortly.
So, so I think pondering that one and thinking about which type you are, I think, I think that's
kind of instructive and how and how different people can can really differ on that.
So, yeah, it's a really interesting thing. So I, my memories, my memory is not that good.
I really, it just like, when I first read, when I was young, I first read about this,
this idea that your memories could be false. I had, I was like, yeah, of course, I could barely,
I mean, my memory, I don't know, you know, I don't really trust it that much anyway, it seemed to
make perfect sense. And so I'm one of these guys who takes lots of pictures and, you know, records
everything because that's, I find it hard to kind of replay it later. So, so from, from, from that
perspective, I can, I can sort of see both views. I think that my memories aren't worth, the raw
memories aren't worth all that much. So I would, I would take the immediate experience. But, but
in real life, I sort of augment that with, with all kinds of stuff, right? So I think
tons of photographs and videos and whatnot. So yeah, I don't know, I think it's a, it's a profound
set of questions. Yeah, I agree. Yeah, I have, I have a silly questions. So
dinosaurs not real? Both of you. So are you saying that dinosaurs is not real then? It's just
a perceptions of us then with the, the, I had said.
Yeah, so I'll go after that. So it's, it's quite good. I mean, so, you know, dinosaurs disappeared
about 65 million years ago or something like that, right? And, and, and that's, that's our
space time story. And it's, I think it's, it's a good story. But, but I would say, yes, there,
there is some reality, but it's not a, it's not in space and time. And if you get the right answer,
if you think about virtual reality, most of the time. So you just always think about virtual
reality. And so is, is that car that you're seeing in virtual reality, is it really there?
Well, no, it's not. It's there when you look, is there some reality that is causing you to see
that car? Yeah, but it's not a car. It's, it's maybe some supercomputer or something outside
of your virtual reality. So, so, so yeah, we will find dinosaur bones and we will date them
a 65 million years. And that's our virtual reality perception of it. There is, there is
some deeper reality that, that, you know, that's real. But, but this is, as, as Mike was saying,
we have to recreate this stuff all the time on the fly. And, and, and so, so, so yeah, that dinosaur
experience that you're having when you dig up that bone right now, that experience only exists
in the moment. And that bone didn't exist as a bone until you perceived it.
There is some other reality that there's somebody else who wants to go and dig in that area to see
the bone, right? So you'll all agree. But you also agree in virtual reality, say that, you know,
if you're playing Grand Theft Auto, that everybody would agree, oh yeah, you're racing a, a green
Porsche. Everybody agrees that you're racing a green Porsche. That doesn't mean that there
really is a green Porsche. It just means everybody agrees. And so we all agree that we see dinosaurs
and we all agree that, you know, our heads up, they look like they're 65 million years older, older.
But agreement doesn't mean that it has a preexisting reality.
So are you saying Max Delta? He was, no, no, who's, who's talking right now?
Sorry, it's one of the audience. Can we move on quickly? Don, sorry about that.
Briefly talk about your model and touch on on the contest agency so that you and Mike could
compare the two models. So you talk on your contest agency and the mathematical sites of it,
and then Mike could unpack it from his perspective on the biology side of it. Shall we go on that?
Sure, sure. So then we can come back to the Max Gelbrook thing later on in the Q&A. Absolutely.
So I didn't want to rudely stop anybody. I just didn't know who was talking.
So, so the conscious agent model is a precise model of consciousness. I'm not saying it's the
right model, but it's at least mathematically precise in which we have agents that have experiences
and based on those experiences, they take actions that affect the experiences of other
conscious agents, of interacting conscious agents. And the mathematics is basically Markovian.
It's a Markov chain that you get on this collection, this network of conscious agents.
And one of the things that we're doing right now in the model, which is for our next paper,
which is really fun, is looking at the role of observation. So the only thing to observe is
other consciousnesses, right? The consciousnesses are observing consciousnesses. And it's a theorem
of this theory that any collection of consciousness agents is itself a bigger agent. So ultimately,
the math says there's one agent. But it also tells us that we can never write down the one agent
because you'd have to, it would be infinitely long. So you can't write it down. So it's interesting
that the theory says there is one conscious agent, but it will transcend any precise mathematical
description. But we can build as big an agent as we want. And so that's what we have to do.
So we have to be modest and build big agents, but we can't build the one agent.
And the only thing there is to observe is consciousness, and it's only conscious agents
that are there to observe it. So what we can do is we can take a huge agent, which has a huge number
of experiences, a huge number of states that it perceives. So maybe a billion by, it's a billion
states, a billion experiences that it can have. And we can then take any subset of states from it,
maybe just 100,000 over or 2 million. And that will also correspond to a sub agent. So this will
be a sub agent of this bigger agent. And then we can take the Markovian dynamics of the big
agent and do what's called a trace chain. We can look at the Markovian dynamics that's induced
on the little agent as a consequence of the big dynamics. So it's called a trace chain. So every
time, most of the time, the state of the big agent is not in the state of one of the states of
the little agent. But when it does, then we will, you know, that little agent will get activated
and we can then build its Markov kernel. You know, we can actually describe over time what is
Markovian kernel is. So there's some big Markovian kernel, but we can induce little Markovian
kernels on all the sub agents. So if you have a big agent with n states and experiences that it can
perceive, then there are two to the n sub agents, including the original agent, two to the n sub
agents. So and so you have two to the n different Markovian kernels or trace chains that you can
look at. And so you're now going to get a very interesting group structure. So how do the different
agents see the deeper reality? So you will, I bet we'll see in certain cases, we can get a
Lorentz transformation relating them or Euclidean transformation. So we will start to see how the
different agents, perceptions differ systematically as you change the agent. But the other thing that
is interesting is that not only the, we might call the spatial window, which particular subset of
states you're using, but many steps of the chain, do you want to look at? Do you want to look at
only 50 steps or 100 or a billion or a trillion? I mean, ultimately Markov chains are supposed to
go off to infinity. But, but, but imagining finite temporal windows, and it turns out when you do
that, what each sub agent will see depends almost entirely on his temporal window as well as the
spatial window. So when you have a very small temporal window, you will, and I can go into the
mathematics of this, but what you will see with small temporal windows is, is what, what we believe
will turn out to be bosons in physics. These are massless particles. So, Don, and you'll see
tons of bosons. So, Don, the mathematical sites of it, right, the W represent the world, and then
you got the perceived, the P, and then you got the A, the R, and then you got the measurable,
you got the measurable space between the experience, the acts, and then the action, the G. So what is
that measurable experience that you're measuring though? So, so what are those measurable spaces?
Yeah. So, so those are probability spaces. So anytime that you have some kind of probabilistic
dynamics, you need to have a probability space in which the dynamics can take place.
And so that's the case with these Markovian dynamics. And what's interesting is, I didn't
think about that for the longest time. We, you know, it's just deregure that if you're going to write
down a, you know, probability, then you have to write down a probability space. And, and I didn't
even think about what the probability so years later, but I realized that I was only focused on
the experiences. But what about the probability space in which they occur? And it seems to me
that a natural interpretation of the probability space itself is to be interpreted as pure awareness
without any particular content, something that spiritual traditions have talked about for a
long time. So here is your awareness, which is the potential. I'm sorry.
The verdict you're talking about the Indian philosophy about the observer position,
the Ackman go backward to the Brahman. Is that the one that you're talking about?
That would be, I think that's one example of it. I think all the different spiritual traditions
point with their own words to the same kind of thing. And what was interesting to me was,
I mean, I wasn't trying to model that. I just was trying to do the math and I had to write
down a probability space. And I didn't even think about it. And it was only years that
probability space. And the only interpretation that makes sense is something along the lines of
this unbounded potential for experience, namely awareness of pure awareness without any particular
content. And then many spiritual traditions will then say, that is what you are. You are not the
particular content, this particular body or this particular color that you're seeing or this particular
headache that you're feeling. That's not what you are. Those are just experiences that are arising
in this fundamental awareness. And you are that fundamental awareness, not just the things that
arise. So Don, the end represent our our selfhood, the observer position. That's where the end come
in. And that triangle, Mathematic Ralph? Oh, well, in the position, the perception,
decision, action loop, and there's also an integer n that we have there, that was simply just to
a counter for the number of steps of the Markovian Internet. So you need a counter in some sense to
say what step of the chain you're in. So that was just a technical thing. It's not time. It's just
the sequence counter of the Markov chain. Thank you, Mike. Yeah. So I end up basically at the
same point as Don and let me walk it backwards towards the biology of where I think it comes from.
If you didn't already know what it was to communicate with a human and somebody showed you a
three pound, you know, three and a half pound brain, and they say, So how many, how many cells
do you think you think are in there? Well, we have absolutely no idea because because I priori,
you don't really know what the dense, you know, the the agential density of this material is,
you have no idea. And and the thing is that, and then of course, in, you know, you get to
split brain patients and dissociative states, we still actually, it's still not super clear,
you know, how to count these things. But but it's interesting that in biology, every, every cell
is some other cells neighbor. In fact, every cell, every cellular neighbor is some other cells
external environment. And so this question of, you know, what Don was saying, of different,
different cells, sort of being within the kind of a larger structure, this is almost guaranteed
because because there is no obvious and unambiguous way to say where any one self ends and any other
self begins. And biology is always multi scale. And at every, everything is made up, you know,
so, so like Descartes was looking, he liked the pineal gland, because there was just one of them.
But one of what if you look inside, it's full of cell, the thing's full of cells, there's not one
of anything. And if you look inside the cells, guess what you find, you find a bunch of molecules,
I mean, there really is no one of anything, everything is made of sort of components. And
and you really start to see this when you look at basic embryogenesis, which I think is super
important here, it's this this journey that each of us took from being an unfertilized
oocyte, you know, this blob of chemicals into whatever it is that we are now. Let's just look
at the early time points of this, right. So, so, so what happens is you have you have this embryonic
blastoderm. So it's a flat in mammals and birds, it's like this flat disc. And okay, 50,000 cells
or something. So you look at this thing, and we say, Oh, look, there's that's an embryo. Now,
what did you just count as an embryo, there's one of what, well, there's 50,000 cells, what is
there one of? Well, there's one of if you put a particular lens on this thing, and you say,
I'm going to count the system that attempts to that that is going to use energy and attempt to
build a particular structure. Basically, what I'm going to count is goal directed systems,
I'm going to say, how many different goal directed systems are there and what you will find is that
all of these cells will work together towards a particular anatomical goal, you can the other
way to think about it, if you don't like go talk, is that it's trying to reach a particular region
of anatomical morpheus space where you've got a couple eyes, you've got the right number of toes
and all that stuff. So, so a bunch of these cells get together, and they're all going to work on
this one construction project, everybody agrees every step this is what they're this is what they're
working on. Okay, so now you've counted one, you say, well, there you go, that's a that's a separate
self, it's a separate consciousness, it's going to be a human embryo, let's say we know what that
looks like, except that if you were to come along at that early stage, and I've done this in avian
with chicken eggs and things like this, when I was a grad student, you take a little needle,
and you make a couple of scratches in that blastoderm. Eventually, it's going to heal up,
they're going to heal. But before they heal, what happens is that every group of cells that cannot
feel the other cells, because you put a scratch between them, decides that, well, it's just me,
then. And so, they form an embryo, and every island forms an embryo, and then when they heal,
you have conjoined twins, and or triplets or whatever. So the question of so you look at an
embryo, and you say, well, how many are in there? It could be anywhere from zero to some small number
of them, because that question is decided on the fly. It is not pre-programmed, it is decided on the
fly by the physiology of a bunch of cells making a decision of how they're going to coalesce towards
one machine that's going to take this morphogenetic journey, this movement through anatomical morpho
space. So what happens then is that you realize that what you've got is you've got this almost
like this Freudian ocean of possibility, these 50,000 cells, and out of them might come some
number of intelligences. And once you realize that that's the case, and that within this one
thing, there could be three different conjoined twins, and this, of course, happens in humans as
well as other animals, then you realize that fine, the adult human body or any animal body also has
within it various collectives, such as organs and various other things, that for the exact same,
and so I'll say, I'll just back up and say that I don't have a theory of consciousness that I'm
sort of propagating, right, like many other people do, I don't have my own, maybe I will at some
point, I don't now, so I don't have too much to say about consciousness except this. All, as far as
I can tell, all of the theories of consciousness that try to explain why brains are associated with
consciousness in some way, for the exact same reason that all of those theories pick the brain to be
able to do it, pretty much every tissue in your body should be judged as conscious, because all
of these things that these theories talk about, and you know, let's say the neuroscience theories,
they lean on things like, well, they're these integrated electrical networks, and we've got
some neurotransmitters and some ion channel, all of this stuff exists all over your body. I have
yet to come across a theory of consciousness that tells you why the brain is different from anything
else. And when you sort of start to poke at it, you know, they say, well, then it's the magnetic
field of it. They say, okay, how about the magnetic field of the liver? Why is that different? Well,
I guess it probably isn't. I mean, right, that's where you end up. There's just no one has drawn
that line for a very good reason, because neurons evolved from systems that were other cell types
that were using these electrical communications long before brain showed up. So for the same reason
that you might not just this, it's not going to be verbal consciousness, you're not going to talk to
it using using language, and you're probably not aware of it anymore than you are aware of your
other nonverbal hemisphere and the opinions that it has that you don't even know about.
Because you're not aware of it, but but it's entirely plausible, given the developmental
biology, that we are these these nested hierarchies of diverse conscious agents that are all having
experiences and solving problems in different spaces, all kinds of weird spaces. So, so transcriptional,
so gene expression spaces, metabolic spaces, physiological spaces, anatomical spaces, we
love the three dimensional, you know, sort of space of the where it's easy for us to recognize
intelligence. But but that's just that's just our own, our own limitation. If you had a, you know,
just imagine, imagine that that you had a primary sense of your own blood chemistry.
Instead, you know, in addition to your to your retinal, it looks outwards for medium size
objects moving at medium speeds, you would also have an internal sensor of your blood
chemistry, you could feel it, you would have no problem recognizing your liver as extremely
intelligent, because it would be solving all these problems on a daily basis. And you would
know you would feel it. I mean, the same way that we see, oh, look, that crow and that,
you know, octopus, look at the amazing things they're doing, you would see your liver doing
that stuff every day if you had, if you had the perception of this other space. And so and we
can build things, right? So at some point, we'll talk about synthetic beings and we can build things
that will have consciousness in those spaces. But so so I end up exactly where we're done ends up,
I think that we are these nested hierarchies of consciousness is only some of them are verbal.
Only some of them do we have any direct connection to, but they're all over the place and we're
bad at recognizing them. And that's why we need to, you know, we need to think about these things
more. Gone. Brilliant. That's brilliant, Mike. And I agree. I'm definitely not the biologist that
Mike is, but I'll just throw in another simple biology example to support what he's saying.
And that is with split brain patients, right? We so some people who have intractable epilepsy
that can't be treated with normal drugs were in extreme cases where they were their lives
were on the line, submitted to a surgery called colosotomy surgery, where they would
Joe Bogan, who was a friend of mine would actually take a scalpel and go in there and cut the corpus
colosum, which was a band of about 220 million fibers that connect the right and left hemispheres
of the brain. And it was a success. If the epileptic focus was on the right hemisphere,
you would spare the left hemisphere from getting bothered by an epileptic seizure. And so it was
a clinical success. But but then some other friends of mine and other researchers started
to study, you know, what's different about these people that have their their brains cut in half.
And the Micah Zaniga and many others, but you know, did this. But for my Ramachandra,
V.S. Ramachandran at UC San Diego, friends called Rama. So I'll just what Rama did was he found
some one patient in which the right hemisphere, I believe, was an atheist in the left hemisphere
believed in God. Right. So so here, and another case was found in which the right hemisphere
wanted to be a race car driver in the left hemisphere wanted to have a desk job. So so you
have, you know, those are as different a personality as you could as you could possibly
want, stuck inside one cranium. And so that raises the question here, I am with my corpus
close and intact. And why is it that on Friday night, the battle going on about what I want,
maybe one part of me says, let's go out and have fun. The other part says, no, I got a book I want
to read. Well, well, maybe there are two people in there. And they really want to do two different
things on Friday night. And I do have to negotiate among them. And so who is the I now that is
doing the negotiation among those two people. So the whole notion of a self then becomes really
interesting and very problematic. So I agree completely with Mike on that. And again, a big
issue here is, we're only seeing things through a space time interface. Right. And so it's not
like, for example, the distinction we make between living and non living, or conscious and unconscious
is a principle distinction. But so for just to get what I'm talking about here, I'm looking at
all of you on a zoom screen. So I'm looking at Mike right now on the zoom screen. And some of the
pixels are pixels for Mike's face. And when I look at those pixels, I'm getting a portal into
Mike's consciousness. I can tell if he's interested, I can tell if he's bored, I can tell what I can
get some insight into his consciousness. But there are other pixels of a floor, for example,
in the back of this chair. And those pixels are not giving me any insight about consciousness.
Now, should I say that some pixels are conscious? And other pixels on my zoom screen are not
conscious? That's stupid. Pixels are pixels, they're not conscious or unconscious. Some of them
are giving me a portal into Mike's consciousness and others are not. So it's not so the same thing
is true of space and time and what we call physical objects. There is the distinction we make between
Oh, that's alive. And that's dead or that's conscious. And that's not conscious is the same
mistake as saying, Oh, those are those are conscious pixels. And those are unconscious pixels on my
zoom screen. It's exactly the same mistake. An interface is just an interface. It's not the truth.
So, so it's not a principal distinction between living and non living. It's an artifact of the
limitations of our interface that we're mistaking for an insight into the nature of reality.
It's a rookie mistake. So we have to get past the rookie mistake of saying that the distinctions
that we see in our interface are therefore necessarily true in reality.
Sorry, I just want to add one one funny, I don't know if it's funny, but a story of a kind of a
troubling story that that goes with Don's point about having two different opinions in your in
your brain. And so I read this, this was a description of a therapist as a psychiatrist
to have this experience. So, so this guy, this patient comes in and he says, I've got some sort
of dissociative disorder where I've got there's a personality in there that he's a real partier
and I like to work and he just start, you know, I can't I can't work anymore because sometimes
he comes out and screws up, you know, he acts, you know, acts like a fool at work and whatever
we need to take care of this. And so, you know, they start doing some sort of I don't even know
how they do it, but some sort of integrative therapy and they're gonna so so one day one day
the patient walks in and it's the other guy. And he says, Hey, what's this I hear about integrating
integrate? What are you guys doing? And the and the doctor says, Well, you know, we're going to
integrate you. And he says, Excuse me, you're going to integrate me and who's going to be left?
He says, Well, you know, you'll be well, you'll be able to do well at work. And when I was,
wait a minute, wait a minute, where am I going to be? And he's and the doctor said, Well, you're
kind of going to be gone. I hope if you know, if we do, are you kidding? What? What happened to
the hypocriticals? What do you mean? I'm going to be gone. I don't want to be gone. I should be
gone. I, you know, he's a boring, you know, he's boring. I've got the fun life to make him
gone. And so, and right, so just put yourself in that, in that place, right? I mean, presumably
the other, you know, the other personality signs the checks and everything. But, but, but, but
you're faced with a coherent, this isn't some weird tick or reflex. This is a coherent being that
is making an argument that knows what what a hypocritical it is, and is making an argument
that whatever, that whatever you're doing is going to erase them from the world by sort of
somehow jamming you down into this, into this integrated personality that can spend, you know,
12 hours at work and not have any fun. So that's, I mean, that's a super, you know, it's a super
disturbing sort of kind of, you know, way, the way to think about this, because we, there are no,
as far as I know, there are no indivisible beings. We are all made of parts that that's just how it
has to be. And therefore, there is the possibility of that, that magical, which I think if anything
is magical, this is it, it's this, this, this process by which, by which merge into a larger scale
collective, the, you know, self or individual, that process is going to have failure modes,
some of them temporary, some of them permanent. And, and it's these failure modes that really
give us something to think about in terms of what are we and who are we and how we relate to each
other. Fabulous, fabulous. Yeah, we recently have McGilchrist. Ian McGilchrist came to our club
last Monday. Yeah, he has booked the matter with things. Yeah, he talked about the, the laugh and
right hemisphere hypothesis a lot in his book on his volume one. Yeah, we're going to quickly move on
before, because Mike got to go pretty soon, probably about 30 minutes time back. But Don,
you can stay with us for another hours, right? So that I'm going to go straight to the, the last
question. So these conscious agents, the common factor done, so all these multi multiplicity
and diversity of conscious agents. So how many of them so they're all going towards one field
of consciousness? Is that what it is? Can you speak on that? Right. So, so there's
it's quite interesting. Suppose I start off with a countable infinity of conscious agents. So
there's agent one, two, three, four, all the way to the countable infinity, then any combination of
any subset of them. So agent one and two, agent one, two and three, whatever that also is a conscious
agent. That's a theorem of the math that any collection of conscious agents is also a conscious
agent. So that means that I start off with a countable infinity of conscious agents. I can take
the power set with what the mathematicians call the power set. That's the number of new conscious
agents that come from combination. Well, that's a higher level of infinity. That's, you know,
a left one. And now with that new set of agents, I can take their power set. Now I'm at a left two
conscious agents. So now I'm marching my way up Cantor's hierarchy of infinities, and there's no end
to that hierarchy of infinities. So, so it's a, it's a theorem that there is just one. And it's
also a fact that I'll never be able to get there, which is, I guess, again, also in line with the
spiritual traditions, right? That they, they say that anything that we can say about it, like the
Buddhists will say a finger pointing to the moon is not the moon. It's just a finger pointing.
And so that will be true of our scientific descriptions as well. We have to recognize that
the scientific distractions are scientific theories are merely pointers, and they're not the
reality. And in this case, what's nice about the scientific pointers is that they tell you
that they're not the reality. They tell you that they are limited. And that's what's beautiful
about the scientific pointers. Like Einstein series space time and with quantum field theory
tells us that that pointer, that space time idea fails at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters.
That's where the pointer stops and the moon begins, right? Whatever's beyond begins. And so, so the
Conscious agent theory has the same nice property. It says, basically, there is one conscious agent,
and I can't describe it. I can, I can go to a left zero, I can go maybe to go to a left one.
Of course, even then I'll fail because I don't have a supercomputer that can do it.
So and I don't have enough paper to do it. So already you can see that that
is telling you this is a pointer and the reality is going to transcend the pointer completely.
Absolutely. Mike, did you agree on that? Mike?
They're all pointed to one or you're still keen on your panpsychism?
I think, I think both. I think they're not mutually exclusive. I think that there are, I mean,
to me, recognizing agency and consciousness in the world around you is a lens that you bring to
the process like any other. And so, if you, if you have a way of recognizing intelligence in
components of something, that's great. And then you may have, you may also observe that the whole
thing is, so just to give an example, we recently, there's this mathematical notion of a gene
regulatory network. It's very simple. It's a collection of nodes, let's say a dozen of these
nodes. And you're just going to write down how each one up or down regulates some others. So
it's this like little network and you can, you know, people have been, like Stu Kaufman has
been studying this for a long time and you can view them as dynamical systems and see what they
do and so on. So you look at this thing and you say, well, okay, it's very simple. I can see all
the parts. There's nowhere to hide here. This is like the rock bottom of deterministic, you know,
zero agency mechanical system. There's just nothing there. So we took the hypothesis. So my view
always is that you can't just make these pronouncements from a, from an armchair, you have to do
experiments. So we said, okay, what if we just, what if, what if we test the hypothesis that this
thing has some degree of cognitive ability. So what we, what we ended up doing was testing
their learning capacity in the following, in the following way, we assign some, one of the nodes
as a condition stimulus, another node as an unconditioned stimulus and pick some other
node as the response. And then we do things like Pavlovian conditioning. We, you know,
we twiddle two of them simultaneously and we look at what happens. Anyway, you get the idea. So we
now have a couple of papers on this, that biological networks and not so much random
networks. So I think evolution likes this because a biological networks do this more than random
ones do. Biological networks show six different kinds of learning, including associative conditioning
in this, in this dirt simple system. And that's with no, with no changing of the network structure.
So we're not changing the synaptic weights. We're not rearranging the network. None of that. This
is purely, purely dynamical system stuff. But, but, but there is a lens. So there are two diff,
two competing lenses on the same phenomenon. One is the standard molecular biology lens.
This thing is dumb as a rock. And what you, if you're going to change the way it works,
let's say for biomedical purposes, your only hope is bottom up rewiring. You need to add nodes,
subtract nodes, you know, genomic editing to change the way that these nodes interact with
each other. That's your only hope. There's another lens, which makes a completely different
prediction. And if you, which is that, which is that actually if you treat, if you don't
rewire anything, but you treat this thing as a minimally cognitive agent that, that can be manipulated
by experiences, by stimuli, by training, then you can do some more stuff. And then you can look at
these two lessons, say, gee, this one tells us a lot that we can use in biomedicine that we're
actually not getting out of here. Right. So, so, so you can have multiple perspectives,
they have different powers in terms of what they let you do in the real world. Maybe someday,
somebody else will come along and say, ah, you're both wrong. Here's a much better lens. You know,
fine. That's how it goes. So, so then, so then that, that allows you to have it all. You can,
you look at a human body and you say, I'm looking really deep and I see some components that clearly
have their own thing going on. But of course, so does the organ that they sit in. And because,
because that has certain, certain interesting capabilities in physiological space. And then
the whole thing that we're going to call a human, well, that's a bigger intelligence that can do
other things in behavioral space, maybe linguistic space. So I, I see it both ways. I think, I think
the merging is, is, is correct. I think Don's totally right about all of that. But I also think
that there are useful lenses that allow you to exploit a panpsychist view. And just to be clear,
you know, the, the, there's a couple of different versions of panpsychism. The one where, the one
where you take a perfectly good physics and then paint some hopes and dreams on all the electrons,
that's not, that's not the one, right? So people correctly make fun of that one, because
that's just not going to give you anything. There's a different, however, research program,
which, which, which Don and people like Chris Fields and Carl First and other people are doing,
which is to reformulate physics from the, the, the cognitive perspective. So it's not that we
have a perfectly good physics and now we're going to paint some extra junk on it. No, it's that
actually what we have been taking as physics is a, I don't know what the right word for it, but,
but it's a, it's a, it's an oversimplification and a, not a really not, not the best lens. I mean,
it's done well in many areas, but it's not the best lens. And you can formulate a different lens
where things like active inference and some of these other extremely general things. And I don't
pretend to be any kind of expert on, on active inference, but, but, but I understand the research
program. It helps you understand inanimate things and interactions between living things and non-living
things from the same, with the same lens. And I think that's super powerful. And, and so I think
you can have a useful version of panpsychism where you scale down your cognitive expectations. It's
not that the rocks have hopes and dreams like humans. That's not the point. The point is that
you can use the same tools, including, you know, active inference and some, and, and, and train
ability and some other things to understand both physical processes and then eventually,
you know, advanced cognitive properties, maybe social phenomena, who knows? Yeah. Anyway,
so that's, that's a long answer to, to, to your question.
Thank you. So how many conversation then to make a photon down? That's a question from the audience.
Ah, so
that's what we're going to be working on on our very next paper. We're calling it
tentatively titled traces of consciousness paper. And the idea is that I was talking about these
trace chains, right? You've got a big, dynamical system of consciousness agent, a big agent,
but I can look at the two to the n subagents and do a trace chain on each one of those.
And I can change the temporal window. And so I should say just a little bit of background
about what, what motivates what I'm about to tell you. So, so in the paper that we just published
last week, we proved that the Markov chains map on to decorative permutations. I mentioned that
earlier. The permutations and the decorated permutations the physicists have shown are the
deepest structure they found behind space time. And with decorated permutations, you can then
create things like the amplitohedron and compute scattering amplitudes, like two gluons
smashing into each other and four gluons go spraying out. So you actually, you can compute
all of the scattering amplitudes. Truly, if you just have these decorated permutations and maybe
momentum and spin data as well. And so when we made this mapping from our Markov dynamics onto
decorated permutations and decorated permutations into space time, that gave us the clue there's a
particular aspect of our dynamics of consciousness agents that's critical for the physics and the
mapping of the physics. And it's called the communicating classes. So that's, that's the
key thing. So if you look at Markov chains online, you can see what the communicating classes are.
It's a standard part of Markov chains. So our hypothesis, the one that I'm working on right
now is that the so-called entropy rate, this is the technical term in Markov chains. So if you
can look it up online as well, entropy rate of a communicating class is what corresponds to mass
in space time. Okay. So particles in space time are projections of communicating classes, but
most communicating classes project to things far more interesting than particles. But particles are
projections of communicating classes. And for those communicating classes that project to particles,
it's the entropy rate that is their mass. So when you look at what I, technically what I just said,
it means that if the Markovian dynamics, if the Markov kernel has only zeros and ones
in the matrix, then it will project to a massless particle like a photon. So now I'm getting to
your question about photons. You can see why I had to spend some time, right? The zero entropy rate
communicating classes project to massless particles, or I should say mass lift particle, the better
way to say this, massless particles are the projection of zero communicating, zero entry rate
communicating classes, because communicating classes don't necessarily project to particles,
they can project to more interesting things than particles. Particles are the simplest. So
that means, so now we want to find out exactly what specific, there are lots of different
kinds of Markovian kernels that are, that have zero entropy rate. Some of them are, for example,
are derangements. They're permutations called derangements, and there are other kinds that
will have combinations of derangements as well as absorbing states. So we want to look at those
and then figure out, okay, which correspond to like photons, but photons are not the only kind
of bosons. There is also gluons, there are w particles and z particles, and then there's a
Higgs. So there's a number of massless particles, and so we'll want to get this dictionary between
the particular kinds of permutation matrices and which ones mapped to which with massless
particles. So that you can see that there's a lot of fun work ahead, but it's a deep technical
question. Looking forward to it. So we're going to open up the floor for Q&A. We
are on the stage waiting to ask both of you some questions. So we're going to open it up now.
We have Prakash. Yes, greetings. Fantastic talk, good conversation. I was just curious.
You know, looking at living systems, I always wonder, where would you put plants in this picture?
Plants are living agents. They don't seem to have neurons, but they have the same cellular space.
I was just wondering what you would have to share about what you think about plants.
Who's the question to us? Prakash, is it to both?
Mike makes sense. Yeah, they make sense. They want to break out the model.
Yeah, thank you. Thank you. Yes, Mike, would you want to go first, Mike? Sure, sure. Well,
two things. One is, so there certainly are people who study this question of plant intelligence.
There have been some nice papers on that. People like Frantisek Balushka and some other folks.
Really, really talk about plant cognition and plant intelligence. From my perspective,
plants are not nearly weird enough as a challenging example for all of this kind of stuff. I mean,
and other people, of course, spend time thinking about really minimal models compared to which plants
are a no-brainer to pardon the pun for having cognitive capacities, including anticipation
and memory and learning and creative problem-solving and various things. Plants do all of that.
Yeah, I have zero. The fact that they don't have neurons means almost nothing to me. I think
as we think about the wide universe, I find it impossible to believe that the only things that
have cognition are things with actual neurons like we have. That seems like just an incredibly
implausible view to me. A lot of electrophysiology was done in bacteria anyway. I mean, neurons,
they do some interesting things, but this is way wider than that. So yeah, no problem with plants.
I agree with Mike, and I think you said it well. So yeah, absolutely.
Thank you. Are we going to move on to Andy?
Hey, thank you both for being here. This is fascinating. Thank you, Ivy and John for making
this happen. It's hard to decide what to drill into. I would like to drill into this idea of
the simulations. So this is for Dawn. The simulations that you claim prove that perception
of truth leads to extinction. So I want to drill in this idea of truth a little bit. What
do you mean by truth versus fitness? It seems like fitness is a sort of truth for a biological
system. Can you give an example of the perception, like a true perception of a thing leading to
less fitness than a false perception and or a false perception of a thing leading to more
fitness than a true perception of a thing? And finally, isn't the results say more about the
simulation and how it's built and the built-in approximations and assumptions and biases
that are built into it than it says about reality? Thank you.
That's a great question. So I'll first just give you, you asked for an intuitive example
that might help understand why not knowing the truth could help you out. I'll just give
an intuitive example. In virtual reality, say again, Grand Theft Auto, you're trying to race
against a bunch of friends. You've got your car and you're racing a Porsche and a Maserati and so
forth. What are you really doing in reality in this metaphor? What you're really doing to win
the game is you're toggling millions of voltages per second in a precise order. That's what you're
doing to try to win the game. In this metaphor, that's the reality. What you know about what you're
doing is you're turning a steering wheel and you're pushing on a gas pedal. A lot simpler than
toggling a million voltages per second in a precise order. So now if you said, well, Cal, I want to
know the truth and I'm going to try to play the game knowing the truth. I'm going to actually toggle
the million voltages per second to try to win. So I can guarantee you the person who's trying to
toggle those voltages as fast as they can would lose against someone who is just turning a steering
wheel and pushing on the gas. And that's the top level intuition why evolution hid the truth from
our eyes is because if you had to actually toggle all of reality, you would die in the process.
Better to give you just a user interface that hides most of that from you. So that's the intuition.
But now for the math, we did simulations to begin with just to check to see what would happen.
And once we found that organisms that saw reality were going extinct, we then let go of the
simulations, we went to the math. So I went to a mathematician. So we now have theorems. So we're
not relying on simulations at all. We have theorems. And the theorems are using the tools of evolutionary
game theory. And in evolutionary game theory, the key technical notion are fitness payoff
functions. The domain of that function includes whatever objective reality might be. Evolutionary
game theory doesn't tell you what objective reality is. It just says there is some objective
reality. It could include organisms, their states, their actions, and so forth. And then so there's
this fitness payoff that includes whatever objective reality is in the domain of the function
and the range of the function are the possible payoff values, say from zero to 100. Zero means
very, very bad 100 means wonderful, wonderful payoff, say. And you can ask a clean technical
question. What is the probability that a generically chosen payoff function will be a homomorphism
of some structure in the objective reality, like a total order in objective reality or
measurable structure or topology or whatever it might be? In other words, what is the probability
that a fitness payoff function will actually have information about structures in objective
reality? Because if it doesn't have information about the structures, how can it tune you to
the structures in objective reality? So we ask the technical question, do fitness payoff functions
generically contain information about structures in objective reality? And if you want to see the
math, you can Google our papers called Fact, Fiction, and Fitness. So that's the paper where
we go through the math. And Chaitanya is the mathematician, not Don Hoffman. Chaitanya is
the mathematician. But of course, we collaborate on it. And what we prove is that for several
different structures, but when you see the trend, you realize it's true basically for all structures,
the probability is zero, precisely zero, that a generically chosen payoff function
will have any information about objective reality, about any structure in objective reality.
So there's nothing in the fitness payoff functions to tune you to objective reality.
Now, I'll just mention a couple quick objections that people say. One objection that
made in Sintes recently is look, you're using evolutionary game theory. So either you believe
that evolution, the math of evolutionary game theory models biological evolution correctly,
or you don't believe it does. And if you do believe it models biological evolution correctly,
well, biological evolution assumes that there are physical objects like organisms in space and time
and resources. And if you don't believe that, so if you're going to use evolution or game theory
to say that there are such no such thing as physical objects in space, time is fundamental
reality, then that would be contradicted. You'd be contradicting yourself because the math,
you're claiming the math faithfully models the physical biology. And if you don't think the
math of evolutionary game theory models the physical biology, then you shouldn't use it anyway
because you didn't think it models. So either way, you're stuck in a logical contradiction,
that's sort of his argument. And what that argument misses is how science works. So take
Einstein's theory of space time and quantum field theory. So these theories assume
their mathematical theories are built on the assumption that space time is fundamental, right?
So Einstein's special relativity and quantum field theory, those mathematical, those assume
that space time is fundamental. So you could use the same argument. But notice what the physicists
do is they say, our theories tell us that space time is doomed. Space time is not fundamental.
Okay, well, okay, so I'll use the same got you logical argument. Well, so either Einstein's math
modeled his intuitions, in which case it could not possibly show that space time is doomed,
or it didn't model his intuitions in which case you couldn't use it, you shouldn't use it to
show that space time is doomed. Well, no physicist would take that seriously. That's a, that's a
silly argument. Here's what really goes on in science. Every scientific theory makes assumptions.
And there is no theory of everything. There is no such thing as a scientific theory of everything.
So a good scientific theory starts with assumptions and basic concepts, but a good
scientific theory will tell you the limits of those concepts. Einstein's theory with quantum
field theory tells us the limits of his basic concepts, namely 10 to the minus 33 centimeters
and 10 to the minus 43 seconds, you fall apart. So what we're doing is exactly the same thing
with evolutionary theory. The assumptions about sure Darwin thought about physical objects in
space and time. Absolutely. What are the limits of those concepts? Well, evolutionary game theory
is the mathematics. And that mathematics is precise enough to tell us the limits of the basic concepts,
just like Einstein's theory of relativity is good enough to tell us the limitations of
Einstein's notion of space and time or space time. So this is the way science works. It's not
a self refutation to think that is actually to misunderstand fundamentally the nature of
scientific progress. Now, what you can't do is to use the old theory to tell you what's next,
right? So Einstein's theory tells us space time is doomed, but it can't tell you
where's the next step beyond space time. You can't do that. And similarly, the theory of
evolution by natural selection with the mathematics of evolutionary game theory tells you, aha,
the notions of organisms in space and time is not fundamental. But does it tell you, okay,
what is more fundamental? No, it doesn't tell you what's more fundamental. So that's where
then scientists have to make a creative leap. And that and physicists have done this just in
the last 10 years, they just they went outside space time, they found the amplitude hydrant,
they found decorated permutations, that's a creative leap. But then what you do is you show
how they project back into space time. But you have to go back and get your your previous theories
as a special case of the more general framework. And so we have to do the same thing. Our theory
of conscious agents is a leap beyond evolutionary theory. But we have to show how it projects back
into space and time and gives us back evolutionary theory as a special case. So so so I'm answering
your question, but I also want to answer another question that has just been published in Sintase,
you know, the philosophy journal recently. And this and I just want to point out that that that
argument just falls flat very easily. I'll stop. Thank you. Can we move on? We have
a lemon lemon. Did you want to ask questions?
Were you? Well, were you talking about me, Ivy? Yes.
Hi, Donald, we've corresponded before. I think I'm probably your one of your your biggest fans
on Clubhouse here. I was wondering if you had had any correspondence with Neema or Connie
Hamed, because I know that you're following what they're doing in high energy physics really
closely. And a lot of people have been, you know, begging Neema to, you know, write a book that's,
you know, more understandable for the general public, because I'm fascinated with the,
you know, decorated permutations and the amplitude hydrant. But it's so far over my head.
Could you provide any resources on how to really get a grasp on on what that means?
Right. So I would love to talk to Neema. I haven't yet. And I'm hoping to actually get to a place
where I'll be worth this time. So I'm trying to, you know, the work I'm doing on these trace
chains and so forth, the decorated permutations stuff in the map mark of chains onto it, I think
already might be of interest to him. But I want to push this a little bit further. His time is very
valuable. When I talk to him, I'd like if I get the chance to talk to him, I'd like to really have
something that'll be of interest to him. But if you want to see more details, a little bit more
accessible about the amplitude hydrant and the decorated permutations, of course, at Harvard
that he gave in the fall of 2019. So if you Google Neema Arkani Ahmed Harvard lecture one,
you will find on YouTube, they post it all 20 something 25, 20, whatever it is lectures.
So Neema Arkani Ahmed Harvard lecture one, you'll see that he has an introductory lecture.
And he really lays it out in the introductory lecture. He tries to be fairly non technical.
It's for a graduate class at Harvard. So you know, non technical for them might be technical for
the rest of us. But it's fairly accessible. And that's probably I would say his class and all
the lectures are online. That's maybe the most accessible source you're going to find right
now is his Harvard lectures. And I've studied, I've been studying his lectures, I've actually
transcribed 15 of them, all his first 15 lectures, I've transcribed myself personally,
equation by equation, figure by figure, I did that until COVID stopped me. COVID took me out.
So when I plan to get back to it now, I'm starting to recover from COVID and go back to it. But so
but yeah, I'm really trying to study Neema stuff. And, you know, I'm not a physicist.
I work with physicists. And at some point, we would love to talk with them.
Thank you. And we move on to Willie.
Wonderful. Thank you, Ivy. And thank you to have this great minds in the same room,
and watching your conversions at some point. And I have two questions for each of you.
One question. And it's definitely fascinating what you're doing, God. And I say the first thing
that great jumps in science are often company of a big flock of people who don't understand
what the new perspective is. So I'm also confused sometimes by the combination of
metaphors and mathematical apparatus and all this. And it's intermaking, definitely.
And I will take it for granted that you imply kind of anti realism with your stance.
And I don't want to discuss it. What I want to see, if I get it right, is that you are letting
go a reality and space time in a way. Yeah. And starting with the fundamental of the conscious
age. And we had a reading room here with these wonderful people from the 2014
article, The Origin of Time in Consciousness Agents. And we found that it's a bit hard to define
or to go with you, what you mean. And it reminded me of the Floggy Stone story,
which is famous from Thomas Eskuhn about the structure of revolution and Occup's razor and so
on. And we found out that we don't need Floggy Stone to understand that heat is flowing from
hot point to a cold point. And so we let go Floggy Stone. And I wonder how it can be
in the same way let go reality and space time. Does it really make sense? What are the practical
and theoretical consequences in science and in life? And closing here for your question,
the old Leibniz introduced Monets in the same way as atomism just cannot deliver the mantle.
This was his basic intuition. It cannot deliver emergent theories of emergence or combination
or composition just doesn't suffice to make us understand how this should ever work. So
understand to go back to the primacy of the mild, definitely. But what are the predictions?
Is it detectable? Are you working on a kind of operational and kind of a detector, so to speak,
that you can say now we can really see that he is a conscious agent. Sorry, it's in space time
somehow but we can detect it and then we can count it just as an example. And then we can even see
how they emerge together or cooperate together and let time emerge. Something like this would be
very ambitious, of course. And should I go to Michael or should I just wait for you?
We really got to Michael first because Michael got to live in about five minutes.
Yeah, to succinctly ask your questions. So for me, also you, contrary to what Descartes was doing,
Descartes tortured cats saying that they are not sentient beings, they are just machines,
don't worry. And now we have inflation of consciousness and inflation of conscious
ancients, contrary, for instance, to even Thompson, who is preferring biopsychism, psychism,
to panpsychism, only biological stuff like maybe even plants might have consciousness.
And now my question is, because you are also coming from a series of process structure,
like auto-poiesis in a way, but I guess you're going in a different direction. You're going
into this bioelectricity pattern. Here's my question. Are you looking for a substrate
where the self then is emergent? Because you're using the term emergent and have a different,
you have a different ontology, contrary to Don, because you are starting quite with common sense
that you are observing nature like Aristotle, Newton, Gallier, and so on. And then from this on,
you are constructing theories. And yeah, you say, I start with reality in a way, or do I get you
wrong? And the last thing, and this is again, to both of you, are you actually waiting for a new
physics, which might be even produced by Donald? Yeah, this is very exciting, because maybe this
comes together. So thank you for both of you for your answer. Yeah, thank you so much. I'm not
sure I will be able to hit all of that, but I'll try to get to some of it. The first thing I should
say is that I'm in an enjoyable position here, where on this panel, I'm not the most sort of
avant garde person here. So Don has gone further. My stuff is a little more mundane. I have not
really said anything about consciousness. I don't know anything about any new physics. I haven't
really gone there, although I'm in complete agreement with Don's view of it and where he's
going with it. I have a somewhat less ambitious thing, which is that I'm interested in cognition.
Cognition is not the same as consciousness. And I sort of get into this in excruciating detail
in this last tamed paper, what exactly I mean by cognition. But to address your first point,
I do think that there's way more of it, not less of it than, for example, Descartes might have
thought. I think it's actually extremely prevalent in the universe. I don't think it
is limited to things that we would call alive. I'm actually not sure what we mean by alive,
necessarily, and I don't spend any time trying to figure out what this category is. Other people
do, and that's great. I spend all of my time thinking about cognition, not life, because I
think there are many things that are importantly cognitive that we may or may not call life.
And so that's A, and I have this, and B is that I have this functional framework,
it's called TAME, which is technological approach to mind everywhere, that basically,
it's a very engineering kind of approach that seeks to show you what exactly are the practical
benefits of the odd cognitive lens. So it's very important to me that this is not just philosophy,
that all of these views are supposed to drive new discoveries, new research programs, new,
so half of my lab takes this stuff and turns it into interventions for biomedicine, for cancer,
for whatever, because this is not just supposed to be, well, you can look at it this way, or you
can Occam's razor it and just sort of do the science. That's actually not true. This way of
thinking about this gives rise to new experiments and new capabilities that we didn't have before.
So, and maybe at some point consciousness will be folded into that, I haven't done that yet,
and so I make no claims whatsoever about consciousness yet. But I do think that
this view of basically dropping our teleophobia, we've got this, we've developed through the
early stages of science, this really weird fear of talking about goals and the systems that pursue
goals. And I think we need to dump that. I think that leaves us so much on the table when we pretend
that doesn't exist. Since the 40s and cybernetics, we've had good theories of how you can have
non-magical goal pursuing systems. So I think it's time to kind of give up our fear of that.
And once you do that, really interesting examples of novel research programs come to light.
And bioelectricity, I think you mentioned bioelectricity. So bioelectricity happens to be
my favorite kind of cognitive glue for cells into larger systems, but it is not the only one. I
don't think it's magic. I don't think it's the only game in town. I'm sure there are other
mechanisms that play the same functional roles and who knows other places in the universe what
substrates play that role. But here on earth, what evolution has done is really
exploited bioelectricity and shown us how you can use certain features of physics and computation
to scale up cognition from very primitive goals of homeostatic little tiny systems all the way
up through human level, massive cognitive light cones. So I love bioelectricity, but it is certainly
not the only game in town for that. Thank you, Michael. Can we give a massive thank you to
Professor Levin because Professor Levin would have to leave now. So a massive thank you to
Professor Levin, everybody. Thank you so much. Thank you for having us. Great to see you, Don.
Awesome to be able to discuss this. And thanks, everybody. Thank you for your questions.
Great to see you, Mike. See you soon. Thanks. See you soon. Thank you. So I'll respond to the
question as well. So first, the notion of reality, I would distinguish two kinds of reality.
You might say something is real if it exists, even if no one perceives it.
That would be what you might call objective reality. But that wouldn't apply to my headache.
So suppose I have a headache. Well, that headache sure seems real to me, but it would not exist
without someone perceiving it, right? So the notion of objective reality doesn't seem to catch my
headache. And if you told me my headache wasn't real, I'd be very crossed with you. I mean,
it's real to me. So I'll distinguish between objective reality versus subjective reality in
that sense. And then what I'm saying is that we thought that space, time, and physical objects
like the sun and the moon are objective reality. And all I'm saying is, no, they're a different
kind of reality. They're subjective reality. We thought that they were objective reality,
but no, they're subjective reality. And I think quantum theory, the Nobel Prize in physics last
month was awarded to three researchers who have done empirical work showing that local realism
is false. And basically, what I'm saying is local realism is false. These things are all
subjectively real. They're there when you observe, those properties are there when you observe,
and they're not there when you don't observe. So they're subjectively real, but not objectively
real. So now in terms of lightness, yeah, lightness, brilliant work in monodology,
and, you know, he had the analogy of the mill where he understood the hard problem of consciousness
and dismissed it in one paragraph. He knew that you couldn't boot up consciousness from physical
systems. And it was so obvious to him, he didn't think it was worth more than one paragraph of his
time to spend on it. And I agree. And so he then proposes the monodology and the monads and his
big, he basically says we need to start with two things, experiences and probabilistic
relationships among experiences. And I agree with lightness again. That's what we've done in our
model of conscious agents, we basically model experiences and probabilistic relationships
among experiences. So lightness was there 300 years before me. And his notion of pre-established
harmony, that I think we're going to be able to model that in the way I was talking about earlier,
where I have like a big Markovian kernel for a big conscious agent. And when I take its trace
chain, there's two to the n trace chains, those are two to the n conscious agents that are all
interacting, it'll look like a pre-established harmony because they're all part from this one big,
now I can't do the trace channel on the one big conscious agent, the ultimate one, I can't do
that just because, well, Apple hasn't built a big enough laptop for me yet. So we need to
go to all of Cantor's hierarchy of infinity. So Apple has a little bit of work to do ahead
for that. So we can't do that. But I sort of concede the notion of pre-established harmony coming
out of this. But it's also very useful for me to talk about conscious agents interacting in
non-trivial ways as independent agents looking at their interactions. So I mean, ultimately,
I think Leibniz is right, but I think this other perspective is useful, given that we
can't actually model the one itself. And finally, in terms of what kinds of, you know, testable
predictions, that's what I'm working on this year. I want to, I'll be writing a paper and
I'm going to try to show that we can predict precise part on distributions
for protons from a theory of conscious agents. So the proton, as everybody knows, is one of the
fundamental parts of the nucleus of protons and neutrons, nucleus of atoms. The proton itself
is one of the most complicated things humankind has ever studied. It's not a trivial little ball,
and it's not just three quarks. You see three quarks, two up quarks and a down quark,
at sort of low spatial resolution, Bjork and X, and low temporal resolution, Q squared.
But as you increase your spatial and temporal resolution, you find at the highest resolution,
you see what they call a gluon C, an ocean of gluons that are appearing and disappearing. And
then as you back off on your, you know, you sort of have larger temporal, larger temporal scales,
less temporal resolution, then you start seeing quark, anti quark appear, disappear. So you get
this quark C. And then finally at the crudest scale, you see the three quarks and then some
other quarks that are appearing and disappearing. So they have momentum distributions for all
Bjork and X and all Q squareds. And I want to show that we can get all of those as artifacts
of the spatial and temporal windows of our trace chain. In other words, these particles and their
properties that we're seeing at the colliders are not an insight into a fundamental reality.
All of the particles and all of their properties are artifacts of the spatial and temporal resolution
of trick like conscious agents in their observations. So again, I could be wrong,
but you're asking for a prediction. So the thing about predictions is you can be wrong. So
this is the prediction that we're going to try to make. And we'll see where it goes.
Thank you, Don. Maron, next. Great. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Good to see you, Professor Hoffman. I have a question about the problem of
perception. So under the free energy principle, perception has been defined as finding the most
likely explanation or the most likely value for a hidden variable, given the current observations
that, say, we have five sensory inputs. And at time t, we are receiving five different
sensory inputs through those five channels. And given that, I'd like to predict the most likely
explanation for a hidden variable that has probably caused those sensory inputs.
Especially in artificial intelligence, when we want to create smart AI models, particularly deep
learning models, we are talking about a hierarchical structure of layered neurons. And one of the
reasons that we do that, which is also similar to what they do in predictive coding networks,
is that we are having a hierarchical structure of neurons so that we might be able to infer
the hierarchical sequence of, you know, links of causality behind, what is it, like in the world
out there that might have caused these sensory inputs, sort of model the hierarchical structure of
God knows how many hidden variables and the way they're connected to one another.
Now, if, first of all, I'd like to know whether you agree with this, like would this be the right
at least approach in trying to understand the complicated hierarchical structure of hidden
variables. And second of all, because, I mean, this way, it seems intractable to me to try and
sort of, you know, model, you know, potentially many, many, many such hierarchical relationships to
so that we could model the world around us because it's just too complicated. So these are my two
questions. Thank you very much. Yeah, great question. So the idea of perception as Bayesian
inference is you have a long history in the field. I've done some papers on that myself.
There's a book called Perception as Bayesian inference. So if you there is actually a book
called Perception as Bayesian inference by edited by David Neil and Whitman Richards. And Whitman
Richards was my PhD advisor. And I have a paper in that book. So I'm very interested. And that's
a 1996 book. So it's quite old now. But it's I've been interested a long time in Bayesian
inference models of perception. And I think that they're quite powerful. Most of my colleagues who
are doing that are assuming that space and time is fundamental reality. And that word were the
Bayesian inference was we're actually finding the true physical substrate behind our perceptions.
And I think that that whole thing is that that interpretation of Bayesian inference
is mistaken. And if you go to the, you know, predictive processing, predictive coding kind
of thing and the work on Bayes nets, for example, and the implications there, what you see is
the nodes inside a Markov blanket appear to be doing this kind of, you know, Bayesian estimation.
Whenever I say something, it sounds like Siri Siri on my phone starts anyway. So so
but but but here's the key thing that that we know about Bayes nets, the, even though it looks like
the nodes on the inside are doing some kind of Bayesian inference about the world states,
we know that the states of the nodes on the inside and the states of the nodes on the outside of the
Markov blanket are conditionally independent, given the state of the Markov blanket. That means
the only thing that the nodes on the inside can never can ever know about the external world
is the information on the Markov blanket. So that whole framework tells you that you're only
seeing an interface, the Markov blanket is your interface. And you're not when you're doing this
predictive processing, you're not predicting you're not estimating the true state of the world.
You're doing something on an interface and you're using only interface variables. So you never see
the truth and you're not estimating the truth. And it's just right there in the actual, you know,
the fact that a Markov blanket is the set of nodes that makes the internal nodes and external
nodes conditionally independent. That means you can't know anything more about the external nodes
except what you see on your Markov blanket. So so it just really highlights what I've said
from evolution of natural selection. And what the physicists are telling us,
not fundamental, evolution tells us it's just an interface. And so does the Markov blanket that
tells you it's just an interface. So they all agree. Thank you very much. Thank you, Don. John,
did you have any questions for Don? Thank you, Ivy. Yeah, the one thing I guess I,
as a as a physicist, I confess, I, the one part I like, I love your
Windows interface analogy, you know, and I, and I think that's really powerful. But then
Oh, I'm sorry. Yeah, sorry, not doing. But I feel like I feel like I can't quite make the leap
to, you know, my experience in the world. And so, for instance, the things that I have trouble with
is kind of extending that to the idea that I can both see things and feel things and I can travel
to those things that I see and touch them and other people can too. And they have the same
experience. And I don't know, maybe I'm, I just feel like I'm missing something there. And I wonder
if you have anything to help me over that. Sure. Sure. I think I think the virtual reality
metaphor is a big, big help here. So for people who are playing multiplayer, so multiplayer VR
games. So I'm playing with somebody in China and, you know, in Germany and in Argentina,
we're all playing Grand Theft Auto together. And we can all agree that, Oh, yeah, I, you know,
Hoffman is racing against a red Porsche. And the red Porsche is, you know, is 20 meters ahead of
Hoffman. And we all agree. So we have consensus. And they might be giving me advice. You say, you
know, Hoffman, you do a hard left there. There's a shortcut. You can beat them, something like that.
So we have consensus. And it looks like there's this objective reality. But we know that there is
no red Porsche anywhere. There's just some supercomputer. We're toggling bits. So when the
physicists like Nima or Connie Hamid tell us that space time is doomed, right? That it's not
fundamental reality. They're, but they're going beyond, they're saying, okay, there is a reality
beyond space and time. And by the way, beyond quantum theory. But they're saying that quantum
theory itself is not fundamental. So the new structures that they're finding, like the amplitude
Hadron, there are no Hilbert spaces there. But the apple to Hadron is this high dimensional
geometric object with facets and faces and edges and vertices. And it turns out that the properties
of space time and quantum theory, locality and uniterity are coded in the face structure
of these geometric objects beyond space time. So, so, so this is so physicists themselves,
and this is only in the last 10 years. So most, by the way, I was at a conference
on consciousness just a couple months ago, where a number of physicists who are quantum
theorists. So they're their PhDs in quantum theory. And they're looking at consciousness.
At the end of their talks, every one of them asked, now, are you aware of these structures
beyond space time, the amplitude Hadron and the decorated permutations and to a person,
they had never heard of it. Now, now, now the reason is, is this is high energy physics,
right? Only people who are in high energy particle physics, right, know about this stuff.
And, you know, so why does a cognitive scientist know about it? Well, because I knew I needed to
look for something beyond space time. So I've been looking for physics beyond space time. And
when I found Nima or Connie and their work, I realized, okay, okay, the other ones that would
be doing it, they're the ones that are pushing the envelope with the highest energies, right?
They're the ones that are going there. So it's and it's Nima who's saying quantum theory is doomed,
not just space time, but quantum theory, that both of those are going to arise together.
Because if you think about it, the particles, right, some people are trying to boot up space
time from like entanglement of particles, right? But what are particles? Particles are
irreducible representations of the Poincare group of the symmetries of space time. So you're not
getting outside of space time, you're just staying in. So quantum theory does not get you
behind space time. In fact, all the weirdness of quantum theory, the fact you need superpositions
and collapse and all this stuff is a symptom of an interface. It's the fact that you've lost
information in projection. That's why we get the weirdness of quantum theory and the no cloning
theorem and all that stuff is all an artifact of space time not being fundamental. And there's
this deeper reality. So now where physics is right now is, so the amplitude Hadron, so here's
something for a physicist. If you do the scattering amplitude computation, say for two gluons,
smashing into each other four gluons, spraying out, you do it in space time using quantum field
theory. It's hundreds of pages of algebra, nasty, nasty math. If you do it with the amplitude Hadron,
three or four terms, you can compute it by hand. The math becomes trivial. Well, relatively trivial.
It's all relative. But trivial compared to what you have to do with Feynman diagrams. And the other
kicker is you see new symmetries. There's something called the infinite Yangian symmetry that's true
of the scattering, but you cannot see it in space time. You can only see it when you go beyond space
time. So when the physics, when the physicists find that the math is getting simpler and you're
seeing new symmetries, bye-bye space time. Well, I'll be sorry to see it go. It's a wonderful
headset. It's been a useful headset. Thank you. Do you want to, do you know it?
Yeah, very quickly. Donald, you didn't talk about the hard problems for consciousness.
It seems to me in fact that that problem still remains as a problem because you
essentially created a mathematical model of, you know, the effects of consciousness,
not the consciousness, but the effects of consciousness, where the sentience, the sentience
is coming into play in probably all the, all the, the way you're kind of portraying the reality.
Can I just very quickly tell us something about this? Because I feel that experience is something
that you cannot, you cannot convert it into any kind of model. That is my...
Right, right. So the hard problem is that it comes up if you, if you assume that space and
time are fundamental and you're trying to figure out how, for example, something like neural
activity could cause conscious experiences. And there, I've got many friends and colleagues who
are working in that direction and they're brilliant, but it's impossible to solve that problem.
And the failure is clear. There's, you know, there's, for example, integrated information
theory. What is the integrated information that must be the taste of chocolate or the smell of
garlic? There's not a single one that they can do. Same thing with the orchestrated claps and
microtubules. There's not a single specific conscious experience that they can explain.
And I predict I'd bet good money that they'll never be able to do it because it's just impossible.
Live notes was right. It's impossible. So, so for me, I don't have the hard problem of consciousness
because I'm not trying to boot up consciousness from non-conscious ingredients. I'm saying that
that whole approach is wrong. So I've got the reverse hard problem. I have to, I have to show
if I start with consciousness, so I'm assuming consciousness, I have to show you how I give
you physics in all detail. So I'm doing the reverse hard problem. And that's why I said my goal
this year is to predict the part on distributions for all the quarks and gluons and so forth inside
the proton. In other words, that's my reverse hard problem. So I agree that we need to solve it,
but I have to go in the other direction. That one, I think is feasible. And by the way,
my current simulations are already very, very, they're encouraging. At small temporal scales,
I get a gluon C, well, a massless particle C appearing. And as I increase the temporal scales,
I get a C of small, increase the temporal scale even more, I start getting bigger particles with
greater mass. So I get the, I've already, my simulations got the big picture now, but my
goal is not just the big picture, I want to get the exact momentum distributions. But already,
my current simulations tell me, you know, this is in a very profitable direction.
Thank you, Don. Can we move on to Ethan Prillock?
Yeah.
Go straight to your question, please.
Yeah, well, we had asked it about Delbroc earlier, and you're just curious about comments as to how
you have additions or subtractions or how similar it is. Thank you.
Well, just briefly, I mean, Delbroc did a lot of things. So what specific idea about Delbroc's
did you want me to comment on? Well, he talked to sort of, yeah, I mean, he talked about evolution,
not really providing for something that we should expect to understand, you know, the fitness
function as modeling, underlying reality. So, I'm not familiar with that. So he actually said that
the notion of a fitness function, the fitness payoff function is not a useful tool, you're saying?
He said it wouldn't really, we shouldn't expect it because of the way evolution works, that to
represent the underlying reality. But he didn't, you know, he didn't talk about it in terms of,
you know, operating systems, of course, we didn't really have anything as powerful.
Oh, I see. So you're saying that he was sort of agreeing with me, that he was saying that we
shouldn't expect evolutionary grounds that we don't see reality as it is. Oh, yeah, yeah, absolutely.
And he was a student also of some of the great modern, he was a doctoral student of one or two
of the great modern physicists before he became a biologist. Right. So yeah, and I think he was
not a reductionist, and I'm not a reductionist either. So I'll just say yes, I agree with Delbroc
on that. And he is absolutely my superior in terms of his knowledge of molecular biology.
And then my other one quick question too is in terms of the stuff that you were talking about
these formalisms, is there anything that would, if we stay on the side of the Planck limits,
that would make a demarcation about describing features of the universe in, you know, a prebiotic
situation or a proto-ecology? And is there anything that would show something like that?
Well, what I think is going to happen from the simulations I'm doing is that as I
increase the windows, the spatial and temporal windows of the trace chains that I do,
I will get more and more complicated behaviors. And so I'm doing particles because that's the
most trivial thing. I mean, I'm doing the physics because it's going to be the easiest thing. And
it's also where we have the most data, right? The physicists have been doing these scattering
experiments for decades. And so we have tons of data. And so I'm not going after the physics
because I think that that's the final thing or the most important thing is the thing that you
can do first. And you can get, but I eventually want to show how as we go to larger scales of
these trace chains, we will then be able to see like the emergence of cells in organisms and
greater organization. But that's more complicated. If I went after that first, I wouldn't have anything
to report. I need to do the physics where we actually have a shot at getting a concrete result.
Thank you, Don. Can we move on to Tony, please quickly? Yeah, it's going to be Don's last question.
Okay, let me try to add something useful. How you relate physics or fundamental physics,
particle physics and consciousness. This part is still not clear to me.
Okay, so we just published a paper last week that you can take a look at. It's called Fusions
of Consciousness. So if you just Google my name, Donald Hoffman, and Fusions of Consciousness,
it's available free online. And you'll read how we make the connection. But what I'll say at the
top level is what we show in that paper is that communication or communicating classes
of conscious agents correspond what are being catalogued by decorated permutations. So the
physicists found these decorated permutations beyond space time. These decorated permutations
account for most of the data about scattering in space time. So we said, okay, if decorated
permutations are the deepest thing the physicists have found beyond space time, let's take our
theory of consciousness and project it onto decorated permutations. And we did. So we
introduced new mathematics, the mathematics that takes Markov chains and maps them to
decorated permutations is brand new in our paper. So that's a new contribution as far as I can tell
to mathematics. And that tells us now that particles in space time correspond to communicating
classes of conscious agents. So that's so that paper establishes that part and we were clear
on the paper, we're proposing that particles in space time are projections of communicating classes
of conscious agents. So in the next paper that we're working on, I'm going to we're planning
to now make specific mapping. So for example, what properties of communicating classes
correspond to the mass of a particle? And there, as I mentioned earlier, so my proposal and this
is not published, so I'm telling you what we're working on. And if you can beat me to it, go
ahead and publish it. That'd be fine. I don't care who publishes, I just want to read the
papers. I just want to know this stuff. So so I'm putting my ideas out there and someone who's
a lot of people are smarter than me in this area. So you can run with it and I'll be happy
to read your paper. What we're proposing is that the entropy rate of a communicating class
corresponds to the mass. And the number of states in the
communicating class will will lead almost immediately or momentum and wavelengths. So so
those are the things that we're looking at right now, but we're going to write up we're writing a
paper tentatively called traces of traces of consciousness, where we use these trace chains
and show how particles arise as artifacts of the trace process. And all of their properties
arise like the they'll then be artifacts like the entropy rate of the Markovian kernel that
of the Markovian kernel that happened to arise as an artifact of the trace chain process.
That will be the mass that you see. So so that's how I'm proposing to get physics.
All of the particles and all the properties are not fundamental reality. They are artifacts of the
way we observe. Statistical artifacts and we're going to so and that's not just a hand wave,
we're going to say now exactly what the statistics are and exactly how those properties emerge as
the artifacts and why you get like bosons first and then only later does it condense into fermions
and so forth. That that's all going to fall out of this. So thank you Don. I have a very small
question if I may. I will cry otherwise on stage. I'm sorry Madi, we have to stop the interview now.
Don, have to go. So can we all give a massive thank you to Don for today, for his time, please.
Don, thank you so much. It's been amazing. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much. We'll see you later.
Bye bye.
you
