I'm Tim Ventura, and we're joined today by award-winning science fiction author and space
scientist Dr. David Brann.
In addition to writing dozens of best-selling novels and short stories, some of which have
been adapted for film and television, David is a 2010 fellow at the Institute for Ethics
and Emerging Technologies, helped establish the Arthur C. Clarke Center for Human Imagination,
serves on the advisory board of NASA's Innovative and Advanced Concepts Group, and does futurism
consulting for diverse organizations, including the U.S. Department of Defense, Procter & Gamble,
SAP, Google, and many more.
David is the winner of numerous awards and honors, including the prestigious Nebula,
Hugo, and Locust Awards for Science Fiction, and holds a Ph.D. in Space Science from the
University of California.
So David, welcome back.
It is always a pleasure and a true honor to have you with me today again.
Well, terrific, Tim.
Yeah, I hope you can hear me all right.
From way down in the lower left corner of the continental United States, where everything
loose rolls down.
Fruits, nuts, flakes, random ball bearings.
Anyway, so yeah, let's explore the future.
Right over my head there in the image is a Globe of Venus.
One of my book covers for my novel set on the sun called Sundiver.
So we have, we're already on a planet, an interplanetary theme.
Yeah, well, again, I cannot thank you enough for joining me today.
So I saw Dune 2 last week, and as I mentioned before, we started recording.
I have been binge watching Foundation Season 2, but this makes it the perfect time to
talk about these two.
And I actually found an article by Tim O'Reilly where he compared them.
This was way, way back when, so he was comparing the novels, right?
Not the adaptations, but I thought it would be great to talk about these.
So Dune 2 is currently in theaters.
Foundation just finished Season 2 on Apple TV.
There was another season on the way this fall.
I guess they've confirmed that.
So I wanted to start by asking what your thoughts are on the new Dune movies and the Foundation
series, and how well these capture the vision of the original science fiction authors, Frank
Herbert and Isaac Kazimov.
Well, let's put this in context.
Well, first off, the commercial plug, and that is that I wrote the intro to the new
collector's editions of Dune and God Emperor of Dune, which have just been released.
They're only for those with some folding money in their e-accounts, because these are lavish,
gorgeous, two-color pages on acid-free, recycled, you know, Smith's own bindings, special slipcases,
all that sort of thing.
So people can look out for them, or I'll provide you with a link.
But in any event, in these intros, I pointed out a number of things about Frank.
I did know Frank Herbert.
I did know Isaac Kazimov.
I wasn't as close to them as I was to Ray Bradbury, who went to the same high school
as me, 30 years difference, but still the same high school.
But there's some really interesting things one sees about the 1940s, 50s, 60s, when these
folks were in their heyday.
And one was an almost religious need for transcendental solutions to problems that were facing them.
It seemed as if there was no way to avoid, for instance, the theme of Oppenheimer, nuclear war.
Certainly no one was setting up UN agencies as Oppenheimer requested to manage these horrible
weapons.
Meanwhile, among the ways out that were being pushed in science fiction, John W. Campbell,
the editor of the flagship science fiction magazine of those days, astounding, that became
analog, still a pretty good magazine for nerds, he was pushing some mythologies on his authors.
And one of them was that we would develop force field shields, no sign of that.
And another was that psychic phenomena would bear fruit, and that you would wind up with
PSI, PSI powers.
And this was in part based upon Campbell's inherent notion that there would be a restored
hierarchy to human affairs.
The American experience has been a constant tussle between the themes of hierarchy and
the themes of democracy and equal opportunity.
And we're seeing such a tussle right now in our politics and in what I call phase eight
of the American Civil War.
And I'll provide you a link for that, if you'll remind me so people can get the context.
But it's been going on for 240 years.
We're all descended from the harems of those feudal lords and priests going back 6000 years
in pyramid shaped hierarchical societies.
Now our mythology is supposedly anti-hierarchical and yet look at the number of our myths, especially
in recent years, that have extolled hierarchy and feudalism and that sort of thing.
Game of Thrones, Lord of the Rings, Dune, very much so.
And in some cases George Martin in Game of Thrones and Frank in Dune, both of them were
very upset when they realized that these mythologies, which they tried to make feudalism as gruesome
as possible and as repulsive as possible, wound up getting millions of people saying,
ooh, how cool.
The same is true of Star Wars, which I point out in a nonfiction book called Star Wars
on Trial and also in my most recent nonfiction book called Vivid Tomorrow's Science and
Revolution.
I point out that Star Wars is also one big advertisement for feudalism.
If you're a regular character, not one of these midichlorian infected mutants in Star
Wars, you have one choice.
Which set of mutant overlords you're going to die for?
And we are encouraged in the movies to root for the pretty ones.
The same is true in Tolkien.
We root for the pretty ones who are a little egalitarian in the way they treat people.
You know, Aragorn has a common touch, he'll have a beer with you while deciding whether
or not to execute you on the spot.
And so the number of these that you see that go into explorations of feudalism, I could
never bring myself to do that.
I'd be much richer now if I wrote the same.
I had a good, I have a good following, Hugo Awards, all those sorts of things.
So from that as a launching point, if I did a series about pretty feudal, psychic lords
against ugly ones like Sauron and Harkonnen and that sort of thing, and George's villains
in Game of Thrones, I'd have money coming out my, you know, horrifying.
And David, let me jump around on my questions a little bit because I heard this further
down.
But several years ago, you did a YouTube critique called Dune the Movie, Good vs. Evil.
Now at the time you were focused primarily on the 1984 movie, again this was before the
new series came out, but it was the same novel, same plot, right?
Same themes.
And one of the key points that you made in that critique was that Frank Herbert was
quietly testing the reader to see if they'd noticed that the Atreides themselves are morally
questionable.
I thought that was really interesting.
This goes to what you're talking about with feudalism, right?
Oh, right.
Both Dina De Laurentiis in having the Atreides wear costumes that were kind of like Nazi
brown shirt costumes.
I mean, this was taken to the extreme in the movie version of Starship Troopers, where
the director has this very interesting conversation with Robert Heinlein.
Now I actually quite liked it, not only as an adventure thing, but to watch this conversation
because all the characters' words that they spoke were straight out of Heinlein, and the
visuals were straight out of the director's responses to Heinlein.
So you got this creepy quasi-Nazi, but not entirely Nazi, because what's happened in,
he makes clear in Starship Troopers, is we've solved all of our internal problems.
The grand marshal of the human empire military is a short, dumpy black woman.
Men and women troopers have showers together and don't think twice about it.
So we've expanded, we've done what we're doing now, expand the circle, the great American
project, expand the circle of inclusion, but in the Starship Troopers, we haven't
bug aliens yet. Maybe the grandchildren will rebel against this vicious war and
include the, but notice the lesson of the movie is that we should.
Same is true in Avatar.
Nothing happens in, we root for the natives because they're being invaded,
but also we root for the dances with wolves patronizing primitivism of the natives
against the evil human invaders. And the thing that's unrealistic about Avatar is it never
considers that people in that future would have seen Avatar or movies like it.
None of those guilt trips that Avatar is representative of, emblematic of,
have ever been seen by any of the human invaders in that movie. But back to Dune, go ahead please.
Well, yeah. So with Avatar, actually, I think that dovetails back to Dune kind of in another way.
My interpretation of Avatar was that it was, it was basically trying to tell or retell
a conflict story between, you know, early American pioneers and Native Americans, right?
Very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very tall smurfs.
Yeah. Well, but, but then what's interesting about that is bringing this back to Dune.
Dune has this apparent comparison of spice to oil and a large part of the plot
involves repressed tribes of desert dwellers who rise up against foreign interlopers who are
taking their natural resources. So there's a strong comparison.
Lawrence of Arabia. And the, there are scenes in Lawrence of Arabia like when Lawrence goes into
town and meets the morally questionable Turkish general that are very similar in Dune.
So, look, what I've said, I've established a couple of pieces of context. First off, that
folks writing in the 40s, 50s, 60s felt
helpless and a need for some kind of transcendent solution. So psychic powers, if you
rent, or just on YouTube, one of the best sci-fi movies of the 1930s, which was
Things to Come by, based on H.G. Wells' novel. You'll see that one of the ideas that was toyed
with, and this was predicting a World War III like aftermath before it was clear that there'd be
nuclear weapons. It's, you know, a bit of a corny movie, but it's also quite beautiful and very
fascinating things to come. But the notion was that the transcendental thing that would happen
then is technocracy. All the nerds of the world would get sick of the kings and the party politicians
and the nerds who actually have the power, the people who understand how things are done and
how things are made. They take over. And of course, that is a notion that's overly simplistic and
most technologists and nerds don't like the idea in any event. So that's a group that has been,
to some extent, offered power that has turned it down, which is often a good sign.
So what they were looking at when we're looking at technocracy, they were looking at psychic phenomena
which wove its way into Herbert's viewpoint as Tim O'Reilly in the article you're linking to
points out Herbert explored this in other stories and other novels evolving toward
the analog magazine obsession of the time that Psy just had to be real. And of course,
as a physicist, I have to tell you that there are certain ways in which I'm open to certain
aspects of that, but otherwise it's complete baloney. Yeah, I think that was in Heinlein's
books too, right? Didn't Heinlein use that a lot? Heinlein did, but Heinlein was making a nod to
John W. Campbell giving him what he wanted, like Heinlein had a book called Beyond This Horizon,
which is one of his best novels, but the first half is crap, because it's filled with
another John W. Campbell's cult notions that an armed society is a polite society.
And so the whole first half of Beyond This Horizon is this garbage about how everybody's
walking around with guns and is therefore very polite to each other. Well, that might happen
if all the young tufts keep dying for 10,000 years, then we genetically be more polite,
but it's not happening now. So in any event, the second half of that book, Beyond This Horizon,
you'll link to it, is absolutely fascinating intellectually, but Heinlein never made a big
deal out of psychic stuff. Yeah. Now, if you take a look at this need for a transcendent notion,
what happens is in Dune, but even more so in Asimov's ongoing Foundation and
Robots universe. And by the way, I wrote the last book in Isaac's foundation theory and again,
David, that makes you the absolute perfect person to speak about this. You wrote Foundations Triumph,
the conclusion to the grand saga of the foundation and his widow and his daughter,
Isaac's widow and daughter were very, very happy. I tied together loose ends even from obscure novels
of his like The Stars Like Dust, Pebble in the Sky, Caves of Steel. Well, and as you mentioned,
you also wrote the forward to the new Frank Herbert editions as well. So again,
an introduction to Dune and to God Emperor of Dune recent editions. So in any event, I pay homage
to these folks who were ahead of me. And the same can be said of Ursula Le Guin
and several others, the notion that the feminist utopias of the 60s, 70s and 80s
also have a transcendentalist notion that their utopias happen out of male created apocalypses
by happenstance rather than planning. In my feminist utopia of glory season,
I tried to fill that gap by portraying what would happen if calm feminist scientists
simply decided to design calmly without revenge, a society in which males are just much less important.
No, no, no persecution, just less important. So this whole business manifested in Asimov
and in Clark, going with something stapled and talked about earlier, and that is
psychically connected macro humanity. So the three laws of robotics in Isaac's universe
are drifting toward the super duper, duper, uper, uper robot, Daniel Oliva,
who's portrayed as a female robot in the new foundation series.
He concocts the zeroth law of robotics, which means he can do anything he demo
pleases as long as he rationalizes that it's for our good. Over the course of the novels,
you are drifting toward something called Gaia or Galaxia, which is a bit like what Frank sees
us drifting towards under the benevolent, cruel domination of Leto, Emperor Leto II,
and what Clark distilled in one of his greatest novels, Child to His End, and that is their
fervent belief in the 40s, 50s, 60s, that humans will never be wise enough to handle all this.
We must subsume ourselves to something godlike, but these guys were also anti-religion.
So the godlike thing we subsume ourselves to is a macro humanity, where everyone
psychically can link to each other and we become one big macro mind. In other words, the Borg.
Now, the difference in science fiction is if you go to a world that has
a macro mind of all everyone connected, and they are floating around cross-legged in the air
with flowers in their hair and birds chirping around them, then the macro mind is good. If
they're clanking around with crude hinges and implanted mechanical stuff, then the macro mind
is bad. Same as in Star Wars and so many of the others, if the leader is ugly like Sauron or the
Harkonnens or the Emperor in Star Wars, then the average person should devote their loyalty and
love for the insanely stupid Jedi who are, you don't want my rant about Yoda.
You know what, and actually, if I can get you to promise to come back for this, I will dig
into Star Wars on trial. I saw the, when the YouTube ended for Doon Good and Evil,
it brought up an ad for Star Wars on trial. It was some review for that and I said,
oh my god, I forgot that he wrote that. I read that when I was a kid and I was like,
okay, that one I will, I will beg and grovel. You just made me feel so old. But the point is that
I'll just say one sentence and that is two sentences. One is I've been defying people
for 30 years to name one thing that horrible green oven that Yoda ever said that was actually wise.
And two, Yoda, there is no character in the history of human mythology
who was responsible for a more painful death of more fictional characters than Yoda is.
Now Thanos comes close, but notice nobody has any pain. The ones that he gets rid of.
But that's that. I've just angered enough people. The point is that the common themes
are rooted to some extent in the desperation of the 50s, 60s, 70s that you see in the movie Oppenheimer.
And I highly recommend, and if you remind me, I'll give you a link to it,
the CBS interview with Oppenheimer in the 1960s. So it's about 20 years later than the movie
and 20 years before the fall of the Berlin Wall. So it's sandwiched by these two major events.
And of course, what we proved is that humans are barely, but actually capable of actually
using tools of a weird thing called civilization to stumble and creep past crises. And one of the
things I'm engaged in right now is a lot of the arguments about AI. And you'll link to my
Wired article, my recent Wired article, pointing out that there may be a golden path to ensuring that
AIs treat us well. Well, and if it's okay, let me dig in a little bit there, because in so in
Dune, there was what they called the Butlerian Jihad, right, where they smashed all the machines.
And then in foundation, Daniel Oliva was kind of this robot in hiding after
what appears to be a similar situation, right? So what I've read is that it's been suggested that
in both of these series, the authors avoided robots, they could focus the books on the human
characters, but it is interesting. How are you going to get a humanity
that remains billions, trillions and quadrillions of hapless fools
in a future when there's AI? Now, Jack Williamson took this farther than Isaac did in his humanoid
series, where the robots are deep programmed to serve and protect us, and they become vastly
smarter than us. So they hover over us at dinner, and then they take our knives away, because we
might accidentally stab ourselves. A generation later, they take away all the forks. Then they
take away the spoons and they say, here comes the airplane, open wide. And it's a chilling and a
horrible future for us. Daniel and his, what I call just guardian robots in foundation,
they've left us to our own lives to some extent while manipulating things in our favor. So the
25,000 worlds in the galaxy are all pastoral, lovely planets, and we have a galactic empire
that we think we control. But what's happened is the masters, they're 100 quadrillion humans,
the masters are numerous, cheap, utterly powerless, and the servants are few and utterly in control.
And that's the situation that I had to deal with in Foundations Triumph, and I followed clues that
that Isaac had left for where he was going next. And he was already questioning the
notion of this Gaia Galaxia uber superduper mind. He was already questioning it when he died. And
I took his questions to what I believe, and a lot of the readers believe, is the fruition of what's
taking everything back full circle. But the point about Doom is that Frank was kind of upset,
as has been George Martin, that he cannot make the feudalism loathsome enough to drive people away
from feudalism to conclude. Instead, what they've basically accomplished is what Orson
Scott Card deliberately accomplishes in all of his works, and that is praising feudalism.
You won't find an Orson Scott Card novel, and one of them is in all the junior high schools of America,
that doesn't propagandize against citizenship, democracy, everything in the Enlightenment experiment.
But he's extremely gifted. He's a very, very gifted writer who's really, really good at extolling
the notion of feudalism and demigods.
Well, so again, going back to our comparison of Dune and Foundation, and this goes back to
Tim O'Reilly's article, and I'm going to link to that as well. It was actually, it was a book,
it was Frank Herbert, and I believe this was chapter five, it was, I believe it was Gods and
Rogues. He had said, Dune is clearly a commentary on the Foundation trilogy. Herbert has taken a
look at the same imaginative situation that provoked Asimov's classic Decay of a Galactic Empire,
and restated it in a way that draws different assumptions and suggests radically different
conclusions. The twist that he introduced into Dune is that the mule, not the Foundation, is his hero.
So would you agree with that? Do you think that Frank based Dune, at least in part, on Foundation?
Well, I think that these, as I said, these themes were really running through, and I really
am impressed with Tim O'Reilly making that connection, especially the notion that
Paul Atreides is the mule. The equivalent of the Bene Gesserit in Dune is the Second Foundation,
which is trying to manipulate things behind the scenes toward a happy outcome for all,
but leaving them in charge. And I deal with that in Foundation's triumph. In Isaac's last books,
he, you have to remember that Isaac is the Jewish Russian refugee born in Russia,
raised in his father's candy store in Brooklyn, and about as American as Apple Pie, and yet he
tempted by the same ideas. So Isaac kept having a conversation and argument with his one decade
earlier self. So first in Foundation, he treats humanity as gas molecules, because this is a nerd
going for his chemistry PhD. So he treats humans as predictable gas molecules by statistical
mechanics. Then what he does is he realizes that there would be perturbations
in the plan. So then he introduces the Second Foundation, which is a bunch of nerds like him,
because he's become a professor now, who are guiding things. But then he realized that he's
created essentially a genetic aristocracy, which is what he and his parents escaped from in Russia.
So he starts thinking about how to make sure that the genetic powerful super psychic
Second Foundation is temporary. So at this point, he did something that made us very angry,
us fans of his in the 1970s. And that is he wove the robots and Foundation universes together.
And he spent the next 30 years explaining why it made sense. And it never made any sense.
I mean, in the 1990s, we build robots. All right, we're doing it in the 2020s now.
But 25,000 years in the future on 25 million planets, nobody invents robots.
Well, in order for that to happen, Daniel has to have a big cadre of follower robots,
going around suppressing the invention of AI. And I go into the logic behind that in Foundation's
Triumph. And how Daniel's plan is, he knows this won't work for much longer. So his plan is to develop
Gaia Galaxia so that humans can become the masters again, but only one. Spanning the whole
galaxy, one mind spanning the whole galaxy. So the Bene Gesserit are doing something very similar.
But what happens is the mule comes along. Now, they were planning for the mule. They were planning
for the quiz outside Iraq, but they thought they could control it. So it's a bit of a higher
hybrid notion by Frank. But then again, Tim O'Reilly is very bright. There is that overlap
in the concept. And what happens is, you know, the 70s turn into the 80s. And we've started
distilling some of these notions and realizing that maybe we need to move on. Like in my uplift
universe, I'm not the first to portray humanity meddling in other creatures, to bring their
intelligence up to participate in our civilization. H. G. Wells did the island of Dr. Murrow.
Cord winner Smith, one of the greatest of all science fiction authors, certainly one of the
greatest crafts, word craftsmen, has the under people where all sorts of animals have been uplifted
to be servants. Pierre Boulet, the planet of the apes. But in all cases, these were morality tales
that the plot winds up shaking fingers saying, you're going to turn them into slaves. Don't do
that. That's not nice. So when I started writing uplift with Sun Diver and Hugo Ward,
star type rising uplift war, I said, you know, that's been done. Those lectures, you know,
don't turn them into slaves have been done. What if the people who wind up up lifting animals
have read these books or watched these movies? Well, then they wouldn't do that.
They would try by Californians uplifting dolphins would and I portray this in my novel
existence. The trailer is actually loads of fun. It's the most fun you'll have in three minutes
with your clothes on. So I'll give you a link to that. In my uplift universe, we have learned
from the fingerwags of earlier science fiction authors. And therefore, we try to uplift these
creatures to be fellow citizens. But still will make mistakes. Still, there will be pain.
So if you want to explore the plausible in science fiction, sometimes you have to accept
that the earlier warnings were heated. And that's what Cameron does not do
in Avatar. Well, it's a self aware plot, right? And in a sense, I'm going off the rails here,
but the movie screen, the series screen, right, where it's it's a horror movie that's aware that
it's a horror movie. And what you're talking about is kind of the same thing. It's a science fiction
novel that takes into account earlier science fiction. Right. And I talk about this in Vivid
Tomorrow's about how we are probably alive today, because of science fiction warnings
about nuclear war on the beach failsafe, Dr. Strangelove Testament, war games,
all of which had some effects on nuclear weapons policies. And we might be alive today
because of that, the China syndrome, all these movies about diseases that that helped to do
the CDC admits that they were informed by these movies and made adjustments in policies.
Above all, two topics, and that is Soil and Green and all those evocations of ecological
disaster that Frank also dipped into in Dune. These recruited millions of environmentalists,
and we might skate by because of their political influence. And of course, the granddaddy of them
all, George Orwell's 1984, which all sides of the spectrum uses their metaphor for creeping
tyranny by their opponents. The point is that science fiction has a job to do. And when it
does that job well, it's called the self preventing prophecy. It helps to prevent the chilling prophecy
that it portrays. Science fiction in Hollywood also does some bad things, like the lesson
no institution can be trusted and all of your neighbors are sheep. And it does these
because it makes it easier for the director to have a movie and keep their hero in pulse pounding
jeopardy if they can't get help. So if there are no institutions that we're going to help you,
you can keep the hero in pulse pounding jeopardy for 90 minutes. And if they can't knock on a
neighbor's door, knock, knock, knock, hello, I'm being chased by bad men. Well, you try that.
If you're being chased by bad men, you knock on three neighbors doors. One out of those three is
going to say, hold on a second. Let's go. So in terms of Hollywood science fiction, here's one
that maybe you can help me with it. To me, it makes no sense. The Terminator is supposed to be
a warning, right? It's kind of a retelling in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein. But it is also a warning
against AI controlling killer robots. And yet every defense manufacturer in the world is rushing
towards this. So instead of instead of looking at this as a warning, they're looking at it as a
blueprint. That's the impression that I get. I'm not so sure about that. I would wager that
Skynet is the at the back of the minds of a great many of the people involved in all of this.
I'll bet if you look at both the software and the on off switches, cut off switches,
and especially the wall plugs for the rechargers, all of them are within reach of a living human.
I believe that that the Terminator has undoubtedly had effects. As a matter of fact,
I've talked to a couple of serving officers who say they bear in mind, they just can't afford in
the modern world not to move ahead with this new technology of drones, which is keeping Ukraine
alive. Now, I'm not saying that the problem is solved. But in my Wired article about AI, I point
out that the three cliches that come from both Hollywood and human history, that the most brilliant
guys alive, and they're almost all guys who are inflicting or donating whether you think that
it's a curse or a gift, this AI revolution, and Sora just got released yesterday.
In any event, all of them fall prey to three absolutely rancid assumptions about AI.
They're brilliant. They're geniuses. On the architecture level, they're designing these
things to learn and past touring tests. But they all assume that either A, these new entities will
be controlled by two dozen major castles, Google, open AI, Microsoft, Facebook, Beijing Defense
Department, and the scariest of them all, Goldman Sachs and the other Wall Street firms. They're all
doing this, and they all control these AIs, their own AIs, and so it will be like feudal castles
on a hill. And the lords who own the castles will have their own AI dragons. Well, that's how things
are now, at least as far as we can see, but it won't last. It can't last, because assumption number
two you hear them mention is that AIs will be like the Steve McQueen movie from 1958, The Blob.
They'll be amorphous. They'll drift everywhere. They'll pervade every crack and copy themselves
like an invasive species in this new ecosystem we're making, because that, to get back to the
theme of ecology, is exactly what we're doing. The four billion year ecosystem on earth takes sunlight
to plants, to herbivores, to carnivores with parasites all along the way. This is a descending
gradient of free energy. We are now creating a new ecosystem that's electricity,
computer chips, memory, space, clock cycles, and it's being inhabited by new organisms.
So those are the first two assumptions, and they both have a lot of parallels in science fiction,
and they have parallels in human history. The third is the one you mentioned, and that's Skynet.
Yeah. And they will all coalesce into one giant macro super duper uber being, and this is what
Beijing is trying to accomplish. This is what they want, thinking that they'll be able to control it.
And the notion is that this is identical to absolute monarchy.
So each of them has parallels in science fiction, and each of them has parallels in human history,
and each of them lead to hell and horror for us all. There is a fourth possible format,
but I won't go into it here. You can link to it in my Wired article. Let's get back to that ecology
question regarding doom. Yes, thank you, because that was a major point when I was reading through
again all the reviews of the movie. They put that out there. The ecology of doom was incredibly
detailed and well developed, and he drew, I guess, from the Bedouin tribes, and then he drew,
actually, in terms of language, they said he drew from a number of different references,
a lot of Islamic words, and a lot of things that were somewhat changed. Right?
Right, right. The Islamists are either very pleased with doom or extremely angry,
depending upon many aspects, but the ecology thing fascinated Frank, and he was very much,
very much interested in that. How did Arrakis become what it became? And so he invented the
life cycle of the sandworms, then he realized that if he's going to transform Arrakis into a
watery world, which he does by the time you get to God Emperor of Dune, the water has to be somewhere,
so he invented this kind of creature called sand trout, which basically have sealed off the oceans
Arrakis buried under the sands. And so breaking that water free turns Arrakis into just another
damn boring water world, which I found kind of sad, actually, so there are no sandworms,
but the Emperor does this in order to maintain his monopoly on spice. But in any event,
yeah, yeah, Frank was very interested in the ecological aspects, we've covered the
Psi or psychic phenomena aspects. And of course, the thing I talk about in my
older podcast about Dune is the assuming of the point of view of the character. And that is that
if the audience is drawn into the point of view of the character,
you can get them rooting for things that are not in their own best interest. You see this over
and over in Game of Thrones, Orson Scott Card is a master of it. Sometimes one wonders what Sauron
would say if he were put on trial, because the elves are the ones who actually made
things horrible on Middle Earth. But in Dune, Frank does what he does best. And that is dive into the
personal point of view of character after character. And you wind up embedded in Lady
Jessica's thoughts and her paranoia about the schemes around her. And you get embedded in
Duncan Idaho's thoughts. And the best one of the best satires I ever saw was just one page.
Lady Jessica is sunning herself by the pool in a bikini. Duncan Idaho comes on strolling on by
you know, on his way to the to the hover to the ornithopter planes. And he says, oh, hi,
do you know what time it is? And we dive into Lady Jessica's thoughts.
What is what is Duncan thinking? What's his scheme in asking me the time? And she goes
through this multi paragraph playoff on what he might be up to by asking that question.
And so she lifts her arm and she says, it's 1115. And then you dive into Duncan Idaho's
point of view. Can I trust that response? Is she actually giving me the correct time?
What possible reason would she have to give me the wrong time?
You you you go through all this, these mental machinations like Frank was so good at. And
finally he says, thanks and walks away. Well, so that's Dune. Now in in the foundation series,
characters, for me, at least, I didn't feel that drawn into them in that way.
Was it just the way that he wrote them? It seemed more like like you'd mentioned
molecules in a chemistry set. That was how I kind of perceived them in the novel in the TV series
that they seem a little bit more developed. Well, don't forget foundation, the original
foundation stories were written in the 1940s. So Isaac would never became a profoundly
in depth writer of character. But by the time you got to second foundation,
the incredible horrible what we would now consider horrible sexism of the early characters
which the TV series corrected by a simple flick of a switch,
you make several of the characters black female and you've done, you know, it didn't matter.
Gal Dornek, you know, Salver Harden, they're now black females. And that's fine. It doesn't matter
a bit. I mean, Daniel Oliva is wearing a female robot body. But you know, it's terrific. It keeps
you up to date and all that. But by the time he got to second foundation, he gave us in the 1960s
two of the breakthrough female characters. Now by our present standards, there's nothing much to
them. But they were among the first truly dramatic lead characters in science fiction in the early
60s. And that's beta Daryl and her daughter, Arkady Daryl. So we evolve. We move along.
Science fiction has always been at the forward edge. And this is one of the reasons why some of the
extreme woke critics of science fiction of that era are just not fair. I mean, for instance,
that's the era in which Ursula Le Guin was treated as a total colleague, Ciel Moore, you know,
so many others, Judith Merrill, the DC Fontana, granted some of them used initials in their names
to smooth things along for them. James Tiptree Jr., who was Alice Sheldon and probably one of the
half dozen greatest science fiction short story writers who ever lived. So, you know, and granted,
we had John W. Campbell and a lot of things that now read in retrospect as being sexist.
But Isaac evolved. And if Isaac could evolve, not completely, he was a bit of a burden. But
if Isaac could evolve, then the milieu within which he operated science fiction
was one that encouraged some degree of evolution. But Frank Frank had a portrayed in extremely
sexist society in which the female side of humanity is highly empowered to do what he
portrayed as their thing. Again, we might view that as sexist, but it was a very interesting
Ganakan experiment, and it certainly didn't minimize the female imperative in humanity.
It bifurcated it. It separated it. But it certainly didn't minimize it.
Yeah. So, one thing I wanted to ask, and we have covered so much, but this is almost
too important. And you, again, are one of the few people that can speak to this.
Dune, the 1984 movie was criticized as, I mean, basically just being limited in terms of time.
You have this massive, expansive plot that you're trying to squeeze down into a couple of hours.
Now, in the new movie series, you have it spread over a couple of movies. And the sci-fi series.
It's made very clear at the end of number two, and this is not really much of a spoiler,
that he intends to do number three. However, with the amount of plot that remains,
certainly Chani, the emotional and romantic tension created at the end of Dune II, and again,
that's not much of a spoiler, that's going to draw people in. So that's very personal,
as well as the plot elements. But there's not enough plot elements in the novel Dune
for that to make number three. So, clearly, he intends to go into the next couple of books.
Now, I'm not thrilled by that. I personally think, as Frank did, that he had told what
really needed to be told. But the 1980s Dune, which, again, I really didn't mind that much. I
thought it had great textures, and I thought it did its job. I don't know why people hate it so.
It took the position of taking Frank at his word that Paul was a genuine
Messiah, with genuine powers. What I liked about Venue's new one is, everybody might be lying.
When Jessica talks about, she's translating between her son and her daughter's fetus in
the womb, and by the way, not having Ali up here at the end of the movie when he was so built up,
is really a weird choice in continuity. And there are other continuity problems with Dune II,
like where Paul was stabbed. But in any event, the point is that
there are many scenes in which characters claim to be psychically doing things, and you only have
their word for it. We only have Jessica's word for it that she is translating with a fetus who's
holding conversations with her. We only have Paul's word for it, that he has had these psychic
experiences and can see the future. And I like that. I like that there is a real possibility
that they might all be a pack of liars. I mean, when Paul goes to the grand meeting of the Fremen,
he pulls a camp show psychic riff that's identical to that Burt Lancaster movie about the,
what was it again about? You'll put it in the very extensive now,
clips down below in the description, but it's on the tip of my tongue. But a wonderful movie
about a tent show revivalist, fundamentalist revivalist, Burt Lancaster, where you prepare,
your agents prepare the way by interviewing various people in the audience, and then you
leap on stage and read them. Yeah. And it was so blatantly what Paul was doing in that meeting
to get all the Fremen to kneel before him, that it's perfect. It's perfect. And yet the director,
I doubt, expects hardly anybody to notice, just like in Starship Troopers.
So, and I was just noticed that thought just now, saying it to you, Tim, about the camp show,
the camp show moment when he convinces everyone to follow him by just reading a couple of the
angrier members of the, of the gathering, not to give it showing any powers or anything,
just acting as if he was reading their thoughts. Yeah.
So the fact that he chose to leave it ambiguous, not only who or whether Paul is even a good guy,
but whether or not he actually has any of these powers, I think is a fascinating choice. And I'm
wondering if DV will make that more clear in number three. It'll be, it'll be interesting.
So the thing that I, the thing that I, again, I want to circle back to this,
do you think that the mini series format that sci-fi used and foundation is a series format,
right? Do you think that that gives these big extensive plots more room to breathe?
And the, the reason I ask is a lot of books like Glory Road would be a perfect example.
I don't know if you could squeeze something like that into a two hour, three hour movie,
but if you had a mini series to work with, do you think that that might open the doors to some of
the larger, just more immersive plots that are out there, like, like many of your books?
Well, I mean, did you mean Glory Road, a fine novel by Heinlein, or did you mean Glory Season?
Glory Season by David Brinn. That was the one I was thinking of.
My feminist utopia. They're both. Although, although I love, I love Glory Road. I read that
10 times when I was a kid. They both would make fine, fine works. Warner Brothers is
pondering whether or not to make a mini series out of the postman, as we speak.
And I'll believe it when I see it. I think it would be great, by the way.
Well, the thing, what I remember from Glory Season was and the part that caught me was
it started so deeply with character development that, you know, you got into it and then you
didn't realize, for me at least, there was this realization much later on that it was
science fiction, I guess, if that makes sense. The postman? No, I was, I was thinking Glory
Season, right? Oh, Glory Season, right. No, Glory Season has more, is my one work with more of that
in the practice effect, are my works with a more of a sort of a fantasy feel. Yeah. Though they are
definitely science fiction. It transitioned later, though. That was, yeah, one of the big
differences between fantasy and science fiction is not the furniture. Star Wars has all the
furniture of sci-fi, and yet it's blatantly an extreme fantasy novel because, again,
it declares openly and repeatedly that regular humanity and all the aliens have no choice
but to tumble into feudalism. Science fiction almost always implies there's some kind of a choice
here. But in any event, yeah, the miniseries is working for foundation, they had to add plot
elements. Most of the ones they added, like the clone emperor, are fine by me because they could
have been happening offstage and just Isaac never mentioned them. The thing that upsets me about the
foundation series is that they had to pull forward all the psychic stuff that should have waited for
the mule. Because the psychic stuff destroys Harry Seldon's notion of computable human sociology.
They try to fabulate it away in the series, but the fact of the matter is they are Hollywood
people so they cannot write a series without a couple of protagonists who make all the difference,
which is utterly the opposite of everything Isaac wrote about. So that's my complaint about that.
The 1990s, or was it 2000s,
miniseries of Dune with its lavish costumes, they tried hard to get into the cross, into
Dune Messiah and God Emperor of Dune and all of that. I just didn't find it
all that interesting. It was all just court politics and betrayals and things, and I don't think that
was Frank's central point. As I said, he is doing sort of what was done in Starship Troopers,
and I think he is interrogating Dune and leaving things ambiguous, which I believe were also
ambiguous in the novel. The novel is set in a future in which humanity has destroyed all AI
and makes it an utter religion to always destroy all artificial intelligences,
putting aside how you could possibly do that. It is a perfect explanation for the psychic phenomena,
including the prophecy abilities of the Bene Gesserit and of Paul Atreides, the Kwisatz Haderach.
If you assume that humanity lost the Baderian jihad and we're all living in a matrix,
and the AIs therefore within the context of the matrix can provide anybody they choose
with predictions that come true, it's easy to do in a simulation.
I'm trying to think about how many different science fiction series, because we just brought
the matrix into it, and we had the board earlier. We've got a lot of stuff going on here.
We're spanning the length and breadth of one of the sub-genres of science fiction,
and I talk about it in Vivid Tomorrow's, how we have both been saved by the science fiction that
chided us and made self-preventing prophecies, and we have been sent into some kinds of hell
by Hollywood's relentless attacks upon our faith and our ability to have institutions that can solve
problems, and that our neighbors, our resources that you can knock on the doors, maybe it might take
five doors. Within five doors, I promise any of you out in the audience, within five doors you'll
find somebody you can rely on, and Hollywood never, never, ever portrays that, because it makes
things inconvenient to the director if the hero can get help, if the hero can get help by dialing
911, and skilled professionals leap to her aid. Even if part of the government is evil in the
plot, there's other parts of the government. Since when is Ipluribus unum anything but a phrase on
our money? So in any event, let's see now, we covered a whole lot of stuff. Oh yeah, there's
something going on that in AI that might offer us another soft landing regarding AI, and I'm
raising this, I can't see anybody else raising this issue, and that is the movie Rain Man.
We all know by now that about 5% of autistic people have their pain moderated by a gift of
some kind. They're called savant traits, and it was depicted in Rain Man, you know, if somebody
spills matches on the floor, and he says 128 matches, you know, he can do instant calculations,
there's some amazing savant traits, and Frank Herbert tells a story about how he had a savant
or psychic episode once in his life that seemed to prove something to him. When I was a junior
at Caltech for about six months, it happened suddenly, and then it went away after six months.
For about six months, I knew what time it was. I simply knew what time it was. Now that's not
much of a savant trait, but it was enough to convince me that these things should be accessible
in some way to normal humans, if you call me normal. But the point is that, and there are some
people who have fairly normal careers, lives, families who have a savant trait over on the side.
So we know it's possible, and it could possibly be part of us developing some of the powers,
like mentat powers, in DOOM that might help us to keep up with or be of value to AIs,
making some kind of treaty or synergy that I've portrayed in some science fiction stories,
especially in The Best of David Brennan. I will pick up my collection there to show you.
But the point is, this occurred to me just three weeks ago at a conference in Panama about
how to keep AI beneficial. For at least 4,000 years, gurus, priests, meditating people
have explored human mental states, and they have inarguably achieved certain amazing things,
control over their bodies, serenity, an ability to care less about the world, maybe.
And yet I see no sign. And I'm not super educated about this, by the way.
But I have seen no sign that the gurus in their explorations of human mental states
were ever triggering these autistic savant traits.
Be able to calculate the number of branches on a tree by looking at it.
Well, I met a six-year-old boy who had read geography books, and this was my ex-wife's
Montessori school. He had memorized every capital city in every province and every country in the
world. And this kind of came about by chance, right? Because I was helping in the school,
and they had mentioned that. They said he knows all the capital cities in these U.S. states. I
said it's six. That's not normal. So I started to ask him, and I moved farther out, and we got
into rural Mongolia, and he had them all memorized. Was he on the spectrum?
He was. He was. Not severely, though. Not severely.
Yeah. Well, that's fine. That's terrific what the merely Asperger's, what we used to call Asperger's,
what the merely Asperger's spectrum folks, and none of you go after me about autism.
I have a blurb on my novel, the cover of my novel, Existence from Temple Grandin. So back off.
In any event, what we're learning is that the spectrum doesn't, you don't have to be extreme
on the spectrum to get these things. Yeah. It's, I think, neurodivergent. I like that word.
Yeah. Yeah, that's pretty good. But the point is that these,
these, these abilities may be something that we can find a way to bottle
or have access to that would help us to keep up with or be of value to
superintelligent AIs. It's one possibility that I raise in some places, not the wired
article you're going to be linking to, but other places. But it occurred to me three weeks ago that,
oh my God, we're probably not going to be able to do it simply by thinking.
Because the gurus have been poking at mental states for 4,000 years at least. And I know of nothing
to indicate that they triggered massive calculability or massive memory of things in the real world
traits. Now, it may be that they simply, they did and they simply didn't value it as much as they
valued floating above a tatami mat and going, ah, ah. But
in fact, that 4,000 years would suggest that it's mechanical, that it may have to do with
Roger Penrose's notions of quantum accessibility outside the skull,
using quantum effects in our neurons. And that the gurus would not have had access to that
because their explorations were purely mental and had no physical aspect to them, other than drugs.
Of course, Carlos Castaneda, all that stuff that helped to warp you because my generation
took all the pay-on. Yeah, I was thinking of the Beatles and Yellow Submarine, so.
Right, right, right. But other than the drugs and the mental states, it may take something else
to tune our antennae to do this. And if we do, remember you heard it from Grandpa.
Well, David, on that note, let me thank you so much for your time. It has been a true pleasure
and absolute honor speaking with you. I will put all of those links in. I'm going to rush to actually
get this published today. I'm really excited to have this one up. Well, let me know if any of the
links, if you don't have any of them, I'll be happy to supply them. Okay, so I will put that up
there. And I'm not going to ask, I just want to say the word Stargate, that way we've covered all
of the major fiction franchises. Star Trek, too. Both of which fall into my belly wick. Those were,
those have been optimistic about civilization. Although not Kirk, not Kirk, because Kirk is
a sexual harassment lawsuit just waiting to happen. So yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But
the Federation is an important topic in Star Trek. And that's all I ask. The, you know, the notion of
governance and institutions and neighbors are topics in Stargate. And in my novels, and that's
all I ask, I ask just we talk about it. Because this is, this is our superpower. This is our
superpower, the civilization that this year in 2024, we are going to have to defend. So
do that guys. David, thank you again so much for your time today, sir.
