Hey there. Welcome back to The Futurist. I'm Rob Tercik and my co-host Brett King is traveling
once again. He is a globetrotter. He never slows down. He never stops. He's in such demand
around the world. It's often hard for us to find a time for us to schedule the show together.
So this week, we're going to do something different. I'm going to fly SOHO. No guest.
Instead, what I'm going to do is share with you a presentation that I use when I work with
client companies. Now, I'm often called upon by companies to help them reinvent what they're
doing. They need to launch a new product or a new service, or perhaps they have to upgrade an
existing product or something that they sell, and they want to change it. And to me, this is a way
to invent the future because you're going to get a group of people together in a room, and if you're
successful, what you're going to come out with is a world-beating product, something that everybody
in the world needs. Believe it or not, I've actually done that several times in my career.
I've designed and launched services that today are used by hundreds of millions of people around
the world. So I have something to share on that subject, and all kinds of folks have asked me
to share this publicly. So here I'm doing it for you, our fans on the Futurists. Now, I'm going
to teach you today about collaborative creativity. Give me just one second. I'm going to load up
this screen, and then I'll go through this with you all. Okay. This is all about creativity
in groups. That sounds easy, but actually it's kind of hard to do, particularly in a corporate
setting. So what I've done is devise a set of thinking tools and some visualization techniques,
and these are fun ways that you can work with your colleagues to design and develop something new.
So let's get started with collaborative creativity. Often this process is called brainstorming,
and these days brainstorming has kind of a bad reputation. Some people say negative things about
it, and that's often because the way brainstorming is done in companies I think is completely wrong.
Very often you'll have a group of people called together by the department leader,
maybe a manager or an executive in the company, and they say we have to brainstorm something new.
Well, right there you've got a bad dynamic because there's somebody in charge.
That person has seniority in a hierarchy in an organization, and that's just an uncool vibe if
you're going to be trying to be creative. You want to get everyone on an equal footing.
And so what I try to do when I work with organizations as a facilitator is to create
that kind of unhierarchical or non-hierarchical gathering where everybody's in an equal footing,
everybody feels empowered to talk, and I'm going to share with you some of the techniques that I
use to do that. This is much more than a brainstorming session or a planning session because it's
actually a chance for you to forge a completely new relationship with your coworkers. It's a way
for you to get in sync with your coworkers and discover creative talents that maybe you didn't
even know you had, or they didn't know that you had, or you didn't know that they had. So it's
more than a planning session. It's even more than a brainstorming session. This is a collaborative
creative process. Now you might be wondering why is this guy telling me this stuff? That's a fair
question. My name is Rob, as you know. You know me as the host of The Futurists with Brett King.
But in my career, which has been a very long career, I've worked all over the world. I've worked in
Asia and in Europe, in North America, South America, and many other places. And I've worked with some
of the biggest media companies on or some of the biggest technology companies and telecommunications
companies and a bunch of other organizations as well. And my job has been to help those organizations
figure out how to launch something new, something that never existed before. And these are companies
with extraordinarily high expectations. I'm talking about movie studios like Sony Pictures,
Warner Brothers, NBC Universal, Paramount, Columbia, and so on. Technology companies like Unity and
Hewlett Packard, AMD, Google, Microsoft. And gaming companies like Activision. I've also worked with
telecommunications companies like Nokia, AT&T, and a number of others all over the world. For a period
of time, I was an executive at Sony Pictures. I was the president of a group at Oprah Winfrey's
company. And I also worked at MTV, launching MTV around the world. Now, these are a bunch of different
companies from a bunch of different industries. But what they all have in common is extraordinarily
high expectations and zero margin for error. If you're going to launch a new service for them,
it has to be successful. It has to work. And so in that process, I realized that really the job
that I had was creativity on demand. My job was to come up with ideas and they had to be good ideas
and they had to work. Now, that's a lot harder to do than it seems, because you don't have much
margin for errors, I said. That's where I arrived at these techniques. So what you want to do when
you come to a situation like that where the expectations are very high and there's not
much of a safety net, you really need to hit it, you want to stack the odds in your favor.
In fact, what you're not looking for is one good idea. What you want to try to achieve is to have
a lot of ideas. If you want to have a good idea, you better start with a lot of ideas and then
you can work your way to the best idea. That's what I'm going to talk to you about today,
how to generate lots of ideas. And I want to make this a fun process and I encourage you to do this,
if you're going to do this with your colleagues as well. So you can actually play at this,
almost like a role-play game. Play the part. The first part I want to talk to you about is how to
be an alchemist. And the key with an alchemist is to combine different things, right? The alchemists
used to combine base metals in their quest to achieve gold or create gold or something. But
you can do that too, but you're not going to combine base metals. You're going to combine
people from your organization. You're going to combine, you're going to try to find chemistry
with the folks that you work with and get them to collaborate in a new way. So that's a new
kind of alchemy, but it can be a very creative kind of alchemy. Now, the process of brainstorming
typically involves two steps. You probably have heard this before, diverge where you're going to go
out in a lot of directions. You're going to try to generate all kinds of ideas. This is the generative
phase. And then there's a second phase called converge. That's where you start to apply filters
and criteria and narrow down the list of ideas. Very often, for instance, if I start a workshop
with a company, I'll begin the warmup exercise. I'll ask them to each generate 50 ideas with a
blank piece of paper. And we do that with a time limit, sometimes five minutes, sometimes 10 minutes,
depending on how much coffee the group has had or what time of the day it is.
A lot of folks think they can't generate 50 ideas in five minutes, but actually it's quite easy to
do once you get started. And the great thing about doing it in a room with other people is that you
see other people writing down stuff. They're kind of furiously scribbling ideas down on their piece
of paper. So that kind of encourages you. It creates a little bit of a competitive dynamic,
or at least a gentle motivation to get started. And so that's the process of diverging, and it
generates a lot of ideas. After you get done with diverging, you can start to apply criteria and
filters and critical thinking to narrow down that list. Now, a lot of people get this wrong. And
this is actually where brainstorming goes wrong. This first starting point is where people get it
wrong. Lots of folks want to jump to converge. They don't have the patience to do the diverge cycle,
but you've got to do diverge first and then converge. So the people who are impatient,
they're real smart. They typically are people who get paid a lot of money to think critically,
and that's what they're good at. They're very proud of it. And so they want to apply that
converging thinking right away. The problem with that is it kills the energy and the
divergence process. So if you start with critical thinking, for sure, nobody's going to generate
any good ideas. You can almost guarantee you're going to have an unsuccessful brainstorming
session. That's why I think all of this process fails when companies try to do it themselves.
So I'm going to show you now is how to diverge and how to do it respectfully with other people
and not preemptively converge and cut them off. So you can be generative, which is creative,
or you can be evaluative, and that's critical critical thinking, but you can't do both at the
same time. So you can do one or the other. And you got to get everybody in the room on the same
page, because if you get some people in one part of the room who are generating ideas and people
in another part of the room who are sitting back on, that'll never work. And here's why
that's evaluative. That's critical thinking. They're going to gun down those ideas before
they've even been fleshed out. Again, your results are going to be not very successful if you take
that approach. The first thing you want to do, if you're going to be involved in a collaborative
brainstorming session or collaborative creative process is get clear. I want you to get clear
about your emotional state. Again, this sounds easy, but frankly, lots of people are not honest
about how they feel and how their emotions are. Some people feel awkward or defensive. Some people
feel like they're being called out or isolated or singled out. Other people are angry or frustrated
or they've got, they're irritated because they've got something important to do and they should
be working on that and so forth. Look, if you can't commit to this process in an open way,
with love in your heart and the idea that you're going to do something fun with your
colleagues and really commit to that, if you can't do it, then you shouldn't participate in it
because you're going to bring that negative energy in the room and you're going to kill
everybody else's creativity. So just don't do it. One great way to break out of a negative
emotion is to change your physiology. I had the opportunity to work with Tony Robbins for a period
of time. Gentlemen, I respect greatly and he says this all the time. If you want to change your
physiology, what he means by that is you got to get up. If you've been sitting around, you've got to
stand up. If you've been standing inside, you've got to go outside. Change your physiology if you
want to change your perspective, if you want to change your mind and that's especially true
if you're in a negative emotional state. If you're in a negative emotional state and you've been
sitting, let's say you've been sitting in front of your computer or looking at Facebook or some
other social media and it's got you down and you're feeling bad, well get up out of that chair
because you're going to stay stuck in that emotion if you stay stuck in that chair. Get up out of
that chair, go for a walk, go outside, go play with your dog, go toss a ball, go for a run,
go to a yoga class, do something different. Shift your body, shift your physiology and you will
change your attitude. It's essential that you come into this brainstorming session free and
clear of any emotional baggage. Second thing you need to do is strike a deal with the rest of the
people in the room. Figure out some agreements. What do we all agree on? What are we agreeing to do
today? Let's strike a deal about that. The first thing you can do is a very easy thing to do is
agree to turn off your phone. Nothing is worse in a brainstorming session than having a couple
people looking at their phones and really the thing that kills brainstorming more than anything is
a telephone call in the middle of it. Oh, sorry, I was right in the middle of an idea. We're right
in the middle of collaborating in a great way and then the phone rings and some people have to peel
off and go deal with the phone. Just turn it off. Trust me, you're going to be okay. This is only
going to take 90 minutes max, maybe less. You can live without your phone for that period of time.
So that's one of the agreements you can strike. There's others as well. You can agree that you're
going to have one conversation at a time and this is more important the more people that you have in
the room. So if you have five people in the room, you definitely want to make sure that two of them
don't break off on the side and have a side conversation, but as you add more people and
some people like to have a lot of people in a room for brainstorming, then the likelihood of that is
going to increase. It's very difficult to keep people on the same page with more than three or
four people in one conversation, but you got to have that commitment. If you find that this is
hard to do, break up into smaller groups. That's a great way to handle it. The smaller the group,
the more likely you're going to come up with things. You can do great brainstorming with
four people. You don't need to have 25 people in the room. If you have 25, break it into five groups
of five. The key thing, when you're brainstorming, one conversation at a time. And mind what you
say. Mind how you respond. Here's a phrase you're not allowed to use. This is one of the other
commitments you can make to your collaborators. You can say, you're not allowed to say the phrase
no, but you can't imagine how often people say this. It's almost unconscious. It's like a knee
jerk reaction that some people have when someone's floating an idea. They're like, oh, I know what we
can do. We can create robots that fly through the sky and do the zone, drone delivery or something
like that. And immediately someone will say, no, but you can't do that because, okay, that's
evaluative. That's critical thinking. You're killing the joy in the room. You're going to kill the buzz.
Nobody's going to come up with an idea. So you must not say, you got to banish that phrase.
And I might say, yeah, okay, but or no, but I need to respond. I need to respond to that idea
because it's so far-fetched. It's such a wacky idea. The way to handle that is to use a different
phrase. Everybody knows this, yes and. It's the classic phrase that you use when you do stand-up
comedy or any kind of improvisational comedy. And that's what this is meant to be, a fun,
collaborative, improvisational process. So you say, yes and. Yes is great. It's positive. It
means the other person feels heard and you confirm their idea and you're going to build on top of it.
So banish, no, but and go with yes and. Here's another thing that you can do. And this is a
rule that you can create as well. Talk less and listen more. Everybody thinks that they're a great
listener. I got to tell you folks, I find most people are not great listeners. They're not
listening to what's being said. Instead, what they're doing is they're just waiting for their
chance to say the idea that they've got in their head. So they're, they're just holding back,
waiting till they hear a moment when they can say their idea. The problem with that is you're now
moving away from somebody else's good idea. You're not engaging with it. You're not building on it.
And that's a missed opportunity. So talk less, listen more. And if you want to really do it
like a pro, do active listening. You'll probably notice if you look at the show, the videos of
our show, I'm always writing things down. Active listen is important. You want to, you want to
listen with a pen in your hand and a piece of paper in front of you because you're going to process
what that person is saying through more motor centers in your brain. And that means you're
going to have much better retention. And that's not all. When they're done talking, you can say,
Hey, I was inspired by what you said. I want to test my understanding. Can I test my understanding?
No one's going to say no to that. Of course, that's okay. Right. If you test your understanding,
you're going to say, this is what I heard. And you play back what you just heard that person
say. Now, this is the best way to build good energy in a brainstorming session,
because the person who took the risk, who came up with an idea and shared it with the group,
even if it was a half baked idea or a fledgling idea, that's a risk. And you're confirming that
they did something constructive. You're saying, Oh, here's what I heard. And maybe you're going
to reframe it for them in a way that's even a little bit more articulate than what they were
able to do the first time around. So you're building on it. You're helping them develop it.
Testing your understanding is a great thing to do. Now there's a secondary benefit here,
which is that some people are not going to be listening as closely as you some of the other
people in the room. So you're going to help them understand what that first person said and get
everybody on the same wavelength. This are very good practices for getting people in sync.
Don't forget that not everybody loves to talk. Some people prefer to do things verbally or
non, and some people prefer to do things in a nonverbal way. And they like to write down and
draw and so forth. So typically when I'm running a brainstorming session with a client company,
we will do lots of things with Post-it notes, poster boards, paper. Sometimes we do things
where we don't even talk. We just silently brainstorm and write things down. That helps
people who are not comfortable speaking out loud in front of a group. That could be very easily,
it could be half the people in the group. It also tends to eliminate a power dynamic where the people
who do have the gift of gab, the people that love to talk a lot, well, they're going to be
temporarily silenced. And that kind of creates space for other people to come up with ideas and
fill that void. And so actually nonverbal participation is a great way to do it. It's
another rule that you can create to do collaboration. Another rule, another baseline
commitment that you can make to the people in the room is to suspend judgment. You can agree
that for the next hour, we are not going to be critical. We are not going to evaluate. We're
going to just listen to each other's ideas, build on those ideas and celebrate all the crazy ideas
that we come up with. Give your inner critic the day off. Just tell your inner critic to go fishing.
I know everybody's listening to this. You're a smart person and you get paid a lot of money
to figure out what's wrong with something. Anyone who's a business development executive
or a dealmaker of any sort or an attorney or in the finance department, these people,
they are primed to gun down ideas because that is what they're paid to do. They're critical thinkers.
You got to send that person away. You're never going to be creative if you do that.
You cannot indulge that person in a brainstorming session. So give your inner critic a day off,
send them fishing. And what you want to do is prevent premature evaluation.
Only you can prevent this from happening. You got to kind of restrain yourself
from leaping to a critical statement or an evaluative statement. I cannot tell you how many
times in my career I have been in sessions, brainstorming sessions where we're planning
something new and people just can't wait to tell you how it's going to fail. I'll give an example.
And I worked for MTV. They asked me to go over to Asia and I had never been to Hong Kong before
and that's where they were sending me. And we got some advice. A big consulting firm came in
with some people from Billboard Magazine and they were going to give this advice before we shipped
out to Asia. And their advice was MTV and Asia was going to fail. They said the customers will
never go for it. And they had all sorts of data to back themselves up. They had some information
about purchasing behavior and local preferences and different parts of Asia. And so with all that
evidence, they said, look, it's not going to work. You are on a suicide mission. This is going to fail.
Now, at the moment, I had already shipped my stuff to China. It was literally on a boat to China.
And so I figured, well, I've got nothing to lose at this point. I'm going anyway. So I'm going to
just go there. Let me tell you, that MTV Asia launch was the most successful launch MTV ever had
internationally. And so those critics, those folks who are like premature evaluators,
they were just dead wrong. They had a lot of data, but they didn't really understand the
nature of the problem. And so that's often the case. Don't listen to those critics.
The same thing happened for me when I worked at Sony, where I was asked to design and launch
a whole range of new games. Now, at the time I was doing this in the 90s, there were not a lot
of internet games, very few, and network games or multiplayer games were extraordinarily difficult
to do. So those were few and far between. We were launching them. And the feedback I got from some
executives was, oh, we tried that already and it didn't work. This is another joy killer phrase.
This is a great way to kill the joy in the room if people are trying to brainstorm how to launch
something. And some smart person walks in the room and says, oh, yeah, we already tried that.
It didn't work. Now, what they're not taking into account when they say this is they're not
considering that maybe they tried it too early, or maybe they didn't do it the right way, or maybe
their team was incompetent, or maybe their idea that they tried to execute on wasn't very good.
Anyway, I didn't have the flexibility when I worked at Sony to listen to this because I had
a mandate. I had to launch games. I had about six weeks to launch the first game when I joined
that company. And I did. And you know what? It was out of the box success. So was the second game,
the third, and the fourth, and so forth. We launched dozens of games successfully. And we
just disregarded these critics who tried to slow us down when we were brainstorming.
And the same thing is true when I worked at Packet Video. There we were putting video on
mobile phones. Today we take that for granted, but back in the late 1990s, early 2000s,
that was a preposterous proposition. Nobody could figure out how to put video on a phone,
but we did figure it out at Packet Video. And of course, what we were told is that will never
work. You will never be able to put video on a mobile phone. Many people told us this. I heard
this from motion picture companies and TV studios where I was trying to strike partnership deals.
I also heard it from the people that make mobile phones. And then I actually went to visit Vodafone,
one of the biggest mobile operators in the world. And we demonstrated it streaming,
we demonstrated video streaming on their network in their office, on a device that they sold.
And their chief technology officer came in the room and he said, that will never work. And we
were like, hang on a second, you're actually seeing it work right now in front of you. But he said,
no, it'll never work because he had been so conditioned to the belief that it was impossible
to send video through a mobile phone signal that he could not conceive of the possibility.
Now, if you let people do this, if you let people start your brainstorming session with
these kinds of statements, what they're doing is they're telling you how your idea is going to fail.
And candidly folks, this is not such a work of genius. It's not very hard to say why a new idea
will fail. There's a lot of ways ideas can fail. What's very difficult is to explain what might
make it work. And that is your job in brainstorming session. Your job is not to say how it's going
to fail. Your job is to figure out what will work. If on the other hand, you want to stop the thought
process completely and kill the brainstorming session, well, that's easy to do. Just say
things like this, we tried that before and it failed or the customer will never go for it,
or that will never work. And for similar terms, I call these things thought terminating comments,
because all they do is stop the creative process. They stop the brainstorming process. They stop any
ideas that are in progress completely dead in their tracks. And so if that's what you're seeking to do,
if you want to terminate it, use a phrase like that. But my view would be that you should have a
commitment with your collaborators in a collaborative brainstorming session to banish all thought
terminating comments. And if somebody slips up and they say one, as you're pitching an idea,
you're trying to formulate an idea, they might say something because some people slip up sometimes.
All you have to do to remind them is to say, ouch, that hurts. You don't have to call them out. You
don't have to make a big stink about it that they're using a thought terminating cliche. All you have
to do is say, ouch, that hurts. And then they realize what they're doing is actually inflicting
damage on the creative process. And they'll tend to pull back the correct course. Okay, so that part
was how to be the alchemist and how to create great chemistry between the people you're collaborating
with. The second part is how to be the seeker, because of course we're looking for new ideas and
being a seeker is the way to do that. So this is another kind of role playing game episode we're
going to go into. Seekers are curious. Seekers want to know. They want to know how things work.
They want to know where things are. They want to discover the unknown. Be curious. One way to do
that is to ask better questions. If you want better answers, you got to ask better questions.
One way to do that is to think like a journalist. If you've ever been a journalist, even a high
school newspaper, then you'll be familiar with the fact that journalists ask a certain set of
questions for every story. Who, what, when, where, how, and why. These are great questions to start
with, particularly if you're trying to design a new product or reinvent a product or service that
already exists. Who is it for? Who's going to provide it? Where will we sell it? Or where will
the customer discover it? What is it exactly that we're proposing? How, how will we get it in front
of them? How will we create this thing? How will we deliver it? And how much will we charge for it?
When will it be available? When do they need it? When's the right time to deliver it? And why do
they need it? These are such powerful questions. Each of these questions, if you answer them honestly,
if you actually approach them candidly, you're going to uncover so much information that'll
help make your product concept or your new idea better. Another thing to think about is,
is what old thing has to give way for the new thing to happen. There's a lot to be said about
this subject. You know, we often use the term killer app in software. When people use that term,
they forget that actually a killer app has to kill something. If you're, if you're launching a killer
app, it means you're going after something else. You're trying to undo something. Killer app,
for instance, you know, email was the killer app for, for postal mail, right? For paper mail,
and it really did succeed in effect. In effect, we don't send letters anymore. Now we just send
attachments and email and so forth. So if you have a good idea of the thing you're trying to kill,
it can actually help you define your proposition even more tightly. Now you can also learn things
from other parts of the company. Too often when we do brainstorm and we do it in an isolated way,
but I'm a big believer that you want to get cross divisional groups together because
you're going to get more perspectives and more understanding. You know, for instance,
there's often a marketing team and their job is to really basically create demand for new products.
And they'll want to think about user scenarios and so forth, but it would make a lot of sense for
that marketing team to have the customer care people there and some sales people as well,
or some distribution people in the room, because they're going to learn some hard realities about
how customers actually get the products. So it's a good idea to learn from other parts of the company.
Now, many businesses that I deal with happen to be regulated and I've discovered over the years
that if a company is optimized for regulation, they don't really think about customers. They
tend to be preoccupied with the regulator and they design and optimize their entire business for
regulation. So that's really not the best way to do innovation. Companies like that have a very
difficult time innovating. And if you think of any regulated business, whether it's banking or
air travel, you'll know exactly what I mean. These are not businesses that are very adept at
launching new services or innovative products. Why is that the case? Well, particularly in a
regulated business, but really any established business, you can think of that company as an
operator. And that company is optimized for compliance, predictability, including revenue
predictability, and reliability, customer expectations and so forth. Those are the
things that they optimize the business for, compliance, predictability, and reliability.
But if you think about the creative process, those are not the creative values. So creator values or
innovator values are almost the exact opposite. So instead of compliance, what an innovator is
going to value is differentiation. Instead of predictability, what an innovator wants is surprise,
joy, and wonder. And instead of reliability, what an innovator is seeking is novelty,
something different. And so you can see that these are running exactly opposite of each other.
And so if you're in an organization that you might say is defined by operator values, particularly
in a long existing company with a long track record, perhaps a company that's highly regulated,
it's going to be very difficult to break away from those operator values. And you want to
consciously strive to embrace innovator values. Again, you might talk to your colleagues about
this when you're in the brainstorming session so that they're aware that that's what you're seeking
to do. Operator values are just death to the creative process. If your company's optimized for
regulation or compliance, or even kind of an old school customer expectation, it's going to be very
difficult for you to adopt that innovator mindset. But I've got some ideas to help you, so let's
proceed. What I always tell people is rethink everything. And that means literally rethink
everything from where you source your products to how they're found and what they cost and how
they're delivered and how customers use them and so forth. And you can often discover some fun
things. You can turn your customers into marketers or you can turn your customers into
colleagues who help you design products if you rethink everything. How to do it? More questions.
We're going to ask better questions because in this section we are the seekers. So here's a very
powerful question. What if one of my favorite questions, because it's open, right? It's all
about possibility. What if the sky were green? What if we could deliver things by drone? What
if we could replace our physical store with a virtual store and so forth? These are some of
the questions people have asked in the past. They're working on solutions for them now.
The flip side of this is why not? Now, usually when you hear someone say why not,
they're saying it in sort of a flippant way. Like, oh yeah, why not? But I actually want you to say
this in a sincere way. When I say why not, I mean it quite literally. List all the reasons why you
can't do that thing. Why is that difficult to do today? That's going to be your road map. That's
going to be your challenge that you have to resolve, right? So if you can figure out the answers to
the question why not, you can actually identify all the challenges you're going to need to sum
out. That's a very constructive process and it's going quite quickly if you answer that question
literally. So what? Here's another question. Often people say this and they're sarcastic,
you know, you can say, oh, I had the most wonderful day today and some will say, so what? That's a
joy killer, right? I don't mean to use the phrase that way. I want you to use it quite literally.
So what? Yeah, so we've developed a brand new way to deliver this service to our customers.
So what? Oh, well, it's going to give that customer so much joy and satisfaction because
they're going to get in a more convenient way. So what? Well, if the customer likes it more,
they're going to talk about it to their friends. It's going to save us marketing money. We're going
to get the customer's endorsement. Word of mouth is the best thing going. So what? Well, we're going
to differentiate from customers from other companies that are out there competing with it. I
mean, you can start to see what I mean, right? You can actually design a little exercise around
this. When you have a concept or an idea and you want to kind of make it bulletproof, you can go
through this process of asking so what a few times, maybe three or four times, and you start to uncover
some hidden benefits or things that are going to differentiate your product actually helps you
sell it even better. And finally, what's stopping you? And again, often do you hear this question
asked in a kind of rhetorical way? Maybe it's a sarcastic way, but not a serious way. But I want
you to seriously think about this question. What's stopping you? What's stopping you? Very often in
my life, I run into people who say, Oh, I want to do this thing, or, you know, I need, I need to
adopt a new habit, or I need to make more time to do this. And I'll ask them what's stopping you.
And sometimes they get defensive because they think I'm being snide, but I'm not. I'm actually
genuinely curious. I want to understand what are the things that are stopping you and make a list?
Again, you're going to identify the roadblocks and the hurdles and the hazards in the way between
you and success. This is incredibly useful information because you can design for it.
If you know what you're aiming for and what you need to design around, that's going to inform
your product, it's going to make it much more successful. And here's the technique that is
going to sound so crazy to people who don't know me, but I actually do this myself and I guarantee
it will work. Ask yourself a question before you fall asleep at night. So when you lay in bed,
before you, you know, before you turn off the light, before you go to bed, take a second and try to
formulate a question. Now here's the interesting thing, you know, when you go to sleep, your brain
doesn't turn off, your brain continues working. And your brain will be free of all those limiting
factors, all those conscious rules that bind us during the hours when we're awake.
And that's why we have such vivid fantasies when we dream because your mind is unbound.
And if you frame a question, the mind loves a question. The mind cannot resist a good question.
It finds it an irresistible challenge. And so if you ask yourself a question before you fall asleep,
what you're really doing is programming your unbound mind, your imaginative mind. Some people
might call it the right brain. So we used to call it the past. You're programming that part of your
brain to continue working on the puzzle and solve the puzzle. And then here's the trick. When you
wake up in the morning, take a moment before you jump out of bed and see if your unconscious mind
actually delivered some solutions, because very often that will be the case. Write them down
before you forget them. Write them down before you jump out of bed and brush your teeth or take a
shower. Jot down those ideas because that might be the germ of a really great original thought.
I do this myself. I do it all the time when I'm trying to work on something new,
and I recommend it. It works. Now, there's a thing that you'll notice people tend to do.
They want to jump straight to solutions. This is a habit in particular in the technology and
telecommunication space, but I think it's kind of widespread these days. I call it solutionism.
And so people want to jump straight to the solution. But this is a gigantic mistake. If you
start out by jumping to a solution, you're almost certainly solving the wrong problem. So you might
come up with a very elegant solution. I'm not going to say you won't, but it's not the solution to
the problem you're trying to define. You have to take time to do problem definition. And I want
you to think like a scientist. Here I have a picture of Albert Einstein, who's a fabulous thinker and
a fabulous articulator of problems. And he could even articulate the proofs that were necessary
to prove that his ideas were valid. These are great disciplines. And one thing Einstein was in
the habit of doing is starting with problem definition and then going to solution finding.
And he would not proceed to solution finding until he had a good problem definition. There's
this apocryphal quote attributed to Albert Einstein, where apparently the anecdote goes like this.
There was a radio journalist in the 1920s who came to Albert Einstein when he was quite famous
after his general theory of relativity had been proven in an experiment that he himself
had designed. The experiment was conducted by other people in other parts of the world,
but he wrote the experiment himself. And he said, if this can be demonstrated,
that proves the theory. So by the 1920s, he was the most famous scientist in the world.
And a radio journalist came to him and said, Dr. Einstein, Dr. Einstein, if you had only one hour
to solve the most pressing problem that faced the world, if you had one hour to save the world,
how would you do it? And Einstein paused for a moment. And according to the legend,
he looked at the journalist and he said, if I had one hour to save the world, I would spend
55 minutes defining the problem and five minutes solving it. This is the essence of problem
definition. If you spend enough time to carefully define what problem you're solving,
the solutions will present themselves. The solutions will be very easy to find. So take
your time to do problem definition. And by the way, I should point out that there is no proof
that Einstein said this. I've searched all over and there is actually no evidence that he said
this, but it's such a good story and it fits my narrative so well. I figured I would throw it in
there, be like a scientist and start with problem definition. Now in the design thinking world,
there's a way to do this. Of course, it's another question. The question is, how might we,
how might we do this? How might we? This is another excellent question. You'll notice the
questions I'm framing here often involve possibilities, right? They're written in this
sort of subjunctive tense or conditional tense because what we're doing is imagining possibilities.
And just by framing the question that way, you're triggering an unconscious part of your mind to
begin to embrace possibilities. How might we? And there's a little formula here. It's how might we
verb plus object plus modifier. There's a phrase. It's usually an adverb or an adverbal construct.
But how might we verb, object, and modifier? And that's how you build what we call a problem statement.
Here's an example. Very famously in the 1960s and 70s, when Toyota company was trying to become a
world-class auto company, they were constantly brainstorming new ways to improve the automotive
process. And eventually, they figured out just in time manufacturing. And in the process, they
changed the world's approach to manufacturing. But along the way, they had a couple of misfires.
And here's a funny thing they had that happened. They started to ask workers in the production
line at the auto factory, how might we increase productivity? And the reaction they got from
the workers was puzzlement. Their workers were like, what? Increase productivity? I don't know,
man, I'm just here bolting these bolts on this car body. I got to get back to work.
So they didn't get very far when they asked a question that way. But then they heard to them,
the researchers realized they could reframe the question. And if you reframe the question in the
right way, you're going to get great answers. So instead of asking how might we increase productivity
and getting no answers at all, they changed the question to, how can we make your job easier?
And all of a sudden, they got a torrent of responses, because every person on the factory
floor had a bunch of opinions about how to make the job easier. So if you reframe the question,
you can sometimes unlock great creativity. So what I just taught you about is two things there.
First is this idea of how might we, that's how we frame a problem statement. But if it's not
working for you, if you've written a problem statement that's too convoluted or too abstract to
come up with good answers, simplify it, reframe the question. How might we make your job easier?
How might we repackage our products so people will buy more of it? How might we make our product
more discoverable? How might we offer this as a service instead of a physical product?
How might we present this to more customers? How might we make this product relevant to a
customer base that we've never talked to before? All those questions are going to help you devise
new features and new things that will make that product more successful in the marketplace.
There are a couple other techniques around this, around problem definition.
Substitution. In math, there's a simple process of substitution. Here, I'm borrowing that concept.
One way to do substitution is simply say, how do we meet that need right now,
before we have a product? What's the way we currently do it? And then go a little further
and say, okay, if we took that product away, how else would people get this need met? And the
examples are clear. So let's suppose you're trying to build like a flying car. All right,
the question is, the substitution question is, how do we get around town before we have flying
cars? Well, the answer is obvious on motor vehicles and bicycles. Okay, what if we took those things
away? Well, then people would probably use a horse or maybe they'd walk on foot. Okay,
what if we took those things away? Well, then people wouldn't get very far if you can't walk.
Okay, so we can do that process of substitution. And what that shows you is, first of all,
that there were transformative changes that occurred in the past. And each of those changes,
each of those changes will help you, they'll inspire you to think about new substitutions
for the current way those needs get met. Another technique is called the heuristic idea technique.
This is a highfalutin phrase. Heuristic is just a rule. So we don't really need to get too fancy
with it here. But for product companies in particular, it is a very useful thing to do.
You look at all the products that are in the market, they might be products from your competitors,
and you make a list of them. And you can see that if you're looking at the video, you'll see
that listed on the left side, product one, product two, product three, product four. And then you
make a set of columns, and you make a list of attributes. And so you might say, convenient
packaging is attribute number one, and you identify which of the products have convenient packaging.
Another one might be that it's compatible with a lot of different other products. So that kind
of compatibility is another attribute. I mean, every product is going to have a different attributes.
But what you're trying to do here is learn from the marketplace of ideas that already exist.
And what you're breaking down here is attributes by products. You're trying to create a list of
all the attributes that pertain. Now, what you'll find is not every product has all the same attributes
as the other products. This is interesting. Here's a place to get curious. If you find a blank spot,
when you're doing the heuristic idea technique. So you've got a list of products. And now you're
trying to write down all the possible attributes that they share, but you might discover there's
a couple of places where products don't share certain attributes. That's the white space for
innovation. That's a really good thing to do. Another thing to do is to solve the opposite
problem. If you're stumped and you cannot figure out how to come up with a solution, you've defined
a problem, but you can't find the solution for it. Flip it around, solve the opposite problem.
How might we get people to buy less of our products and make it more expensive,
make it hard to find? You can get the idea here. I'm being facetious, but actually it's quite
useful to think in opposites like this if you get stuck. And one of the techniques that I love,
I was working with Barbara Roth, who is a great innovator recently. She reminded me of this. It's
a process she calls headlines from the future. You may have heard about this. Here, what you're
trying to do is envision your ideal end state. So you say, okay, we're here today and we've identified
a problem. We have an opportunity to solve that problem. Tell me what the press really says. Tell
me what the newspaper is going to write about this when that product actually hits the shelves.
And do the whole newspaper. Give me the date. Tell me which newspaper it's in. Write the headline
and write the story out. Literally write out the story about your success. It's an incredibly
powerful visualization technique. And you might think I'm being facetious here because it sounds
a little silly if I say write headlines from the future, but I'm not. In fact, in the forecasting
and planning industry, there's a technique called back casting. And it's the exact same thing. It's
just a little bit geekier because it's done by analysts instead of creative people. What they
do is they identify the current state. They sort of define the current state. And then they forecast
several future states, possible states. You know, if these trends hold true, then in the future,
we might arrive at state number one. If other trends hold true or other trends prevail, we'll
arrive at state number two. So we can kind of plot out into the future this kind of expanding cone
of possibilities. And we want to define each of those future states and actually attribute a
little bit of probability to each one of those. Okay, so that's forward planning. That's a kind
of trend analysis into the future. But now that we've got those future states, you can ask yourself,
what would it take to get the future state number one? Or what would it take to get the future
state number two? I've talked about this as a cone of possibility. Well, there's a range of
probable outcomes here. Some of them are more desirable than others. What you want to do is get
your group to agree on which is the most preferable outcome. And then say to yourselves, all right,
what things must be true for us to achieve that preferable outcome? And you might identify four
or five things that must be true in order for that future outcome to happen. Those four and
five things, that's your product roadmap, that's your development roadmap. Those are the tasks
that you must do. And if you do all five of them in the right sequence, you're going to arrive at
that future state that you desire. Okay, in the last section here, part three, I have yet another
role play persona for you. And this you can do with your group as well is be the storyteller.
It's one thing to have ideas. It's another thing to convey those ideas to other people. Well,
this is a collaborative process. And so you've got to master the craft of getting the ideas out of
your head and into someone else's head. And there's always so many tools at our disposal to do that.
I'm going to take you through those right now. I'm going to teach you how to be the storyteller.
The first thing you can do is write it as a narrative. Lots of times I see people give
presentations filled with data points and charts and diagrams and so forth. Those charts and diagrams
and numbers don't speak for themselves. They need a narrative to make them meaningful to people.
People don't understand numbers. People can't remember figures. What we remember and what
we understand is narratives. So you have to turn your concept, your solution or your idea
into a narrative. And notice a narrative with a beginning and a middle and an end.
Almost always that's going to be some kind of scenario. That could be a product development
scenario, but even better, how about a user journey, a customer journey, and talk about
where they go and how they find out about your new offering, your new service or your new product.
Are they going to encounter that? Are they going to pay for it? How's it packaged?
How's it presented to them? What do they do when they get home? How do they use the thing in their
lives? So if you write that out as a narrative, you'll notice that I'm framing this as a story.
And you actually can do it as a story. It might be a very simplistic story. That's okay. We're not
getting graded here on how well we write stories. The point is that it's a linear sequence to
discovery, to product discovery and product understanding. There's a linear sequence to
customer journeys. There is a linear sequence to the decision to purchase something new.
And so if you write it out as a narrative, you're going to envision that. That's a very
powerful envisioning tool, but it doesn't feel intimidating. I'm not asking people to
visualize anything. I'm just saying, tell me a story. Anyone can do it.
The next step is to get visual. This is really important. More than half of your brain power
is devoted to processing visual images. We are visual creatures. We love visuals.
And yet most people can't draw very well. So there's a conundrum. How can you get a group of
people who are brainstorming to come up with visual ideas? Here are a couple of ideas.
The first thing, of course, is to diagram the solution. And you might be wondering what that
diagram is if you're looking at the video. It's just something I generated. Obviously,
those are not English words. These are not words in any language. But the point here is to simply
draw a diagram, a process diagram. It can be a sequential diagram. It can be a diagram that
shows how parts fit together. It can be a diagram that shows the product. It can be a diagram that
shows how all the elements of a service come together. Whatever it is you're trying to develop
or design or launch, diagram it. It's a great process. Most likely what you're going to discover
there's a couple of places or a couple of steps in the sequence that you hadn't thought of. So
this is a great way to discover blind spots in your process. Another way to handle this is to
draw a storyboard. And here we can take a linear narrative and combine it with that process diagram.
And then we come up with the storyboard. The concept of the storyboard was invented by Walt
Disney. And he was trying to get animators to work together to create great grand narratives.
But it hadn't really been done before. He was one of the very first people to try to create
feature-length movies with animation. And so they created a storyboard. And a storyboard is
simply the key frame of a key moment, the key idea. For each one of those key ideas in the story,
they would draw one frame of animation. And that was the storyboard. And so, you know, literally
you'd say, this happens, and then Snow White wakes up, and then this happens, and then, you know,
there's a reaction, and then the evil queen or whoever it is, the villain does this thing.
So again, it's a linear narrative. And it's like, this event occurs, next event occurs,
next event occurs. That's how we would do it for an animated show or film.
But you can actually do a storyboard for product or service or any creative thing you're trying
to invent. You can literally draw out each step in the process. A linear narrative presented
as a series of images. Draw a storyboard. Another thing you can do, and I do this all
the time when I'm working with companies that launch products, is we go all the way to designing
the store and designing the package on the store shelf. And you may have noticed that on the
Futurist, we've had a couple episodes now where some Futurist do this process as well.
One of them actually even designs an entire catalog. He'll make an entire kind of like
Ikea style catalog, where his product or his new concept is embedded in it. So it feels like
it's in the context of the future. You can do this. Design the place where people will make the
purchase and then design your product inside of that and design that shopping experience.
Again, this is going to tell you so much about what matters in your product and how to make
it noticeable to people who are going to buy it. You can also draw a mind map. If you haven't done
a mind map before, there's tons of resources on the internet that'll help you figure this out.
But a mind map is useful. And frankly, this is great in the brainstorming process itself,
where you can start to re-associate all the attributes around a single concept.
So for instance, here we're showing strategies for plant-based diets.
And you can see there's different branches to the tree. This is a mind map that looks like a
tree. One of them is about social events and finding restaurants. Another one is cooking.
Another one is how to stock a pantry and so forth. So those are all different processes or steps in
the process of designing a plant-based diet and living that lifestyle. But they're quite different,
so going to a restaurant is a very different thing from shopping. And so you want to organize
those ideas around each other. And so if you find, if you draw a mind map, what you can do
is as more and more ideas flow into your mind, as you work more and more on that concept, or as
you collaborate with your colleagues, more ideas will get generated and you can find a place for
them on this map. And that's a very useful step. It's actually a good preliminary step before you
create a narrative. It's also good to draw the competitive landscape. And if you're listening
to this and you haven't got the picture in front of you, I've got a picture I generated here with
one of those generative AI apps of a scary landscape. And it's great. It's a narrow path
through a dark woods and there's a nice village on the other side. But first you have to go past
all these creepy skull things and these kind of haunted trees and so forth. It reminds me of the
woods in the Wizard of Oz. And that's a great way to think about the creative landscape. It's like,
wow, here's a very perilous landscape that we have to get through in order to get to the other side.
Draw it. Draw it and create kind of personas, a little bit of personality for the competitive
products. It's a great way to think about them and how you position against them. A related idea
is called draw the force field. And you don't have to be a good illustrator to do any of these
things, by the way. You can do this with stick figures. You can even tear pictures out of magazines
or find them on the web and print them out. Now drawing the force field is an interesting thing.
There are forces that will accelerate your progress. And there are forces that will stop
your progress. They're going to oppose your progress. And so in this diagram, if you're looking,
if you're not looking, if you're listening, you'll see what you would see in the diagram is that on
the left side in blue, I have forces that are going to propel our progress forward. And you want
to identify what those are. In the technology world, they often call those the accelerating trends
or the accelerating technologies. So for instance, these days, you've heard me and Brett talk about
this on the show, we would talk about the things that are, for instance, accelerating artificial
intelligence. And that is that is great increases in parallel processing from the microprocessor
is the GPUs that are created by company called NVIDIA. Another thing is the great growth of data.
These are fueling artificial intelligence and propelling it forward. So right now, one of the
reasons you're seeing so much AI is that there are these great, great forces at work that propel AI
forward to make it move much faster. But for every action, there's an equal and opposite reaction.
And that's also true with technology. There are forces opposed forces that are going to slow you
down. And you want to know what those are as well. And so for instance, in the AI field, we might say
regulatory conditions. Sometimes there are new laws that are being introduced, customer acceptance
might be slow, people might be resistant, because they feel AI is a threat, there might be a kind
of consumer sentiment that are working against you. Some companies are using copyright and they're
seeking to stop the progress in artificial intelligence by leveraging copyright. So those
are forces that are opposed. Anyway, the idea of drawing the force field has simply helped you get
aware and visualize the forces that are going to accelerate your process. And the forces that are
going to be pushing against your progress. This is a really helpful thing. And it goes with the
competitive map in the sense of drawing the landscape in which you're going to be operating.
Folks, don't hesitate to break some glass. I'm giving you all these ideas, but they're not rules
that are written in stone. These are ideas that you can change. And when you're out there brainstorming,
trying to come up with ideas, don't be limited by what's possible or what you believe is possible or
what somebody else has told you is possible or something like that. Break some glass, come up
with ideas that no one's thought of before. Feel free to do that. This should be a risk-free zone.
And it's okay if you fail. Failure is an important part of the creative process.
I'm an artist. I'm a writer. I launch new businesses. I launch new products. And I fail
all the time. I fail frequently. Probably half the time I'm going to fail. If you do anything
creative in your life, even as a hobby, you're going to know that failure is part of the process.
And what Jeff Bezos famously said at Amazon is failure and invention are inseparable twins.
You got to embrace failure. Don't hide from it. Pay attention to it. Understand why it occurred.
Of course, correct. Try again. Fail again. Fail more spectacularly. Keep trying. Keep learning
from failure. You'll find the path forward. So now it's your turn. What I would recommend you do is
as a takeaway on this, if you're trying to do something new, you're trying to invent something
new, start by writing a problem statement. Start out by saying, what problem are we solving?
It could be for business. It could also be for creative project, or it might be something social
that you're working on. I've framed all this as if we're selling products, but I know some of the
people that are listening are pursuing other things, nonprofit ventures, artistic ventures,
creative ventures of various sorts. All of them are there to solve some sort of problem. So define
the problem. First start by broadly considering all the opportunities and threats that affect your
field or the industry you're in or the organization that you're in. So figure out the opportunities
and threats, and then maybe you can identify a need, something that is not currently being
addressed in a company that might be a need for a new product or to flesh out a product line
or new revenue. For an artist, it might be something involving a new audience segment,
or perhaps you've got new materials that you want to apply and create an artistic statement.
And finally, frame your problem statement as a question in this format. How might we,
how might we do this differently? How might we do it better? How might we?
All right. Well, that's all for me today. I'm Rob Tercik. I am the co-host of The Futurist with
Brett King. I'm the author of the book, Vaporized. And I will be back with another guest next week.
He'll be telling us about how they build the future. But now you're equipped to go out and
invent and design your own future. And I sure hope you'll take advantage of this. Once again,
I'd love to give a big shout out to the people at Provoke Media who make this show possible.
They are great. They're my friends and supporters. They have been so encouraging to us.
Thank you to Kevin, our engineer, and to Lisbeth, our producer, and everybody at Provoke Media.
And of course, I thank you, the fans who make the show possible. I've found lately we've been
getting great things in social media from people. I love it. I love to hear from the audience. I love
it when people tell us what's working and what they want more of or who we should interview next.
So don't hesitate. Bring that stuff. We want to hear from you all.
That's it for this week, and I'll see you in the future.
