Welcome to the Poetry of Reality podcast.
If you're hearing this it means that you're on the public feed, you get episodes a week
late and you hear advertisements.
You can get access to the subscribers feed by going to thepoetryofreality.com and becoming
a supporter with immediate access to each episode and no ads.
You can also support me by liking and subscribing on YouTube and sharing my podcast.
Thank you so much for your support.
I'm a huge fan of Ricky Gervais, he's a wonderful, spontaneous, irreverent comedian.
Mr. Life is deeply moving, tragic comedy and Derek is a wonderful exhibition of his talent
as a writer as well as an actor.
So I was delighted when the Centre for Inquiry in America decided to give Ricky the Richard
Dawkins Award for 2019.
The ceremony took place in London theatre, I made a speech and then we had an on stage
conversation which was chaired by Richard Wiseman.
I thought it was a lovely occasion and I hope you will enjoy it too when you listen to this
recording.
I'm sorry to say I hadn't seen any of Ricky's wonderful shows when I met him for the first
time.
It was backstage in a London theatre where the comedian Robin Ince had organised an alternative
Christmas, a Christmas for atheists.
I was one of the many performers and Robin had lined up some really big names as well
including Ricky Gervais as one of the star turns.
I was astounded by the audacity of his act.
It reminded me of a New York Times review of Tom Lehrer, that wonderfully witty American
songwriter and performer.
The New York Times said, Mr Lehrer's muse is not fettered by such inhibiting factors
as taste.
Well Ricky's act was like that, only more so.
I found his script literally shocking and I don't shock easily.
Naturally this drew me to him.
How I asked him, did you get away with it?
He admitted that he was using the atheist audience as a test bed to try out ideas and
see just how far he could go.
Before subjecting a real audience to a more generally acceptable version, he was pushing
the envelope.
I must rephrase that, he was using the atheist audience to reach way outside the envelope
in order to calibrate where the bounds might be for an ordinary, dare I say, less interesting
audience.
I next met Ricky when I interviewed him for one of my Channel 4 documentaries.
We pretty much agreed about everything.
Some people think that makes for bad television.
It's not exciting.
The public want disagreement.
Well I've never thought that.
Agreement can be interesting as well as verbal fisticuffs.
It doesn't have to be tame and bland.
And I need hard to say there's nothing tame or bland about Ricky Gervais.
His comedy frequently gives offence, not least in his splendidly irreverent takedowns of
Hollywood celebs in his presentations of the Golden Globe and things like that.
If there was a Golden Globe for seeing how far you can go and just getting away with
it, Ricky would win hands down and he's so witty and entertaining with it.
More recently I binge watched his various drama series, The Office, Derrick, Extras,
After Life.
And what I've learned is that he's a truly great playwright and actor as well as a stand
up comedian.
The character of David Brent in The Office is so sensitively written I found the embarrassment
of it too near the bone, I almost couldn't bear to go on watching, like Faulty Towers
but I also admire.
Perhaps my favorite of all his shows is Derrick, where Ricky plays a supremely kind and gentle
half-wit.
It's a piece of acting genius, but he also shows his writing genius.
As for After Life, it almost had me in tears, it's so movingly clever.
Ricky is not just a stand up comedian, not just a great comic actor, he's an outstandingly
creative writer as well, like Woody Allen except Ricky is capable of playing more than
one character.
I'm going to end my acclamation of this witty hero of atheism and reason with a quite long
series of quotations from him, because I think they're so wonderful.
On Life and Death, it's a strange myth that atheists have nothing to live for, it's the
opposite.
We have nothing to die for, we have everything to live for.
It's amazing life, there's so much to live for.
As for Death, he said, that's the best thing about being dead, you don't know about it,
it's like being stupid, it's only painful for others.
The Doctrine of Hell is one of the most evil things about both Christianity and Islam,
at least it is to the extent that people really believe it.
But as Ricky points out, a Christian telling an atheist they're going to hell is as scary
as a child telling an adult they're not getting any presents from Santa.
Another wonderful sally.
Remember, if you don't sin, Jesus died for nothing.
On morality and the absurd myth that you need religion to be good.
Do unto others is a good rule of thumb, I live by that, forgiveness is probably the greatest
virtue there is, but that's exactly what it is, a virtue, not just a Christian virtue,
no one owns being good, I'm good, I just don't believe I'll be rewarded for it in heaven.
My reward is here and now, it's knowing that I try to do the right thing, that I lived
a good life and that's where spirituality really lost its way, when it became a stick
to beat people with, do this or you'll burn in hell.
You won't burn in hell, but be nice anyway.
And one of the nice, one of the things that you'll notice about Ricky if you follow him
on Twitter for example, is how nice he is, yes he can be cutting in his wit and he can
of course give offence, but he has a wonderful gentle side as well, frequently to non-human
animals but to human animals as well.
When asked once whether he believed in God, his reply was, I believe in dogs.
As for Twitter itself, I can strongly emphasize with this, arguing with morons on Twitter
is like correcting graffiti on a public toilet wall that you'll never need to use again.
I read that Ricky had an early ambition to be a scientist and his attitude to science
seems to me exactly right, though of course he wouldn't claim to be a scientist.
To quote him, science seeks the truth and it does not discriminate.
For better or worse, it finds things out.
Science is humble, it knows what it knows and it knows what it doesn't know.
It bases its conclusions and beliefs on hard evidence, evidence that is constantly updated
and upgraded.
It doesn't get offended when new facts come along, it embraces the body of knowledge,
it doesn't hold on to medieval practices because they are tradition.
And the following seems to me to show an admirably scientific attitude to theology.
The existence of God is not subjective, he either exists or he doesn't, it's not a matter
of opinion.
You can have your own opinions but you can't have your own facts.
Ricky is immensely famous of course and he's very gracious about being stopped in the street
and other aspects of fame.
But being famous also prompted a typically witty remark on the subject of the widespread
belief that only religious people are moral.
Being famous is like believing in God, someone's watching you all the time.
I've never quite known how to cope with the retort that it's only extremists who get
a religion a bad name.
Ricky's answer to that at least hits one nail on the head.
You can easily spot any religion of peace, it's extremist members would be extremely
peaceful.
Literary scholars have sometimes pointed out how fine can be the line between tragedy
and comedy.
Some of the greatest comedians and comic characters have been close to tragedy.
Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, Tony Hancock, Falstaff, Basil Faulty.
Ricky Gervais is one of the world's great comedians but unlike some comedians he's not
himself a tragic figure, he's a happy man with an endearing smile, a laughing court
jester in a dark time.
He uses humour to lift us all out of despond.
Other comedians may do that in an escapist way, making us laugh as a way of running away
from the dark reality of life.
Ricky doesn't do that, on the contrary he goes right to the heart of the darkness, tackles
the evils of life and the evil people by confronting them head on and laughing at them.
As he himself said, if you can't joke about the most horrendous things in the world, what's
the point of jokes?
What's the point in having humour?
Humour is to get us over terrible things.
Ladies and gentlemen, atheists and rationalists, I give you a great hero of our movement, our
own wittily creative, infectiously laughing court jester, Ricky Gervais.
Thank you so much.
Fantastic, I can take that back from you.
I'll sit down.
That's it, good night.
Now, Richard, did you do that?
If you'd have been all in black, that would have looked like a really amazing trick.
That was the power of your mind, that was amazing.
So, we're going to chat about, I think, and I'm going to start off picking up on one of
the topics you mentioned there, which is, I think for many people in the public, atheists
have this sort of reputation for being a little bit down in the world and a little bit pessimistic.
Are you, I mean, we're living in quite a difficult time in the moment, are you optimistic
people, are you optimistic about the future?
Well, I don't know if I'm optimistic, I don't know.
I'm happy, I've always been happy.
I have, I've always tried to get the most out of life.
I worked out early on that that was the shortcut I wanted, I just wanted to be happy.
I did that first and then decided how I was going to sort of make a living.
Am I optimistic?
I mean, I've got nothing to fear.
I look at this a bit like a holiday.
We don't exist for 13 and a half billion years.
Then we exist for 80, 90, 100 years, if we're lucky.
And you experience everything, it's amazing.
I mean, it's amazing to be alive.
The chances of us being here, as us, that sperm hitting that egg is 400 trillion to one.
It's incredible that we're here, you know.
And then we die, never to exist again, you know.
Some people even get offended by me saying that.
They say things like, you don't know that.
I'll probably live again.
Someone said on Twitter once to me,
why don't you pray just in case there's a God?
And I said, why don't you put garlic over your door just in case there's a Dracula?
I've got no problem with praying, you know.
It doesn't bother me.
I've never been bothered by spirituality.
I don't believe in it, but I never,
a personal belief has never been a danger.
As I say, religion is something else.
Not even just religion, but dogma.
Dogma is the dangerous bit.
And it doesn't just exist in religion.
It exists in more and more places now.
That cultism, that which shouldn't be questioned.
Anything that, you know, that's what you want to question.
If someone says you shouldn't question this,
oh, you've got to question it.
You've got to question it.
I love that thought experiment about the improbability of being here
and the chance of one sperm meeting one egg.
And I love to quote a poem by Aldous Huxley.
I think it's called Fifth Philosopher's Song.
And it goes, a million, million sperm at a zoo,
all of them alive, out of their cataclysm,
but one poor knower, dare hope to survive.
And all that billion minus one
might have chance to be Shakespeare,
another Newton, a new Dunn.
But the one was me.
Shame to have ousted your betters thus,
taking ark when the others remained outside.
Better for all of us, Froetomunculus,
if you'd quietly died.
That's great.
APPLAUSE
But I mean, I think realistically,
we probably have to be pessimistic,
but that's no way to live a life.
I think you've got to be optimistic,
otherwise you're not going to have any chance of changing things
to make them better.
So I say I'm realistically a pessimist,
but I live my life as an optimist.
And like Ricky, I'm happy.
Yeah, and I think if I get it right,
then your question is geared to
either are we worried about not existing again,
or are we worried about where the world's going?
Well, there's not a lot we can do about it, either way.
You know, it's not a choice.
No, are you going to die or live?
I'll probably just live forever.
Which I probably wouldn't choose,
or I would then regret it.
I think the first million years,
I'd really be kicking myself.
LAUGHTER
Oh, no, why did I choose infinity?
Oh, there's no way out.
I quite absolutely agree with that.
What's frightening about death is not death itself,
it's infinity, it's eternity.
I want to spend eternity under a general anaesthetic.
Yes, that's exactly, yeah.
And, you know, we don't know, we don't know,
but I imagine it's like the 13.5 billion years
before we were born. OK.
And that was fine.
Well, before we started, I did put on Twitter
a call for questions.
Oh, my God.
Why are you asking for it?
Well, the first question was to Richard, actually,
which is about Charles Darwin,
created the theory of evolution.
How did animals change before that?
No, that's not...
That's a joke.
That's a joke, isn't it?
You made that up.
I made that one up.
Yeah, but listen, OK, you...
That is a joke, but it's no more stupid
than some real one, OK?
The one that obviously everyone gets,
and I used to be frivolous and I used to do not...
Now I just answer them seriously.
If we evolved from apes, why are there still apes around?
I used to say things like,
well, if God made man from dust, why is there still dust around?
And things like, you know...
But now I say, well, we didn't evolve from modern apes,
we evolved with modern apes from a common ancestor,
rather like...
And I just answer it deadly, deadly serious,
like they, you know, it doesn't help.
Someone followed it up with,
well, I've been going to the same zoo for 24 years
and I haven't seen one monkey turn into a person.
But I think, even though that's incredibly stupid, we think,
actually, it shows what the problem is
when people try and understand it.
They can't grasp the scale of it.
They can't imagine these tiny changes.
No one can imagine 50 million years.
So they do expect them to chimp to go,
come on, lad, get on with it.
And that's because they also give it a will.
They think, they think...
Even non-religious people are trying to understand,
they try and think that the giraffe was really stretching his neck,
you know, that's the problem.
There's lots of little logical problems
that hasn't been explained properly.
But actually, if I can understand it, anyone can, you know.
Richard, you must have been asked many stupid questions over the years.
Is there a standout stupid question for you?
Yes, well, the one that Ricky just mentioned,
but there's also, why don't we ever see a Crocoduck?
You should imagine that...
That's a good question.
I think that's a great question. I would love that.
I would love a Crocoduck.
I've actually got a Crocoduck tie that somebody gave me.
What image have you got in mind for a Crocoduck?
A Crocoduck would be a crocodile that would be angry,
but he's fucked because he's just got a bill.
That's like my tie.
The implication of that is that there should be an intermediate
between every animal and every other animal.
I think there should be, though.
You can get a Crocoduck.
They can't see that it's nearly an analogue thing as well.
And I think you've spoken about this before.
Your amazing model about if you took a picture of your dad
and your grandparents and their dad,
any one point you go, they look alike.
But for some point, it's a fish.
Eventually, there's a fish.
I didn't see that coming.
What you did, do you see?
Again, it's the scale.
The scale is unimaginable.
It's lucky that it did happen because we couldn't imagine it.
If it wasn't fact, we couldn't make that up.
Because it's incredible. It's incredible.
It's perfectly true, but whenever I've done that,
it always gets a gasp of astonishment.
Why? I mean, everybody knows we're descended from fish.
Don't they?
The way I put it is, if you could meet your 200 million great-grandfather,
you would eat him with a slice of lemon and tartar sauce.
Yes, exactly.
Yeah, yeah.
There is the scale, though, isn't it?
Is it true we're closer?
I know closer is a non-scientific term,
but I like these facts as well that go around
that we're, evolutionally speaking, I think they mean in time,
we're closer to a salmon than a salmon is to a shark.
Yes.
That's a perfectly respectable thing to say, by the way.
There's nothing wrong with that.
All it means is that we're closer cousins.
That means to say that the common ancestor that we share with salmon
lived a lot more recently than the common ancestor that salmon plus us.
Yeah, sure.
It shares with sharks.
So is a crocodile possible?
LAUGHTER
OK, listen, let me... I'll take this one.
LAUGHTER
I'm a psychologist, so I mean...
I can answer this one.
Is that a possibility in a parallel universe?
Oh, here we go.
LAUGHTER
This is a podcast with Lawrence Krauss,
and he was definitely saying things like that to just wind me up.
Just when I started understanding it, he'd throw in something else.
I'd go, oh, well, why are you doing that?
Well, it is true that when duck-billed platypuses were first
sent back to the museum here,
nobody believed they were real.
They thought it was a hoax.
They thought that somebody had taken a duck's bill
and sent it on to some other kind of creature.
So I suppose that's the nearest approach to a crocodile.
But actually, because it's the only monotreme
that it produces eggs and milk,
it could make its own custard.
LAUGHTER
LAUGHTER
It doesn't, but it definitely could.
It could.
I use that instant stuff, so it could use that as well.
If you get a whisk, it would be fine.
It is amazing.
I mean, some Australian mammals...
Is it true that...
It floated away and there weren't predators as such, so...
Oh, there were predators, actually.
But they didn't... They mostly had gone extinct.
There was a giant predatory carnivorous kangaroo, for example.
It must have been quite terrifying.
Bounding after you with its jaws agape.
Yeah.
We should bring them back.
I think so, yes.
Can we...?
Now, you started it,
but you turned it into an idiot on Twitter.
No. Can we bring back the mammoth?
You know, can we now?
I think we can, can't you?
Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome...
LAUGHTER
That would be the greatest thing ever.
Can we bring back the mammoth?
There is a serious possibility.
The genome of the mammoth has been pretty much worked out.
And the technology to actually bring it back isn't there yet.
You've got the genome,
and so it doesn't seem totally impossible that you could...
Now, what does that mean?
Do you mean you've synthesised something,
or you've put together bits of DNA,
or the DNA exists and you've found it in the elephant and modified it?
What does it mean we've got the...
You mean you've got the thing that would make a mammoth if it was...?
Well, because frozen mammoths died sufficiently recently
and they're frozen in the Arctic,
so that there's plenty of tissue there.
You can get plenty of DNA.
There's a lovely Hiller-Bellock poem about the frozen mammoth,
which ends up...
I can't remember how it goes,
but if the skin be...
It will make an excellent soup, but the snag is...
If the skin be but punctured before it is boiled,
your confection is wholly and utterly spoiled,
and hence on account of the size of the beast,
the dainty is nearly unknown.
But anyway, there it is.
If you don't know the answer, Richard, just say so.
Right, you asked for this.
How would we bring it back?
What is the process? What would we do?
The process is that you use the soft tissues of this frozen mammoth,
sequence the DNA, and that's pretty much been done.
There's a little bit of filling in with elephant DNA as well.
Now, what we don't yet have the ability to do
is to implant that DNA into an elephant egg,
then put the elephant egg with mammoth DNA into a female elephant,
and then grow the embryos.
So it would be a hybrid at most?
No, no, no.
How could you say, oh, so you'd clone the mammoth egg
and just use that as a syrup?
Dolly the sheep. Yeah.
Well, it would be that kind of thing.
So Dolly had a sheep egg,
and into that sheep egg was put,
the DNA of another sheep.
Right. And then it was cloned.
If a mammoth baby come out, wouldn't that surprise the elephant?
No doubt. Yes, no doubt.
A lot of people have hairy babies.
Tusses and everything like that.
Well, elephants have got tusks. Tussed to it.
It's just hairier than this. Yes.
If you could clone a mammoth, would you do it?
Not clone it, would you do it back?
I would, but there are many who wouldn't.
There are many who think it would be unethical somehow to do this.
They think it would be cruel.
Why would it be cruel?
Because it wouldn't ever be in its natural habitat.
The stand modern technology.
It was just on its own.
If you made lots of them,
what would some people think?
We should actually clone lots of them
and let them loose on the Siberian tundra
to bring back the ecology that's disappeared.
I'd bring back Tyrannosaurus rex.
I'd let it loose in parts of England, to be honest.
So atheism.
So I can remember,
and I don't know whether this has any resonance for you at all,
but I can remember listening to you on the radio,
and I can't place this.
It was a long time ago,
and I would think it's after the initial success of the office,
I think, and I think it's Steve Wright,
but I might be wrong.
And he said something like,
oh, you must wake up in the morning
and say thank God for my amazing things that are happening.
And you said, why would I say thank God I'm an atheist?
Right.
And it was the first time I'd heard the word atheist
on kind of public radio.
I mean, yeah, there shouldn't even be the word, should there?
If people didn't invent gods, I wouldn't have to deny them.
And it's just...
But...
It's like...
I was told when I sort of started Breaking America
to not mention I was an atheist.
Really? Oh, first thing I did.
And every...
First thing I did.
I thought, what am I going to do?
Imagine not doing something
because people hate you because of what you are.
That's, you know...
That's my only thing I've got.
I'm a white, rich middle-class man,
but at least I'm hated for being an atheist.
Do you know what I mean?
I'm oppressed.
I'm oppressed in 13 countries.
I'd never go to anyway.
Have you seen a change in your...
That was the last 20 years or so
about how atheism is perceived?
Well, I mean, you sort of do it...
There's part of me that does it because I think I should,
that there is someone being persecuted now
that might, you know...
I can't change the world,
but what I mean may be someone in a Western world
that thinks they shouldn't come out because it's a bad thing,
because it's still a bad thing in Western society.
In America, they took a vote...
America, right?
Probably that big bit in the middle of America,
but we were voted least trustworthy group,
joint bottom with rapists.
So there's still a thing about...
I'd better not say I'm an atheist,
or annoy my mum or dad or granddad or school.
There's still that.
So you do that.
Some of it, I do it as an intellectual pursuit
because someone asked me a question.
I'd rather give the right answer than the wrong answer.
I'd rather tell the truth than lie,
because it's easier, you know.
People think I run into churches and go,
it's all fucking bollocks!
I don't...
I don't care!
You know, I don't...
But if I'm asked, if I believe in God,
I'll say no.
I mean, you know...
The tricky one is...
I did a film called The Adventure of Lying
where I did a scene where my...
Thank you, seven people saw that film.
Where my mother in that is dying,
and it's...
Because I'm the only person in the society who can lie,
she says, I don't want to go to nothingness.
And I go, there's not nothingness.
It's a beautiful place you go and you're young again.
And I invent heaven, right?
And that comes from the fact that
when my mum was dying, I did face dilemma.
If she'd have said, do you think there's a God,
that's a personal...
thing, and that's...
you know.
So, yeah, I...
I just try and be honest, really.
And the other thing is,
if someone else's kid,
five-year-old, asks me, do I believe in God,
I sort of think, what should I say here?
And I say, well, I don't, but a lot of people do.
What do you think? You know, I try and...
There's still a level of diploma.
It's not always my place.
You know what I mean?
But, you know,
my house, my rules,
if someone asks me something on Twitter,
I tell them the truth.
And, Richard,
in the last 20, 30 years,
have you seen a change in how atheism is perceived?
I'm not a sociologist.
I haven't done the research.
I'm not a psychologist.
So, I'm not sure. It would only be a subjective impression.
The statistics suggest
that we're growing in numbers.
Obviously,
in Western Europe.
But also, even in America,
I think the number of people
who claim no religion in the United States
is now more than 20%,
which is large compared to any particular
religious denomination.
So, I think that the statistics
show that the trend is in the right direction.
But as Ricky says,
other polls show
that we're down there with rapists
in terms of public...
I think I have to lump us in
with, you know,
agnostics, which, again,
I keep trying to explain that on Twitter
I'm actually exclusive.
One deals with knowledge.
One deals with belief.
And so,
people say on Twitter,
it's illogical to be an atheist.
You should be agnostic.
And I say, well, I am as well.
Don't agnostics get on your nerves a bit?
Well,
no, because
we're all agnostic, aren't we?
We're all agnostic by definition.
If we accept that no one knows
that there's a God or not,
we might be wrong.
We're 99% sure.
No.
But let's say we don't know.
We're all agnostic.
So, take it out. It doesn't matter.
Now we ask about belief. What do you believe?
What's your best bet?
But when someone says they're agnostic, isn't it
sort of attempting to go,
why don't you just think about it a bit more, then?
Well, I just think there's a...
Yes, but there's a category mistake.
People do do it because they don't want to say
they believe in God.
You shouldn't ask an agnostic
if there's a God or not.
You should ask them, do you believe there's a God or not?
Because then they can't say I don't know,
because that doesn't make sense.
You don't know whether you believe or not.
Right?
I think the really
sick-making thing is people who think
because they're agnostic
and we can't know for sure.
Therefore, the likelihood is 50-50.
Very different.
I'm agnostic,
but I believe that the likelihood
is about 1% or less.
It's not really agnostic, is it?
Yes, it is.
If we accept that we don't know,
if it's a default, we don't know.
No one's come back from heaven, no one's proved it.
You can't prove the non-existence of something.
And why would you?
The periodic table of non-existent things is infinite.
It's like...
So if we accept that,
that's a knowledge,
that's a category of knowledge.
But if you just say, what do you believe?
Yeah, you have to step up to that.
You have to say what you believe.
And if you don't believe in any God,
you're an atheist.
That's the other misconception.
People think that atheism is denying the existence of God.
It's just not accepting the claim
that there is a God.
If there were three doors which said God exists,
God doesn't exist, I don't know.
That doesn't make sense.
There's three doors.
It says God exists.
It doesn't exist, I don't know.
You not knowing is irrelevant to where there is or isn't a God.
Again, you've done a sleight of hand there
on a category mistake,
because one is knowledge and two are beliefs, right?
I haven't even finished my question.
No, there's always...
I'm saying three is always there.
If you had to choose one...
Yeah.
I believe
there's a God.
I don't believe there's a God.
I don't know. It's irrelevant
then, isn't it?
Crocoducks.
When...
So moving on to my
Twitter questions.
You spoke about lying there.
What's the biggest
lie you've told to impress somebody?
Is that a question that's been submitted?
On Twitter. The biggest lie you've told
to impress somebody?
It's quite a tricky question, actually.
Oh, the biggest I've told to impress someone?
Yeah.
I honestly can't think of one.
Yeah. Richard doesn't think...
Not only can I not think of one, I'm quite confident
there's never been one.
You've never told a lie to impress anyone?
I've told a lie
to not hurt people's feelings.
Yeah, that's different, yes.
I suppose that's impressive because I want them to like me
by not saying...
So can you come to my party?
I say, no, I can't.
I'm giving blood at the orphanage or something.
No.
Because I don't want to say, of course I'm not coming to your party.
I hate you and all your friends.
It would be always...
So my lies are usually because I haven't got the nerve
to be honest when it's hurting someone's feelings.
They're all white lies.
OK.
But I don't think I've lied to...
Like on a CV or something.
I didn't write the question.
Don't turn it back on me.
It could be anything you want.
Yeah.
Richard, there are three doors.
I believe in God.
I don't...
I suppose that works if you say which answer sums
you up most.
That's allowed, I think.
What, with the three doors?
No, I'd go for
there is no God
because I'd identify
with choosing that door.
But they're still a category mistake
because one deals with knowledge and one deals with belief.
Another category mistake.
You have a background in philosophy, of course.
Your first degree is in philosophy.
My only degree?
Your last degree.
He made it sound really good.
I could have just nodded.
Yes, that was my first degree.
My first degree was biology,
which I did for two weeks.
And then swapped to philosophy.
There were nine o'clock lectures.
There was 40 hours a week.
I suddenly got to university and thought,
I haven't come here to learn.
I've come here to join a band. Do you know what I mean?
And so...
So that's a category error.
Philosophy was...
Yeah, I did philosophy. I got a degree in philosophy at UCL.
Have you ever found that useful?
Well,
only that everything
is useful that you learn.
Any sort of...
Well, that's not true, is it, really?
I suppose
critical thinking
is useful,
but I think I already had it
or I wouldn't have done science
and philosophy.
So I don't know that it's useful other than
it's nice to know stuff. It's fun.
I mean, I take it as one of the
best things about being alive.
Learning stuff. I want to know everything.
I'm still in awe of the world.
Honestly, I wish this wasn't about me
because I'd be quizzing him.
He'd get fed up. He'd go,
shut up. I'd be asking him questions
all the time, you know.
LAUGHTER
And if we turn to your
work for that, in fact, actually,
this is a question to both of you.
I think what's interesting is that
your work is incredibly
innovative. So if you take selfish
gene or you take the God delusion,
it's a very innovative
work and the God delusion in particular,
I mean, came out of a time
when atheism wasn't a popular thing
to be writing about and you went for it.
The office, I mean, just
phenomenal in particular, all of your work,
but the office, we just sort of focus on that.
Where do those
ideas come
from? What's the process
behind innovation
in that sense? Well, it's very different
because Richard's dealing in
what's true about the universe
and I'm making stuff up.
So I wouldn't
put myself alongside
scientists.
But for me,
it's...
As I get older, all I want to be
in art, in comedy or whatever,
is just more honest and look deeper.
That's all I want to do now. That's all I try and do.
Am I being...
First of all, it's even done before.
That's what you don't want to do.
You want to keep going, you know, this is new.
But
I do want to...
I am fascinated with honesty
and bravery
even in something as lowly as comedy.
I think, is that
the best thing to... And not without
consequence. I think
people think that
sometimes you're just trying to
offend for the sake of it. That's too easy.
That is too easy.
And I imagine when people say, oh, yeah,
anyone can just be offensive.
And I go, go on then.
Set out an arena and
just be offensive.
See, you know what I mean? It's a ridiculous thing to say.
So that's never the aim.
But I am aware
that some people will find everything I do
offensive because everyone's different.
But that's no reason why you shouldn't
shouldn't say it, you know?
That's the good thing about freedom of speech.
You have the right
to piss off lots of people
at once.
Is that your thoughts as well?
Well, I think that the...
To say that offends me
as though that was somehow an argument
is what's really pernicious.
And
I think Stephen Fry said
you're offended.
Well, so fucking what?
Yeah.
Yeah.
And
Christopher Hitchens said
slightly more moderately,
you're offended.
I'm still waiting to hear your argument.
But that's what it is.
That's what...
people have found out now.
It's sort of tipped for tat, right?
And some
of it was a rebellion against the first wave
of political correctness where they said,
well, if you can't do that, I'm offended by that.
Now what? You know, and it was...
But it's another form of dogma. It's another form
of shutting you down,
putting the suffix
phobia on the end of some things.
That means you can't discuss it anymore.
And you've got to be very careful about that.
But particularly in comedy,
most offence is taken
when people mistake the subject of a joke
with a target. They think that subject
is a terrible contentious, terrible thing to laugh about.
Well, no, we look at the joke, though.
You know, and they don't. They go,
no, you shouldn't joke about, so and so.
I've been asked by journalists,
is there anything you won't joke about?
And I say, is there anything you won't write about?
Because, straight away, they assume a joke
is making fun of the terrible
situation or the victim or the...
And I don't do that.
I actually don't do that.
And it's fine if you do. I think humor
is exempt from those things.
But I still don't. I still have a conscience
when I try and make my jokes bulletproof.
Now, of course, you've got to make them bulletproof
for ten years' time,
which is a...
Which is a problem.
And is it a question
of the audience perceiving
where it's coming from
in a sense that, you know, if you're a racist
and you do racist material,
clearly, that's a very ugly thing.
Yeah.
I think the actual...
What I mean is, I think people...
You can do a joke about race
without being racist.
And I think that's... I think people think
you mustn't joke about race
because they assume it might be right.
They haven't looked at it.
And some people just...
It just scares people a little bit.
And some people are offended on other people's beharves.
You see people in the audience looking around
thinking, can I laugh at that?
Maybe I shouldn't. And you go, why?
And I... That's why I deal
into boo subjects, because I want to say,
well, you can laugh at this. Look, here's an example
of something you can laugh at. And I give them examples.
And I almost...
I defy them
not to laugh.
Because
it's OK to laugh at bad things.
It is OK to laugh at bad things.
But you're not setting out to offend.
I'm not setting out to offend.
And I think the targets are my joke of valid.
I can defend every joke I've ever made.
I can even argue
that every joke I've ever made is politically correct.
But
that's another matter.
But, yeah.
Not that that matters, because
there's a difference between being correct
and being politically correct.
And it's been mugged and changed.
And now it's a different beast
than it was, you know.
But, no, I think you're allowed to joke about
anything. It's what the joke
actually is.
And sticking with your work
for the moment, if there was a
weird parallel universe
where you could only have written
one book, or only made one
television series, or film,
which one would you
be most happy with?
I would be most happy with
the extended phenotype.
Oh, that's surprising.
Which is the one book I've written for a professional audience, although I hope
other people can read it as well.
How interesting.
So I
thought you would go with selfish gene or
God delusion, but... Oh.
You've written those as well, just to remind you.
I'm actually...
I admit
pretty pleased with all my books.
I must admit.
But
I think
the one...
I think perhaps the one where I made the most original
contribution is the extended phenotype.
OK.
I was quite agreeably surprised when you said
you thought the God delusion was
innovative.
I'm not sure it was innovative.
Paul Robson singing to me. I've got to stop.
It's my alarm clock.
Reminding me to take
my pills.
Do you...
I love Paul Robson.
Do you need to take your pills, because we can chat on if...
It's fine. OK, it's fine.
This is going to get good.
I think the God delusion was
almost... I mean, no one was doing
books about atheism at that time, as far as I can remember.
No, that... Well, it's not quite
true, actually. Sam Harris was.
But...
And I think...
But I mean, there's really nothing
in any of our books that's not
foreshadowed in, say, Bertrand Russell.
That was amazing.
Why I'm Not a Christian and so on.
But then you mentioned the selfish gene.
I think that is more innovative, actually.
And I think the extended phenotype is more so.
OK. Ricky?
I'd probably go with the Old Testament.
Just because of
how popular it was and how well it sold.
You did phenomenally well with that.
I'd be... Just think how rich...
I mean, could I do better marketing and I'd do better deals?
Yeah.
Than those goat herders did.
I'd have a top US agent.
And, yeah.
I heard a... I was listening to Woody Allen routine,
which is the vodka routine.
And he said, oh, he said, my rabbi is terrible.
My rabbi is terrible.
He's giving a sermon and he forgot the ten commandments
and listed the seven dwarfs.
I thought it was a great joke.
Anyway, I digress.
So, if I
didn't allow you to agree
that your work was with the Old Testament,
if you weren't allowed to...
Which of your TV series or films
would you go with?
Well, I mean, The Office brings to mind,
again, because it was the first thing
I'd tried my hardest at and, you know...
So, yeah.
That's it, really.
Did you know? The US office, I'd choose.
LAUGHTER
Did you know from the get-go with The Office
that you'd got something very special there?
Yeah, I thought it was special.
I thought it was different.
I sort of came to it with a big list of sort of
don'ts more than do's, because, you know, you...
It was very late in life.
I'd worked in an office for ten years
and I think I was, like, 38, 39.
So, I knew this was a, you know,
a sort of second bite at the cherry.
So, I knew it had to be
special and I was happy with that.
I could walk away knowing that I'd done something.
But is it true that when it was exported to America,
they got a different cast and...
Oh, yeah.
Well, we sold the rights for them to do it.
Why didn't they just take your version?
Because there was only 12
and I was too lazy to do any more.
LAUGHTER
And there's a thing over there they want that's syndication.
So, they want a hundred episodes of something
and then the money is exponential,
because it gets a lot of money.
And then the money is exponential,
because it gets shown in rotation.
And, you know, so...
And they did 300-something episodes.
Were your episodes shown as well?
Yeah, but it was on BBC America.
And I think it was the highest-rated show on the channel,
and it got, like, a million and a half.
So, the US office
was getting 10 million a week
and the Super Bowl episode got 25 million.
So, it's a different beast.
It's just a...
Each episode, we made ours for about 120 grand.
By the end, theirs were 3 million an episode.
Yeah, yeah.
So, it's just...
It's not even to be compared.
I look at it like I sold my DNA,
but it's not my...
Yeah, I mean, I was rather shocked to discover
that one of David Attenborough's really major series
was redone with an American voice,
with opera Winfrey, instead of David Attenborough.
And I thought that's utter heresy.
I mean, I just...
But presumably...
She just literally overdubbed the footage.
She didn't go and remake it with different...
No.
Steve Carell as a spider.
Right?
Yeah, no, they just started again
just because Americans want things
by Americans, for Americans.
Ours wouldn't have been big in the big middle bit.
You know, it was...
It was different. It was different.
They did make it differently.
It was more optimist.
LAUGHTER
It wasn't mine artistically,
but honestly,
it was much more lucrative
for me than my version, you know.
So, someone on Twitter
once sent me...
The US version of the office is better than yours.
How does that make you feel?
And I sent back fucking rich.
LAUGHTER
But that happens with TV, obviously,
Americans by ideas and remake here.
It doesn't happen with books.
I mean, if an American publishes, we love God Delusion,
but we're going to get Sam Harris to do it.
That wouldn't really... That's true,
but what they do is change the title.
It's extremely irritating.
It was called Mega Jeans.
I've actually...
I've actually bought the same book twice,
but I didn't realise it was the same book.
LAUGHTER
And on one occasion,
I saw...
You know on Amazon, it says,
if you like so-and-so, you'll probably like so-and-so.
Same book, if you like.
Really?
That's a fantastic algorithm,
because it is correct, isn't it, if you like that?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Wait, so what... They changed your titles, did they?
I've never allowed it,
but many of my colleagues have had the titles changed.
Right.
And I find it unnecessary
and really damn nuisance.
It...
Matt Ridley says it's because the publishers
like to feel important.
It's the only thing they can do.
I assumed it was marketing.
Like, they wouldn't get that title, or certain...
Yeah, they call it marketing.
Yeah, they call it marketing, yeah.
LAUGHTER
So, we were chatting beforehand,
I was checking with some friends,
and one of the questions came up about comedy
and the fact that we couldn't think of many,
if any, comedians
who were religious.
I'm not asking for example, I'm just saying,
do we think it's a thing that most stand-ups
tend to be agnostic or atheist or...?
I think so, I think that's because a lot of comedians
are critical thinkers,
I think a lot of them are science-based.
But they're intelligent.
Well, I don't want to...
Yeah, but then, you know,
a lot of religious people are intelligent,
but they've been got an early age,
and it's like...
Yeah, I think they're braver.
There's still a thing of not saying,
I'm an atheist, because people think
that it's a bad thing to be.
You know, parents still...
Chris and their kids are still in school
and it's a respectable thing to do.
You know, and I...
That's sad, but I get it.
There's a couple, though, there's a couple.
They don't put it in their act, I don't think.
Tim Vine is very devout Christian.
That's true, yes, yeah.
But in general, they tend to be, I think,
more skeptical or...?
I think that's because they look at things
from all angles and they come up with funny ideas
and I...
And I try...
I look at the idea and I think that's what's wrong
and that's what dogma does,
is that people try and give ideas human rights,
so you leave them alone.
And you don't have to.
You can ridicule ideas without hurting anyone.
And some people say...
That deserves a round of applause.
OK, thank you.
APPLAUSE
And they found it shut some people up.
If they say, that's hurt, you know,
you could be accused of racism or anything
if you criticise an idea.
And it's people jumping in the way of a bullet
and saying, why are you shooting at me?
And it comes back to Richard's point that...
I'm offended.
That's not an argument. It's not an argument.
It's like me being offended
if someone takes the mickey out of maths.
It's like...
Go on.
Yeah, fine. Yeah.
Do you know what I mean?
You can laugh at maths.
It doesn't affect maths.
It doesn't affect maths.
APPLAUSE
And I like asking this of all performers,
when you've done a lot of live work,
when you go on stage or before you go on stage,
do you have any superstitious rituals that you carry out?
No.
No.
Really?
No, I'm not superstitious, am I?
LAUGHTER
Is this a trick? No.
If I said yes, I'd go down a vault.
LAUGHTER
Look at this footage and deny it. No.
No, really? No, I have...
I probably have loads of...
sort of neuroses and OCDs and things like that,
but nothing based on superstition.
It's...
Worrying that...
The audience in, what's the air conditioning like?
Is there a squeaky door?
No ice in the drink.
Someone's putting it off.
I have all those things, but I have no superstitions.
No.
Did you mean superstitions?
Some performers touch wood or wear certain socks or...
Nothing.
Well, I wear the same clothes
because I can't be bothered to think about what else to wear.
But...
I don't do touch wood.
No. I don't do touch wood.
No.
LAUGHTER
I don't ask. No, I don't.
No.
I just...
I burn some incense, say a couple of prayers.
LAUGHTER
That's it.
Really?
And in terms of changing minds,
in terms of getting people to be more skeptical
or rational or scientific,
both of you are enormously influential,
but with two different ways.
Obviously, you're using comedy a lot of the time,
and you're depending more on factual arguments.
How does that play out?
Is that playing to the same audiences?
Do you think it's equally persuasive?
Well, I think Rich is more driven
in his, you know, thing than I am.
But what do you think about changing minds?
What do you think...?
I'm known to be not really good at it.
I tend to just...
As you were saying earlier, Ricky,
I tend to just tell the truth.
And that isn't always the right way to go about it.
Marketing wouldn't approve, I suspect,
of just simply going out and telling the truth.
I had a rather nice encounter
with Neil deGrasse Tyson,
who said something like,
you just put it out there.
There's no act of persuasion.
There's no act of seduction going on.
You just simply say,
here are the facts, take it or leave it.
And I had to say...
Well, I said, I gratefully accept the rebuke.
But I then went on to say,
I'm not the worst of that.
And I quoted Alan Anderson,
who was then the editor of New Scientist,
who said...
I asked him what your policy is at New Scientist,
and he said, our policy at New Scientist is,
science is interesting,
and if you don't agree, you can fuck off.
Yeah, yes. That's exactly...
Yeah.
Yeah, I don't...
In the greatest scheme of things,
there are probably worse things
than people believing in all the different gods.
It doesn't affect me,
because I'm free and liberated and safe.
But, yeah,
you can still be annoyed.
It's ignorance that annoys me more than anything.
Whatever it is, it's not...
I don't want to keep going after religion,
because that's only one form of this belligerent willful...
And it's not even that.
You can't sort of help what you believe in.
Most people aren't going around
thinking this will annoy people,
or I'm trying to oppress people's rights.
They just think, I believe in God,
because that's how my brain worked when I was little,
and now I think, yeah, it's probably a God.
And most religious people aren't crazy.
It's something else.
Again, it's something, you know?
And we worry about the people
who believe the bad bits in their holy book,
as well as the good bits.
Most nice people who believe in God,
they can tell the difference.
They know the nice bits, they cherry pick,
and they know the nice bits from the bad bits.
They don't do the bad bits.
And my point is, if you know the bad bits from the good bits,
you don't need the holy book.
You know, you're already a moral person.
And with afterlife, which I think is phenomenal...
Thank you.
..the...
Clearly, obviously you talk about atheism in there,
but it's fundamentally about kindness
and living a good life, I think.
I think it is. I think the question is,
when you lose the best thing about life,
is it still worth living?
That's what the question starts with.
It started with a high concept, really.
Imagine you lost everything.
You wouldn't care about anything. You could do what you wanted.
So that was the comedic...
Where did that thought come from?
I don't know. I don't know.
I think it might have been...
..sort of two years of...
..this thing that you've got to watch what you say.
Like, it wasn't...
It wasn't to say the right thing.
It was to say the thing that was least offensive to most people,
which is nonsense.
We'd still be in the Middle Ages.
We'd still be putting leeches down our pants, you know?
Every scientist committed heresy at some point.
Every great invention, every move forward in progress
was going against some sort of crazy dogma at some point.
And it wasn't that there was more
crazy, mad, nasty people around.
It was that they weren't ashamed of it anymore
in the last few years, you know?
In my day, racists were ashamed.
Right?
No, they're not.
So...
And the backlash was people saying,
oh, you can't say anything.
And I just thought, well, imagine if you could, you just could.
You didn't care about the consequences.
You didn't care about offending anyone.
Because we do.
Even myself and Richard, who want to tell the truth,
we do things we don't want to do all the time
because we're worried about it.
If we're mugged, we hand over the cash
because we don't want to get hurt, right?
But imagine if you didn't care about living or dying
or what happens after life, you think, bring it on.
I'm not scared anymore.
So that was the idea.
If you weren't scared about consequences,
if you weren't scared about politeness,
if you weren't, you had nothing to lose.
And that was the seed of the idea, really.
But then, of course, it becomes about kindness.
It becomes about overcoming that feeling.
It becomes about people trying to save you.
The comfort of strangers and the people who care.
And that's the thing about grieving and depression.
The thing that came out of our life that shocked me,
I've never had a reaction like it.
Even the office, I've never had a reaction like it
because it was an emotional reaction.
And I found out that people come up to me all the time
and they say, oh, I lost my mother.
I lost my husband a lot.
And you think, oh, yeah, of course, everyone's grieving.
Everyone's grieving this year about something.
And the older they get, the more that happens.
And that was never an intention.
But I think it...
I think people hadn't seen, certainly, a comedy,
but they hadn't seen something that dealt with grief.
That man, he was just... he wanted to die.
And then I had to make it funny.
So, yeah.
But also, this character is dealing with grief
not from a religious point of view at all?
Well, I wanted that.
I wanted a bit of a play on words with afterlife,
like he thought his life was over.
And he doesn't believe...
He doesn't even believe in an afterlife.
He hasn't even got that comfort.
So, what's the point?
And I went down to sort of a nihilist road
and I wanted to bring him out to say,
well, there's still a point.
You've still got a few years to enjoy everything else.
That was the sort of philosophical question.
So, to answer your original question,
I think I am quite positive
and I think I am quite optimistic.
I'm an optimistic person. I think it'd be all right.
You know, I think it'd be all right
if there's a meteor heading towards Earth,
five billion people are praying to their God
and a few hundred scientists
to get Bruce Willis up there.
LAUGHTER
So...
And you talk about the impact.
I think, again, this is true of both of you.
The impact on people's lives.
On afterlife, that has a resonance with people.
Well, I think people want to see things
that they haven't seen before.
And I think this is what happens with marketing
and people who are worried.
I think everyone sets out with these good intentions.
I'm going to do an uncompromised thing
about something that's never been said before.
And then soon someone says,
if you take out a couple of the swear words,
we can put on a nine o'clock.
If you change that to so-and-so,
and then soon it's watered down
and it's, you know...
I remember once,
I was one of my first things at Channel 4,
11 o'clock show,
and I did a sketch.
It was about...
There was a thing about people who claimed benefit
when they didn't need it.
And I played this sort of bigoted,
crazy right-wing journalist
who would always come down on the wrong side, right?
And he was saying, my character was sort of saying,
what you should do is, right,
if someone, you know,
claims their death,
set off a fire alarm and see if they run out of the building.
Right, so it was all that sort of stuff.
Channel 4 said,
can you change that to the blind,
because the deaf are very militant?
LAUGHTER
So their moral judgement
was how many letters they'd have to write.
Also, it doesn't work if he's blind,
because he can hear the fucking bell.
LAUGHTER
I wonder why they care about getting letters, actually.
I've often wondered that.
Because people think that one...
Now it's worse.
Now people are terrified of one complaint,
and now the hell to run,
particularly the BBC, you know.
I've...
You know, talked people down,
like executives,
by saying, I'll write the letters.
Sometimes they want to know...
I've explained the joke, why it's OK,
and they go, OK, never a complaint.
If I let a complaint, it's never been upheld.
Because if you can...
If you're clever enough,
it's not just putting stuff out there
and trying to offend everyone.
You can explain it.
Some people just want to be heard.
In my normal job, people would complain,
I'd call them back,
and they'd go, oh, didn't think you'd call back.
They were already happy
that you'd called them back.
Some people want to be heard,
because they're never heard,
and then people are scared of a complaint these days.
There's no reason for it.
But with afterlife,
how does it feel to get that feedback
from people that...
It's much more emotional.
People saying that touched me, that has resonance.
It's great. It's really good.
I feel very proud of that,
because it's just another
little layer to it.
And...
And I'd certainly rather that
than I hated it.
I was offended, you know.
I want people to hate things I do
and be offended.
I want them to enjoy it.
I'm a comedian.
I'm not a politician or a religious leader.
I put stuff out there
because I think they'll enjoy it.
And pay me.
LAUGHTER
And, Richard,
obviously your books have had enormous influence
on people's lives.
How does that feel?
Well, I do very much appreciate
getting letters from people
who say, you've changed my life.
And I get a fair number of those.
I get an enormous number
who say that my books on evolution
decided them
to go into science at school.
And only this week
I was seeing a doctor
and he...
an Australian doctor
in the hospital, and he said
the end, I want to thank you.
The selfish gene was what made me
take up biology
and hence made me become a doctor.
I love that.
I mean, that's really wonderful.
APPLAUSE
And perhaps more
relevant to this meeting,
the God Delusion,
enormous numbers of letters
from people who say
you saved me from my religious
upbringing.
You articulated
something that I felt myself
but could never quite find the words
to say myself.
I'm no longer a real...
I'm freed from the shackles of religion.
And that I find
again hugely gratifying.
There are many who say...
APPLAUSE
There are many who write
in great distress because
they have lost their faith
and are unable to
break the news to their parents
or their spouse.
And in particularly poignant
are the clergy people
who've...
We've got a project in America called
the clergy project
which is designed to help clergy
people, clergymen and clergywomen
who've become atheists
and can't escape
because it's the only living they know.
And...
That's poignant when they're stuck.
They can only earn their living
by going on preaching sermons
and things like that.
So the clergy project
does that.
And I like to think that maybe I help
them as well.
People who need to escape
and find it very difficult to do so.
APPLAUSE
I think that's...
I think that's really important
and it comes back to the point
that you made earlier about
ideas not having human rights
because I think people think when we
criticise religion, we're criticising
people who are religious
which couldn't be further from the truth
because we think they're victims too.
Absolutely.
The word Islamophobia is all about that.
People think that if you criticise Islam
you're criticising Muslims.
Quite the contrary, they're the primary victims
of Islam.
APPLAUSE
We are...
We're almost out of time,
but just before we finish up here,
just to turn our attention to the future,
you have amazing pieces of work
that you've carried out.
What direction do you see yourself going
in the future?
Downhill.
LAUGHTER
Just downhill. Seriously.
It's just... Just awful.
Awful. Yeah.
I've got a bar back, I wake up,
my knees have gone...
I don't know, it's... What's the point?
Really, I just...
I want to be...
When have we got the head in a jar?
That's where I'm...
On a skateboard. Me in a jar,
on a hoverboard,
whizzing around, 200 years old.
Right.
I want to do more Afterlife.
I'm starting filming next week, actually.
Afterlife too. Thank you.
APPLAUSE
I'm going to do
a follow-up to Humanity next year
with Super Nature.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
So, and then...
I don't know.
Just...
get drunk.
LAUGHTER
APPLAUSE
Thank you so much
for your
sharing insights, not only about atheism,
but also about the work
and the fan of being a crocker duck.
And
before I thank
my two guests properly,
there's some other thanks to be done,
which is Simon,
who is in charge of this wonderful venue,
the Troxy here,
who's given us the venue.
None of it.
APPLAUSE
Let's just say that I've knocked over a glass of water.
I haven't actually wet myself on stage.
No, I can't.
A real rock and roll death
as you electrocute yourself
with your little head mic.
Debra Hyde and Chris French
from The Skeptic, who have organised
the event this evening.
APPLAUSE
And the Centre for Inquiry
and, of course, the Richard Dawkins Foundation
again for helping to organise
and start out the event.
APPLAUSE
But, most of all,
my two wonderful guests.
It felt like a very special evening,
I think you'll agree.
And congratulations on the awards.
Thank you very much.
Yeah.
LAUGHTER
It's not going to happen.
So...
Richard Dawkins for fuck's sake.
APPLAUSE
Richard will be signing books afterwards.
But I think you'll agree
a fantastic and unique evening.
Ladies and gentlemen, please give
a huge round of applause
for two wonderful guests, two amazing people.
Richard Dawkins, Ricky Gervais!
APPLAUSE
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Richard Dawkins, Ricky Gervais!
APPLAUSE
I hope you enjoyed this episode
of The Poetry of Reality.
You might consider subscribing
on thepoetryofreality.com.
That way you get the content
without the ads.
Anyway, thank you for listening
and see you next time.
