If you're watching this on YouTube, you might have noticed that this episode is a week delayed.
But if you want to get early access to our episodes, consider becoming a paying member.
If you enjoyed this episode, please subscribe and share it with your friends.
Thank you for all your support.
Stephen, I find myself somewhat in awe, both as one of the world's most distinguished scientists,
but also a physicist, where physics is in some sense a sort of senior science.
I mean, the bedrock of all other sciences.
I'm a mere biologist.
I suppose biology has the complexity, but physics has the fundamentals.
Of course, we physicists feel that way, but we're much too polite to say so.
Yes.
It has been said that, whereas most distinguished scientists tend not to be religious believers,
there's a slight tendency for biologists to be even more atheist than physicists.
You have heard that.
What do you make of that, if anything?
Oh, I don't know.
Perhaps it's just that biologists have bloodied their knuckles so much fighting over evolution
that they've become a little bit more militant.
And I think physicists perhaps tend to, since they hope that they're approaching some ultimate
understanding of the laws of nature, they tend to use God as a metaphor for that.
Einstein famously did.
Hawking has, without necessarily meaning very much by it.
That's been always my impression that most physicists who say they're religious,
if you actually probe a bit deeper, it turns out that they're religious in the Einsteinian sense.
But you probably know some genuinely Christian or genuinely Jewish who really, really do believe.
Oh, absolutely.
I know a number of general relativists, for some reason.
People who work in Einstein's general theory of relativity who are devoutly religious.
I don't know why that in particular.
I knew one astrophysicist who said he was an orthodox Jew but didn't believe in God.
Yes.
I mean, nobody ever says they're an orthodox Christian but we don't believe in God.
I mean, because Judaism puts so much more of an emphasis on observance as compared to
belief that it makes sense in a way.
I think Hinduism in that sense is like Judaism, that what's much more important is the dietary
rules and the keeping various Sabbaths and holidays.
You're honoring a tradition and in Judaism nobody ever catichizes you about what you
believe.
In fact, obviously many of my friends are Jewish and I've asked them what they understand
about the afterlife and they don't have the foggiest idea.
It's not part of the official religion to have a definite idea about the afterlife.
I mean, I think it's very different from Christianity.
Yes.
And I think also in Judaism there's a tradition of continual questioning, isn't there?
Continuing sort of examining and turning your beliefs over and...
I suppose so, yes.
The Talmudic tradition.
Of course Christianity is more like Islam in that way.
It's really important that you believe in specific things and you're likely to get
killed by someone if you don't believe the right thing.
Particularly someone of almost the same religion.
Yeah, that's right.
But not quite.
Whenever I'm asked what's the most convincing evidence you could think of, it would really
convince you that there is some kind of a supernatural being.
I think once upon a time, say in the time of William Paley, biology was it because the
prodigious complexity of life, the beauty of it, the sheer intricacy and the stunning
illusion of design which living things project.
Paley himself said something like, the heavenly bodies are not best fitted to demonstrate
the existence of the theatre.
I think that's just an accident of the time that Paley lived because at that time the
physical scientists had done a good job of explaining the solar system.
Although there were still things that were not well understood.
But you know, you go back earlier, everything seemed to require a divine explanation.
Even Newton thought that although he could account for the way the planets moved and
the tides and the fall of fruits, he could not account for the fact that there was a
difference between dark matter and light matter between the sun and the planets.
And in a letter to Bentley, he said that that was the sort of thing that required divine
intervention to explain why the sun shone and the planets did not.
Nevertheless, the eye as the instrument that sees things with sunlight, surely Newton would
have regarded that as even more of an evidence of the divine, wouldn't he?
I don't know.
I don't know that he ever speculated about that.
He had great hopes for a unification of all the sciences in terms of various forces acting
on corpuscles of matter.
I don't know how far he went in thinking that that would apply to living things.
That's an interesting question.
I doubtless Newton scholars could tell us, but I don't know the answer.
But it's true that by the early 19th century, when Paley wrote, the outstanding problem
that seemed to require a divine explanation was the problem of life.
And I believe Cardinal Manning, at least this is what I learned from Lytton Strachey's
biography of him, Cardinal Manning became a devout Christian by reading Paley's book.
He was so convinced.
Well Darwin himself was.
I mean, Darwin himself read Paley as an undergraduate at Cambridge.
They all had to.
But Darwin was particularly impressed by it.
And I think on the voyage of the Beagle, he probably thought that what he was seeing when
he roamed through the Brazilian jungle and things was evidence of God.
But although it's often said that it was Darwin who finally killed that kind of Paley-ism,
and I think that's probably right, nevertheless, even before Darwin came along, it's never
seemed to me to be a very logically coherent argument.
I could have imagined, indeed, as David Hume did, that before Darwin came along, one would
have said, well, I don't understand where this illusion of design comes from.
But a supernatural designer doesn't help.
We're still left with a mystery.
And so although it's very nice that Darwin did come along and actually answer the question,
even before Darwin came along, we didn't actually, so to speak, need him in order to reject the
idea of a supernatural designer.
We physicists are somewhat in that position, because we hope for a set of very simple laws
of nature that will account for everything we see.
But when we have them, there will always be a question, well, why those laws?
And many people say, in fact, that Jesuit has argued to me that that's where God comes
in, that God ordained the laws, and he is the ultimate explanation.
And of course, the response to that is, well, have you really helped at all with that?
What explains God?
What explains why God is the way God is?
If you have some specific understanding of that three-letter word, G-O-D, then you have
the mystery, why is God that way rather than some other way?
If you don't have any specific understanding of what you mean by, I hear the thunder, I
hope he's not getting annoyed with it.
If you don't have any specific understanding of what you mean by G-O-D, then what are you
talking about?
Yes, quite.
Then it's just an empty word.
I suppose a biologist would put an additional spin on that, which is not just why he's
God this way rather than that way, but in order to do what he's supposed to be doing,
which is ordaining the laws of physics, to say nothing of forgiving our sins and listening
to our prayers and things, he would have to be a complex entity, which is exactly the
kind of entity that we are setting out to explain, and which Darwin in fact does explain.
And so in a way, the Darwinian theory raises our consciousness to the fact that any God-worthy
of the name would have to be much more complicated than an eye or a brain or a heart.
And therefore, particularly, I love this, this is really great, particularly demanding
of just the kind of explanation which he purports to provide.
Yes, once in a, just to change the subject for a moment, once in a debate about this
sort of thing, someone in the audience said, your view that there isn't any God is not
falsifiable.
And I said, yes, it is falsifiable, a bolt of lightning to come down and strike me dead.
And then my view would be falsified.
And I suppose listening to the thunder reminds me of that.
But going back to what we were saying, yes, it's a little bit like the explanations the
Greeks were satisfied.
You know, Aristotle explained falling bodies by saying they're going to their natural
place, which is toward the, toward the center of the earth.
Well, when you say that, you really haven't learned anything more about falling bodies.
It hasn't helped you to say that.
And in the same way, talking about a God who is complex and created the world the way
it is, you haven't learned anything.
It doesn't help you to anticipate anything you'll discover in nature.
But I don't think one should underestimate the fix we're in, that in the end, we will
not be able to explain the world, that we will have some laws of, some set of laws of
nature.
We will not be able to derive them on the ground simply of mathematical consistency.
Because we can already think of mathematically consistent laws that don't describe the world
as we know it.
And we will always be left with a question, why are the laws of nature what they are rather
than some other laws?
And I, I don't see any way out of that.
And I, I just regarded as just another one of the tragedies that we have to get used
to, like the tragedy that we will die and the tragedy, well, I don't want to linger
on tragedy.
But I think essentially the position of human beings is a tragic one.
And the more we understand, the more clearly tragic it is.
And part of it, which particularly affects a physicist, is the tragedy of never being
able to come to a really satisfying conclusion of our questions, why?
And what do we do in this tragedy?
I think, well Shakespeare showed us that one way of living with tragedy is to mix it
in with comedy.
And we can have, we can take a certain amusement at our position always seeking why, why, why,
never coming to the end.
I think humor is one of the leavening agents that makes the tragedy of our position possible.
The Greeks in writing their plays didn't understand that, that you could mix comedy and tragedy.
There's no comedy and soffocles.
But Shakespeare understood, and I think that's what's so great about Shakespeare.
That's right.
I mean, moving to another level, I love the comic novels of Douglas Adams.
Have you read any of his literature?
No.
Oh, well, I think you might like them because he uses comedy, but in a rather sophisticated
scientific way.
And so his jokes would really appeal to a modern physicist who understands...
Well, I've heard of the one, you know, what is the secret to everything?
It's 43 or...?
No, no, yeah.
They're much better than that.
I mean, I can't think of a rare fact.
You might enjoy it.
But going back to the tragedy of never finally understanding, I mean, you're making pretty
good progress, working your way back through the first three minutes and getting...
Where are you now, to the first picosecond or something?
Oh, it's...
We don't...
I mean, if our present, there's so many powers of ten that I don't even know what English
word to apply to it.
But we certainly can directly observe the universe as it was when it was 380,000 years
old.
That's the microwave radiation that comes to us essentially undisturbed from that time.
And that's been a great success story in cosmology, the detailed analysis of this radiation
that fills the universe, and it's not quite uniform everywhere.
It's the non-uniformities that are so interesting.
And so important for what happened later, of course.
Yes.
Well, they are the non-uniformities that ultimately grew into the proto-galaxies and then galaxies
and then clusters of galaxies and allowed us to arise.
Looking back earlier than the first 380,000 years old, we have theories, and the theories
work.
In fact, some of our theories that describe what happened when the universe was three
minutes old tell us the chemical composition with which the stars started.
And that works, too.
I mean, the predictions come out right.
There's a certain amount of hydrogen, a certain amount of helium, a certain amount of certain
rare isotopes of hydrogen and helium, helium-3 and hydrogen-2, that we can calculate the amounts
and that's what we observe in the oldest stars.
So that actually, more accurately, that's what we observe in the intergalactic material
out of which the stars form.
So in terms of things we can actually observe, I suppose you could say we've traced the history
of the universe back to the first three minutes.
Earlier than that, it's just pure theory, except that these non-uniformities in the microwave
radiation, which is so important, which we're studying with radio telescopes and which we
believe and have every reason to believe, grew into the distribution of matter we see
in the sky.
These non-uniformities, we believe we have a theory for their origin in terms of a pre-Big
Bang phase called the period of inflation.
And it works.
That is, it predicts certain properties, for example, the strength of the fluctuations
as a function of how large they are.
What's the probability of seeing a fluctuation this big as compared to one that big?
That theory works, and it deals with a period of time which is incredibly early in the history
of the universe.
So early that you really begin to wonder whether there really was a beginning or should you
even talk about a beginning.
I mean, it's so, I don't even know how to say how early it is, but it's way earlier
than the first 380,000 years or the first three minutes.
It's an incredibly small fraction of a second after the beginning, and those theories seem
to work.
But that's only going back so far.
Then you have to go back to what started inflation, what started this inflationary period.
And we have theories.
There are some attractive theories, but they can't be tested.
We don't have any observational handle on them.
Even without an observational handle, however, if you've got a theory which is even plausible,
I'd be grateful for that.
Well there is a theory of chaotic inflation due to Andrzej Linde at Stanford that there
are certain fields, the kind of fields we encounter in our modern theories of elementary
particle physics, they're known technically as scalar fields that fill the universe.
And essentially, they're chaotic at the beginning.
One does not impose any particular initial condition on the universe.
It's just as complicated as you can imagine, which is a nice beginning because you don't
have to fine-tune any initial conditions.
And this burbles on, you have fluctuations which are continually increasing and decreasing.
It's all very complicated.
Every once in a while, surely by accident, a patch of this fluctuating field happens
to become smooth.
That is, it doesn't vary much over a sufficiently large region of space.
Just by accident, not by any design.
That region, you can show according to reasonable dynamical assumptions, will then blow up,
will inflate, will increase in size exponentially, becoming smoother and smoother, turning into
the inflationary phase, which we think preceded our big bang.
But this didn't just happen once.
It happened again and again, and perhaps time without end.
And our big bang, that is all we can observe directly, that is 13.7 billion years old,
and we now know that number to 1%.
That big bang is just one episode in a chaotic universe which is always burping off these
big bangs.
So does that mean there are lots of universes then?
Well, what we call a universe, our big bang, there are lots of them.
I guess for linguistic purity, one should reserve the word universe for the whole thing,
the whole shebang, and talk about each of our big bangs as a sub-universe.
But very often, people refer to each big bang as a universe, and then they use the term
multiverse for the whole thing, and I think it's up to you what language you use.
The multiverse idea has some very attractive features.
I mean, it arose out of thinking of theories of inflation, but it has had interesting byproducts
because if this idea is correct, and we don't yet know, at this point it's just a speculation,
but if this idea is correct, there's every reason to expect that in the different big
bangs that occur, you will have different conditions, different values for what we
call the fundamental constants, and so that the fact that the constants of nature are
suitable for life, which is clearly true that we observe, may not be a universal fact.
It may just be an accident, just as the fact that the temperature of the earth is suitable
for life is not true of planets in general.
We have to be on a planet in which the temperature is suitable.
I don't know exactly what the range is.
Most people think water has to be liquid.
We could argue about that.
It doesn't leave very much range.
No, perhaps life could arise in liquid methane, but clearly there are some limits.
I don't think life can arise at one degree Kelvin.
I don't think it can arise at 100,000 degrees Kelvin, so there's some range of temperatures
in which life can arise, and as you say, it's only on the planets that happen to be in that
fortunate position.
Or in the universes that happen to be.
And then this is then carried over by analogy into our universe, that it's only in those
big bangs where the values of the constants are suitable where life can arise.
In other words, if there was, I don't think there's really any evidence for a very precise
fine-tuning of the constants of nature.
That's interesting, because some physicists seem to think there is extremism.
I know, I've argued about that.
One of the examples that is often quoted is a certain energy level of carbon, of the
carbon nucleus.
If it was 10% higher or 10% lower than the nuclear reactions that build up oxygen from
carbon and stars wouldn't work.
This was Fred Hoyle's argument, wasn't he?
Yeah, well, Fred Hoyle was the one who realized there had to be this energy level, and that
nuclear synthesis wouldn't work well without it.
Well, the fact that there is such an energy level that just that energy does not require
a fine-tuning of the, I think, and I've argued with people about this, I don't think it requires
a fine-tuning of the constants of nature, because that state of the carbon nucleus is
essentially a bound state of a beryllium eight, I'm getting very technical, a beryllium eight
nucleus and a helium nucleus, and that's just the condition that you need in order to allow
nuclear synthesis to occur.
Even if you change the constants of nature, the value of the energy of this state would
change, but it would still be a bound state of a beryllium eight plus an alpha particle,
plus a helium nucleus, and so it wouldn't make much difference as far as nuclear synthesis
is concerned.
There is one constant that seems to be fantastically fine-tuned, but again, we're not sure, and
that is the constant called the dark energy, or the vacuum energy, or the cosmological
constant.
It's the energy in space itself, not associated with any particles or radiation, but just
an energy, so many calories per quart of space, everywhere in the universe, whether it's
matter there or not.
The amount of this has been measured, it's been observed that it's not zero, it has a
small finite value, to give an idea of the value, it's about the amount of, in a volume
the size of the earth, whether the earth is there or not, just in that volume of space,
the amount of energy is the energy in a few hundred barrels of petroleum.
Not a lot for a volume the size of the earth.
That energy is detected by its effect on the expansion of the universe.
It's causing the expansion of the universe to accelerate, and that's something that was
discovered ten years ago by two different pairs, two different teams of astronomers studying
the speed and distance of distant galaxies.
This, now we can, we try to calculate what this energy is from first principles.
There are various reasons why we can't calculate, but we can calculate certain contributions
to it.
For example, we can say fluctuations in the electromagnetic field, just due to the quantum
nature of radiation, not down to arbitrarily small wavelengths, because we don't understand
anything at very, very short distances, but just down to the shortest distances at which
we think we understand physics, which is roughly a hundredth the size of an atomic nucleus.
These are the shortest distances that have been probed in our accelerators.
So counting the fluctuations in the electromagnetic field, or the gravitational field, or any other
field, down to the shortest distances that we have probed, the energy that we can calculate,
what energy that gives space, and it comes out to about fifty-six orders of magnitude
larger than the observed value.
That is a one with fifty-six zeros.
Now, well, you just have to shrug your shoulders and say, well, there are the other contributions
we can't calculate, like the contributions from fluctuations with even shorter wavelengths.
They clearly cancel.
But it's a pretty accurate cancellation.
It's a cancellation that's accurate to fifty-six decimal places.
And that has us disturbed.
And it's possible that that will be explained in a way that has nothing to do with the multiverse.
It may be that for some fundamental physics reason that we don't know, the universe is
evolving toward a state where that vacuum energy, that dark energy, is exactly zero.
And it's small now just because the universe is old, and it's not far from that final state.
No one has constructed a theory in which that's true.
I mean, it's not only a speculation.
The theory would be speculative, but we don't have a theory in which that speculation is
mathematically realized.
But it's a possibility.
But the only other explanation, well, it's not even an explanation, because we don't have
a candidate theory.
But the only explanation that seems to work is that this is just one of those things that
varies from sub-universe to sub-universe, from Big Bang to Big Bang.
In most of the Big Bangs, it's very large.
It's much larger than what we observe.
And in those Big Bangs, they go through, because this energy drives the expansion of the universe,
depending on whether it's positive or negative, the universe either blows up so rapidly, there's
no time for galaxies or stars to form, or it crunches.
It recollapses so rapidly, again, there's no time for life to form.
So it has to be small for life to exist, and it's about as small as it is.
In fact, that's interesting.
It's not much smaller than it would have to be to allow life to arise.
And the fact that the cancellation is so precise means that the number of universes in the
multiverse you need to postulate in order to anthropically be comfortable with it is
very, very large.
And it must be at least 10 to the 56, or in fact, if you think you have some idea about
fluctuations at even shorter distances, I think you would say at least 10 to the 120.
In fact, that's a little disturbing, but a completely separate development, not motivated
by this at all, has taken place recently in string theory.
String theory is our best hope for a theory unifying all the forces of nature, gravity,
and all the other forces, all the particles.
It's the most, it's been a little disappointing that it hasn't led to any specific breakthrough
in understanding what we already know, but it still, it's the best game in town, the
best hope we have for a really fundamental understanding.
It was realized a number of years ago, largely through the work of Edward Whitten, that what
had seemed to be about half a dozen different possible string theories was really only one
string theory.
There's just one string theory, but it manifests itself in many ways, and in fact, not in half
a dozen different ways, but the solutions of string theory are incredibly numerous.
And in fact, the estimate that people usually quote, although it's highly approximate, is
something like 10 to the 500 solutions of string theory.
And these solutions fill out what string theorists call a landscape.
And each one of them may represent a possible kind of big bang.
Now again, this is very speculative, because we don't understand string theory at the deep
level that we need to understand it.
But this is already upset some religious leaders.
Cardinal Schoenborn, the Cardinal Archbishop, well, you've had problems with him with regard
to evolution.
He wrote an op-ed article in The Times a few years ago in which he attacked the neo-Darwinian
synthesis, if that's the right word, and he attacked the idea of evolution without design,
but he also attacked the multiverse idea.
And that did my heart good to see that, because you evolutionary biologists get all the fun
being attacked by religious zealots.
And here Cardinal Schoenborn at least knew enough about cosmology to realize we were
worth attacking.
I'm glad you enjoy it.
I must say I don't mind either, I think.
No, I mean, isn't it better than being ignored?
Yes.
There are teachers of biology in this country who tell me that they are intimidated, they
don't dare teach these contentious subjects.
And I find it hard to understand, because I should have thought it would be more interesting
to teach something controversial, but they're frightened of being, I don't know, attacked
by parents or by maybe the children themselves sometimes.
Well, yes, I mean, I think there are school boards that are very backward.
I testified in front of the Texas State Board of Education.
Which is particularly influential, because of textbooks.
At that point, they were honestly confused.
They really thought that intelligent design was an alternate scientific theory, and why
not present both scientific theories?
And they were not anti-science.
They thought it was science.
They thought it was science, and they were, I think, their mind was changed by scientists
coming before them and telling them, no, it's not science, it's jiggery, pokery.
I mean, the myth has been assiduously promulgated with science, and they've been taken in by
it.
I mean, there are people who are much more difficult to deal with than I found the Texas
Board of Education, and we won that argument, now it's coming up again in Texas.
I think this is beginning to be a problem in Europe, and I understand it's very much
a problem in the Islamic world, that there's a strong prejudice against teaching the theory
of evolution there.
In fact, perhaps of teaching basic science at all.
The Islamic world took a turn away from science sometime in the 12th or 13th century, which
is really quite tragic.
Given their rather good role in preserving Greek science before.
There's a lovely line in Philip Hitti's book about the Arabs.
He's talking about the great period of the House of Wisdom and Baghdad at the time of
Caliph Haroun al-Rashid and al-Ma'mun, and he said, while al-Rashid and al-Ma'mun were
studying Greek and Persian philosophy, Sholomein and his lords were dabbling in the art of
writing their names.
Yes, that's right, very good.
Coming back to the alleged fine-tuning of the universe, I was interested in one of the
things useful in so many things, but I've always tried to explain it as an amateur because
I'm not a physicist.
Having accepted the word of physicist that there is an element of fine-tuning, and I've
tried to lay out three possible explanations.
One would be God, which as I've said isn't an explanation at all.
One would be the multiverse, and then anthropically with hindsight saying we have to be sitting
in one of the universes that could give us.
The third one, which I've attributed to you, possibly wrongly, would be what I call the
macho physicists who say, well, it's just that we don't understand why these things
are the other way they are.
One day we will, when we have a theory of everything, it will be understood.
But it sounds from our conversations, though, that I misrepresented you there.
Well, I don't know.
I really am not impressed with the amount of fine-tuning there is, with the exception
of this one, the dark energy.
And that, you can say qualitatively, the amount of dark energy now is comparable to the amount
of energy in matter now.
It's a few times larger, but it's not very different.
Maybe there will be an explanation for that, and a fundamental explanation.
People have aimed at that sort of thing, Stephen Hawking, for instance, has.
So I think it's fair to say we don't know.
If you discovered a really impressive fine-tuning, that if you change some otherwise arbitrary
parameter, numerical quantity, by one percent in either direction, life would become impossible.
And that was just a free constant in your theory.
It could have any value.
Even I think you would really be left with only the two other explanations, either a
benevolent designer or a multiverse.
But the benevolent designer, we know can't work, because it begs the question that you've
raised.
So that leaves us with a multiverse, doesn't it?
Well, it doesn't solve the problem, but it opens up the realm of possible speculation
in a way that I can't even imagine thinking.
But it changes the nature of the game.
But the multiverse would be really an explanation then.
Very satisfying.
I mean, I've heard it said that physicists somehow think it's cheating, but I think it's
rather elegant.
I think it's rather beautiful.
Well, we've had to live with this before.
There was a time when it was thought that the distances of the planets from the Sun were
dictated by geometrical principles.
Kepler had a theory like that, although it was only the ratios of the distances.
And it was somewhat of a disappointment to learn with Newton's theory that we were never
going to have a fundamental theory of the distances of planets from the stars.
I mean, each planet is the distance it is because of a historical accident that can't.
When will we ever be able to explain precisely why the Earth is 93 million miles from the
Sun?
Clearly, we're not going to be able to do that.
The only explanation is a rather fuzzy, anthropic one, which allows for it to be 92 or 94 million
miles from the Sun.
The difference between that and the multiverse is, of course, we can see that there are lots
of planets.
We have only discovered a few dozen planets in this universe, but our theories tell us
their vast numbers, because a large fraction of stars seem to have planets.
So the existence of the other planets is no longer a speculation.
Well, the existence of the other Big Bangs is a pure speculation right now, but it may
not always be.
But it's not the case that the existence of the other Big Bangs be postulated only for
anthropic reasons.
No.
I mean, you have other reasons for that.
That's right.
Cardinal Schoenborn in his op-ed article said precisely that the multiverse idea was invented
in order to avoid the appearance of design in the universe, and that's simply not true.
It's historically not true.
Okay, right.
Now, going back to the planets, which is a much easier case, of course, I think you can
turn this argument quite interestingly on its head and point out that since there are
obviously going to be probably billions and billions of billions of planets, if, which
is perfectly possible, only one of them has life, because we know nothing else than that,
then we would have to say that our theories of the origin of life, in our theories of
the origin of life, we are looking for a chemical event which has to be quite staggeringly improbable,
because otherwise we would expect the universe to be teeming with life.
Now, you're the biologist, you would know better than I do, how improbable do you think
it is?
That's a quite separate question, and it's an interesting question, but what I'm saying
is that the statistical argument allows us to postulate an event which would be so improbable
that we would ordinarily call it impossible, because it only has to happen once.
Yes.
And with hindsight, we have to be on that planet.
Right.
The our existence tells us nothing about how probable it is for life to arise, given the
right conditions.
Even the fact, apparently we know now that life arose rather early in the history of the
Earth.
That helps a bit, that's an additional fact.
But even that doesn't help very much, because suppose life had risen on Earth, not when
it did, but a hundred million years later, still very early as the Earth goes, the Earth
is four and a half billion years old, but still very early, well, that means evolution
would now be a hundred million years behind schedule, behind schedule, and we would not
be here talking about it.
And so the condition, well, I don't know, does it take two billion years for intelligent
life to arise once life starts?
Possibly.
I mean, maybe it takes that long to get a eukaryotic cell.
However, I don't think there is a schedule once you get out to, I mean, it's not clear
why the dinosaurs didn't produce intelligent life.
They might well have done, in which case it would have happened at least six to five million
years earlier.
So I don't think you can say that it took, as you say, two billion years from the origin
of the eukaryotic cell in order to get intelligent life.
I think it could have happened much earlier than that, or indeed much later.
But I think that's an accident.
I can't believe that something like that worm that all the biologists study, C. elegans,
C. neurobditis, which has about a hundred neurons in its nervous system.
I don't think that could ever.
No, no, no.
But I mean, that's a multi-celled organism with a nervous system, but it still is not
going to learn quantum mechanics.
There's no timetable in the sense that 65 million years after the dinosaurs went extinct,
they then had evolution kind of breasted the tape of it.
It could have happened 10 million years earlier or 10 million years later or more.
Well, it may be that we're on the tail of the Gaussian.
That is, it's very improbable that life arose as early as we did, as it did after the formation
of eukaryotic cells.
And if that's true, then there's a strong selection that it's only life that arises very early
in the history of the universe that has a chance of becoming intelligent.
That has time before the, yeah.
And if that's true, and we don't know that it is, but if that's true, then the fact that
life arose very early on Earth does not argue that life arises readily whenever the conditions
are right.
It might be that it's still an incredibly unlikely thing.
And it's only on the doubly rare cases where it arises very early that it then becomes
intelligent.
Yes.
And of course, we don't know how rare life is.
It could be very common.
I think we pretty much know that intelligent life is rare because otherwise we'd have been
visited by radio transmission.
The Fermi argument.
Yes.
Where are they?
And so I think you have to say that maybe there's a cascade of improbabilities.
There's the origin of life, perhaps the origin of the eukaryotic cell or something like it,
and the origin of intelligence and technology.
But even we've got through all those hurdles.
Even that, you know, we've sampled, in terms of how long it takes to reach us, we've sampled
only a few tens of thousands of light years, even assuming people can travel at the speed
of light.
Yes.
Or that they send us signals.
So we've perhaps sampled a volume of our galaxy.
It's a pretty small sphere.
Ten thousand light years, but it's only one galaxy and there are billions of galaxies.
So it may be that life maybe occurs a few times in each galaxy.
I would have thought, yes, I mean, yeah.
And then it's still quite frequent.
Wouldn't it be exciting if the signs of a completely independent life were found even
on Earth?
I mean, it might be that one could find organisms that had a different genetic code.
Well, Paul Davis is actively looking for that.
It would only take a different genetic code.
I mean, because as far as we know, the DNA code is universal, the minor, minor details.
But a different genetic code, either not based on DNA or based on, even based on DNA with
a completely different lookup table.
Yes.
There's nothing very attractive or elegant or efficient about the genetic code we have.
No.
I mean, Francis Crick devised a much better one.
Yeah, I heard that.
Yes.
Yeah.
What a pity.
Yes.
What a pity.
That's right.
You know, I'm quite an opponent of manned spaceflight, not because I think it's bad
in itself, but just it's incredibly expensive and it's sold as a way of doing science.
And I don't think it is a good way of doing science.
I think spaceflight, unmanned missions are very important.
I'd like to see lots of unmanned missions to Mars scooping up soil and examining it.
But I must say, if they discovered something on Mars that required human inspection to decide
whether it really was a sign of life, that would change my mind about...
Wouldn't it be staggering?
Wouldn't it be amazing?
Yeah.
But I don't see that happening.
And I don't see why we would want to send a very limited number of humans to Mars examining
just very small regions of the surface rather than hundreds of robots.
Yeah.
That's pure.
We're going to go over the surface.
That's public relations, isn't it?
That's...
Oh, there's some kind of mystique about putting people into space.
I've argued about it and most astronomers, I think, would agree with me.
Aeronautical engineers or whatever they are disagree.
They love the idea.
It's a challenge, doesn't it?
Yeah, that's right.
And of course, politicians love it.
What about talking about Big Science 7, presumably you're excitedly looking forward to what CERN
starts to produce?
With a certain amount of terror that, you know, they may discover great things like the particles
that make up dark matter or they might discover signs of supersymmetry.
They probably will discover the so-called Higgs boson, which in theory of Salam and myself
is responsible for the breakdown of the symmetry between the weak and the electromagnetic forces.
But it may be that they'll only discover the Higgs boson and nothing else and we'll be
left looking at our toes and wondering, what are we going to do next?
You know, there may be nothing exciting, really new, that can be reached with the large hadron.
But it was worth doing, nevertheless.
Oh, well, we have to find out and of course there's a good chance that they're going to
discover something very exciting.
But I have fears that in a way it's less frightening if they don't discover the Higgs boson because
that would be a contradiction of our good theories and then we would all go back to the
drawing boards and we have various alternative theories that might explain that and it would
be exciting for a while.
But if all they discover is a Higgs boson with roughly the properties that the theory
predicts and nothing else.
I see what you're saying.
Nevertheless, wouldn't you say to a young person, now would be a very exciting time to
go into physics because of this?
In Britain, they're moving away from physical science and growth.
It's not only cut at support for this, it's cut at support for a number of telescopes
and other things.
It's cut at support for the next linear collider.
Yes.
No, it's kept at support, I think, for CERN.
I think Britain has maintained its support for CERN, which is the laboratory where the
large hadron collider will be placed.
Well, I would say that anyone who goes into physics right now would be a little bit too
late to participate in the work of the LHC.
Whether or not it would be a good career move depends on what they're going to discuss.
I think I'm thinking of theoretical physics that, depending upon what they discover, mightn't
there be a sort of opening of damn walls?
If they discover something exciting, then by all means.
But if all they discover is the Higgs boson and it has the properties we expect, then
no, I would say that the theorists are going to be very glum.
Right.
A moment ago, you mentioned Abdus Salam.
Can I ask, was he one of those who was a genuinely religious?
I've heard it said he was a devout Muslim, and I've always wondered about that.
Well, when I first met him, I visited Imperial College in the academic year 61-62, he had
a bottle of starch in his desk drawer.
Yes.
So he was...
He wasn't an observant Muslim.
He wasn't completely observant.
He was religious, and as the years went by, he gave up alcohol.
But he belonged to a sect, the Amidae, I think that's what it's called, I'm probably not
pronouncing it correctly, that has beneficially declared heretic in Pakistan, his home country.
And as a result, for many years, he wasn't allowed back into Pakistan.
But he was quite religious about that.
I mean, I regard all religion with a certain sense of bemusement, and the Amidae sect seemed
even a little bit more peculiar than the other branches of Islam, but he was quite serious
about it.
He had two wives, one of whom an Oxford guy.
I know her, yes.
And the other is a very conventional Pakistani woman who lives in London, and they both came
to the Nobel Prize in 1979, and they alternated appearances at the official events.
He...
It's interesting, because although he was quite devout as a Muslim, he deplored the anti-scientific
attitude that he found in the world of Islam.
He told me that he had tried to get the states of the Persian Gulf, which are very oil rich,
like Dubai and so on, Bahrain.
He tried to get them to put money into building universities that would include a component
of basic science, and he said that they were very resistant to that, that they wanted to
go into technology.
They were enthusiastic about technology, but they did not want to do fundamental science,
but yes, they thought that was corrosive to religious belief.
Probably rightly so.
Yes, I suspect they're right.
But he didn't think that then.
He didn't think it was corrosive.
No, no.
Well, his point of view was that of many well-meaning physicists, I know in America, who think,
oh, there's no problem, science, religion can happily co-exist.
I think, in fact, although it's a slow process, and there are many exceptions, that in the
long run, science is eating the lunch of religion, and that we already have seen a great weakening
of religious belief.
It's obvious in Europe, I think it's also true in America.
I think Americans believe in religion, on the average.
They believe that religion is good for you, but when you ask them, what do they actually
believe about the afterlife, or about how are you saved, they're likely to tell you,
well, it isn't so important what you believe.
The important thing is to live a good life.
Yes.
I've heard that something.
Me too.
If I really cared about religion, and I looked at the state of religion in America, I think
I would cry over it.
Religion is a mile wide and an inch deep.
It doesn't go very far.
It doesn't make me cry.
It makes me laugh.
We're running out of time, so can we resume after?
I began by saying I felt humbled as a biologist, and one of the reasons is the sheer mysteriousness
of physics, which I suppose is nowhere more true than in fundamental particle physics.
But as a biologist, I try to come to terms with why it's so hard to understand, and I'm
wondering what you think of this, that something about, well, natural selection equipped our
brains to control medium-sized bodies, which is moving at medium speeds in roughly two
dimensions rather than, well, in three dimensions.
And therefore, things like multidimensionality, things like particles mysteriously going through
two slits, or one depending on when anybody's looking at them, and the slightly less mysterious
aspects of relativity.
Our brains were never equipped to understand that kind of thing, because we didn't need
to.
But if we had been denizens of interstellar space traveling at near the speed of light,
relatively would be second nature to us, and if we had been the size of fundamental
particles, we wouldn't find mysterious, the things that I at least find mysterious.
Do you find them mysterious, or do you cope with them in your own mind?
I think you're exactly right about why they seem mysterious.
We cope with them using mathematics.
We have mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics that are perfectly satisfactory.
We know how to calculate things.
A course in physics is a series of problems the student has to learn, how to calculate
the energy levels of the hydrogen atom, the classic problem that convinced people that
they were on the right track during the development of quantum mechanics.
Occasionally, perhaps we lose our sense of strangeness because the mathematics become
so familiar to us.
I think there are things that are truly strange, and that even though we can deal with them
mathematically, we shouldn't lose the sense of strangeness, not relativity, which no longer
seems to me paradoxical or weird, but quantum mechanics is really strange.
The interpretation of quantum mechanics that developed in the early 1930s under the leadership
of Niels Bohr and Copenhagen, the Copenhagen interpretation, I think is fundamentally flawed.
It divides the world into physical systems and observers, and that can't be right.
Observers are parts of the world.
They have to be described by the same quantum mechanical language as everything else.
The first person who thought seriously about that and tried to develop an alternative way
of looking at quantum mechanics was a graduate student at Princeton, Everett.
But his solution to the problem is, in a way, even weirder.
There is something called the wave function, which evolves in a completely deterministic way,
and there is a wave function of the universe which governs everything, including all our observers
and their apparatus and the physics journals in which they publish their results.
And all of that happens during a measurement, and a subsequent publication is all described
in the evolution of the wave function.
But if you believe that, then you really have to believe that since, in an experiment,
we can have a particle which has neither a definite spin this way or this way,
but is a superposition of the two, when the spin is measured, it's either this way or this way,
one or the other, with different probabilities.
In Everett's interpretation, both are realized.
The universe splits into a world in which the electron is spinning this way
and the observer sees it spinning this way and another world where it's spinning this way
and the observer sees it spinning that way.
And this happens not only in physics buildings but continually throughout the universe
so that the wave function of the universe is infinitely more complicated
than we normally think of the universe itself as being.
It contains components for every possible history of the things in it.
Now, that's so weird that it's hard to think in those terms.
It seems to me to be ever so slightly less weird than the Copenhagen interpretation.
It's less weird in the sense that...
It's just hideously uneconomical, I think.
Well, I would say the Copenhagen interpretation is just hopeless
because the split between observers and observers can't be different from electrons and spins and so on.
There is a hope, which I nurse, but I don't see being realized,
that eventually we'll find that quantum mechanics, as we know it now, is just an approximation
and that when an electron, which is in a superposition of states in which it's spinning this way or this way,
when it interacts with some big thing like a physicist, a macroscopic body, like a physicist or his apparatus,
actually there is a physical decay of the wave function into a wave function where the electron is purely moving this way
or purely moving the other way and that, in fact, the history of the world has not split.
There has been an evolution of the wave function, which is not the kind of thing that occurs in quantum mechanics as we know it,
but represents something that's specific to large bodies.
I think some people have thought that perhaps gravitation has something to do with this,
that after all, large bodies are the only ones where gravity is important,
gravity is incredibly weak force on the atomic level.
That would make sense of the whole thing, if that were true,
but it requires a modification of quantum mechanics.
And there are papers that suggest possible modifications of quantum mechanics.
Well, that's a great hope, isn't it? That would be wonderful.
I think that's the best hope, that we will find out that quantum mechanics, as we know it, actually breaks down for very large things.
Now, it's true that the predictions of quantum mechanics have been verified for electrons that are separated by macroscopic distances.
We can verify that there really is what's called an entanglement,
that you can have two electrons that are meters away from each other,
where the physical state is not a state where one is up and the other is down,
but one which is a superposition of left up, right down, and left down, right up.
So these two particles know about each other.
And it's just what you expect quantum mechanically, and it happens over macroscopic distances,
but they're still just electrons, they're not big, heavy things with gravitational fields.
So it may be that these experiments that verify quantum mechanics at macroscopic scales don't really settle the argument.
Well, I tell a story and something, I wrote a true story that a friend of mine,
who was a physicist at the University of Texas, who now incidentally wound up at Oxford,
Philip Candillus, was standing next to me waiting for an elevator,
and I asked him, whatever happened to so-and-so,
mentioning a graduate student who would seem very promising and then we never heard of again,
and Philip nodded his head sadly and said, he tried to understand quantum mechanics.
Well, I try and try and try, but I never seem to get anywhere.
And the amazing thing is that we don't need to, that you can live your whole life calculating the energy levels of atoms and molecules
and calculating cross-sections for elementary particle reactions using quantum mechanics every day
as part of your intellectual toolkit and never confront these problems.
Well, I've met physicists who have said, well, why bother?
I mean, the mathematics works, and that seems to be so unsatisfactory.
It is unsatisfactory, but it's not professionally unsatisfactory.
No, I can see that.
It's only humanly unsatisfactory.
But there's a slight analogy, it's nothing like so profound.
I think I've heard you say, all right, that many physicists going back to the God question don't really care.
I mean, they don't think it's an interesting question.
I can't quite get that.
I mean, it does seem to me that, I don't believe in God, but it does seem to me that you've got to care about it
because if it's true, it's one of the most profoundly...
It's the most important thing in the world, that's right.
I agree.
Well, I think the expression I used is that most of my friends in physics don't care enough about religion
to qualify as practicing atheists.
Yes.
They just don't care, and they don't want to think about it.
And I do think about it.
I try not to think about it too much.
I mean, clearly one could let it run away with you.
I've visited organizations of people who are atheists and who gather together for mutual comfort.
To me, it smells a little bit like a church.
Yeah, they're not very edifying some of those meetings.
But they're very well-meaning people, and I agree with them, but I wouldn't build my life around...
You go along to give them a bit of moral support.
Well, they invited me, so I went.
And I think maybe you and I have also some slight difference in our attitude toward religion on the aesthetic level.
Well, perhaps not, but it's been part of our lives for so long.
So much of history has been bound up with it that you can't not only be interested,
but have a kind of respect for it the way you would have respect for someone who you don't particularly like,
but who is still very powerful and has played a large role in your life.
I'm not sure the respect is the word I'd use, but certainly, I mean,
when you think of the great music that's been inspired by it,
and obviously because that's where the money was, I mean, you get a bit cynical.
That's not only because that's where the money was.
I mean, some of it, yes.
But some of it seems to have a really religious feeling to it.
I don't know about music, but, you know, in poetry, there are poets...
Well, with John Dunn, I don't know.
I mean, he was such a Randy preacher, but with someone like Herbert or Gerard Manley Hopkins,
I think there really is a religious inspiration there.
I do, too. I mean, I used to be a suit.
I think giving up religion, we would lose Gerard Manley Hopkins.
I agree, and I'm sure Hopkins didn't make that much money from it.
Yeah, but we wouldn't lose Shakespeare.
There's not a bit of religious inspiration in all of Shakespeare.
That's right.
And that's one of the... I mean, that's considerably more important than Hopkins.
Yes. Nevertheless, you can't read Shakespeare without knowing the Bible,
because, I mean, you can't take...
No, you have to know about it, and he uses witches and...
Yes.
He has Hamlet worrying about sending Claudius's soul to hell,
but there's not the slightest feeling that Shakespeare himself took that very seriously.
No, that's right.
But I mean, I am in favor of religious education in the sense of education in the Bible
and, I suppose, other holy books.
Well, and also the Greek myths and the Nordic myths as well,
or you can't understand the Bible.
And some of it is great literature. Some of it isn't.
I mean, the Bible is a mixed bag, a friend of mine who more learned it in these things
than I am said. It was really an anthology of Hebrew literature.
Yes.
And some of it's good, and some of it isn't so good.
Well, in the King James version, some of it is...
I'm from the Old Testament, of course.
Yes.
I can't read the Hebrew, but I'm told that, for example,
my favorite book, Ecclesiastes, which in the 17th century English is ravishing,
I'm told that in Hebrew it's very good as well.
Well, in fact, an Israeli told me that the King James version
is closer to the Hebrew Bible than modern English versions
because the Hebrew Bible had an archaic flavor when it was written.
I see, yes.
And you get more of a feeling of the Hebrew Bible by reading the King James.
Yes.
I remember I went to a Catholic mass, and a friend took me to,
and I went to be friendly.
And they use that line, which is in the King James version,
is now we see as through a glass of darkly.
They translate it into modern English.
Now we see, obscurely, not clearly, or something like that.
Yes, it's hopeless.
It was so bad.
Absolutely hopeless, yes, yes.
Vanity of vanity, says the preacher, always vanity.
That's translated as hopeless, hopeless, or something like that.
Just awful.
I mean, if you really want to kill religion,
translate the holy books into modern speech,
and that will go a long way towards it.
And of course, we would, in architecture,
we would lose so much those wonderful cathedrals and mosques.
This, I remember how impressed I was with the Al-Aqsa mosque
in Jerusalem.
Yeah, you can't get away from that, and I wouldn't wish to.
But it's done so much harm.
And, well, I use this metaphor that it's a crazy old ant
who used to be beautiful.
It's quite fond of her.
And we've fond of her in a way,
but it'd still be better when she's gone.
Yes, I think that's right.
What do you think about...
But you said, I won't regret it at all.
I won't regret it at all, but I get the point, even so.
In American education, in my own field of evolution,
there's a very, very serious attempt to subvert science education.
That doesn't seem to be happening in physics, or is it?
Oh, I don't think it's happening.
I've never heard of anyone attacking the teaching of cosmology,
but they don't go into it very much in high school.
And at the college level, there's no attempt.
I mean, you're not saying that at the university level,
there's an attempt to subvert the teaching of evolution.
Well, I think so.
Really?
Yes.
I wasn't aware of that.
I've known teachers who, in almost every class they teach,
there will be a significant minority,
not maybe even quite a large minority of students
who will ostentatiously fold their arms
and kind of look defiant when you start talking about,
maybe even walk out.
In extreme cases, go and complain to the dean
that they've been offended.
Their religious beliefs have been offended.
One of the things that may help,
may work in this direction is that we,
I think we over-reli on student evaluations.
Yes.
I think student evaluations should not be given very great weight,
precisely, well, partly for this reason,
because they provide an incentive for the teacher
to teach in an ingratiating, comfortable way.
Yes.
And, well, I taught a course in the history of science.
In fact, I will again in the fall.
And I went a lot into the interaction of science and religion.
And I was sort of hoping that some student would get upset with me
and that we would have an interesting interaction.
But, you know, I'm at a position where I can live with it.
I think for someone, say, an assistant professor,
who doesn't have tenure, it's a serious problem.
It's not a serious problem for me.
I was actually looking forward to a little Donnie Brooke.
But it didn't happen.
I don't think that I offended anyone.
I wonder whether somebody of your clout and prestige
might actually just look around and perhaps ask
whether there are any junior professors of biology
who are having a hard time.
Well, that would be interesting.
And perhaps you could put your weight behind them
if they are getting in trouble.
Yeah.
Well, the only one people in the biology side here I know
are senior professors.
Yes.
But that's an interesting question.
And I certainly will ask the question if I have a chance.
I had assumed that the universities,
just as, you know, American secondary school education
is pretty terrible on the average,
American university education is pretty good.
And when you get to graduate education, it's excellent.
I assume the same was true about academic freedom,
that there's a lot of pressures at the high school level,
much less so for undergraduates,
and none at all for graduate students.
But I may be wrong about that.
That may be.
I have heard the story about Texas having a particularly
disproportionate influence on textbooks.
Oh, yes.
Well, that's just economics that for historical reasons,
Texas selects its textbooks at the high school level,
excuse me, at the state level.
And so it buys a lot of books all in one package.
Yes.
I remember, you know, I gave a talk once soon after coming to
Texas to a convention of high school science teachers,
and they were interested in just this sort of question.
And I was talking about how it's important to resist pressures
and teach evolution and all this sort of thing.
And they sat there, they had heard that before.
And then I said, I really didn't see why the question arose,
because it seemed to me that every high school teacher
should be able to select his or her own textbooks to fit the
kind of course that he or she wants to give.
At that point, I got a roar of applause and I got a standing
ovation, because much more important to them than the
question of what they taught is their intellectual
independence.
And they really chafed under the system of having prescribed
courses with prescribed textbooks.
Our daughter did not go to a public, what we call a public
high school.
She went to the equivalent of an English public school.
A private school.
Yeah, and over.
Yeah.
George Bush's old school.
And although she turned out differently.
Yes, I'm glad to hear that.
And her professors, her teachers, they weren't called
professors.
Her teachers designed their own courses, chose their
own textbooks, and they were very much more stimulating
courses.
Not that they were.
There is this dirigeced tendency.
People attack the idea of government doing things.
They say government is inefficient, and then they do
their best to make it inefficient by forcing it to
behave in a bureaucratic, uniform way.
Everyone has to use the same textbooks.
I think people should be much more relaxed about people,
even though they're employed by the government, doing
things in the same kind of freewheeling way that you do
in private business.
And every once in a while, a taxpayer's dollar will be
wasted.
But I bet the taxpayer will get better value for their
money that way than under the present system.
Thank you very much.
It's been a great privilege.
Enjoyed it.
Thank you.
If you enjoyed this episode, you can show some support
by subscribing to the podcast, sharing it with your
friends, and leaving a review.
