The strength of a nation's currency is based on the strength of that nation's economy.
And the American economy is by far the strongest in the world.
Accordingly, I have directed the Secretary of the Treasury to take the action necessary
to defend the dollar against the speculators.
I have directed Secretary Connolly to suspend temporarily the convertibility of the dollar
into gold or other reserve assets, except in amounts and conditions determined to be
in the interest of monetary stability and in the best interest of the United States.
August 15, 1971 will stand as an important event in economic history
for many, many generations.
In fact, you know, hundreds of years from now, people will look back to that day.
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
The sun rises today as it has a million times before.
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
¶¶
showing signs of collapse.
Governments responded quickly,
issuing massive bailouts and stimulus packages
in an effort to keep the world economy afloat.
And it worked.
The global economy recovered much quicker
than most predicted,
and soon it was back to business as usual.
And yet, something still isn't quite right.
A growing sense of unease fills the population.
In the world of finance,
indeed, in all facets of modern life,
cracks have started to appear.
There's angst out there,
and I think if you talk to people on the street today,
they would tell you,
I don't know what's causing all this,
but this just doesn't feel normal to me.
You know, the government's running
a trillion dollars worth of deficit.
Why isn't the economy improving?
The government's gonna spend almost 3.7 trillion dollars.
Why don't I have a job?
Why is the unemployment rate at 9%?
And I even think that number's understated.
A lot of people are feeling unsure about the world today,
concerned that something terrible is waiting in the wings.
We're told that the global financial crisis
of a few years ago has been fixed.
But what if the crisis isn't the cause of the angst so many of us feel,
but rather, the symptom of a much deeper problem?
At Bretton Woods, New Hampshire,
delegates from 44 Allied and associate countries
arrived for the opening of the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference.
Our story begins in 1944.
With World War II coming to an end,
the Allied nations met at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire,
to create a new financial system
which would stabilize the world once the war ended.
With America poised to enter a golden age of prosperity,
the U.S. dollar was chosen as the world's reserve currency.
The Bretton Woods system was created after the Second World War
at the Bretton Woods Conference in New Hampshire.
And rather than using gold as the means of exchange
between countries, as was the case under the old gold standard,
the dollar was going to be used.
The dollar was chosen because back then it was as good as gold.
Under this new system,
countries agreed to fix their currencies to the U.S. dollar,
and the U.S. dollar would be tied to gold
at a price of $35 per ounce.
This meant that countries around the world
could trade their currencies for U.S. dollars,
which they could then exchange for gold.
This created a system where all currencies
were essentially backed by gold.
To avoid the logistics of shipping physical gold
across the world,
when countries did exchange their currencies for gold,
it was usually stored safely in the U.S.
Under the Bretton Woods system,
you could exchange your currency or your dollars for gold.
Now, it only applied to foreign countries and central banks.
And we began to run budget deficits.
We were running the Great Society program under Lyndon Johnson,
and we were fighting a war in Vietnam.
And all of a sudden, we were running these deficits,
and countries were changing their dollars,
and they said they wanted gold.
And it began with the French,
and then it started to spread.
With all the new spending programs in the United States,
other countries became concerned
that the U.S. was spending more money
than it had gold reserves.
They started exchanging their dollars for gold
and demanded physical delivery,
as they felt that there were more dollars being printed
than the gold that backed it.
To prevent this outflow of gold from American vaults,
President Nixon called for an emergency suspension
of the gold convertibility system.
I have directed the Secretary of the Treasury
to take the action necessary to defend the dollar
against the speculators.
I have directed Secretary Connolly
to suspend temporarily the convertibility of the dollar
into gold or other reserve assets.
All of the problems that we see today
in the monetary system are a direct result
of the decision made in August 15, 1971,
you know, to abandon a fixed link back to gold.
What gold did is it provided discipline on governments,
provided discipline on government spending.
Under the old system, if you ran a budget deficit,
then what would happen is gold would flow out of your country
until there was a balance again.
Well, without any gold backing,
then countries ran perpetual deficits.
So if you look at, for example, this country,
from 1971 on, the U.S. has never run a surplus.
Ever since we went off the gold standard,
it's just been perpetual stimulus.
Good times, bad times, always run a deficit.
What led Nixon to abandon the gold standard in 1971,
and although he claimed it was temporary,
we've been waiting 40 years, we're still off of it.
We ran up huge deficits during the 1960s.
We had the guns and butter economy,
where the government was both simultaneously
fighting a war in Vietnam abroad.
In addition, we were funding manned missions to the moon
and the whole space program.
We were creating more money than we had gold reserves
to back it up.
And a lot of our foreign creditors saw this
and began to demand gold rather than their Federal Reserve notes
because they sensed that Washington simply didn't have enough gold
to make its commitment to back the dollar.
By removing the link between gold and the U.S. dollar,
President Nixon created a system where all currencies were backed by nothing.
This is what is known as a fiat currency.
Fiat currency is currency that's backed by nothing
except government promises.
The word fiat is a Latin word,
and it basically means currency that's circulating by force.
If people have confidence in that currency
and if there's enough government force,
that will enable the currency to circulate for a period of time
until people lose confidence in the currency.
There is no nation on this planet that currently uses money.
We all use currency.
There will come a day when everybody knows the difference.
Money is a medium of exchange,
and the way it has evolved is that it's always something
of intrinsic value until the modern age.
When the politicians say,
well, we don't need anything of intrinsic value anymore.
All we need is political decree.
We can say this is money, this piece of paper is money.
Now money has a new characteristic.
But underneath it all, there's the same concept in place
that nobody ever seems to challenge,
and that is that governments have a right
to declare something of no value to be money,
and you must accept it.
That's really the problem, and it's still the problem today.
It's destroying the economies of the world.
With currencies no longer backed by anything real or tangible,
their value was measured only in relation to each other.
And because countries with relatively weak currencies
can make products cheaply,
countries devalue their own currencies
to make them desirable trading partners.
Every paper currency measures itself against the dollar.
So if the dollar goes down,
the other central banks respond to that,
and they try and intervene in the foreign exchange markets
to ensure that the impact doesn't hit their domestic economies.
What is a Ponzi scheme?
A Ponzi scheme is a fraudulent investment scheme
that promises high returns for investors with little or no risk.
Sounds too good to be true, right?
That's because it is.
In a legitimate investment scheme,
the money invested is used to build wealth,
typically through low-risk ventures like stock or real estate portfolios.
Over time, this generates enough income to pay the investor back
their initial investment plus some profit.
A Ponzi scheme, on the other hand, promises massive returns quickly.
How does it accomplish this?
Instead of using the money invested to build wealth,
a Ponzi scheme simply brings in more investors to pay off the previous investors.
And because these new investors have also been promised large returns,
the scheme must then find an even bigger group of investors to pay them off,
all the while the creators of the scheme are skimming cash from each group of investors.
Because a Ponzi scheme doesn't generate any wealth itself,
it must constantly bring in larger and larger groups of investors to keep functioning.
Eventually, no more new investors can be found,
or large numbers of previous investors all cash out at the same time,
and the scheme collapses in on itself.
By this time, the perpetrators of the scheme have siphoned off tremendous amounts of money for themselves,
while the investors are left out of pocket and out of luck.
Without a fixed link to gold,
the U.S. Treasury has been able to borrow and spend as much money as it wanted.
When the U.S. government needs money,
it takes out a loan with the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Reserve prints the currency required for the loan
and in return receives an IOU from the U.S. Treasury.
These IOUs are called government bonds.
With the money provided from these loans, or bonds,
the U.S. government pays its bills and obligations.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve work closely together to sell these bonds at auction,
where foreign central banks, pension funds, and even individuals buy these U.S. government loans.
And why wouldn't they?
Loaning money to the U.S. government is virtually a risk-free investment.
But, if the loans are spent on bills and paying off previous loans,
where does the government get the money to pay back the current loan and the interest that is charged on it?
Is investing in a U.S. government bond simply one small part in a giant Ponzi scheme?
The Federal Reserve System is definitely a Ponzi scheme.
There's no question about it.
They go through the appearance of lending money to the governments.
And the governments agree to pay back the money plus interest.
And so this money comes into being, and they create it just for that purpose.
They give it to the governments.
It didn't exist before that, you understand.
Central banks just make it out of nothing and click a few keys on a keyboard of a computer,
and the Treasury of the U.S. government now has another trillion dollars that it can spend.
That's where that money came from.
And so that creates a liability on the part of the federal government to pay it back, plus interest.
Now think about that, plus interest.
Well, when it comes time to pay it back, plus the interest, they can't pay it back.
And they certainly can't pay it back, plus interest, too.
So what they do is they borrow more to cover the original loan, plus the interest.
And then by that time, Congress wants more money anyway.
So the debt just keeps going up and up and up and up.
Under the current monetary system, we borrow all of our currency into existence.
And we promise to pay it back, plus interest.
If you borrow the very first dollar into existence, and that's the only dollar that exists on the planet,
but you promise to pay it back, plus another dollar's worth of interest, where do you get the second dollar?
The answer is you have to borrow that.
It's a Ponzi scheme because you can never pay it off.
It always requires that we go deeper into debt.
Since 1971, the United States has been running trade deficits with the rest of the world,
meaning we've been buying a lot more products from the rest of the world than they have been buying from us.
The Japanese and Koreans sell us cars and electronics, the Middle East sells us oil,
and the Chinese sell us seemingly everything on our Walmart shelves.
The US pays for these products with US dollars, and everyone is happy.
But if countries were to convert these US dollar profits back into their own currencies,
their currencies would rise in value, making their economies less desirable to trade with.
Instead, countries invest their dollar profits by buying US government bonds.
So countries around the world sell their goods to the US in exchange for US dollars,
which have been borrowed through the Federal Reserve, creating IOUs.
And countries then loan their US dollar profits back to the US by buying more IOUs.
The money from these loans is spent on paying government expenses, as well as paying back previous IOUs.
But in order to do this, larger and larger loans must be made
in order to pay back the principal and the interest.
By paying back old loans with new and larger loans,
it would appear as if the entire world has been investing their hard-earned money
into a Ponzi scheme of epic proportions.
In this business of creating money for federal governments
and national governments around the world,
if they didn't keep creating new money in larger and larger amounts,
the whole thing would crash.
Because that's where the money comes from to pay off the previous loans.
It's the new loans.
So that's why it's a Ponzi scheme.
It's a classic Ponzi scheme.
In order for the US economy to function,
we have to borrow more and more money from the rest of the world.
And the more money they loan us today,
the more money they have to loan us in the future.
And if they ever stop loaning,
the whole thing collapses and we can't pay them back.
Every Friday night,
Julia's job is to compare the grocery prices of our neighborhood stores
for Saturday morning shopping.
There are five big neighborhood markets within a couple of blocks of our house,
and Julia spreads her shopping around,
going where the prices are lowest and the quality best.
Remember when a chocolate bar cost a quarter?
When you could fill your car up for $5 and feed a family of six for $35 a week?
Whatever happened to those days?
Without anything tangible backing currencies,
governments could borrow and print as much currency as it wanted.
This has gradually led to the value of our currency being eroded.
With the creation of all this money that dilutes the value of all of the dollars
that were out there before so that the purchasing power of the dollar
gets crowded down, down, down.
And we used to be able to buy a gallon of gas for, you know, 31 cents.
Now it's hitting around $5.
The average guy in the street is affected by inflation
because of the loss of purchasing power.
And as a consequence, his standard of living is declining
if he can't keep up with the inflation rate.
In many measures of a standard of living,
Americans today are actually worse off.
You can take my grandparents.
My grandmother never worked despite the fact that my grandfather was a carpenter
and they had eight children.
Could a carpenter, somebody without even a high school diploma,
just working in a blue-collar job, support a wife and eight kids today?
Not a chance.
With inflation rising faster than incomes,
people were forced into more and more drastic measures to maintain their standard of living.
With each new day, the work of a family begins again.
When we went off gold backing of the dollar,
what used to happen prior to that is the husband went to work,
the wife stayed at home, raised the family.
Because of inflation in the 70s, the wife went to work.
So now you had two incomes that were necessary to produce and buy the same goods and services.
In the 90s, we stopped saving.
The savings rate basically got down to zero because people were spending.
They couldn't save in order to buy the same goods and services.
Then we got to the last decade.
The wife was already working. The savings were down to zero.
They borrowed money.
And so we've gone from two earners getting rid of our savings rate
to borrowing money to keep pace with inflation.
The average person is now forced to borrow well beyond their means,
getting themselves deeply into debt.
At first, this was to maintain a nice standard of living.
But slowly, it has become necessary just to survive.
By printing so much currency and devaluing it so heavily,
it would seem that governments are essentially levying a hidden tax on their people.
Central banks try to say that 2% or 3% inflation is a good thing and they make that a target.
Well, it's still a tax.
Why is 2% inflation or 3% inflation better for the country than no inflation?
You will be told, of course, that it's better than deflation.
And you'll be told that people like to feel that their money or their jobs or their
wages are going up by 2%, at least it's something.
Where, in fact, that 2% is robbery and what they get is going down by that amount.
We are experiencing inflation these days. I mean, yeah, they say the CPI is up whatever it is,
2% or 3%. I mean, anybody who's alive knows that inflation is well beyond that,
probably running double digits.
The purchasing power of the average person has been deteriorating drastically.
But in order to disguise this, governments have been skewing the figures in their reports to make
it seem as if inflation is much lower than it really is.
There is this curious distinction made, which most people don't understand,
between core inflation and headline inflation.
The core inflation is the basic 2% target, which doesn't matter.
And the headline inflation is once you include all sorts of things like energy prices and
sudden tax rises and the rest.
Well, the inflation rate is skewed. They use all kinds of contrivances to make the inflation
rate look lower than what it really is. If the US government were using the same CPI model that they
did when President Carter was in the White House in the late 1970s, the inflation rate today in the
United States would be 9% or 10%. That's how badly the currency is being debased. Now,
the reason why they do that is there are a lot of inflation adjusted responsibilities that the US
government has to pay out money to, you know, for example, people on the social security system
on an inflation adjusted basis. If they keep the inflation rate low, according to their own statistic,
that means they're paying out less. That means the government budget deficit is less.
A thriving metropolis, Toledo is one of the world's greatest glass processing centers.
In Akron, the state's fifth largest city, that story deals primarily with rubber.
Akron is the rubber manufacturing capital of the nation and the world.
Her very name is synonymous with rubber. In a global economy where currencies are measured
only against each other, countries are able to artificially lower the value of their own currency,
making their industries more competitive. A country with a weak currency can make products
cheaper, causing entire industrial centers to move overseas. This effect has been seen countless times
in cities around the world, some of which still haven't recovered from the loss of their industrial base.
I think the guy in the street is, he's kind of frustrated. They go, gosh, I went to college.
I don't have a job. I can't get a job. I spent all this money. I've got student loans. It's costing me
more to live. The Fed is telling me there's no inflation. Yet I go to the store and I see the price
of milk going up, eggs, meat. I pull into a gas station. It's costing me more for gas. They don't
really understand how all this affects them on a personal level. And that's why I think they're
frustrated because there isn't an educational system that explains that, look, when you print money,
when you have nothing backing in, and when you debase it, you have all the side effects
that you see. Higher inflation costs, corruption, cronyism, all the things that would have been in
headlines that we've seen over the last four or five years. The protest movements are an interesting
phenomenon. A lot of people are terribly upset with Wall Street. They're upset what's happening to their
purchasing power. They're upset with the news that they hear of the fact that the executives of these
giant banks are getting million-dollar bonuses at the same time they're dipping into the pockets of
the taxpayers to get all this bailout money. And so they're angry. Unfortunately, people are
demonstrating against the crisis, the economic crisis, and yet at the same time they're demanding
more welfare, demanding more medical benefits. They're demanding more state control and regulation
of their lives. They're demanding more money being created and pumped into the society. They don't
realize that those are the very things that have brought them onto the street in the first place
in their anger. While the person on the street is struggling to get by, we're told that what we're
experiencing is a typical recession. Why then does this current crisis feel different to previous economic
recessions? This is far from typical. I think this is the end game. I think what we're experiencing now are the
pains of the 40-year experiment in fiat currency coming to an end. And it is an absolute failure,
not only for America, but for the entire world. Up until 2008, we've been borrowing more and more
money to maintain our standard of living. Are we now at the point where we're maxed out and cannot take on
any more new debt? What we're seeing today is deleveraging at all levels of society. I mean,
consumers are maxed out. Each succession that we had in the economy, when we went through this boom
and bust period, we'd go through a bust, they would reinflate again, the economy would start up again,
but we kept piling on, piling on, piling on levels of debt. And finally, we reached the point where you
just can't pile any more debt. Banks are no longer willing to give out credit so freely,
and many people are more concerned with paying off existing debt as opposed to taking on new debt.
While this is prudent, sensible behavior, it's also a serious threat to the global economy.
Having set itself up as a giant Ponzi scheme, the global economy is reliant on more and larger debt
being issued to keep itself functioning. If you try to just live within your means and get by with
just the amount of dollars that we have today, paying the interest on them collapses the currency
supply. And so we continually have to borrow more units of currency into existence every month than we
extinguish by paying off debt. The system as it's been presently structured is that they have to
continue expanding the money supply, otherwise the system is going to die. Politicians and pundits
talk about living within our means and paying down the debt. You can't do that without collapsing the
entire economy. It would just vanish into this black hole. All the politicians are in a situation where
if they don't come to the rescue, we could just have an overnight shutdown, which they can't ever
imagine happening while they're in power. So there's always this wish to to move it on and
kick as you know the expression kick the can down the road, which is really what we're doing. But the
problem is we've run out of road. You know, there is no place to kick the can anymore. But we've got to
deal with the can and it's not simply a can because every time we kicked it down the road, unfortunately,
it got bigger. So now it's an enormous can. And you know, it's going to crush us. While the financial
crisis of 2008 may have been the first death throes of the Ponzi scheme, governments around the world
weren't about to sit back and let it fail. So they delayed the inevitable collapse, pushing it down the
road by bailing out struggling financial institutions, buying toxic mortgages and taking on debt on behalf of
its citizens. In 2009 and 2010, what happened was the crisis was papered over through bailouts,
guarantees, money printing, expansion of the money supply, etc. And governments can do that. I mean,
don't underestimate the ability of governments to dictate results in the short run. But in the long
run, none of the problems were solved. The bad debts are still there. The banks are still insolvent. The banks
are not lending. The economy's not growing. So we haven't really solved anything. By buying their way
out of these crises, by creating money out of nothing and flooding it into the economy and diluting the
purchasing power, they're not really solving the problem. What they're doing is pushing it off a
little bit into the future and making it worse. Now, do we keep going down this road? Do we print more
money? I mean, the Fed balance sheet went from $800 billion to $3 trillion. Should it now go to $6 trillion?
We had an $800 billion stimulus. Should we now have a $2 trillion stimulus? I mean, in theory you could,
but this is where people could lose faith entirely in the currency and the currency could collapse.
The Federal Reserve's money printing exercises may help prop up the economy in the short term,
but what are the consequences of money printing on such a large scale?
I think you're going to see a very rapid decline in the value of the dollar in a matter of days,
whether it's 20%, 30%, 40%. A lot of people have been buying the dollar as a safe haven. You know,
when they find out that there's no safety there, in fact, they need a safe haven from the dollar. I
mean, right now the dollar is benefiting from the fear trade. Well, what if the fear trade is afraid of the
dollar? Aside from causing an enormous amount of inflation, the Federal Reserve's reckless money
printing exercises also run the very real risk of creating a worldwide loss of confidence in the US
dollar. I think a currency crisis is highly likely, but it'll be very difficult to know exactly what
will cause it and when. I think it'll be something unforeseen. It could be a natural disaster. It could be
a political shock. It could be just a general loss of confidence. It could be something as simple as
a treasury auction that goes bad. There's no buyers and all of a sudden the interest rate starts to go
up. Then the financial players, the big hedge funds start to react to it dumping dollars. Then all of a
sudden you have foreign central banks that begin dumping dollars. Get me out. And when that happens,
it just like that. At some point, just like all Ponzi schemes,
the participants wake up to the con. They don't want to participate anymore. And the whole thing
implodes. Now, you know, when private factors, when people who are voluntarily participating,
foreigners, foreign central banks, when they stop buying, the one difference is the Federal Reserve can
come and supply the demand for the people who are waking up to the Ponzi nature of what we're doing.
But of course, when the Fed becomes the only buyer, that's the end game. Or be the beginning of the
hyperinflation.
A flight from the currency defeated Germany as a runaway inflation.
In Germany, the mark becomes so worthless it is used to paper walls or the light stoves.
What happens is the government spends so much money forcing it to borrow. It gets to the stage
where it's borrowing more money than the market is willing to lend to it. The central bank then steps in
and turns that government debt into currency. The great question is, and I don't know the answer,
is at what level of inflation, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, do you start to panic? All I know is when that level
comes, everybody panics together. Consequence of a hyperinflation is the price of goods and services
rises very, very rapidly. And that feeds upon itself, causing people to get rid of the currency
even more quickly. So you then have a situation where people go out and they buy things just to
get the hell out of paper money. And paradoxically, that then starts driving an accelerating demand
for paper money because they want more paper money to go and buy things. So you have the situation where
the value of paper money starts collapsing in advance of its issue.
In everyday life, you'll be scrambling from day to day to get tangible things.
If you're thinking of buying one can of tuna, you're going to buy two because you know that tomorrow
or even later on that day or the next hour, that can of tunas can be costing you more.
That you're going to be scrambling to get anything that's tangible.
This period is going to involve a lot of economic pain. A lot of people who are currently
retired in America are going to have to get jobs. Their retirement is gone. It's been bankrupted
because they put their faith in a Bernie Madoff type national Ponzi scheme. And of course,
a lot of the property is going to decay if people are spending money on these necessities. They don't
have money to make the repairs necessary to maintain their properties. If the landlords can't collect rents
from their tenants, how are they going to maintain the properties? How are they going to pay the taxes?
So I think that the whole economy is going to crumble beneath the weight of this runaway inflation.
And of course, the initial reaction by the Fed will be to create even more inflation, to try to
stimulate the economy by printing even more money, which of course is the source of the problem.
On the surface, it would appear that this is a problem facing the United States alone.
But with so many countries holding their savings in U.S. government bonds,
a loss of confidence in the U.S. dollar could trigger a global crisis which would affect every nation on Earth.
If the U.S. dollar hyperinflates, the implications are really profound because you can go to a country
like Zimbabwe and see the impact of a hyperinflation. But what happens when the world's reserve currency
hyperinflates? We've never been in this situation before. It's impossible to predict, you know, what the
outcome is going to be. But logic suggests that if the U.S. dollar hyperinflates, most, if not all,
of the currencies of the world will also have severe economic problems. Because at the end of the day,
the reserves of all of these currencies are basically dollars.
There have been dozens and dozens of currency collapses since the end of the Second World War,
and they all result from the same thing. You know, bad policies, bad management. And the U.S.
right now is pursuing bad policies. Central Bank is doing a bad job managing the currency. As a
consequence, it's inevitable that the dollar is going to collapse. It's on this road that I call
the fiat currency graveyard. The markets, the private sector, however you like to decide it, people,
they suddenly sort of move in a herd instinct. They suddenly sort of understand things. And this can
happen overnight. I mean, it really can. So the timing of this is, I think, very difficult,
if anything, impossible for us to say. But I would point out that there is the danger that,
I use a metaphor, one morning we will wake up and find that we are in a very different world.
It may not be one morning. It may be a week, a month. I don't know. But when it happens,
I think it'll happen quite quickly. And we won't really be able to predict when.
Hyperinflation may be one of several scenarios facing the world today. But history has shown us
that whenever a nation tried to run its economy using an artificial fiat system,
the end result is always the same. Disaster.
There is a proven 100% failure rate. There is no exception to this. Fiat currencies always fail.
And then 40 years ago, we tried this grand experiment where all the world's currencies
became fiat at the same time, when we ended the Bretton Woods system.
The world is going to have to extricate itself from this monetary system based on the dollar.
Because if you want to back your currency, you have to back it with something. You can't back it
with nothing. You know, I was thinking of that old Superman movie where the first one where Lois Lane,
she falls off the top of the building, and Superman catches her. And he says, I got you. Don't
worry, I got you. And she says, well, you got me. Who's got you? Well, that's the dollar. Who's got
the dollar? It's not Superman. The dollar can't fly on its own. The dollar used to be backed by gold.
It was gold that had the dollar. It's like everybody has tethered their ships to the Titanic of
currencies. And so we're all going to go down. If there is a loss of confidence in the US dollar,
and I think there will be in this decade. It's happened before. It'll just be history repeating.
Then we'll probably have to go back to something that will instill confidence. And what instills
confidence is gold. The only real solution is to go back to a real sound currency, real money with
something behind it. It doesn't have to be gold or silver. But historically, that has always been
what societies have chosen through trial and error. They've tried this. They've tried that.
They always wind up with gold or silver. I think that probably is a clue that it's not a bad way to go.
With all the uncertainty facing the world today, a return to a gold-backed economy would seem logical.
So how come there isn't so much as a discussion about such a return?
The answer is as simple as it is alarming. The people at the top, the ones who have been benefiting
from the current Ponzi system, don't want the ride to end. Many now believe the price of gold and silver
have been artificially suppressed to make it seem less desirable as a unit of global exchange.
What governments try to do is to maintain a low gold price. Because by doing that,
it makes the dollar look worthy of being the world's reserve currency, when in fact we know
the dollar is not worthy of that esteemed position because it's being so badly mismanaged by the United
States. Groups like the Gold Antitrust Action Committee, or GATA, have been tracking what they believe
is the deliberate suppression of gold and silver prices through a variety of dubious means.
In 12 years, we've amassed nothing but evidence that supports the manipulation of gold prices.
It'd be like talking about a murder trial, when the jury would say guilty beyond a reasonable doubt,
but you know, you're going to have to present each point of evidence and how it all fits together.
There are numerous methods that they use to suppress the price of gold. Some are harder to prove than others,
but some of them are fully reported, and that's central bank sales.
Between 1999 and 2002, the Bank of England foolishly sold a massive amount of Britain's
gold reserves at an average price of $275 an ounce. The proceeds were spent buying euros and US dollars.
The governments of Canada, France and Switzerland, among others, were also sellers of their gold around this time.
We know that the central banks used to sell 400 tons every year. Well, why were they selling 400 tons?
Obviously, it was the dumbest decision anyone could have made in the decade. By far the dumbest.
But they did it every year, sell 400, sell 400. I mean, now, you know, gold goes from 300 to 1600,
almost 17. Now, why were you selling the gold? Because they were trying to keep the price down.
So it was a coordinated thing to keep everyone focused on believing in currencies.
Alan Greenspan, in testimony to Congress, admitted that they were manipulating the price of gold when
he said, the world's central banks stand ready to lease gold in increasing quantities, meaning they
were already doing it, should the price of gold rise, meaning the target was to suppress the price of gold.
So they were already doing it, and their target was to suppress the price of gold. He admitted it,
in testimony to Congress. Although central banks are able to sell off their country's gold holdings
legally, they may have also been suppressing the price of gold using some other rather questionable
means. Some investigators believe that western central banks have been loaning their country's
gold to bullion banks. A bullion bank is an institution that sells gold with the intention of
buying it back sometime in the future at a cheaper price. With the proceeds of this sale, these banks
have been known to buy US government bonds. While this isn't a problem in itself, central banks report
the gold they have and the gold they've loaned to these bullion banks as one item. So while a central
bank may claim it has a certain amount of gold in reserves, much of that gold may be on loan to a
bullion bank, which may have sold the gold in exchange for government bonds.
One means of intervention in the gold market is the lending of gold to so-called bullion banks,
and they sell it in the market. This suppresses the price as if the central banks would sell it
directly, but this lending does not appear in the book of the central banks.
The US Treasury a few years ago changed the way they account for gold, and they're accounting for
some of their receivables and their inventory as one line item. So they're accounting for what they
actually have and what people owe them as the same thing, and that is basically illegal accounting.
It's fraudulent.
But why work so hard to keep the price of gold and silver low? Why do healthy gold and silver prices
threaten to collapse the Ponzi scheme?
There's this competitive relationship between gold and national currencies, because
gold is the only competitor to a national currency. You know, gold is money, and these national
currencies are money substitutes that circulate in place of gold.
Fiat money gives the power to government. Real money keeps the power with the people,
because when you have real money, government is limited. It can only spend what it taxes,
and the public will resist taxation. But if the government can simply print and borrow,
there's a lot less resistance. And so it's a lot easier for the government to grow when it can
promise something for nothing. And so that's what they do. And so gold is what protects the people
from the reckless policies of government. Gold is the government's chaperone. The government wants
to be able to do whatever it wants. Gold stands in its way. So yes, gold is an enemy of big government,
but it's a friend of freedom. It's a protector of individuals from government.
Gold's a competitor to the dollar. When it's going way up, it's a threat for inflation. It's a barometer
of the well-being of the United States. Look at gold screaming now, and the world's falling apart.
So it calls attention to how bad things are. So the U.S. government has an interest, Wall Street,
the politicians, to keep the price suppressed. Wall Street doesn't want you going down to a coin
dealer buying gold and silver coins. They want to sell you paper. The government wants to sell you
paper. So I would say it's the government and Wall Street. Gold in the hands of people is the way you
control government. Governments cannot create money out of thin air. If it's gold, they can only create
paper out of thin air. And if they can create paper out of thin air, they can use that paper to wage wars,
or they can use that paper as a political contrivance to enrich their friends. And as a consequence,
governments have been fighting gold all century long.
Despite this desire to keep gold and silver down, the recent instability in the markets has seen the
demand for gold and silver skyrocket. This in turn has exposed a deeper problem within the central banks.
The problem the central banks in the West now face is that they have sold an awful lot of gold to try
and suppress the price of gold. They are now embarrassed by the fact that central banks,
not in that original cartel, are now really very keen buyers of gold. And we're talking about the
Chinese, we're talking about the Russians, we're talking about the Indians, we're talking about even
Mexico. All these non-mainstream central banks, not part of, if you like, the top club members of the
Bank of International Settlements, you know, the little guys in that context, they're picking up hundreds of
tons of this stuff. To suppress the price of gold, Western central banks have had to sell or loan out
their country's gold holdings. But because the gold they sell rarely leaves their vaults, no one can be
certain they aren't selling or loaning out more gold than they physically own. If this is true, then this
could be one of the biggest scams ever perpetrated in history. A massive con perpetrated not by individuals,
but by entire governments. This central bank gold, most of it sits at the New York Federal Reserve
and the Bank of England, so it's in the basement of these two places. And it doesn't actually move.
When a country is doing international settlement, they basically take a bar off of this pile and put
it on that pile. Or they'll just change the labels, or it's just a book entry, it's accounting. Except
there's been some pretty creative accounting on all this gold, and I doubt very much that,
I don't think all of it is there. The question remains, if everybody, especially the big players,
wanted all their gold delivered at the same time, it is physically impossible to do it. Most gold that
exists on the planet, there's more than one claim on each ounce of gold. There's several people that
think that they have title to that same ounce of gold. I have said many, many, many times, over and over
again. If you can't hold it, you don't own it. The game can't go on forever because sooner or later
people are going to demand their physical gold or silver, and that already is happening.
The lack of accountability in gold sales by western central banks hasn't been a concern so far. But as
more and more buyers of gold have started to demand physical delivery, central banks that have
oversold or loaned out their country's gold will find themselves caught in a major scandal. The result
of such fraudulent activity means buyers of gold, be they individuals, pension or hedge funds,
or even entire nations, could be ripped off for billions of dollars.
It's a little similar than the Murdoch scandal here at Fox News in London, the Madoff scandal. I mean,
it's a very incestuous relationship between press, big money and the politicians. And unfortunately,
these things don't get correct until they blow up. Madoff blew up, Murdoch blew up. The gold market is
going to blow up and I think will be a bigger scandal than either of them because it's a worldwide
financial situation. The only trick that the politicians in power today know and the central
bankers, the only trick they know is to create more money out of nothing, to inflate the currency.
They have no other trick. So as long as we keep looking to them to be our leaders and solve the
problem, how can we expect anything else? That's the only trick they know. The other trick there is,
is to stop inflating and to go back to a sound currency. And they say, oh no, we can't do that.
And the reason they can't do that is because it would put them all out of business.
They wouldn't be able to continue the Ponzi scheme. Even with cracks forming in the current
financial system, the only solutions offered by governments are in fact just more steps down the
road to disaster. But while a single person may not be able to save the world, there is still something
you can do to protect your family and yourself. You cannot turn to a Ponzi schemer and ask him to run a
real business because he doesn't know how. So you can't turn to all of these Ponzi schemers in government
who are inflating the currency and say, well, let's solve the crisis in some other way because they
don't know how. So the solution is to quit depending on the same people with the same mentality to solve
our problems. If governments won't go back on a gold standard, individuals can go back on the gold
standard all by themselves. Politicians can create fiat money at will. That's why it's fiat. So why
would you want to put your faith in that? Put your trust in politicians and bureaucrats and central
bankers when you can just have something real that has intrinsic value that is scarce and that is going
to remain scarce. Would you rather have gold or a fiat currency? And we see what's happening in the world.
And obviously people are starting to figure out that gold is likely to sustain its value way more
than a piece of paper is. It's not that the price of gold is going up. It's that the value of the dollar
is going down. The price remains constant in terms of human effort and purchasing power. An ounce of gold
today will buy the same thing it bought 2000 years ago. An ounce of gold today is approximately takes so much
human effort to get out and refine the same human effort that it took to do certain things 2000
years ago. It's the human effort equation that maintains stability. How much effort does it take?
Gold is financial insurance. And the thing about it is you own it because you want to be protected.
And you know you just have to have it if you want to have or sleep at night because there's nothing else.
You know if some catastrophic event happens and we've seen them. How are you going to be protected?
The current financial system may be dying but where there is chaos there is also opportunity.
As the old model falls apart the door may be opened for great prosperity.
It's clearly not the end of the world. I mean it's probably not even the end of America.
For many countries this is going to be the beginning of an economic boom. A giant burden being
lifting off their shoulders. Where the world no longer has to loan trillions of dollars to Americans
so that we can continue to consume what we don't produce. When this comes to an end the world will
benefit. So it is not something that we should fear. We should embrace it as a world.
This is the greatest wealth transfer in history. If we have a global currency crisis
then you're going to see a greater wealth transfer than has ever happened in all of history.
It's all going to happen at once. Therefore it's the greatest opportunity.
We have millions of people now taking an interest in what is money. The question of what is money.
What should it be? And they're learning. Especially a lot of young people.
The sun will rise tomorrow as it has a million times before. Commuters will wake up and travel to their
offices to begin the day's work. Farmers will tend to their crops. And construction workers will build
new infrastructure. But will the world they live in still be the same? In 2008 the world was given a
wake-up call. The biggest financial crash in human history was delayed by the same poor decisions that
brought it about in the first place. What that massive bailout bought us was not a solution but merely time.
Time for the people responsible to wring the last few dollars out of a dying system. But also,
for those able to see the cliff edge approaching, time to protect themselves and their families from
the imminent plunge. And in the end, that time may prove to be the most valuable commodity of all.
There are these brief moments in history where the safe haven asset for the last 5,000 years
simultaneously becomes the asset class that has the greatest single potential gains in purchasing power.
We're in one of these cycles right now where money is the best investment.
The best thing that people can do of all is really to take on their own responsibility for getting
financially educated. This is the most important thing. Don't let the banks and the brokerage
houses and other people guide all of your decisions. Find out what's going on for yourself. Empower yourself.
You.
We'll be right back.
We'll be right back.
We'll be right back.
We'll be right back.
We'll be right back.
