I'm not talking about respiratory chains, as Nick suggested, because that would mean
that I'm putting forward the things that differentiate us, Nick and me. I will more
take advantage of what he already said about the energy aspect and since you're
prepared now, rub that in and do what Nick in a way cowardly avoided, that is to
make clear to which point this is different from the traditional approach to the origin of life.
Okay, so fortunately Nick made it very easy for me because he already had a couple of
slides that I would have shown you too, so I can speak more slowly maybe. I'm a biologist
since 25 years, as Nick said, but I'm trained as a physicist, so there is maybe a different
approach that comes over here and I was thinking since this is a completely mixed audience I would
try to just have fun and bring in both my physical aspect and my biology aspect, which is not always
easy. So I mean for the biologist the participative structure anyway is a reason to leave the room,
which is probably not true for the physicist, so let's see the physicist can go to sleep for the
moment and I will tell you when to wake up again. Okay, so this dichotomy that I want to say this
is leaving the traditional way to think of the origin of life is connected to what people in
the last couple of decades were thinking about the way they were addressing the origin of life
was they looked at what life was, how was life constructed, made up and of course it was the
organic molecules that came up. Now the organic molecules then you have all these approaches
to find ways to biotically synthesize these organic molecules. Now I'm doing microbiology,
microbial phylogeny and physiology and it's mainly the field of physiology is the point of view,
which is important there. If you really look at microbiology and you look what life does,
you get two different messages. There is an enormous amount of bacteria out there that
don't need the organics, they just make them from scratch, they just need CO2 as Nick just
said for the methanogens. So just give them CO2 and of course ammonia, all the other elements,
but they don't need organic molecules, they don't need lipids, they don't need sugars,
all that stuff, they do them. But they clearly all the time need a read of this equilibrium,
this is what Nick always already mentioned and that's just a cartoon again of what Nick showed
you with the mitochondrial respiratory chain and I would disagree with Nick that we do not strip
electrons of the donor because that would mean that there is some work to get in to get the
electrons out. No, this is a reductant which is more reducing and that's downhill, that's a thermodynamic
process that wants to occur. So there's energy in there and the whole thing works like a battery.
Now of course that was true for us, this is true for the rest of the microbes and there is certainly
many other mechanism mechanisms, there is donors and acceptors all over the place, there's different
types of respiratory chains and there I'm talking about respiratory chains but that would be the
only time and it's not eating and breathing, it's not the same thing in these cases because some of
the donors are gases and some of the acceptors may be solids but what is always the same is you
have an electron donor and reductant and you have an oxidant. Okay, so to summarize it up, when you
look at microbiology what you see is bacteria, prokaryotes need redox energy, they don't need
the organic molecules. Okay, so from the point of view of physics of course the energy point is
clear, there's nothing happening without the energy and this is even the biologists will remember
the second law of thermodynamics. So I think the second law of thermodynamics clearly states that
in a closed system everything tends to increase delta S, the entropy. Now life, if you have,
if you put a bacterium into a vessel and you have it grow what is going to happen is that it creates,
it generates order from this order, it just takes all the elements and puts them together to a new
cell. So that is clearly somehow at odds with the second law of thermodynamics and of course it isn't
because it's not a closed system, it's an open system so you have the delta H that helps you out.
There is enthalpy flowing into the system and that allows the second law to be true.
Now this was already pointed out some 60 years ago by Schrodinger when he said that life necessarily
feeds on negative entropy, so that means entropy fluxes into the system. Okay, the second law of
thermodynamics so in principle tells you that life is possible if there is delta H flowing into the
system but it doesn't give you a mechanism. Now that was 120 years ago and the physicists, many of
you in the audience, do these kinds of things. They know that complexity in this universe,
the rising complexity is not restricted to biology. You have that in many, many different
occasions and so this is just an atmospheric phenomenon so you can see that there is something
structuring, organizing without any biology going on and that's, there's 60 years of non-linear
thermodynamics that was developed and culminating with the Nobel Prize to Prigogen
and in the Nobel Prize attribution there was the word dissipative structures and here it is,
so that's the dreaded word, this is the dissipative structures. Now that's a couple of dissipative
structures that physicists know, being ourselves known to you maybe if you prepare coffee in the
morning, that one is closer to what we are dealing with, you can say that's all atmospheric stuff
and fluid things. This is a chemical reaction. This chemical reaction, if you can look at it,
it generates order both in space and in time just from this equilibrium situation so that's
something that, if I show that to a biologist you'll tell me there is life going on in there.
Now the non-linear thermodynamic people worked out how to, under which conditions you can
develop complexity in a physical system and that is first of all the energy must be far from
equilibrium so this one won't work here if you're here far from the equilibrium state,
then you can get to structure formation, to dissipative structures. You need non-linear
equations and you also feedback loop help as well. Now that is quite often tedious to work out,
this is the chemical reaction for the Belousov-Sapotinsky reaction and in there you can define
certain elements which actually serve as what is called dissipative engines, so engines just
think of the steam engine that transforms thermal energy into movement, into work, so these engines
transform the energy flux into order. Now the task for the physicists is quite often to find,
to define these dissipative engines that specifically on a very small scale do the work.
Okay so, oh I got the wrong way around, okay so now let's return to biology, this is a cell and
if you ask me you have only two choices, either you say life violates a second order of thermodynamics
and then you have to come up with different interpretations, different rationalization
of them, I'm fine with that, but for me I think the more reasonable way or the way I would look at
it is that life in fact is a dissipative structure. So for the biologists this is a something that is
just there, a cell, if I look at it like that what life really is, is all the electrons flowing
through the cell, it's impermanent disequilibrium and if you're a microbiologist you will know
that once you don't put any nutrients into your vessel then the cells won't grow. So now we have
two different tasks, the first one is to find an environmental mental setting for the origin of
life where you have strong redox gradients, because the redox gradients it was we see in
excellent life. So the first choice is to be to say that life also originated from redox gradient,
that that's the, I will go through that quite quickly because we have, so Nick was talking
about the hydrothermal vents and the hydrothermal vents are very interesting because they really
look like a cell and Nick was talking about that so I can go over that. There's maybe other
locales where you can have a similar strong disequilibrium, I'm fine with that for the moment,
the hydrothermal vents seem to be the most appealing to me. Now the next step is that
just as for the chemical systems or for the atmospheric system we have to work out the
participative engines which transform energy into order. So I will, from looking at bionegetics
and what we've seen and other people have seen in in extent life, I would try to propose present
a couple of them to you and ask a couple of questions which might be relevant to astrobiology.
So what is so great about redox energy? Why doesn't life just originate from thermo gradients,
from radioactivity, whatever. So we have to discuss that and I think there's a lot of
discussion that can go on afterwards but I will propose a couple of ideas to you. The first one
is certainly that redox energy is scale independent whereas if you have temperature and you reduce
the scales then the redox that energy gradient will become smaller and smaller and smaller.
So this is not the case for redox energy, you can have the donor right next to the acceptor as a
molecule. So you can have the same amount of energy at nano scales next to each other.
The other thing is that for life to emerge you need that these gradients are stable or at least
metastable and many redox couples are metastable so they can stay next to each other for hours
or days. There is a couple of reasons for that, high activation barriers but one of them which I
wanted to talk about is cooperative multi-electron redox chemistry and this becomes important
afterwards for astrobiology maybe. That's the reason why I will go into that a little bit more
in detail. So I give it a case of a two-electron redox compound which goes through two different
redox states from the oxidized to the same reduced to fully reduced state and if you're in an aprotic
solvent then what you would expect is that the first redox transition is easier than the second
one because if you put an electron on the second electron doesn't want to go on as easily. Now this
changes completely so that the first reduction comes before and if you go the other way around
the first oxidation is at the lower midpoint potential. Now if you put this into an organic
solvent then you have protonations going on and according to PK values that are involved
in all these species you can have a very funny phenomenon. This is because the mass action
energy of the proton will change around the redox potential and you can get to the conditions where
actually your second oxidation comes at the lower potential and the first oxidation.
Now what does that? That's an old stuff for the electrochemists. So I mean this is the
electrochemists can go to sleep now and that is one of the reasons I mean Nadia was mentioning
this morning that in the way aqueous solutions chemistry is very different and more difficult.
That's one of the reasons why the electrochemists avoid aqueous solutions and they prefer to work
in aprotic solvents because everything is much faster and it's much easier to understand. So
redox cooperativity requires protons. Now redox cooperativity gives you just to show you that
rapidly. Imagine you have a second a two electron redox compound and you're in an
aprotic solvent. So as we said the first oxidation has a lower potential than the second one.
So if you have an acceptor there then this one goes downhill, hexagonic, fine, you get to the
semi-reduced state. Now you get a second substance is coming in. This is uphill and actually it won't
go. It will only go to equilibrium. It will go a little bit but not a lot. So you get an
equilibration for that. If you're in an aprotic solvent in water then as we said the first
oxidation is a higher potential than the lower one. So this is our first oxidation going on
and this first oxidation won't go. So you never get to the second state and your
equilibration is very slow actually. You could say there's no equilibration but if you have the two
present at the right time in the right place, two of the same acceptors then of course it
will work. But that makes that this is a very unlikely event and it will take much more time
to happen. So this is why these these reactions actually are metastable and in the lab you can
have a two electron donor standing next to an acceptor for hours or days which is eternity for
chemical reaction. Okay so that's one of the things is metastability. So we don't have to ask
boys for special about redox energy but the thing is redox chemistry in H2O. That is the
interesting thing. So the special thing is as I said it's the metastability. The other thing is
redox bifurcations that the Nick already mentioned and redox bifurcations is that. So go back to what
I showed you already. This is what what I showed you. So you need two acceptors at the same time
in the same place so that this works and you can do a funny thing. You can actually have two different
one electron acceptors. If you have two of them like that then of course the electric the reaction
goes but you have a different very different situation going on in terms of energy because
from this energy level you now reduce one which is exogonic and one which is endogonic. So you
you increase the entropy of this system here because you put it to a higher energy level.
Okay so this redox bifurcation for example is one of the dissipative engines that you could imagine
that were used by life and actually is used by life because as Nick said Nick mentioned this
in the in the methanogens but we have it you have you work with the redox bifurcation mitochondria
work with that and that there's many many new redox bifurcation that's hyped now. If you're in
biology and in bionegetics redox bifurcations are in and to the point where I would say even
there is redox bifurcations published which aren't. In extant life redox bifurcations are mainly
done by quinones of labins. You can we've shown recently and other people have done the same
thing that also molybdenum can do these kinds of chemical of electrochemical reactions and
tungsten probably also can do it has not been checked so far. Now this brings me to the next
point which is that if we look at how life works then we see that metals play an enormous role
and the molybdenum enzymes actually are one of the life why I would I would claim that they are
life's most versatile by catalysts and but the molybdenum enzymes are only a part of it I mean
most the vast majority of catalysis is done by metals so we shoot in astrobiology we should
not forget about the metals and actually Floris was mentioning this this morning as well and
we come back to that so what we have to do is now is and we are not yet there we have to
work out how the metals work as dissipated engines we have an idea for molybdenum but for most of
the others we don't have so far at least a clear idea now I will I can basically skip that because
that's the the proton gradient Nick was talking about that a large part in extant life of the
redox energy is actually converted into a pH gradient which serves to synthesize ATP and what
you do is you move away the the equilibrium the chemical equilibrium of ATP to by more than a
factor of 10 to a tenth so this is again a way to convert one disequilibrium which is electrochemical
in that case into a chemical disequilibrium so that's another engine and I would argue
that it was not ATP but it was pyrophosphate but that's only a detail these things have to be
worked out how that might have worked at the origin of life and that's one of the the proposals that
we have put forward in the past but that's that's not one of the the crucial things that I wanted
to talk about I mean there's other things so this is the only the only point where I will
disagree with Nick I would say well not not even disagree I would say there is other
Nick puts posits the methanol trope the acetyl-CoA pathway as the most ancient one
we have put forward a different scenario which actually is very close to the acetyl-CoA pathway
but which uses an additional electron donor which is methane so the difference I would say
minor in principle we agree on most of the things but one of the things we I'm interested in this
is that in this pathway there's a couple of redox loops and these redox loops may be interesting
to to explore a little bit of more detail whether they can work as dissipative engine if we
just simulate them if we can get the structure formation coming out of these things okay so
my point in here is that we might not necessarily have to look for all the complicated organic
molecules because if you come from the physicist's point of view and you look at life as a dissipative
structure then life does all the stuff itself what you have to look for is where is the energy
coming from the energy is redox energy for the life for the case of life on this planet
and I would argue that it's the most appropriate one for the reasons that we've been discussing it
and then we have to to find all the crucial dissipative engines from looking at extent life
and give all these informations to people who try to do reactor experiment and recreate life
from scratch or the first stages of life from scratch okay so to finish this up and to have
plenty of scope for discussions afterwards that was the thing I was just mentioning
then just the the next thing I was already talking about is the water so I would hold that
redox energy only is a good source of energy for life if you are in water because in an
aprotic solvent everything will go within milliseconds or submiliscine microseconds
if you have a minute it's markers theory uh electron transfer so if you have these things in
atomic distances then with submicroseconds you have a calibration going on that is uh one of the
reasons that uh I wanted to to make you think about all these I mean I hear a lot about about
that the titan is great because it's full of organics so if you there is no redox no interesting
redox chemistry happening in uh in liquid methane because everything as I said everything goes to
equilibrium we we need something which is out of equilibrium which stays out of equilibrium
and now there's one point some of you in the community have understood that we need or have
taken the message that we might need the redox disequilibrium and they put forward oxygen as
as a very very good um oxidant in uh extra terrestrial environments like on mars because
there is oxygen on mars now I would there's one problem and we know that biologists know that
oxygen is an extremely good redox collapse oxidant gives you a lot of redox energy
I have to finish okay so I'm finished actually but it is a mediator so it will do away with all
disequilibria in a very very rapid way this is why you get cancer this is why you age and all
these kinds of things okay and we shouldn't forget about the metals and so the metal should be
taken into account I would say for knowing which kind of uh galactic regions are possibly
locales for life coming up so that's uh thanks to uh especially to Mike Russel and our brand
brands come who worked out most of the theoretical parts of these things that's my group in Marseille
and we have many many uh very stimulating discussions with Nick Lane and Bill Martin even
if we don't agree on everything but we agree on most of the things I would say thank you
you
you
