He was established a long time, his long career career back then as a five.
I worked on a whole bunch of physical principles related to the origins of life for the cells after biology.
It was a pleasure having you today, PhD.
Thank you. Yeah, it's certainly also, it's always wonderful to be back here and nice to see the number of known faces and some new ones too.
Some of you know that I've been a bit obsessed with trying to create life in the lab for many years.
When I was younger, I thought I'd be long done by now, but it's not so easy.
So what I'll present here today is our latest work on computational work, theoretical work,
on the missing link to actually implement a living system in the lab.
I want to emphasize my collaborators here, and we have Christopher Thompson and Marco Toccio.
They are two recent graduate students I've had, and you guys suppose know Artemis, he's been here for a long time at SFI.
Hansiak is an old friend from Los Alamos and Didle, Bornebush is also one of my previous graduate students.
So, I'll focus on the question of how to get information into a self-replicating molecular machine.
This has been an issue we haven't been able to solve experimentally yet, so if I can figure out, I think it doesn't work this year.
I can also use this one here.
So, I think that most of us would agree that if we want to have a transition from non-living to living matter,
then it has to be characterized by the origin of some functional information that can tell how to build this living matter.
So, the goal is to demonstrate how particular molecular reaction networks, they can generate and store this kind of information.
I guess it looks smart, but it isn't.
So, my answer is to start with a metabolism.
I think this is really the key and I'll try to argue for that, even though there's still some discussion in the community about what came first, the chicken on the egg here.
It's clear that energy is needed and information is needed. There has to be some kind of containment also, but I really think that one should focus on the energetics in the beginning.
So, imagine we have an energy gradient, some free energy available.
We can then use this free energy to turn resources into building blocks and the key is to have a catalyst that can be in more than one state.
So, there can be a selection of catalysts if these building blocks, they will actually also be one or more of them will be catalysts.
So, we are in a situation where we provide energy from the environment.
So, we start with resources and then we end up with building blocks.
Of course, the desired situation is that we lift our building blocks up so we get more complex building blocks that are energetically higher up.
But it's also okay if we can just make new materials by this process.
And of course, this is not clear why this is true, at least some people say it is not clear.
So, therefore, I've tried to state two questions here.
Why focus on a metabolism is metabolism really primary to information since our topic is mainly information and how is a good metabolic catalyst selected and up concentrated if you have a system like this here.
Free energy available, you use this energy to turn resources into building blocks where one of the building blocks is actually a catalyst that can catalyze its own formation.
So, we have an order catalysis.
And for some of you, this is, you already know that, but I want to emphasize that if we look at a molecular system that has different states.
Let's see that it has w different states.
Then we know from Boltzmann that it can encode information to the amount of the equation of PIS, which is information is equal to Boltzmann's constant and the natural logarithm of the possible states.
And there is information represented many places in living systems.
It's the most well known sequential equation DNA, RNA proteins and so forth.
But I want to emphasize that information can also be present as conformational information where an aggregate can be composed of different components and then the how many components and in high in how high concentrations will also represent information.
This is the one Lancet that has introduced that and and sequential information like we have in DNA and RNA and proteins, etc.
That's a particular kind of compositional information.
Compositional information is more general.
So if we take Boltzmann's equation and the fundamental first law or sorry, second law where we have that information or entropy here is equal to the energy divided by T.
And then we insert these things.
This is the fundamental equation from thermodynamics into Boltzmann's equation.
We get an equation we see here where we can we can we can eliminate or we can isolate E and then we get in a system where there are two states, we get an energy that is this big.
And this was Landau that I think was first in pointing out that if you want to delete or create or store a bit of information, there has to be it costs you something.
And the cost is about if you put in the sort of the room temperature and the value for the Boltzmann constant, you get a small amount of energy.
And I think this is a physics argument for why one has to look at free energy before one can think about information.
And this is of course in line with all of our experiences.
Whenever we have to write something, we have to use energy computers, use energy transmission of information on tables and satellites and what all of this is something we already know very well.
Oh, biological systems. They also require energy to to the replication machinery is energetically it needs energy.
Can I ask you a question? Yeah, absolutely.
So it's interesting that you're using Landau's principle as this, you know, the argument for why we need a metabolism.
I mean, I agree with all this, but I just as far as I know every real metabolism is many orders of magnitude above that in the amount of heat it releases per bit.
And so is that an indication that actually some other mechanism is making the metabolism necessary than Landau's principle?
No, no, this is just this is just to state. I mean, you guys, most of you are it's sort of, you know, preaching to the to the choir.
But for many people in the community that are interested in these things, it's not obvious and it'll be contested.
But I know I think I know that I mean, you need to you need to use about two electron volts to split water.
So so you need much more energy to do to run chemical reactions.
And and how exactly how the relationship is between how much energy you have to to process to run a chemical process compared to how much information there is.
I'll not get into that here. I'll sort of try to put these two things together at the end. Yeah.
The ribosome, which is running all these strings is about four times off the land our bound.
So it's really and then that machine is about half of cellular metabolism and bacteria.
So that's where one of these costs actually does get scaled all the way up to sort of cellular scale.
It's only about four times that it's four times that.
Oh, I thought it was hundreds or thousands of times.
No, no, no, no, it's not. No, but it but it is.
I mean, we have I don't think anybody has actually reached this limit.
Has that been done? I don't think so.
Anyways, so let's believe that we need to have free energy before we can have information.
And so then if that's true, then we can go to the next question.
How is a metabolic catalyst selected and up concentrated?
Because now we we agree that we actually need free energy to generate this catalyst.
And I will I'll claim that a catalyst is a sufficient condition for having a catalyst
is that you have an energy transducer and a combinatorial cofactor in chemistry.
You have you have catalyst that speed up chemical processes.
And and if you have an energy transducer, that's that's a molecular machine that can turn
one kind of energy into another kind of energy.
We're going to focus on how we can turn light energy into chemical energy.
And this can be modulated with a so called cofactor, and I'll get into that later.
So we so that's number one.
We actually require or assume that this catalyst is composed of an energy transducer
and a combinatorial cofactor that can modulate it.
And a cofactor can be does need to but it can be an
an electron donor or an electron receptor, depending on how the system is made up.
So that depending on how how well it donates electrons to to this energy
transduction machinery, the process will run faster or slower.
And if we also want this catalytic cofactor to be replicated,
then the question is, how is that possible?
I mean, how what kind of systems can both satisfy the first one that we have?
The catalyst being in a energy transducer and a combinatorial cofactor,
and it can also be replicated.
And now, as we go on, I have to emphasize that I'm not trying to solve the origins of life.
I mean, the historical origins of life here on earth.
We're just trying to create life in the lab from from non living materials.
So how do we think about this?
I mean, we we've tried a number of different things.
And this is sort of the workhorse that we are currently
believing in where we have a, you can see over here, we have we have a
vesicle, fatty acid vesicle.
And on on this exterior of this vesicle, we have anchored an energy transducer.
This is a ruthenium complex with a with a tail, a hydrophobic tail.
And then we have a DNA duplex, which is a cofactor.
So so here we have, we have a sort of a blow up up here.
We have the energy transducer and and it's composed of both this molecular system that
can capture life and and and then a energy transducer that can deliver an electron.
And we have a little blue indication up here because it turns out that depending on what
kind of basis we have in a DNA or an RNA or a PNA strand,
we will have a good or a bad cofactor.
So so we have the we have this as a ruthenium complex.
And up here we have an oxagonene because oxagonene is a very good or reasonably good
electron donor.
So how how so how can this work?
I mean, what what does it do?
And and also how is how is this cofactor actually able to replicate?
Because we know that replication without enzymes is is very, very difficult.
Can I ask a question?
Absolutely.
Yeah, I'm curious why you chose DNA instead of RNA since
work on auto catalysis has been RNA.
Yeah, that's more likely to auto-catalyze than DNA.
Well, it's simply because we DNA is much easier to work with.
It's much cheaper.
And and and if you look at charge transfer, which we will focus on here,
it's it's more difficult to do charge transfer in RNA than it is in DNA.
DNA literally thousands of papers out on charge transfer of DNA and all kinds of different.
So so we and the reason why we're using ruthenium is also because
it's the most studied energy transfer in photocatalysis there is.
So so that's why the chemists they've chosen.
They have chosen that.
So just to indicate what we mean by this protocell and to be interesting,
it has to go through a life cycle.
So remember before this was a protocell that's composed of in principle three different components.
The membrane, I mean the vesicle, this energy transducer and the cofactor.
Then we feed the system with an oily substance that will then go into the membrane.
This is the pigolinium ester and we can then by
illuminating the system, turn the pigolinium ester into fatty acid.
And then that means that we get more membrane and as the membrane expands,
then the protocell gets gets bigger.
Eventually, if you run the process long enough, then it will get unstable and it will divide
and not in a controlled way, but you'll get budding events.
So as we do that or as this metabolic process runs, we also provide a small oligomers,
which are pieces of DNA and they will then template if we make sure that this DNA has
some certain properties, which we'll get into a little later.
It has to have deletions and imperfections, so it doesn't glue too strongly together,
so it's not hybridized too strongly.
Then we can actually get a replication of these cofactors.
And then over time, you'll eventually end up with two or more.
Sometimes it doesn't divide, but on average, you actually do get more of these aggregates.
So I promise to talk a little bit about how we can actually modulate a metabolism with a DNA.
Yeah, we've done an experimental and theoretical work on this for many years.
This was our first life cycle of a protocell.
It was Mauer's PhD thesis, where she demonstrated it, where we actually have...
Yeah, anyways, I don't want to get into details, but we can actually show that these vesicles
they can grow and divide.
And by keep feeding this ecolinium ester, we can actually get the system to generate more and more
of these vesicles.
But here we don't have a replicating DNA strand.
We only have oxo-guanine as an electron donor.
There isn't any inheritance, so we have to provide new oxo-guanine all the time.
So, how does it actually work if we want to have this process to act or have this co-factor to act as a
as a modulator?
And so here is the surface of the membrane, the fatty acids are the green ones and the blue ones.
These are these oily ecolinium esters.
And as you illuminate the ruthenium complex, which actually intercalates
self-assembles into the DNA, then what happens is that you will steal this...
Once it gets activated, it will steal an electron from a guanine that is sitting in the vicinity
because once it gets activated, then an electron jumps from the ruthenium
metal out to one of these bipyridine antennas here and then it'll steal an electron from the
strand. So now there is a hole, there's a missing electron and it will diffuse up and down the
strand until it eventually will be absorbed by the oxo-guanine.
And as we have an energy-rich electron here, it's been banged out there by the light,
then this electron can actually be used to to deprotect a peculinium ester and turn it into a
fatty acid. We need to have a sacrificial proton donor
and then this process will go and then we don't like to have a damage the oxo-guanine,
so we need to have the same proton donor here. But at the end of the day, we actually convert
this oily substance into membrane so the system grows. And this is modulated by the strand here
because if we can't get rid of the hole, then this ruthenium complex is,
it's not usable for the next time. It needs to have this electron back.
So what we've done here is looked at this process and tried to calculate
how well the strands they conduct these holes depending on the sequence.
And unfortunately, if you go to the literature, I mean we don't have the measurements for that.
It's not all transition states that's actually published. We don't know what the rate constants
are from all these different combinations. This is what we were able to find and we had to
guesstimate some of them ourselves. And these are either direct measurements or they are
of an issue, calculations, I mean where you have quantum calculations of this system.
So we have the rates from, for instance, going from an A to an A or from a G to an A, etc.
And you can then, if you want to simulate such a system, you can set up a matrix like this
and you will then have these rate constants. They will determine how likely it is for you to go
from one state to the other. And mostly you see off diagonal you have diffusion and then every
once in a while there are actually what we call super exchange where if you have a GC pair and
then you have a GC pair, a little, I mean a couple of three sites, four sites further down,
you can actually have the whole two to tunnel, quantum tunnel for one from one to the next.
So what we've done, we've, first we looked at all these rates and when we realized we couldn't
just, we couldn't make all the rates on the one hand, all the sequences in the world.
On the one hand that was good because we didn't have simulation time to
simulate strands. I think we go, now I know, we go up to about 18 strands of 18,
of length 18, that's what's been, we've also done experiments and other has done experiments with.
And if you take what we know here and then do the, actually do the counting,
you can only construct or you can at most construct 160 strands. So what we've done,
we have constructed these 160 strands and then we've done the simulations. We've then found these
medium first passage time for the whole to get up to the, to the,
to the octagonine and then, and also we actually also calculated the mean.
There's a little bit of difference about this one.
How did you experiment today? What's it?
You said that you found mean first, medium first passage time. How did you find it?
No, this was, this was, this is calculations. These are calculations. All of these transition,
this transition constants, they are found either experimentally or they are found with
first or I mean with, with the quantum mechanical calculations or a couple of them we had to
guesstimate because we couldn't find them in the literature.
But they probably are known, I don't know, at best to like 10%. But for instance here you've
cite, you know, times like this 10 digits, not 10, but five digits. So is it just for fun?
What is for fun?
For instance, this tau you've, you cite, you know, something with like
four significant digits or five significant digits. And these numbers, you know, rates you
probably know, these are, I don't know, 5%, 10%, 50%.
Oh yeah, oh yeah, I know. Don't worry about that. Yeah. No, no, no, we don't know.
Yeah, no, no, no, yeah. So, so, so that's just what, that's what the computer cranked out.
No, no, don't worry about all the, all the digits. We are, we just know what the order of
magnitude is and that's it. We cannot count on more.
Any other questions? Yeah.
Do you understand, right? The idea here is to understand the timing it takes to saturate
the electrons being trapped in the 8 oxo. Yeah.
And then, but yeah, but then what limits you're assuming 18 base pairs of length?
This could grow, I assume. No, no, no, no, no, you have, you have, think about, think about,
don't think about any changes. Just think about a DNA, a duplex that has a certain length.
You can then place the oxo guanine at different locations and you can, you can then also have
different ATs or DCs. But then I'm thinking in your system, you need the DNA to self-replicate.
Yeah. Okay. That comes later.
So it's going to come longer than 18 base pairs?
No, we don't, we don't allow it to get longer because we, we, we feed it with, with, with the
pieces so we can make sure that it doesn't get any longer. But that's, that's sort of the,
that's, that's actually the next step here. You're too fast. So, so just to, to show here
what we got out of that. So this is the histogram of all the, of all the simulations.
This is where we have the slow ones is when we have the oxo guanine above the ligation side.
And, and this is the fast ones. When we have the oxo guanine below the ligation side, that means
it's close to the, to the ruthenium complex, which makes sense. And then there's a bunch in the middle
where it's more complicated what's happening. So, so that's the result of our, our simulations.
Now, obviously, there's much more going on than just charged, charged transport in the DNA.
If you look at this, this is a, I think we've gotten pretty much all of the reactions in here.
For metabolism, this is the ruthenium complex in ground state. It's activated by light,
and then it can either jump back again, or you can actually deliver this energized electron
to, to the, to the DNA. And you can then have the charge run up to the, to the oxo guanine.
You then destroy or you modify the, the, what's it called the oxo guanine. It actually loses a
hydrogen atom, and you then have to repair it. And then you go around in this, in this cycle here.
And then downstream as you,
as you go down to the ground state here with, with the ruthenium,
then you can use this energy to convert picolinium ester into a, into, into a lipid,
into a fatty acid, the, the canoic acid. And, and I don't want to get into all the details,
but we've studied that both experimentally and, and computationally, theoretically, and I,
so, so we know this system fairly well, although all of the constants, reaction constants are not
known. We, we, they're not verified experimentally, but you can, when you simulate the system,
you can have some bounce on them. In any event, if you look at how, look at the, what determines
the time for recharging the ruthenium complex, this circular reaction is determined by the
charge transfer reaction constant. So, if you want to, to ensure that the charge transfer is,
is not too slow, then we can figure out, I mean, there is, we have this, this rate that, that is
the, the excitation, and then we have the, a number of things that's going on up here,
but the time it takes is one over the rate, plus the time it takes going around here,
and then we have a rate, sort of a composed rate for the whole thing, and if we say that we only
allow the charge transfer to slow the system with 50% or with 10% or 1%, we can, we can actually
get a bound on, on this rate, and we say that we only allow it to reduce the recharge with 1%,
and that means that we have a rate constant in this charge transport to be, that it has to be
larger than 5 per, sorry, 50 per second, and we'll require that for the, for as we go forwards.
Any questions? Yeah, I mean, this, this is, this is, this is complicated.
So now we go to what you asked with, with the replication, how, how does that work? And, and the
main, sort of break that, that, that the community got was with Julian Gibbs, or that she and her
groups, they, they figured out a way to, to actually replicate DNA without enzymes by doing a,
a, a ligation reaction, and, and making sure that we don't have product inhibition. And, and
the community has sort of been, has been struggling. I mean, I had to pay several
PhD students, we weren't able to solve it. And, and I mean, many, many, many people have tried to
do DNA or RNA amplification with, without luck. And, and it turns out that if you make,
if you make mismatches, or bulges, or air bases, add that to the DNA strand, you can actually get
exponential amplification by, by, by, by having, having these errors in, in the DNA. And, and the,
and she calls it the lesion induced DNA amplification. And, and if you just look at it here, then
we have some mismatches, or some a basis, that means it could be where there's no,
actually, there's no base at all, it's just a backbone. And if you have, have this destabilized
enough, then there is enough breathing in this short system, so that when you feed it with,
with these resource strands here, and provide an extra ruthenium complex, you will actually be able
to get a replication. So that's how the replication happens. And this has been demonstrated in the,
in the lab many, many times, many groups. Nobody so far has done it while the DNA has been anchored.
So that's something that has to be done. Yeah, you start with mismatched. That's how this works.
But do you end up with a product that's mismatched? Yes.
Interest. Because else you can't, you can, you can dehybridize.
Interest. So else you, and that's that, then you'll get a product inhibition. So this is the
main, the main, the main, that's the main, I mean, this is the, the ingenious thing that, that
Julie gives she did. That's weird. Anyway, so at the end of the day, we have a cofactor replication.
So now we can write down the reaction diagram. You can see that here.
And then you end up with 15 couple ordinary differential equations. I've written the first
two ones, there are 13 more. And what's interesting here is, if you look at the, all the reactions,
almost all of them are of this form where you have two, two reactions that turns into a third one,
or you have, and all of it is reversible, except the ligation part where you actually glue these
at the backbone together. And then we know from the relationship between Gibbs free energy
and the equilibrium constant here. This is something we learned in college chemistry.
If you then know one of these, either the forward or the backwards rate, then you can actually,
and you know the free energy associated with the hybridization, then you can find the off rate.
And it turns out the on rate is much faster than the off rate. I mean, much, much faster. And it
doesn't depend much about, it doesn't depend that much on the sequence details. So if we,
for the sake of simplicity, assume that it's constant, then we can find the off rate by,
by, sorry, if we know this one, and if we know the delta G, and delta G is, we've taken from
St. Lucie and Higgs, they made this monumental work where they actually figured out how to
calculate this free energy. We can also use, there's a lot of online tools, like a new pack
that gives you, gives you the free energy, and actually turns out that depending on what you're
using, you always get differences. It's still, there's still a little bit of, of what's it called
odd, and I don't think they've really nailed it down. But anyways, that's how we can, we can figure
out what the rate constants are by, when we have the sequence, then we can calculate the off rates.
So the results here are given to the left, so we get replication rates, and they're sort of all
over the place in, in this range here. Again, this is the logarithm we are using. And, and what we
have to compare here is, when we do these experiments, to do the ligation, we need to have
one of the ends energized with imidazole, and that actually decays in water, it falls apart in
water. So if you, you can't wait forever, because the system will simply die. And the rate is,
I think the place where they found the highest rate was about 10 to the minus 5, 10 to the minus
5 per second. So it's a relatively slow rate. And we just, we decide that we want to have a
replication rate that it's at least one order of magnitude faster. So we say that the replication
rate has to be higher than 10 to the minus 4. And that's here. So we, these guys are okay,
so there's a few of them that will be, they'll be disqualified. Now to make simple, to make things
simple, we've actually assumed that this happened in bulk and not on a surface at an interface.
Now we did do interface calculation, then you have to adjust some of the rates. And it turns out
that it's at least an order of magnitude, the collision rate is at least an order of magnitude
faster if you do it on the surface. But since there are many other reactions involved, it's not
that big of a difference. And this is assuming there's no crowding if you have too many molecules.
I actually don't know what happens if there's crowding. But we've also, that's a whole other
story we've made. We actually made a model. It's a sipping graph model where we can,
where we can take into account how, when they collide on the surface, how they actually also
in bulk, how depending on, on this, on what sequence details you have, then sometimes you'll
sliding and mismatches. It takes a while for it to find the, the final situation so you can
actually do the ligation. But that's a different story. But I think that it is true. I believe
that it is faster on the surface than it is in bulk. So now we've done a study of charge transfer
or charge transport on the DNA. We found out how fast or how slow we will allow the system to be.
And we've also done replication studies, figured out, you know, of these 160 strands that we,
we have started, which ones are fast enough, etc. So now the question is, of course, how,
what does that mean for the, for a protocell? How do we combine these findings? And that's the,
the, the, the last question, namely, try to figure out, I mean, how can the combined charge
transport and replication process support a protocell life cycle? So the first thing,
the easiest thing to do is to look at, simply map these two, our findings out on two different
in a coordinate system, where we have the, the, sorry, the charge transfer rate on the,
the logarithm to the charge transfer rate on the x-axis. And this is the logarithm of the,
of the replication rate constant on the y-axis. And then we, we had these, as we had these
requirements that we need to have the, the, this, this charge transfer to be faster than,
than, than 50 per second. And the replication rate has to be faster than 10 to the minus
five, 10 to the minus four per second. So, so we are good with replication in the blue area.
And we are good with, with charge transfer in the reddish or light, right red area. And this
area out here is then the sweet area. This is where both things are, are, are satisfied.
One thing I didn't discuss earlier is that for, to, to have a good coupling between,
I mean, for, for, for, for selection and replication, we, we, it's, you, you want to have your DNA to
replicate and not just be the resource pieces that can actually run the metabolism. So if you,
think about it, if you have a, an oxo guanine right next to the, right next to the surface of the
vesicle in one of the pieces, one of the resource pieces you give the system, then you don't need
to have any replication to actually run the metabolism because the, the, the oxo guanine
can communicate directly with the ruthenium complex. You want to have the oxo guanine higher up,
so you need to have, have a charge transfer in, in, in the duplex, in, in this
pipe stacking that you have inside the DNA, what these, what this charge transfer can happen.
So, so all the, the, the round one, the circles, they have, they have the,
they have the oxo guanine above the ligation site, I mean, higher up on the DNA away from,
from, from the surface and all the triangles, they have it very close to the surface. So,
so in a way, we, we, these are the fastest ones, but we, we don't like them because it doesn't
connect the two things very well. But anyways, it's, it was kind of surprising to us that
63 out of these 160 test strands, they actually satisfies these conditions. So that's, that
means that we, if we just make strands, we should, we, we, it should be possible for us to, to actually
make it work. So the next I'm going to tell you is, is I'm not sure how much, how relevant it is for,
for the experiments, but I couldn't help doing it. And because you have, you have the,
the, these two mechanisms, you have the replication and you have the charge transfer. And is there
a sort of a mathematical way to connect these two? And it turns out that we, a long time ago,
while I was still here, still living here in, in Santa Fe, we actually did a study, it was a
grad, no, it's actually a grad, undergraduate, his name is Tristan, he did this here, where we looked
at a system where we have a single stranded DNA or template, and we have an, we have oligomers,
you can then make duplexes, because they, they, they hybridize, they are ligated,
and then they can separate against, you have two single stranded DNA. And then you have precursor
lipids, I mean, oily substance, that together with the duplex here, is able to, to, to make lipids.
So that's a, these are sort of the, a much, much more simplified system, where we have
separate, we earlier, you know, previous work here earlier today, we looked at this separately
and this separately. Here, we can solve these two things together. And, and it's not so simple,
because we have to look at the, you have to distinguish between the global concentration
and the concentration of substances in these small protocells or on the surfaces. So you have the
local concentration of the template, and then what is the volume of, of the, of the protocell
container or the, the surface, and this is the number of, of protocells you have in the system,
that gives you the global, the global concentration of, of your, of your templates to give an example.
So it takes a little bit of, of manipulation, but you can get, get, get these equations out,
one for the, for the production of, of templates, and one for the production of the aggregates.
And in this, you have a replication rate and you have this metabolic rate,
which I mean, the metabolic rate is, includes this charge transfer. And it turns out that these
two equations, if you, if you divide this one with this one, you get a Bernoulli equation that
can actually be solved analytically. And you can then, if you do that, you can then get a
doubling time expressed with all these things here. And that means that you, you actually,
if you look at it here, you have a, a doubling time, then you have to switch it around to the
reciprocal expression. So you get, you get this k t squared and you have the, the k, sorry,
where is it? And k l, that's in, in the, that's in the first order. And then this will be to one
third. So, so this, if you want to, to, to make a, a combined
fitness function or whatever you want to call it, a gross rate function, then it will,
the best guess that we could come up with is using what we know from, from this system,
which is very similar, although a simplification. We will then have to multiply these two guys
with different, with broken, with broken exponents. So if we do that, and then we order our,
our sequences again, where we, we rank them from the worst to the best, we get a,
yeah, well, it's, yeah, some kind of theoretical fitness
coefficient for, for, for the system here. And you can see that it has, it has the same
shape as you can see here, here, there's sort of, there, there are several, there are these three
plateaus or three different regimes. If we just go back here, that's, yeah.
So, since I'm, I can't follow some of the chemical details. Is, is the, is this your design
process for coming up with these sequences? Or is this a fitness landscape that you're hoping
these protocells cells mutate and, and improve on?
So, so, so this is more, this particular thing I was, I was debating whether I wanted to,
you know, include it or not, because this is just for, for, I think this is more an intellectual
exercise, because we, we believe that this is the shape of a fitness function. But since we,
we've just taken these two constants, there was many more constants, or there are many more
parameters involved in the other system. But I think that that will be sort of the functional form.
But you cannot make any quantitative assessments from, from this to the, to the real system.
But, but ultimately, is this, is this sort of consideration what you're using to design the
best sequence? Or, or are you hoping that the protocells will mutate and that the
sequence of the highest metabolic rate will take the population?
So, so, so here from, we already know which is, which is a good charge transfer. I mean,
you want to be up here, because then you're both good at charge, charge transfer and you're good
at replication. So, so you want to experimentally want to, you want to pick some of these sequences
here. And then, once you've picked the sequence, I mean, just, there'll be a big party if we get
it to work. I mean, if the system can just replicate and not die, then we can feed the system
with the pieces of sequences that are better. We, our calculations predict are better. And if that's
indeed true, then we'll see a takeover of this, of the new cofactor. And then there'll be another
party. So, does that make sense?
But so, the, the, the evolution isn't taking place through mutation exactly?
No, no, no, they didn't.
You, you're feeding it like different oligomers.
Yeah. So, so it can pick from different oligomers and the, I mean, these oligomers, they'll form,
they'll form these duplexes that are then cofactors and the ones with a good cofactor will
outcompete the other one. Yeah.
On the same topic, you've designed the oligomers so that they have the imperfections.
Yes, you need to do that. Else we can't, else we can't.
Unless you, so you play God, you have to feed them with imperfections.
Yes.
Because otherwise you don't get that one.
That's right. That's right. Yeah. No, no, we, we have to, I mean, in.
These are new imperfections because you break the molecule at the first imperfection, right?
And then it's going to anneal again at the same imperfection.
So you have to, you have to create a new imperfection in what you're feeding with or.
No, we, we just, we just make sure that there are mismatches or there's a basis in the right places.
Some mismatches.
What's that?
That there's some mismatches.
Yeah, there has to be.
And they can't, well, depending on where you put the mismatches, it works well.
It doesn't work very well.
So, so there is a number of details that, that I don't think, well, I can say one thing for sure
that right at the ligation side, that's where you have, need to have a bulge or an air base.
Because without doing that, you, you won't, you, you will not prevent what's it called
product inhibition.
But, but where you put the other mismatches depends on the rest of this, of the sequence.
For instance, if you have lots of ATs, they're weak compared to GCs.
So then if you have, if you have sort of a GC heavy sequence, you need to have more mismatches
than if you have an AT heavy sequence.
And the ultimate goal here is that, so that you ensure growth of the lipid and the DNA and
the little energy molecule at the first order rate kind of over time.
You just, you, you ensure that that's the goal.
Yeah, the goal is to just have the, have all the pieces to play together.
No, nobody has done that so far.
I mean, that would be, that'll be fantastic.
And then I think that if we can make that play in the lab, then I think to actually
see an, see an evolutionary takeover will not be so hard.
I mean, the difficult thing is to see whether this can actually work.
Just want to show one more fun thing here.
So, yeah, I think this is theoretically interesting.
I don't think it helped us much to in the lab.
But here's another thing that this was Artemis.
He pointed out that it's actually interesting to, to look at the functional information.
It's not easy to calculate the functional information in, in real molecular systems.
But in this system, it is easy because we, we can, we can, this is a Hayeson,
Hayeson's paper we used or his idea.
I guess it's from a show stack originally.
But anyways, we can, we can calculate the probability that we have a strand.
If you pick a strand at random from these, what is it, 160 strands?
Yeah, you know it's 160 strand.
So what is the chance that it satisfies this condition divided by the total number of
strands that gives you the probability that you pick a strand that's good enough
for a charge transfer?
You can do the same for replication and you can ask for both of them to be fulfilled.
And then you have the probability for that.
And then we can calculate the computation, the compositional functional information by
taking the, the logarithm minus the logarithm and then simply calculate these
and then we'll get these results out.
And if you look at it here,
we have calculated the, oh yeah, so this is a functional information from for the charge
transfer process where we have again ranked them.
So we've set the bad ones first and they get better and better and better and better.
And they will then level out up here at about 2.32 bits.
Because we have 32 strands that have identical charge transfer rates.
So that's why it stops there.
It's a little bit different over here for the replication.
But if you do the calculation, you get just 1.34 bits of information is necessary to ensure
growth of cell sustaining.
So it's not very much information, but again, there were 63 strands out of these 160
that satisfied our, our goals.
So I'm sorry, experimental with these plots.
They will stay cases.
You got this how from experimental.
No, no, no, this is, this is from by taking, by ranking,
by, by simply calculating the, this is the functional information here.
By, by calculating the functional information,
then you will have, as you go through the strands, then as you get better and better strands,
there'll be fewer, you have to be more and more lucky to pick the right strands.
And if then rank order them, you get a staircase like that.
Does that make sense?
What do you, what do you say?
Yes, you're going back to Chris's question.
If you did this as a full population,
explicit evolutionary situation, you'd say the strands that survived only gained 1.34
bits over the strands that didn't survive.
I mean, sort of like the information dealt.
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
But there will be, but there will be, even though you just make it over the threshold,
then there'll be some that are better than just doing the threshold.
So, so you can then calculate what that is.
I mean, this is the threshold for, for these 50 per second for the, for the charge transfer.
And, and this is the one for the replication over here.
So, are you, maybe we can talk about it afterwards, how we, how we do this.
But it is, it's, it's really not, it's very simple.
You just, you just take the, you just rank order.
How much information there is as you improve, as you improve the strands.
And, and so this is the best ones.
They are the ones that are fastest here.
Okay, so, so hypothetically, what we want is to set up a chemostat,
what we put in resources, and then we have a certain outflow rate.
And so this is the inflow rate.
This is the outflow rate.
And we have to know the hydrolysis of all these processes, or all the, the products,
or the, the, I'm sorry, the, the input.
And, and these are then the fitness rank cofactors.
And, and this is where we've used, we can think about it from,
from what we calculated earlier.
And these are the resources.
These are the different types of oligomers in the system,
as well as, as a picolinium ester.
And we have to have this proton donor, et cetera, et cetera.
And we then get, I mean, you are probably familiar with these,
with these chemostat equations.
And you then get, if you look at the biomass, we then get a transition for life,
where these, where this is fulfilled.
And, and I think what's interesting is that it's extremely important.
It's not just the, the, the, the, what's it called, the growth factors,
or the fitness function.
You, you have to look at the degradation rates.
And then, as you can see, the rest of it is actually environmental
parameters, which are really important.
And then to end up here, we have a, so that's, I guess, our perspective on,
on what, what's going on, where we have a, if this is again, lined up,
where we take the strands, the cofactor with higher and higher fitness.
So, so once you are below this self-maintaining threshold,
you will be flushed out by the chemostat.
But if once you're above it, then you'll actually have a biomass
existing in terms of, of protocells.
And if you just pick these strands at random and provide them,
then it'll probably be a, you know, a discontinuous,
there'll be discontinuous jobs.
If you, if you put them in sort of one after the other,
where the one is a little bit better, then it'll be approached,
or it'll be approximated with a, with a continuous curve.
So, you know, I know that the literature people talk about,
whether you can view the transition to life as a first or second order
phase transition in, in biomass.
And I think you can, you can, you can do both here.
And also the, the same will be true.
This is our, it's just a symbolic representation of the functional information here.
And yeah, this is where once, once you actually have a cofactor
that's able to support this protocell life cycle,
then you have the possibility of starting to,
to select information or store and select information.
Once the cofactor doesn't provide you
fast enough metabolism and fast enough replication,
then the system will just be flushed out.
So, so what did we get out of this study?
I mean, I, I was, you know, you go in there and you don't know what,
well, I didn't know anything about charge transfer.
My, my graduate student denied us.
So we had to, we had to take a crash course and that and,
and many people are real specialists.
And they all said, oh, we have to do quantum calculations,
up initial calculation.
But if we did that, you know, we'd have to occupy one of the big machines for,
for weeks, for, for making a calculation of a single duplex.
And we wanted to have an ensemble to figure out, you know,
what, what, what the differences were.
So that was why we, we did this, this differential equation approach instead.
But the most important thing is that we can't really reject
that this will work.
I mean, along the way, when we've tried to implement this living system in the lab,
from time to time, we've, it's either been impossible experimentally or we've
figured out that we hadn't thought about it enough.
And theoretically, we, we made a boo boo.
But here it seems like 30 or 63 of them are actually okay.
And then there are some assumptions that I think is important.
We have assumed that we have super exchange across the Bolcher, across this ligation site.
We couldn't figure out whether this is indeed true or not.
We couldn't find any literature on it.
We did assume that it is possible.
If it is not possible, then we need to use, we need to put our oxygony just below the
ligation site so that you need to still have a hybridization.
You need to have a duplex for, for having the charge transfer to, to actually work.
And another important approximation is that we don't have any interactions between the
charge transport and the replication dynamics or the environment.
So we are sort of using a super, a simple superposition of the two.
And of course, a more comprehensive simulation that's much more complicated would take all
these things into consideration, but we didn't dare to venture into that.
So, so I think these are the two most important sort of simplifications.
And, and then of course, the main issue here is to hopefully convince a sponsor that we can
test this in the lab.
Thank you.
Questions?
Else I'll be around until May 8th that we can talk if you have questions.
