Which is the story of man, for the thoughts, the aspirations, the affections of long generations
of humanity are woven into the fabric of human speech.
That's the way it begins, the story of language all over the world, sounds of human speech
like the very air we breathe, or something most of us take just for granted.
What if you hide your paper?
Now David, you read right up the stairs and watch, and don't forget to brush your teeth.
You'd hardly think of our everyday speech as being a specimen for scientists to take
apart piece by piece, to study, to analyze.
But this is a science, a science of linguistics.
There are perhaps many ways to tell this story, we've chosen to tell it through the
imagination of the young lady who lives in this house.
Now as you will see, she's head over heels in linguistic problems of her own, and she
might call it...
She's head over heels in linguistic problems of her own, and she might call it...
I can't use a preposition then to sentence with.
Why shouldn't part of simple fangirl?
Why does it have to be so many different words?
Words, words, words!
I can't use a preposition then to sentence with.
I can't use a preposition then to sentence with.
How'd you do?
I'm the mad hatter.
My name is Judy.
And you're in trouble, we're trouble, but we are going to help you.
Judy, this is Jabberwocky.
How do you do?
She's brilliant.
How, Mimsy?
How do you do?
Why does she talk that way?
Because he's the Jabberwock and talks to Jabberwocky.
What are you two doing out of the Alice in Wonderland book?
We're going to free all the people enslaved by words.
We are going to do away with the alphabet.
Take apart the sword and turn it to rub out the words.
Words are awfully confusing.
Sometimes there's no rhyme or reason to them at all.
Good.
You may join our conspiracy.
Here, take a note.
Judy will lead the letters into track.
Go on.
Go on.
Why do you take care of the capital, Alice?
You may take care of the little models.
Hello, Judy.
Who's he?
He's a professor of linguistics.
Linguistic?
Well, Judy, what are you doing?
We're going to do away with the alphabet.
Then I can murder the language.
Which one?
There are at least 5,000 different languages in the world.
There are a few other dictionaries.
Where would you like to start?
What's he do?
Speak all kinds of languages?
He does just speak them.
He's a scientist of language.
A science of language?
Oh, yes.
He speaks the insides of language.
Sounds and words and alphabets.
Alphabets.
Is he for them or against them?
Well, there's some things to be said in favor of alphabets.
Name one.
The alphabet is the basis of writing for one.
Then let's get the man who invented the alphabet.
Yes, I'd like to meet him.
I'm afraid that would be a bit difficult
because people have been writing for 5,000 or 6,000 years.
Well, that's centuries.
Maybe it is.
The people have been talking for a long time.
If this ruler represents the time man has been talking,
he's been writing only this long.
But even today, in many areas of the earth,
large numbers of people, millions of them,
still get along without writing.
Don't forget long.
Why should they buy good news?
Well, they can't learn to write most of them
because they have no alphabet.
But as civilization began to spread over the earth,
people realized spoken language alone has its limitations.
They were learning so much they couldn't remember at all.
You might say, Judy, that's why writing was invented.
And that must be why we have whole library's full books
because people want to write down for other people
what they've gotten, what they did.
Pity.
People were talking to each other long
before there was anything like civilization.
Scientists don't know exactly how it all got started.
But once on the move,
speech grew like a great tree with branches joining its limbs,
branches growing out of other branches,
branches running up into twigs.
Each a spoken language that was the source of still other languages
and each changing as it went along and developed
until 5,000 or more known languages spread through the ages.
Even now, languages are continually changing.
New ones springing from ovens,
sometimes several from a single source.
Latin was very important, wasn't it?
Oh, yes, it certainly was.
What we call the romance languages
are branched off from the great trunk of Latin.
There's Italian, Sardinian,
Spanish and Portuguese,
Dalmatian and Romanian,
Catalan and French Provençal,
Rito Romance.
And if you listen, you'll hear a certain similarity.
Padre?
Yeah.
Papa.
Papa.
Papa.
Well, do you talk something right?
Well, Julie, would you be interested to know
that at a certain time of their lives,
babies all over the world speak the same language?
Oh, just a moment.
I know better than that.
What about Chinese babies and Indian babies,
German babies, French babies and American babies?
Well, now just listen to the language
that all those babies speak.
Now, here's a typical baby.
Is it just from that young talk?
All babies in the world have the same,
well, baby language to start with.
The same babbling, if you like.
But this babbling includes the sounds needed
to make any language.
I didn't think baby talk really meant anything.
Oh, baby babbling is very important.
When a baby first comes into the world,
the speech areas of his brain are like a clean slate
ready to be written upon from the very moment of birth.
With every sound a baby makes he is producing,
you might almost say practicing the basic sounds of speech.
Then he learns to talk just by practicing.
Not entirely.
Through the first year, the child listens to his parents
and copies as closely as he can what he hears,
winning their approval when he makes the right sounds.
Then the sounds begin to take shape.
And by the age of six, the speech pattern is complete.
It's Daddy!
Hello, Daddy.
Babies all start with the same sounds
and then they just keep the ones that fit their language.
I think I'll make a note of that.
You might also make a note that we have a conspiracy to get out with.
Shall we go?
Oh, yes, that conspiracy to do away with the alphabet.
May I ask a question?
What is it?
Why do you want to get rid of the alphabet?
It's language without a really.
And the letters of the alphabet are the building blocks of language.
That's a beautiful statement.
Thank you, Judy.
Very well put, but hardly scientific.
Professional jealousy.
If I wanted to do away with language,
what I would go after would be sounds,
because sounds are the basis of any language.
Sounds. Make a note of that.
I suppose the next thing you're going to say is there's a science of sound.
Well, as a matter of fact, there is.
For a long time, scientists have been curious
about how our human sounds are actually made.
In the course of such a study,
Professor Wolfgang von Kempelen invented the world's first talking machine.
Make a note again from Kempelen.
That was in the 18th century, around 1780.
Cross him off with too late.
Here's a drawing of von Kempelen's machine
when the professor completed it.
I wouldn't even know how to begin to build a talking machine.
What are you doing, Judy?
I'm trying to imagine how the professor could get it all out.
Before a talking machine could be built,
the professor had to do a scientific study
of just how the human speech mechanism works.
Lungs.
Vocal cords.
Mouth.
Palate.
Nasal cavities.
For speech, you need...
Air.
The chest muscles, acting as a bellows,
operate to fill our internal bagpipe,
the lungs, with air.
Next, you need...
Ah, noise.
Read to my bagpipe. That will do.
Now we build the machine.
While our friend is busy,
let's look at some recent motion pictures
of the human vocal cords in action.
These films were made by the Gould Foundation
voice research laboratory at Northwestern University.
You see, human noise is produced by the vocal cords,
and taste in the larynx are Adam's apple.
Air from the lungs is released through a space between the cords,
causing them to flap apart and slap together.
These vibrations set up sound waves.
Now by slowing down the action with high-speed photography,
we can see that the pitch of sound is varied
by tightening or relaxing the pull on the vocal cords.
Tightening them raises the pitch.
Relaxing them lowers it.
Effective as they are,
the vocal cords are only the source of noise.
It's the rest of the speech mechanism
that shapes the sound into meaningful words.
Now what the professor had to understand
to make his machine work
is precisely how the tongue, teeth, lips, and so forth operate.
Vowels.
And now, consonants.
The breath explodes.
It buzzes.
It hums.
The machine is finished.
And now, demonstration.
Why, the machine spoke French.
Did you have my friend?
Fun Campbell's machine was quite remarkable for 1780,
for it was the world's first successful talking machine.
Scientists today have the benefit of techniques
undreamed of in von Kempelten's time.
In these x-ray films of the human speech mechanism in action,
you can see the tongue and lips assuming various positions
to form cavities that modify the sound by resonance.
Who will give a needle, a mouse, a cat, and a bird to my father?
The sound of the different vowels depends on the height
to which the tongue is raised in the mouth.
High, mid, or low.
It also depends on the position of the tongue in the front
or back of the mouth.
Consonants are shaped by tongue, lips, teeth.
Who will give a needle, a mouse, a cat, and a bird to my father?
This has been very educational, Jabba.
We don't have to bother with the alphabet.
All we've got to do is get rid of those vowels and consonants
and our job is done.
I hate to disappoint you, fellas,
but what really come out of the human speech mechanism
are phonemes.
P-H-O-N-E-M-E-S phonemes.
The basic sounds of speech.
Don't even make a note of that, Judy.
He's just trying to throw us off the track.
Come on, Jabba, we've got plans to make.
It is confusing.
I guess I better ask you.
What is a phoneme?
Phoneme is a sound.
Like A, B, C?
No, they're letters of the alphabet.
They're units of writing.
No alphabet for any language truly represents the sounds of that language.
Let me borrow your pad.
Sit down, I'll show you.
Now, let's take this word.
Either?
Now, this word has five phonemes.
If I say it slowly,
d-e-v-r,
you can hear the five parts.
But some people say either.
Can you say either, either, or either?
Either, either, or either.
As your friend the Hatter has already said,
the alphabet can be very confusing.
Different pronunciations are sometimes spelled in the same way.
That's why scientists had to develop more accurate symbols.
Now, in phonemes, either is written this way,
d-e-v-r,
and either is written like this,
a-e-v-r.
The difference is the first little phoneme.
Now, scientists such as Ferdinand de Saussure in France
discovered that out of the thousands of speech sounds a human being can make,
each language has picked its own set of phonemes.
English, for instance, has 45.
You know those little phonemes sounds must really be the building blocks of language.
I better make a note of that for the Hatter.
But for myself, I better just get to the alphabet.
We have a proposal.
If we can prove that it's possible to communicate without words,
to say nothing of phonemes,
will you give up your linguistic obsession and join our conspiracy?
Science is always open to experimental evidence.
Good.
One, two.
Buckle my shoe.
Three, four.
Shut the door.
Point, I understood him perfectly.
If we can win over science, the alphabet is good as dead.
Well, Dr. Linguistic, do you concede that we have made a point?
Yes, indeed. As a matter of fact, I think we can substantiate your point further.
I think you'll find this very interesting, Ferdinand.
Science.
This is one of the Canary Islands, La Gomera, off the west coast of North Africa,
a land of rugged terrain.
In the sparsely populated areas, people found it difficult to communicate with one another
across the deep gorges.
So go, the Gomeras contrived an extraordinary form of telephonic speech, whistling,
which can be understood over a distance of three differences in pitch.
This whistling language is of great interest to linguistic scientists
because it makes use of only one feature of normal speech, pitch.
It does with all the variations of tone quality that Professor von Kemplen was so concerned about.
Now, whereas this canary...
Another ingenious form of language was invented in the North American plains.
Indian Sign Language.
When tribes met on the trail, hunted buffalo together, or met in council,
it wasn't time enough to learn one another's spoken language, so they used Sign Washington.
The white soldiers told the Indians beside the river called the Lodgepole River.
Before the snow, there'd be no more fighting,
and that made all the Indians very happy.
Excuse me, Francherette.
I was just wondering how the Indians managed to talk with their hands in the dark.
Well, they couldn't, Judy.
As you can see all of these methods,
giving man limitless possibilities for expressing his ideas,
his concepts of science and technology,
his day-by-day thoughts, his feelings, his emotions, love.
Don't be taken by those scientific sophistries.
Do animals have alphabets?
Do they have words?
An animal can, without any words at all, quote,
communicate from the moment of birth,
and they've gotten along without any words at all, haven't they?
Oh, yes, indeed.
That's the would-you-fellows' piece of lies.
Now, look.
There's a crow.
When man invades the forest, he's the first to shout, beat it.
Then all the other birds, animals pass on the alarm.
Not only birds and animals get along without words,
but insects as well.
The most incredible of all is the dance of the honeybee.
When a worker bee finds a flower full of nectar, it flops.
This urgent message is communicated by performing a dance.
The pattern of the dance indicates the direction of the flowers in relation to the sun.
The speed of the dance tells the distance from the hive.
The other bees all take notice.
They touch the dancer where they discover the scent of the flowers.
Then they all fly out to the source of the nectar.
Animals and insects have many ingenious ways of communicating.
Sound smells with motion.
We find in all this communication that the animal mind operates almost automatically.
It receives messages from the outside through its sense organs and reacts instinctively.
Music
Hello. Hello.
Why, Jabber, that's very good. You're improving.
Hello.
Oh, it was the Parrots.
Beware the Jabub talking bird.
But Parrots just imitate what people say.
Yes, that's because they are not able to associate a given sound or word with a specific meaning.
It's curious, though, that they sound like people.
Some animals such as apes do have a larynx and the rest of our vocal apparatus.
The speech mechanism with a chimpanzee is the closest to that of a human being.
Will you please?
Research psychologist Dr. Keith Hayes and his wife raised a chimp named Vicki.
After constant training, Vicki had learned to speak only three human words by the time she was three years old.
Like human babies, she babbled at first.
Later, she was rewarded when she made the right sound.
Mrs. Hayes would shape Vicki's lips to help her pronounce the word mama.
The age of two and a half, she could say papa and cup.
Now, she has learned to use all three of her words appropriately in solicitation.
Now, who am I?
Papa?
Papa?
You say what she was rewarded when she made the right sound.
Mrs. Hayes would shape Vicki's lips to help her pronounce the word mama.
The age of two and a half, she could say papa and cup.
Now, she has learned to use all three of her words appropriately in solicitation.
Now, who am I?
Papa?
Papa?
You say what this is?
By the age of six, Vicki's spoken vocabulary consisted of seven words,
whereas human children are using hundreds of words by the time they're only two years old.
Chimpanzees, orangutans, and other mammals may have larynxes in the rest of the speech mechanism,
but it takes more than that.
It takes brain power.
Well, for the present, we must conclude that man is the only one of Earth's creatures with true language.
Because the animals can't manage to combine their cries, calls, their signals,
form the infinite variety of meaning that we achieve when we arrange words and sounds into sentences.
So, Judy, shouldn't surprise you that some people have argued that what distinguishes man from beast is grammar?
I knew it. I knew it.
I suspected it from the moment we started building up this so-called science of linguistics
and all these pretentious words are just a cover up from grammar.
So, Judy, the sooner we get on with our conspiracy, the sooner we get rid of grammar.
It would be a lovely world without subjects and predicates and split infinitives and the conjugation of verbs.
But, Judy, grammar isn't just a bunch of rules.
I know. It's the building blocks of language.
No, it's more like the architect's plan for the building.
Well, if you'll pardon me, Professor, I've got some plans for that plan.
Then grammar is the plan of how we talk.
It sounds important, but rather hard to understand.
Judy, it's simply this. The way words are arranged into sentences is as important a meaning as the separate words themselves.
Judy, did you know that your brain was unconsciously using grammar long before you started the school?
You mean my husband full of subjects and predicates and didn't even know it.
Yes, of course. Have you ever tried to make your mind completely blank?
You can. If your mind goes on talking to itself and in language, that's what we call thinking.
For language puts not only words into our mouths, but into our heads, too.
Well, that's another trouble with words. Maybe the hatter is right.
Oh, but Judy, before you go, let me say that words themselves aren't to blame.
They were developed through the ages to express the vital experiences of people everywhere.
In a sense, people live in different worlds, worlds reflected in their languages.
We could understand these many languages. We might hear the people say,
We Eskimo must live with snow. It shapes our lives. We have a dozen special words to tell about snow.
It's far too important to be dismissed with one word.
To us, living in the Trobriam Islands, our very existence depend on raising our crops.
We have more than 100 names for yams.
Arabic gives us more than 6,000 different words for camel, its parts and equipment.
When language expresses our various ways of life, it is indeed our servant.
Some scholars have wondered if language is not at times our master.
People use words. Do words use people?
In most of the Oriental world, our various social classes speak one to the other in traditional ways.
Does our language then determine our behavior, dictating for each person the way in which he acts
towards his equals, his inferiors, his superiors?
Our Hopi language has no grammatical way to express past, present or future.
So far as our language is concerned, one might conclude that the world is without time altogether.
Scientists, too, are pondering such questions. Does our language shape our whole philosophy of life?
Is it true that some ideas that are clear in one language may be very difficult to say,
may be even difficult to think in another language?
Even so-called primitive peoples have developed languages that admirably express their cultures,
their ways of life, but scientists have discovered that there are no primitive languages on the face of the Earth.
These languages used with ease by the crudest savages are just as complex as other tongues.
In fact, it sometimes requires the lifetime study of our greatest scholars to figure them out.
Anthropologists like France Boas, who pioneered in American Indian languages,
sought to discover in each language its own system.
Following Boas, Leonard Bloomfield began collecting materials on American Indian languages.
By this and other work, he set the stage for modern descriptive linguistics.
Others, such as Edward Sapir, an expert on many Indian tongues,
studied languages as related to cultures and total ways of life.
All the languages now being spoken only a few have been studied scientifically.
And today, linguistic scientists all over the world are concentrating upon small-speech communities that are rapidly dying out
to prevent their languages from being forever lost to the study of man.
As we understand each new language, we learn more about the way human beings communicate with one another.
Oh, look! There's an envelope. I think there's a letter inside.
It's an invitation. Matt Hatter says we're invited to a mad tea party.
He's going to prove that language is madness. And the guest of honor is to be Dr. Linguistics.
A fish, whiffle, gyre, and gimbal. It'll be right over.
Thank goodness. Tea and linguistics. What a curious combination.
The mad tea party is about to commence.
Who's coming?
Well, I've invited a cowboy from the southwest to theatrical publicity, ma'am, and some other guests.
How do you do, Shorty?
Scammy, ma'am.
Judy, this is Shorty Rogers, famous jazz trumpeter and composer.
Hey there, Judy.
How do you do?
Crazy.
Shorty, you're going to meet a very distinguished professor of linguistics.
Is this cap tool square or way out?
Well, I'm not sure that I follow you, but this should prove a very amusing encounter.
They won't understand each other at all.
Shorty, it is my great pleasure to introduce to you the very distinguished Doctor Linguistics.
Doctor, this is Shorty Rogers.
I'm very happy to make your acquaintance, Doctor.
Scammy, ma'am.
Ma'am, you're really weathered. What's the bet here?
Well, a hat here's been trying to bug me on this ABC jazz.
Crazy made the scene, ma'am. Crazy.
Hey, you're a real live aspirin.
Well, I have to split now.
So long.
Keep cool.
They seem to understand each other, but I couldn't.
Mimsy too.
Me either.
Well, waitly meets my next guest.
Oh, Doctor L, I'd like you to meet a theatrical publicity man.
How do you do?
Hi.
Looks as if you already have a story.
Yep. Here's my lead.
Tongue's wag is wag's gag.
But hot hat cools as Doc clicks on rhetoric tricks.
Well, that's just about ball points the hat's check.
Like a fat bat.
Well, I gotta run now, Doc. This bash is a bop.
Some sock yawks packed in that flax cracks.
Cracks? Cracks? Banger snatch to me.
You're right. They do understand each other.
Perhaps this next guest will confuse him.
Enjoying yourself?
Well, now, I don't want to sound like I raised on sour milk,
but I just can't drink enough of this yalla gargoyle to get a token load.
You see, these dunes give me bulk fever.
I get my spurs all tangled and I'm just playing old hog tide
when it comes to making Chen music with a pack of strangers.
Well, Dr. Linguist... Well, Dr. Linguist...
Well, it was all quite simple.
He said he wasn't mouthy.
He's fresh out of the tongue oil.
His wing ding shortens his stake rope.
Makes him feel like he's got his leg tied up.
Say, partner, you sat at my lingo.
You'll do to ride the river with.
Well, I gotta roll my wheels.
Hold on, Doc.
So long, amigo.
Him and me's made of the same leather.
Well, so much for linguistics.
Now, do let us have some tea.
Judy, after that variety of verbal vocalizing,
surely you would agree that language is a mixed up mix.
But Dr. Linguist didn't seem to think the tea party was so mad.
No, actually, I thought it was quite sensible.
Sensible? With everyone speaking a different language?
Different dialect, if you please.
Now, these dialects and occupational vocabularies
don't make any language interesting, colorful.
They're part of our humor.
But they're also the subject of scholarly research.
Well, Dr. Linguist, I'm afraid that you and I
are not made of the same leather.
Well, thanks for the tea and linguistics.
It was very pleasant.
Judy?
Would you care to join me in a little research project
in American dialect, geography?
The way a man talks tells us where he comes from.
Like in Brooklyn. Some people call a bird a blight.
Yes, it's not only what people say,
it's the way they say it that gives us clues
where they were brought up.
Clues? That sounds like a mystery.
It is, rather.
You could look at it as a kind of detective story.
First, we'll need a suspect.
And a private eye.
Let's make it two.
Now, for the last time, are you going to tell us where you're from?
Oh, you won't, eh?
Well, we have ways of finding out.
Read this.
Mary?
Mary? Mary.
Aha!
West of the Alegans, they pronounce the words alike.
He pronounces them all differently.
Yeah, that's right.
Clue number one puts him east of the Alegans.
All right now, read this.
Uh, uh, Glee?
Oh, sorry.
Gleecy.
Hear that? He said greasy, not greasy.
That puts you north of Philadelphia.
Ha! Read this.
Park.
He said park, not park.
Yeah, yeah, I heard it.
That eliminates coastal New England.
Read.
Wash, water.
Hear that? Not wash and water,
but wash and water.
The rest of New England is out.
Must be sent from Atlantic states and where.
Father.
Father? That senses him.
I'll put him within a 30 mile radius of time square.
Right? Yeah.
33 down to 30.
What a amusing parlor game, Dr. Linguistic.
Something like 20 questions.
Well, a dialect geographer using a list of only 30 words
can usually place a person within 20 miles of his home locality
so long as he lives in the eastern part of the United States.
Dialect geographers began charting their monumental linguistic atlas
in the east in 1929
and have been painstakingly working their way to the west.
Dr. Hans Kurath of the University of Michigan
has conducted a good part of this research.
He and his dialect experts are traveling around the country
for the past 25 years asking people what words they use
for all sorts of things.
They've recorded dialect differences in words
and how they're pronounced.
Perhaps Dr. Kurath will show us how the atlas is put together.
Well, you see, the atlas contains hundreds of words
The atlas contains hundreds of maps showing speech differences
and their geographical boundaries, which we call isoglosses.
May I show you a few examples?
This isogloss sets off the area in which riddle cakes are called fritter.
This here around Philadelphia shows the area where they call them hotcakes.
Over here they're called flammer cakes.
To the south of it, batter cakes.
It is on the basis of isoglosses like these
that we establish the dialect ban.
Thank you, Dr. Kurath.
Man takes his speech ways with him wherever he goes.
As the dialects flowed westward the way our population did
the strands unraveled and began to overlap.
Here's how they traveled.
Western New England accents.
Coast speech.
Southern Mountain accents.
Plantation speech.
Texas accents.
But down East talk and the state of Maine has stayed put.
This research has revealed the paths people have taken
when they migrated from one part of the country to another.
Showing the changes going on in American speech patterns.
This research has unearthed hitherto unrecorded dialects.
It has also marked off areas where big cities have influenced
the speech ways of neighboring localities.
This atlas is a most impressive achievement
in one branch of the science of linguistics.
Dr. L.
It may be linguistics.
It may be impressive.
It may even be an achievement in one branch.
But don't try to convince me that it's a science.
A science is test tubes, telescopes, microscopes,
and chromium-plated machines.
Well, actually, linguistics has its own share of hardware.
Hardware?
Yes, that's what scientists call their machines.
Before you can build a piece of hardware,
you have to know exactly what you want it to do.
That calls for research, imagination.
Would you please?
The kind of imagination that led to Bell's telephone.
To Edison's phonograph.
To Marconi's wireless.
And to the first all-talking picture.
Didn't movies always talk?
No, Judy.
When I was your age, films were silent.
How do movies talk?
Well, only along the side of my head.
Only along the side of our film is the soundtrack.
I wonder whatever it looks like.
Well, we might ask the soundtrack to move in a bit.
Is that what makes the picture talk?
It's just a routine matter of technology.
Routine matter of technology, indeed.
You surely wouldn't make light of the magic of physics.
Converting sound into electrical impulses.
These electronic machines are nothing short of miraculous.
You'll see.
Example.
The sound spectrograph turns speech into pictures.
First, the scientist speaks into the machine.
Never kill a snake with your bare hands.
It is impressive.
But what is it doing?
The machine separates all sounds into two things.
Pitch and loudness.
The phrase, never kill a snake with your bare hands,
comes out looking like this.
Is it a new kind of alphabet?
Looks more like a fuzzy kind of shorthand.
These patterns of light show pitch and loudness
in each instant of sound.
That gave the scientist an idea.
Why not just create speech artificially
by painting these patterns on clear plastic with a brush?
And when they feed this hand-painted speech
into the playback machine,
here's how it sounds.
Never kill a snake with your bare hands.
It talks by hand.
Yes, the sound spectrograph allows linguistic scientists
to make very rapid studies of speech sounds.
And among other things,
some deaf people have been taught to see speech.
For example, they learn to recognize this pattern as five.
They hear with their eyes.
And precisely, they see pictures of speech.
Oh, we've got machines that talk to man
and even machines that can listen.
Audrey, that's a machine that listens to spoken numbers
like a telephone operator and obeys orders.
Four. Four.
Yes, Audrey, the automatic digit recognizer,
can identify numbers spoken into a telephone.
And how about the voice typewriter?
It takes dictation and types words as they are spoken.
See?
You read it.
It's like a secretary who never makes a mistake.
No, they're easily confused by different voices
and different accents.
Voice typewriters are still pretty crude.
What about machines that talk to each other?
Yes, electronic computing machines can transmit data to each other
over ordinary telephone circuits.
Those machines will soon learn that it's a lot easier
to get into this talking business than it is to get out of it.
Out of it? Then you'll snatch.
I never dreamed machines could be so smart.
I have a tea party conversation with machines.
Well, I'm afraid you find the conversation rather dull.
You see, Judy, machines have no minds of their own.
I thought they had electronic brains.
It's the brain of man that tells them what to do.
I give up you and your scientific attitude.
Magic is just matter of fact to you.
Every miracle has to have its qualifications, reservations, footnotes.
Goodbye.
I hope the soundtrack didn't go away mad.
Soundtracks an impetuous fellow.
He was in such a hurry he neglected to even mention an automatic translator.
You see, Judy, for a long time now,
scientists have been working toward the realization of machines
that will translate one language into another.
Here's a machine that's helping them.
It's called a Johnny Act.
Machine translation will need a dictionary and a grammar book,
a plan of the language designed for the machines to use.
There's still a lot to be done, though.
One of the linguistic scientists working on the problem is Professor Kenneth Harper.
His students from the University of California at Los Angeles are also helping.
Wouldn't it be wonderful if we had a machine that could translate languages
so that everybody could understand everybody else?
Yes, Judy, it would, unfortunately.
Translating words from one language to another is not the same as understanding that language.
But if we knew what the words meant...
Well, word for word translation can never quite communicate to us
the thinking, the overtones that convey true meaning in any language.
A linguistic scientist, by finding new ways of teaching other languages
and making them easier to learn, are helping us to break down old barriers.
Judy, differences in language have been one of the greatest barriers
to a meeting of minds among men.
One expression of the desire for greater understanding is the United Nations.
As Tertullian of Carthage in 200 A.D. wrote,
Man is the one name belonging to every nation on Earth.
There is one soul and many tongues, one spirit and many sounds.
Every country has its own speech.
But the subjects of speech are common to all.
Yes, the subjects of speech.
Day-to-day talk, the chatter of small talk,
the exchange of pleasantries, news, gossip,
conversation among friends,
and with strangers who speak different languages
but find ways of understanding each other.
Language and speech, the basis for communication,
tools for learning, for broadening horizons of the mind,
for developing new ideas, for exchanging knowledge,
exploring new frontiers of science,
gift of speech, a universal quality that links each man to the world of men.
Language, the pattern of speech, may one day be the instrument
that will bring compatibility and understanding to human beings everywhere.
Soon I shall be immortalized as the man who freed people from words.
But you're already immortal, huh?
Even if your alphabet conspiracy succeeds and you destroy the books,
you mad hatter and you too, Jabberwock,
will always live on in the minds of men.
It's because they were created out of words.
Yet you're both very alive to me.
Well, I'm very alive to myself.
And so are you, Jabber.
I'm beginning to feel it.
Immortality.
Come on, Jabber.
I believe Alice is expecting us.
Could you possibly hear me?
I'm sorry, I can hear you.
Come on.
Woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi, woi
But I can't hear you.
Hello there, Judy.
Having trouble with your homework?
You see, there's so much I don't understand,
and I'd like to understand.
Perhaps I can help.
Just as men of science explore the atom, the gene,
the universe, so also do they study the living
breath of human speech, expressing the needs,
affections, joys, hopes, tragedy.
They act the very spirit of men's deepest nature.
The Bell system is grateful to the many distinguished scientists who help to prepare this story of language.
Our thanks to the special advisors who supplied and checked the scientific material for this program.
Our thanks also to the advisory board, which reviews the scientific aspects of these programs.
Its members represent the broad range of men's science, including biology and genetics, medicine,
bacteriology and botany, chemistry, geophysics, physics, anthropology, electronics and acoustics, mathematics, engineering.
To all these men and to many institutions, the Bell system is embedded for the support they have given this venture in education through entertainment.
