Have you ever been perusing Netflix and looking at all the comedy specials that you don't want to watch?
Until you inevitably try one out and realize how much of a waste of time it is because,
oh my god, this comedy special is made for someone 50 years older than me.
But then, in the 80s, he put the earring in his right ear,
where,
ELLEN SHOT GAY!
That's not always a bad thing.
Sometimes it's just not your taste.
Sometimes the content's just not made for you.
Sometimes you're just not the target demographic,
which is what I tell my parents when they watch my videos,
and they don't understand 90% of the references in them.
So I've already established that everyone's comedy taste is different,
and I know the title of this video, you might be like,
oh goodness, she's a snowflake comedy police coming after my favorite guy.
And you know what?
Yeah, kinda.
I'm just kidding.
I understand that comedy is comedy, and we can make comedy out of serious situations.
I really do.
I really don't think every single thing has to be inherently problematic,
and everything's a problem,
and oh, cancel culture.
But I do know things age poorly,
and sometimes people also age poorly, and so do their jokes.
There are a few comedy specials lately that have been buzzing everyone's cringe radar.
They've been off the charts.
The cringe meter has been breaking lately.
I need to call the mechanic and get that fixed.
The cringe meter was sounding the alarm,
and like a fly-to-dog shit,
I was there to stick my grubby little hands on it and get in there,
and see what it's all about.
So I have three comedy specials I want to show you today,
and by show you, I mean cringe with you.
So the first one I want to show you today is this beautiful man,
Jim Brewer.
Brewer?
I went to their stadium once.
You thought I was gonna say hardly, no, or hardly ever is that a good joke,
unless Curtis Conner says it.
That's it.
So I'm gonna be honest, I know nothing about this dude,
but oh boy, are the first six minutes of this comedy special.
Everything I need to see,
and the only thing I want to see from this dude.
So we get this really lukewarm intro,
and I really wish they, like,
the editors took the time to actually put the song in the special,
instead of just the recording of the sound going through a shitty microphone,
at going in whatever theater they're in.
So it's a little awkward, but it's fine.
This is how I was imagining it to go.
Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome your Ooloo Senpai, Jim Brewer.
So yeah, after the classic rock you'd play while you're out fishing with your buds,
he opens up with, ooo, COVID humor.
Oh, this was published four days ago, July 2022.
So yeah, this is already not going to age well,
and about, like, yesterday.
And just from this intro,
you can tell that this is a guy that goes to, like, the neighbor's birthday party
in, like, a suburban neighborhood and thinks he's fucking hilarious.
Oh, you can't say anything anymore.
We're risking our lives to be here.
At this part, I was about to damn near jump out of my chair and crawl under the bed,
because that took me by surprise.
The gain on that was just, like, plus 10 over what he had before.
So at this point, about 80% of this two minutes has just been him reenacting something.
You'll see that this is a common theme.
Actually, so much so that somebody made a compilation video of this special,
but just the unintelligible bits, and there's a lot of it.
This is, like, 90% of his comedy is just over-the-top imitations of a person that doesn't exist in the world.
You hear that?
That's all of your grandpas and problematic uncles at every family gathering cheering for this guy.
The vaccinators, you were real cocky a couple months ago.
We got vaccinated.
Got my second shot, April 19th.
I can't get sick from the corona.
I'm vaccinated.
No one ever said that.
No one ever said that.
See this bucket of virus?
I'm vaccinated.
I'll even lick metal.
I'm not afraid of anything.
See, I told you it's just him unintelligibly reenacting something or someone that maybe one person has said
I would bet you one person thought that, but it's not true.
Not to be, uh, anti-comedy Andy here,
but no one ever said you couldn't get sick when you got vaccinated or, um, I'm sorry.
The schmackschismation is just something that would prevent you from dying or going to the hospital in serious condition is all.
That's it.
That no one said it was going to make you superman or iron man just battling the virus.
Like, see, let me take a, let me take a page out of Jim Brewer hardly know where his book here and can give you a taste of my own taste,
my own flavor, my own adaptation of Jim Brewer's comedy.
No one's going out here in a fucking iron man suit after getting the schmackschismation going.
Can't touch me now, virus.
That's me in my Batmobile.
Just dodging all the viruses.
Are you laughing?
Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, uh, that's comedy here.
I don't have to wear a mask.
That's exactly what I did.
As soon as I got my second vaccination, I went, I don't have to wear my mask.
I know this is a joke.
Okay.
I, I obviously know he's not being completely serious, but this is rooted in some truth.
Like, he actually kind of thinks this, you know, he at least says it to his buddies behind the scenes.
Uh, people vaccinated are getting sick.
What?
You need a new booster.
What?
Who wants a shot?
Who wants to see a ball game?
Wave your flipper.
That's for you.
Go see the ball game.
Who wants, who wants to work again?
Who wants to see a ball game?
That's for you.
Who wants your kids educated?
I have no idea where this comparison even came from.
I had watched this before and I didn't get it.
And I thought upon rewatching it, I would understand how like, I don't even know who he's imitate.
Is he, are we seals?
Are we seals for, for getting the schmackschismation?
Is that what it is?
Are we just play seals?
Is the point that we just like go along with whatever the authorities are saying?
Is that, is that that I don't understand?
What's in the shot?
It's safe.
Don't worry.
Don't worry.
The ingredients are on the website.
Trust me.
I, I looked up so many, so many different sources for what's in it.
You know, it's new.
It's brand new.
It was coming out really fast.
It was a stressful time.
A lot of friends that I had were nervous about getting the shot,
even though they're, they're for it.
I just, I'm so confused.
So yeah, I've, I looked up extensively what was in it and I can confirm that it is safe.
I didn't die.
I'm here.
I'm good.
I'm confused what the purpose of this is in the, in the good big year of 2022.
You know, like we've, we've gone through this.
Like, I don't feel like getting into this.
I, I mean, when I take all the steps back, I feel like
this is going to be a Broadway play in three years.
You know what I mean?
Like what?
Six foot safe.
So too distant.
Six foot safe.
This bit goes on for way too long.
And I hope by now you can understand why I couldn't stomach to watch any more
of this entire hour long special.
Because I bet you it's, it's more of this.
It's a lot more of this where he's just reenacting something.
That's the whole comedy.
Can we switch it up a little bit?
Five foot danger.
Six foot safe.
Five foot danger.
Like the bit is dead at this point.
And he just keeps going, keeps killing it.
You know, they say if you can't, if you can't beat them, join them.
So let's do that.
If you're six foot safe, I'm five foot danger.
I'm coming to breathe on you.
I'm the grand ma killer.
Six foot safe.
Yeah.
Six foot safe.
It's not even a good show too.
And like I can't even build off of that.
Six foot safe.
How am I gonna know if it's okay?
How do I know if I can see Aunt Linda today?
Well, I don't know.
I don't know who's gonna show me.
Who's gonna show me how.
And we have to cover our face in the name of grace.
Just to feel disconnected.
Aunt Linda, when am I gonna see you?
Hopefully in a year or two, I can see you and Uncle Jim too.
Curtains close and that's the end of the first musical number.
Scene two opens.
Crazy Uncle Jim Brewer sitting at the family dining table.
No mask alone.
One chair apart.
The family sitting at the rest of the table.
Disappointed.
Listen to the rules.
Here come the governors.
We have no laws and regulations.
We shall determine who is essential.
So at first I thought he was trying to do this like really horrible Chinese accent.
And then I realized it's actually a horrible German accent and he's equating the American
government to a point in history.
Okay, where things got a little crazy.
Okay, I know jokes are supposed to be exaggerations, but it's just like not even funny.
Because the whole bit is just him pacing around making a silly face.
It's like he watched one Dane Cook special in 2008 and was like this.
This is the pinnacle of comedy.
Don't get me wrong, I that's actually that's the whole problem.
I used to like Dane Cook's comedy and you know what else?
I was also like 10.
So that about says everything you need to know.
It's comedy from 12 years ago and it should stay there.
It was good for its time.
You could leave it just leave it in 2008.
We shall determine who may go at your house and who shall have a muffin.
And remember if you see any children playing
ooms outside together report them and their parents.
This is for your safety.
See the bit just goes on for too long.
I also am interested to know what the age range of this theater happens to be.
If we got a glimpse of the audience and what I wonder, I just wonder.
That's all I'm just wondering.
Okay, that's it.
That's it.
Stop, stop.
I have I have I've had enough of this bit.
Okay, so you've seen all that right?
That was the first like that was only six and a half minutes.
It felt like 30.
And if there was that much like reenactment in just those six minutes of him like
exaggerating and overreacting, check this out.
This is Jim Brewer standup comedy, but only the unintelligible parts.
I recommend you watch this for yourself.
I'll link this video in the description below.
I'll only show you a little bit.
So that's just 30 seconds of it.
This compilation is eight minutes long.
And I know for a fact that there's more of it.
I know for a fact this person didn't even get all of the clips.
So that's about all I could handle for this portion of the video.
The next comedian I want to cover here is Brendan Schaub.
And I know other people have talked about him
and he's actually the most recurring guest on the Joe Rogan podcast,
albeit I think they're more of the older episodes that he was on.
And he also used to be a MMA question mark fighter.
Yeah, he does MMA.
He does Brazilian Jiu Jitsu.
He also has like three different podcasts.
The Fighter and the Kid podcast, the Below the Belt with Brendan Schaub podcast,
and co-host of the King and Sting podcast with another comedian Theo Vaughn,
the mullet guy you've probably seen clips of him.
So considering that Joe Rogan also went from the UFC to comedy to podcasting,
I'm here looking for guys to suck my dick and there's nothing.
It seems Brendan Schaub wanted to follow in his daddy's footsteps and do the same thing.
And you know, from what I understand here, not everyone can be good at everything.
Okay, I'm not sitting here expecting these people to be like the best comedians on the planet.
Sometimes you're going to make something and it's going to flop and it's going to kind of suck.
Okay, that's just the nature of things.
We all have our flop era whether we like it or not.
That's just human nature.
It's nothing to be ashamed of.
Unfortunately, Brendan Schaub's flop era also includes bad racist comedy,
but we'll get to that in a second.
So Brendan Schaub's special is 25 minutes long,
posted on the Thick Boy channel with three C's.
Granted, he's almost 40, but it's fine.
The special is called the Gringo Poppy.
So you see the branding here is already a little Mexican and no, he's not Mexican.
His wife is.
And you can see by the dislike ratio that this was not received very well.
So this is already starting off better than Jim Brewer's where they actually
overlaid the song that was playing correctly over the special before he gets on stage.
So Ronnie points there.
I also believe this is an original song made specifically for this and it goes hard as fuck.
Boy squad.
Thick boy nation.
You can catch that cover on my second channel.
So we have this really sad kind of middle school play set here of a city skyline made
with like poster paper from Michaels.
You know, it's fine.
It's fine.
You got to make do with what you have.
Okay.
What's up Dallas?
Look at you guys.
I'm not used to this.
Dallas a little different.
There are some ladies in the crowd tonight.
I am not used to that.
They don't have women where you're from.
It's also pretty funny that this is Texas because you have this guy on the left here
with a don't tread on me sweater.
I demo 18 to 36 bros.
That's that's what I specialize in.
Sure.
I won't argue with that demographic.
Are we vaccinated up in here, Dallas?
Everybody vaccinated?
I don't know why these people keep bringing up COVID in their comedy specials in the good
year of 2022, but I'm going to be honest.
I'm sick of hearing it.
Can we please stop?
Please talk about something else.
I'm here to laugh, not be sad.
There's always one guy.
No fucking way, bro.
That needle is not touching this fucking temple, daddy.
As he says, he's taking a nacho dip in a nacho cheese.
Oh, my bad, Mr. Whole Foods.
So what Brandon's trying to do here is do a little bit of crowd work, which is when a
comedian, you know, picks on people in the crowd and, um, man, it doesn't go very well.
And I feel like people are really hard on this guy and hard on all these comedians really.
Not that they don't deserve to be grilled a little bit, but it is really difficult.
It's not something that is easy to do and they're just bad at it because they're dumb.
Like it's really difficult and hard to master, especially if you're new at comedy, which I
think Brandon's job is new, at least at stand-up.
But that doesn't mean that it's immune from cringe and it's a little cringe.
Like he just made up a guy and like we did not see, maybe it's because we weren't there,
but we did not see any guy that was like, no fucking way, bro.
This needle ain't touching this daddy temple or whatever the fuck he said.
This old vaccination, I'm not anti-vaccine man, I'm vaccinated, but it's, I don't care.
I'm going to move on to the juicy part.
I married a Mexican y'all.
I married a Mexican.
And that is why it's called the gringo puppy because I married a Mexican.
Dallas, I don't mean like Taco Bell Mexican.
No, no, no, no.
I'm talking Guadalajara.
Born and raised, came to the States 10 years ago, illegally Mexican.
What is a Taco Bell Mexican, Brandon?
What is a Taco Bell Mexican?
I, what I am interpreting this statement as is there are,
it's like if we said, oh, this is a, this isn't a Walmart white person.
This is a Creighton Barrel white person.
Because that's, that's the vibe that I'm getting from this.
So we're already putting Mexicans down in kind of a weird way.
You can bring your wife up without insulting other people.
I forget this.
One of my boys goes, dude, dude, puppy, what are you doing, bro?
Get with the Latina, bro.
You know why?
Because they're fun and they're spicy.
No doubt.
Definitely spicy.
Girl spicy, right?
Girl spicy.
You know what spicy means?
They're assholes.
That's what that means.
We love the stereotypical sassy mean Latina.
Seven nights a week.
I'm not used to this.
I was like, what?
Fajitas every Wednesday?
Fuck yeah.
No dumb ass stuff.
Fajitas every Wednesday.
Real Mexican dishes, y'all.
Real shit from the motherland.
I'm talking.
Wavos and toast.
Cornes ah.
Pico de gallo.
And my favorite chili ah.
Yeah, so that's the comedy here.
Boy, you can do self deprecating humor like this.
Just because you talk about another race doesn't mean it's inherently racist.
You can, believe it or not, joke about other races without being racist.
But this is not it.
This is not it.
I guess it just seems like cringy and stupid.
Like I don't know how else to describe it.
Dude, I did that 23 and me.
I did that shit.
You spin the cup, email your DNA in.
I did that.
They sent me drive mayonnaise back.
I am white as shit, Dallas.
Yeah.
White person handout.
Page seven, bitch.
I need a fucking tater tot once a week.
With a fucking hot pocket kill you every now and then.
Every time dinner would come, I'm like, oh,
does she really think beans go with every goddamn meal?
Is she serious?
So like sometimes it is fun to joke about and see the differences
between our culture and someone else's.
Especially when you're married to that person.
But when you take that person's culture and then make it your aesthetic and identity,
it's a little weird.
I can only speak from personal experience,
but I've seen when specifically white people will date someone who's Asian,
and then they think that gives them a pass to like be an honorary Asian.
You're not.
You're not.
That doesn't mean you can use stereotypically Asian imagery and scenery.
And you're like your aesthetics and the way you dress and do your makeup.
So you look more Asian to make their eyes look longer and look more Asian.
It's okay if you learn another language because of your significant other.
I think that's really sweet.
I think that's cool.
I don't know how to put like a hard line in the sand of when it gets weird,
but sometimes it's weird.
Sometimes it just gets weird.
Every time dinner would come like, does it ever occur to her?
Maybe Brennan's not trying to shit his pants tonight.
How about that?
Fuck.
All right.
So we've hit mainly stereotypes so far.
Mexican food spicy, Mexican food hard to pronounce.
Oh, they have beans a lot.
Taco Bell, all the hard hitters there.
Every time dinner would come, my asshole would go like this.
Fuck, bro.
We're dying down here, puppy.
It's so spicy, bro.
I've never been thicker since I got with a Mexican man.
Thick with three fucking C's.
He said the thing.
He said the thing.
He said the thing.
Everything they eat, bean cheese, bean cheese, bean cheese, like the hell, man.
We're just going to carb load year round.
We never tailor off the carbs.
That's a game plan.
Beans and cheese aren't particularly known for their carbs, but go off.
I walk in the house last Friday.
It's show enough.
There's a fucking fiesta.
My favorite food.
You know how like Theo Vaughn can bring out cocaine?
You know how like he struggles with cocaine?
Like if there was cocaine on the table right now,
he'd fucking store it from right field.
You feel me?
God bless him.
I love that fucking dude.
That's I am with fucking Pasole.
I came out of nowhere.
And on that note, basically TLDR, when comedy relies on purely just stereotypes of another race,
it's just not that funny.
I really don't think he's actually racist.
And I really do think he loves his Mexican wife and he loves the food and he loves the culture.
I really do believe that.
I just think the execution of this special with these jokes,
maybe not the best representation of that.
Because there is a way where you could possibly do that while still showing that you're endearing
and you love you love this culture and but still making some funny jokes about it.
But this was not that unfortunately.
It was neither endearing nor funny.
So with that, I want to show you the last comedy special, which is you know him.
You know him as the host of Fear Factor.
Oh, you didn't mean either because I completely did not recognize him with hair.
I know Joe Rogan has a 2019 comedy special.
And I watched the beginning of it and it wasn't terrible.
I firmly believe that you can dislike someone or you can like someone,
but still criticize the piece of media as it is.
You know, you can not like Joe Rogan that much, which I kind of don't.
But that doesn't mean everything he does is automatically going to be unfunny and terrible.
Because you know, he's a fully dimensional person as as are we all.
Then again, I did not watch the rest of this hour and 15 minutes of this 2019 comedy special.
So hopefully there's not anything in there that I would want to take back that statement for and yeah.
I wrote this down.
A unicorn is a donkey from the future.
What the fuck does that mean?
It means you need to stop smoking so much weed, stupid.
Yep, pretty good.
Anyway, if you didn't know that he's actually been doing stand up for a long ass time actually since 1994.
And I did not know people were still alive back then.
So I want to watch a little bit of that with you because oh boy,
when I talk about humor that didn't age well, this is it.
Holy shit, these graphics dude.
I don't know exactly when this specific special was,
but I can probably safely say from these graphics this is from the 90s.
So this is Ronda Scheer.
No, I don't know who she is and I'm not going to tell you,
but I do love her hair.
I've been trying to achieve this style and I do not know how because I do not own a blow dryer.
So that's all I wanted to add to this little bit.
And let's hear it one more time for the spotlight cafe Ben Lech.
Wow, you guys.
I also just want to point out that this person on the left here is playing a key tar.
First of all, cool as shit.
But also the cherry on top is that they're wearing sunglasses with it.
I want to be their friend.
Anyway, you ready to meet your first act this evening?
You look hot.
You look ready.
Oh boy, I look hot.
Well, Ronda, you don't have to gas me up like that.
You look ready.
Where did this outfit change come from?
Holy shit.
She just introduced the show and then go back and change or did she just rip it off?
Like she looks like she's ready for a WWE match.
She's about to damn near jump in the ring here for double cage match featuring Logan Paul.
I know things about wrestling.
Put your hands together for Mr. Joe Rogan.
So enough of the dilly-dallying here.
We're finally introduced to Joe Rogan from
Almost 30 years ago.
Breast to a guy like a light bulb to a moth.
So yeah, that immediately, immediately didn't age well.
What an introduction.
These sideburns are killing me too.
And yeah, his voice is like,
it's like you know that the spirit of Joe Rogan is in there,
but I can't find him.
It's like the spirit of Joe Rogan has overtaken this young man.
Having a rough week, man.
I've been hearing the M word too much for my girlfriend,
you know what I'm talking about?
She brings up marriage a little bit too much and it's uh,
I can't even hear that word.
Hear the word marriage.
My brain just shuts off.
It's like marriage click.
Everyone after marriage is
I'm like, that's, that's like a contract.
I sign this.
I can't have sex with other girls for the rest of my life.
And I gotta buy you a ring.
Yeah, it's everything you ever wanted this to be.
You got booby jokes, booby horny joke.
You got marriage bad, marriage bad.
And I have to spend ring money.
Boo, marriage bad, boobies, boobies good.
So if you date, I date a lot of bimbos.
That's the problem, man.
Okay. Yeah.
Woohoo.
Okay.
Let's uh, and on that note, I'm skipping ahead.
See, women don't understand men because you don't have testosterone.
That's the big thing.
You don't have to donkey, donkey juice.
So you can't appreciate the way guys act.
Okay.
So now we're into like alpha male podcaster territory.
This is the blueprint.
This was the blueprint.
Joe Rogan was laying down for the musty and dusty podcast boys.
That's what it is.
These guys, be honest.
You're gonna be talking to a good looking girl.
But if you and the girl haven't had sex,
it doesn't matter what you're talking about.
Does it not matter?
Does it not matter?
I just want a nice girl to talk to about Minecraft.
Is that too much to ask?
Is that too much to ask?
What if they just want to talk about the 1.19 update?
They just want to talk about the deep dark.
And now they, they died fighting the warden.
That's, I just, your brain simply cannot be that much of a Neanderthal.
It just, it just can't, right, Joe?
Also, that looks like a pizza.
Is this not a pizza in the background?
Got him hungry.
Because all you're thinking while she's talking is donkey, donkey, donkey, donkey.
She's going, you know, you have to save the world.
I don't know how we got into talking about Donkey Kong,
saving the world here.
Mario's trying to save Peach from Donkey Kong.
And there's a floating pizza in the background.
And I don't understand any of it because I'm so hungry.
Energize a rabbit running on your brain 24 hours a day.
Going donkey, donkey, donkey, still going donkey, donkey, donkey.
And on that note, that has taken every ounce of energy out of me.
These three comedy specials have simply drained me,
like the villain in Sailor Moon draining young girl's energy to keep her young.
That's me, but these three men.
And I can't say Amy Schumer's any better,
but I didn't include her because I just couldn't bear.
I simply just couldn't bear the tampon jokes.
I just can't do it right now.
Something else you can get for free, tampons.
Honestly, someone will always hook you up.
So if you really would want to see me cover Amy Schumer,
just comment below.
I don't know.
Anyway, thank you so much for 80,000 subscribers.
This is very cool.
We're almost at 100,000.
I'm preparing a 100,000 subscribers special Q&A for my patrons can ask me questions.
So if you want to do that before I hit 100K,
you can sign up to my Patreon for as little as one singular US dollar a month.
If you want, no pressure.
You guys have helped me and supported the channel.
Thank you so, so much.
So make sure you subscribe to help me hit 100K.
I'm going to go eat some floating pizza now.
So bye.
It's Gabby Bell.
Gatekeeper squad, gatekeeper nation.
Gatekeeper squad, gatekeeper nation.
Breaking down the shop while branding up the paychecks.
Gatekeeper squad, gatekeeper nation.
