It's a great pleasure for me to introduce today's seminar speaker, Dr. Jonathan Schaefer.
He's a world-famous expert on AI for games, games with AI, solving games, building world
championships, playing bots. They published a very famous paper on solving checkers.
That's the punchline. Hey, you're giving away the spoiler.
We already got to get some tools for this.
He took a break and became a dean for about six years, so now hopefully we'll get him back on the side of science.
I'll let you tell us what you actually are.
Great. Thank you very much. I'm delighted to be here. Thank you very much for coming on a Friday afternoon.
I know that you're here for the talk. The pizza wasn't irrelevant in your decision to come here.
This is a very strange talk. It's not the kind of talk that you're used to having.
I'm not going to go into much technical stuff. There are a few technical slides.
I'll be delighted to talk technical after the talk.
This is a very deeply personal story. It's something that happened to me that I didn't expect to happen.
It affected me profoundly. This is a talk of stories.
I'll apologize in advance because what usually happens is story after story.
Oh my God, the one hour is up. The last part usually gets done very quickly and so my apologies.
There's an important lesson in this talk that I want to pass on to graduate students.
That's about research because there's two kinds of research.
The first is the one that we're most familiar with. It's what I call inspiration.
It's where you work and you think about problems and all of a sudden you get that aha moment.
The light bulb goes off and you've got the idea that's going to allow you to prove this theorem
or you've got this great idea how to make this algorithm better and you get that moment of inspiration
and you're really pumped up and excited and you code it or you write it up and voila,
you've got a paper or maybe you've got a thesis or whatever.
That's the kind of research that we most think about.
There's another kind of research which I call the perspiration research.
It's the stuff that's really hard work.
It may not be as glamorous as inspiration. It may not be as exciting as inspiration
but it's the kind of work that you have to do.
If you're working, say, in operating systems and you've got to build an operating system,
you might spend a year or two or three designing and building an operating system.
There's a lot of perspiration before you get to the point where you can do the inspiration.
This talk is about perspiration.
This talk took 20 years to make.
There aren't a lot of projects which take 20 years worth of human and computing power in order to achieve.
Let me talk about games and AI research.
First of all, I want to be clear. I'm an artificial intelligence researcher.
When I was young, I had a passion for games and I thought,
well, I'm going to use games for my AI research.
That's what sort of marked me throughout my career.
My research has been applied to many other problems including scheduling,
GPS, bioinformatics, all sorts of other things.
But when it comes to demonstrating the core ideas, I like to use games and puzzles
because I can relate to an audience.
I can explain it in terms that people can understand.
I'd like to use games as my experimental test bed,
but everything I do is much more general.
Games are just the way of illustrating the ideas.
If you go back to the dawn of computing science,
if you go back even further before computing science all the way back to Charles Babbage
and his difference engine in the 1800s,
people were thinking about building game playing programs.
That's what Babbage wanted to do.
That's what people like Alan Turing, one of the fathers of computing science, wanted to do.
When AI became a discipline in the late 1950s at the famous Dartmouth conference,
building a high-performance game playing program is one of the big grand challenges.
Could we do it?
Today, in 2018, we can look back.
We can talk about Success in Chess, 1997 with Deep Blue.
By the way, the co-author of Deep Blue, one of the three co-authors, Marie Campbell,
born and raised in Edmonton, which is where I'm from.
He did his bachelor's and master's degree at the University of Alberta,
which is where I'm from before going to Carnegie Mellon to do his PhD.
So part of our game's lineage includes Deep Blue.
Backgammon, Jerry Tassara in the late 1990s.
He doesn't have a University of Alberta connection,
but he used reinforcement learning, which is a very powerful technique,
which is developed by Rich Sutton, who was a professor at the University of Alberta.
Poker, it's a project that started in 1995 and in 2008,
we went Superhuman in two-player, Limit Texas Hold'em,
and so that was the University of Alberta success.
You may have heard in 2015 we solved two-player Limit Texas Hold'em,
and in 2017 and 2018, University of Alberta and Carnegie Mellon University
went Superhuman in two-player, No Limit Texas Hold'em.
That's the game you see on TV.
And Go in 2016, computers went Superhuman,
and again, just to brag, the lead author on AlphaGo and AlphaZero,
the programs that went Superhuman.
The lead author is David Silver, who did his PhD at the University of Alberta,
and the second lead was Azure Wang, who did his postdoc there.
So we've done a lot of work in AI using games at the University of Alberta,
and our academic children and grandchildren have done a lot of work.
But I was working in chess in the 1980s,
and I had one of the best chess programs in the world.
It tied first in the World Computer Chess Championships in 1986.
But Chance conversation with a friend said,
what happened with checkers? Everybody's talking about chess.
What happened with checkers?
Checkers is an interesting game.
It's a simple but not so simple game,
but it has all the same research opportunities as chess.
So why weren't people looking at checkers?
This isn't really a talk about checkers.
This is really a talk about man and machine.
And so I may use some checkers jargon,
but you don't need that to understand the talk.
So what happened with computer checkers?
The first real game-playing program was a checkers program
developed in the early 1950s.
But in the late 1950s, a fellow named Arthur Samuel,
who went on to work at IBM for most of his career,
developed a checker-playing program to play against humans,
and that's Samuel standing up.
And in 1963, IBM sponsored a match, man versus machine,
Samuel's checker-playing program,
versus a fellow named Robert Neely.
Now, you have to think back to 1963 and use your imagination
because computers, this is not a computer in 1963.
What is a computer?
A computer fills a half this room with vacuum tubes
and spinning tape wheels, just like out of the Hollywood movies.
And in 1963, IBM's machines running Samuel's software
defeated Robert Neely in a single game.
Computer defeated man at checkers.
Now, I have this wonderful collection of articles
from newspapers and magazines.
Computers defeat master Robert Neely at checkers.
Computers defeat US checkers champion.
Computers are as good as the world champion.
Computers solved the game of checkers.
Now, let me be clear about the word solved.
Checkers has 5 times 10 to the 20th possible positions,
10 to the 20th.
You guys are computer scientists.
That's a lot of zeros.
I have this wonderful, I wrote Samuel's family
and got his unpublished autobiography.
And in 1959, he writes,
I got access to this fantastic new IBM computer.
And that computer could do 15,000 additions per minute.
Now, 15,000 addition operations per minute.
You're not going to get to 10 to the 20th in my lifetime
or your lifetime or whatever.
So he had very slow computers.
And what happened was this got exaggerated out of control
because this was a milestone in a time when people didn't know
and didn't understand what computing technology was.
This was the first demonstration,
public demonstration of what computers could do.
It wasn't with the typical application,
which was like missile trajectories,
which is what many of the early computers were done.
And in 1968, Samuel's program played an exhibition match
against the world champion
and against the world championship challenger
and the program got crushed eight games.
So the program wasn't very good.
And for the record, nearly, he was not world champion caliber.
He was not U.S. champion.
He was not a master.
He was, I can't remember which state now, was it Tennessee?
He was the Tennessee State Blind Champion.
And so, you know, he was a good casual player.
They played six games.
The computer won one of the six.
Nearly won two.
Three games were draws.
Nobody remembers except the one game that nearly won.
And so, even despite what I'm saying here,
this was an incredible result because Samuel actually
invented reinforcement learning.
And although he didn't understand fully what he was doing,
it was an incredible machine learning accomplishment.
And so, I got very interested in checkers
because people ignored checkers
because Samuel had done all this work.
So in 1989, I wrote my first research grant to say,
I want to try and build a world champion caliber
checker playing program.
And I was very angry when the research granting agency
denied my request for a research grant
and had the following quote in it.
Okay, I was lost already.
So, what this talk is about is realizing Samuel's dream.
It's man versus machine for the world checkers championship.
We have two computers playing.
One of them I developed.
His name is Shanook.
It's a computer program.
And the other is a human program, the Marion Tinsley model.
It was a computer.
It was built in 1928.
One-of-a-kind model.
There were no replacement parts built.
So it was just literally one-of-a-kind.
No replacement parts for that computer
definitely was a problem later on, as you'll see.
Okay, so let's talk about the challenger
for the world championship, Shanook.
Started as a project in 1988.
I started playing around with it.
And, well, it looked interesting.
In 1989, the World Computer Chess Championships
were held.
They're held every three years.
And I co-organized them.
They were in Edmonton.
And I had expectations that my program would do well,
but it didn't.
It crashed and burned.
Some friends of mine at another group,
Carnegie Mellon, had a team called Deep Thought,
which won the world championship.
They later moved to IBM to become Deep Blue.
And so I was so pissed off
because I wanted to be world champion.
And it turned out that in a couple of months,
there was going to be the first computer Olympics
where games were going to be contested in it.
And over the span of two months,
I wrote a checker playing program.
And I went to the computer Olympics.
And in 1989, my program, which I named
Shanook, won the computer Olympiad.
Now, interesting thing about this program,
a little bit of technology.
One of the things we built, which was amazing,
its performance was the four-piece database.
Now, checker starts with 24 pieces on the board.
Pieces get removed.
And eventually, you could get down to like one piece.
And again, you don't need to know the rules,
but if I have a piece and you don't have a piece,
I win, you lose.
But what we did is wrote a program that said,
let's enumerate every single position
with one piece on the board.
And compute whether it's a win, loss, or draw.
Well, if you only have one piece, you win.
Done.
But having done that, you can now do
what we call retrograde analysis, go backwards.
Let's solve all positions with two pieces on the board.
Because when you analyze with two pieces on the board,
if one of them comes off, you're down to one piece.
And you can look it up in your database.
So you look up at all the two pieces.
Then you go to three pieces, which reduced to two.
And then you go to four.
Now, I had seven million positions.
And I built that database.
And as the program would search, whenever it got in
and its analysis came down to four pieces, it could stop.
Look up in its database and know whether the position
was a win, a loss, or a draw.
And we won the Olympiad against other computer programs.
And it was clear that the program played very well
and that the databases made a big difference.
So I was on sabbatical in 1989.
And I started working on my program.
And a checker playing friend who had seen the program said,
you know, I really like to see how you would do
in the US championship.
And I said, well, why do I want to do that?
And he said, well, every two years there's the US championship
and there's the British championship.
And the winner of those events gets to play
for the world championship.
So if you can get into the US championship,
you're going to be playing against the best players
in the world because they're all trying to earn the right
to play for the world championship.
The problem is in the US championships there's three categories.
The master category, which is for the best players in the world,
masters, grandmasters.
The majors, which is for the reasonably good players.
And the minors, which is for the beginners.
And I said, wow, that's kind of cool.
If I could get into the masters category,
then I'd have a chance to play against world class players
and see how we could do, right?
I mean, I want to build a strong program.
The problem was, how do I get in?
It's not like I can just walk in and say,
I got a great program.
Let me into the US championship in the masters, right?
That'd be like me saying, hey, I think I'm a really great golfer.
I want to go and play in the US open against Tiger Woods.
Ain't going to happen, right?
So how do I get in?
I'm fighting a battle because two years previously,
a commercial manufacturer, who I will not name,
said, oh, we have a checker playing program.
We'd like to get into the US championship.
And people laughed at him.
The program went into not the masters,
not the major, to the minor section,
which is where all the beginners are.
And you play 32 games in these tournaments,
and it lost its first 31 in games.
And in game 32, something very strange happened,
and it won.
And nobody will admit what happened,
except that the human opponent who lost
was very happy with his results.
So people knew that this program was really pathetic.
And so I had this battle.
How do I get into the master section?
So I arranged something.
I said, OK, I'm going to be diabolical.
I arranged a quote conference, unquote,
at the University of Alberta.
I invited a grandmaster, who people said he was
receptive to playing computers, two grandmasters,
and a master.
And I brought them to Edmonton.
I used my research money, which I didn't have for checkers
because that had been turned down.
I used my research money for parallel computing
because I was wink, wink, using multiple computers
to play checkers.
And I brought them there, and I had them play games
against my program.
And over the span of a week, they played 20
competitive games against my program.
And the grandmasters won four games,
lost one, and there were 15 draws.
And I was pissed off.
I was so angry.
We lost.
And my colleague said, man, you are so competitive.
No, not really, but you are so competitive.
You have no sense of perspective.
And I said, what do you mean, he said,
you've been working on this program less than a year.
You beat a grandmaster.
You only lost four to one.
How strong is the program going to be in a year?
And he was right.
Lots of bugs in the program.
It was very impressive.
So the checkers conference, we had master level performance.
And we had the five piece databases, 149 million positions.
Now, what I did is I got the grandmasters to write
letters to the American Checker Federation saying,
hey, you know, this program is really good.
It shouldn't be in the minors.
It shouldn't be in the majors.
It'll compete in the masters.
One of the grandmasters said, it'll compete in the master.
It'll finish near the bottom, but it won't be embarrassing.
It'll be respectable.
And so I got these letters and I wrote away
to the American Checker Federation.
I said, let me into the masters.
And I waited and waited and waited.
And I finally got a letter back.
And they said, yeah, OK, you can get into the masters.
It'll be a novel.
It'll be interesting.
It looks like you've got something that at least
will be entertaining for us.
And I said, fantastic.
That was great.
And I thought, boy, I'm really surprised they didn't write more.
But OK, I'll take it.
That's great.
And then like a week later, I got another letter.
And I thought, OK, they figured out what my strategy was.
And I read the letter and it said, oh, by the way,
if you're not allowed to win any money.
OK, we're not going to win any money.
And even if we did win money, we wouldn't take it.
In fact, I wrote them back and I said, look,
we don't want any money.
But in order to make this easy, we'll even offer a prize
for whoever plays the best game against the computer
to get prize money.
It turns out that they were actually worried
we were going to win any money because there was a $1,000 prize
for the best junior player under 18 years of age.
And they were afraid that I would claim my program was one year old.
So they said, OK, fine.
And then a week later, I got another letter.
Oh, you can't win any money and you're not
allowed to win any trophies.
That's fine.
I don't need trophies.
That's OK.
And I waited and waited.
I expected one more letter, which I never got.
Who cares about the money?
Who cares about the trophy?
The real prize was if you won the tournament,
you got the challenge for the world championship.
They never thought about it.
They never wrote a letter.
And so we went to the US Championships in the summer of 1990
not being allowed to win any money or trophies and nothing else.
So we had a surprise.
The week before the US Championship,
it was held in Tupelo, Mississippi.
Do not go to Tupelo, Mississippi in August.
Besides being hot, it's Elvis Presley's birthplace.
And August is the anniversary of his birth.
And the whole city is Elvis crazy.
So, well, we had a big surprise.
We went to the Mississippi State Championship
16 games, first place, undefeated.
And why that's amazing is because several of the Grand Masters
had come early for the US Championship
and they were playing.
We beat them.
We didn't lose a single game.
What people didn't understand is that the program was
incredibly strong since the Checkers Conference
because we now had the six-piece databases,
2.7 billion positions, and a whole bunch of bugs fixed.
And this made a huge, huge difference.
By the way, 2.7 billion positions.
It was really stretching my research grant capabilities at the time.
Remember, this is 1990.
We're talking about billion.
Billion is a small number today.
But in 1990, it was big.
I had to scrounge money to get my first one gigabyte disk,
$5,000 plus tax and shipping.
One gigabyte, 1990.
So, computing 2.7 billion positions was a huge task in 1990.
People were shocked that we won this.
And the next week, we went into the US Championship.
And all the best players in the world were there, except for one.
But most importantly, the world champion,
Marion Tinsley, was also there.
And the program started slowly.
It was drawing game after game.
Why?
We'd been winning.
Why were we drawing?
It turned out that, of course, playing in the Mississippi State Championship,
all of a sudden people said, this program is really good.
So they played really cautious draw checkers,
because they wanted to escape with draws.
And halfway through the tournament, I'm so frustrated,
because we're drawing and not winning enough games,
that I put something in which I called the Fudge Factor.
It was just, you know, we've got to do something.
So I put in a very simple line of code that penalized the program
for reducing the number of pieces on the board.
The idea was that the more pieces on the board,
the more complex the position was,
and the more complex it was,
the higher the probability the human would make a mistake.
So if the program started exchanging pieces
to reduce the number of pieces, it got a penalty.
And so all of a sudden, like overnight,
the program became a monster.
And started winning and winning and winning.
And after 24 games, we're now in second place.
First place is the World Champion.
And in the seventh round, a four-game match,
we had to play the World Champion.
This was the first time in history that a human
and a computer played a match that was not an exhibition match.
This was the real thing.
Tinsley had to play us or forfeit.
First game of the match turned out to be a classic.
First of all, there's the World Champion.
There's me.
We're playing against each other.
And there's this ring of players,
two, three, four deep around watching,
because I remember one checker player saying,
I want to see Tinsley spank the computer.
They wanted to see Tinsley beat this upstart computer
because it hadn't lost.
And I'm not a checker player,
so I live and die based on the evaluation
that the computer gives me.
It's like the stock market.
The number goes up.
You're happy, and the number goes down.
You're wondering, what do you do?
And we're 10 moves into the game,
and the computer says it's equal,
maybe a small advantage to the computer.
And I'm sitting there thinking pretty smugly.
This is great.
World Champion.
10 moves in.
We're invincible.
And then he played a move that sacrificed the checker.
And the moment he made the move,
you could hear the chuckles in the room.
Because for a human, this was an obvious move,
and it gave Tinsley an incredibly strong position.
And within a minute or two of him playing this move,
all the spectators disappeared
because in their mind, the game was over.
And I'm sitting there thinking,
we just were up checker up.
Chinook is happy.
We're going to win.
This is great.
And then a couple moves later,
we're up a checker.
The position's even.
This is still great.
And a few moves later, we're up a checker.
Tinsley's got an advantage.
That's not so great.
And a few moves later, things look really bleak.
And we're playing on, and an hour goes by.
And a few players start coming back,
looking what's going on.
And more time goes by,
and more people come by and watch.
And then finally, Tinsley reaches out,
stops the clock, extends his hand,
and offers a draw.
It turns out Tinsley's sacrifice was sound.
There was a very long and narrow path to a win.
He could have won the game.
And he made most of the moves correctly,
and then at the end, he slipped up.
And it became a draw.
The next three games against Tinsley
were uneventful, and they all ended in draws.
We had just drawn a four-game match
against the world champion.
In the last round, we were paired against
the world's number two player, Don Lafferty.
We won a game.
We drew three.
Tinsley won his match.
And the end result was that Tinsley finished first.
Chinook finished second.
And the rules of the competition were
that the first-place finisher
would challenge for the world championship.
And if the first-place finisher was the world champion,
that right went down to the second-place finisher.
So in the summer of 1990,
Chinook became the official world championship challenger.
The first thing I did after this
is I tried to find Arthur Samuel
and tell him what had happened.
He had left IBM long ago.
It turns out he had moved to California,
who is at Stanford University,
working for Donald Knuth on tech.
I'm sure you're all familiar with tech or lay tech.
It's a variant system.
And it turns out, much to my shock,
like three days before we won the right to play
for the world championship, Samuel had passed away.
It turns out he, in the last years of his life,
had been suffering for Alzheimer's disease.
He liked to claim he was the world's oldest programmer.
Up to age 90, he was going in every day
to Stanford University writing code
for the development of the tech system.
And it just seemed ironic that we finally realized
his dream, in some sense,
and he passed away just as that was happening.
All right, let's talk about the champion,
Marion Tinsley.
1950, he was the up-and-coming favorite
to win the U.S. championship,
play for the world championship and win it.
In 1950, he's playing in the last round
for the U.S. championship.
In a winning position,
he had a one-move oversight
and blundered and lost the game,
and he didn't finish first,
which means he didn't play for the world championship.
And he was stunned.
Everybody was shocked.
He disappeared for two years.
He came back in 1952 and he won everything,
including the right to play for the world championship,
went to the world championship and won it.
In 1958, he won the world championship
or defended his world championship,
and then he retired.
He said, you know what?
I don't need this anymore.
He went and finished his Ph.D. in math
at Ohio State University.
Friends convinced him to come back in 1970.
He won the U.S. championship,
was going to play for the world championship,
but the world champion was ill.
He had a heart attack.
Tinsley said, I don't want to play him.
And so he went back into retirement.
In 1975, the world champion at the time died.
Tinsley was convinced to come back.
He won the U.S. championship.
He won the world championship and played it,
held it till 1991 when he retired.
If you go back to that fateful game in 1950
and look what he did between 1950 and 1991,
he finished first in every tournament he played in,
not shared first, first.
He played multiple matches, including for the world championship,
and he won them, usually by a wide margin.
And he literally crushed the opposition.
So early on I called Mary and Tinsley a human computer.
Well, there's some truth in that.
Is this man or machine?
Because from the period 1950 to 1992,
Tinsley only lost three games of checkers.
Three games of checkers out of thousands that he played.
You don't think of humans being that good.
You think of machines having that level of perfection.
If you ever asked Tinsley how many games he lost,
he would shake his head sadly and say it was five.
Five? Why was it five?
Well, Tinsley often gave exhibitions,
so somebody would organize like,
you're going to play 40 people at a shopping mall.
You're going to play them all simultaneously.
Well, once at a shopping mall while playing 40 people
simultaneously in a winning position,
he inexplicably made a one-move blunder and lost.
I asked Grandmaster Don Lafferty
for many years the world's second best player
if he'd ever beaten Tinsley,
and the answer was yes, once.
On a Saturday night, late at night,
after we'd both had far too much to drink.
That was the only time Lafferty ever beat him.
Five losses over 40 years.
Basically, Tinsley's computer brain,
there was a neuron up there that misfired
about every 14 years,
causing him to make a one-move blunder and lose a game.
There's only one recorded game where he got outplayed.
This man was more a machine than man.
So, prelude to the match.
We had just earned the right to play Tinsley
for the world championship.
What do you think the first thing Tinsley does?
He phones me up and he says,
hey, let's play a fun match.
What? The world champion wants to play a fun match?
He says, yeah, sure.
He's bored playing humans because he beats them.
And so we wanted to test himself out against the computer.
So we arranged for him, brought him to Edmonton,
and we played a match, and he beat us seven and a half
to six and a half.
The first nine games were draws.
In the 10th game on the 10th move,
something happened.
The program says it's even.
The program was flip-flopping between two moves,
and at the last minute, chose a particular move.
And the moment I made that move,
Tinsley said, you're going to regret that.
And of course, I'm looking at the screen
and it says the game is even,
and a few moves later, Tinsley got an advantage,
and a few moves later, he's better,
and you know the whole story.
We lost that.
I was obsessed with that position.
I've done the analysis.
To the point from when he said,
you're going to regret that,
to the loss is 64 moves.
And of course, I realized there's no way
I'm going to write a program that's going to analyze that deep.
I mean, the exponential growth is just enormous.
It just brought home how deep he was thinking
and he understood the game.
So we ended up losing the match, one win to zero,
13 draws, and again, being competitive,
I was very upset that we lost,
but the checker world was a gog,
like you only lost by one game
against Tinsley, that's incredible.
Most telling was at the end of the match,
Tinsley said, I feel like a teenager again
and I asked what he meant and he said,
playing against humans is boring.
Everybody knows how good I am,
and so they play draws, boring games,
because all they want to do is escape with the draw.
Nobody tries to beat me because they're not going to beat me,
but Chinook had no respect for me.
It would walk on the edge of a precipice,
it would play loud, audacious,
ridiculous moves taunting Tinsley,
and he loved it and it reminded him
of the rambunctious games that he played
when he was a teenager, when he was learning the game,
and he said, I feel like a teenager again.
I want to play the computer.
Checkers is fun, again.
And so, well, we ran into problems.
The American Checker Federation
and the English Drafts Association refused
to sanction the match.
They said, oh, computers can't play,
this is the human world championship, they can't play.
And I said, look it, we abided by all the rules.
And they said, no you can't.
And then Tinsley said, I want to play the computer.
And the Checker Federation said no.
And he wrote a public letter saying,
they deservedly came second,
they're very strong, I want to play them.
The Checker Federation said no.
So he said, okay, I resign.
No need the world championship, the world title.
And then he immediately signed on to play as a match.
The Checker Federations were agogged,
how can you have Tinsley not being the world champion?
But he refused to take the title back.
And so they gave him the title world champion emeritus.
And so they created a world man machine championship
for the best man, which was Tinsley,
the best machine, which was Chinook.
And in August 1992, we went to London
to play for the World Checkers Championship.
And there we are, the Park Lane Hotel.
Nice 3D visualization board, you can't see it very clearly,
but every time a move was made here on the computer,
it would show up here, big audience.
Checkers is very popular,
or drafts as it's called in the UK.
And so we had packed rooms for all of the games.
So match starts and the first thing,
the first day was terrible.
Tinsley pressed hard in game one.
And I thought we were going to lose.
And I'm sitting on stage and I'm sweating.
All the media is there.
I mean this was a big event, think Deep Blue.
This was global media coverage.
And I'm sitting there, please,
don't let me lose on day one, please don't let me lose.
And I thought we're going to lose.
And then all of a sudden,
the program found its way into a draw.
And I knew we were safe.
We now had the seven-piece databases
and a few of the eight-piece,
37 billion positions in the database.
And the program had found a path from the current position
into a drawn database position.
I offered Tinsley a draw.
He declined.
So we played on a few more moves.
And I offered Tinsley a draw again.
And he declined.
We played on a few more moves.
I offered him again and he declined.
And I said, look, Marion, we're in our databases.
It's a draw.
You can play as long as you want,
but we're not going to lose.
And he was stunned.
He was sure he was winning.
So he immediately shook hands
and we went on to the next game.
Tinsley won game five.
He played better.
And he was winning in game seven
and couldn't, again,
the program made his life complicated
and we saved it.
And so clearly after the first few days
of the matches, the consensus
looked like we were going to get crushed.
I'm full of stories and I'm going to run late,
but I have to tell you this story here
because this is very important.
About halfway through the match,
I got an email from back home
and all it said was database failure.
Uh-oh.
I was computing databases.
And in the rush to get to the match,
I knew that the more databases
made the program stronger.
Half the time was spent computing the database
and the other half was spent verifying it.
So about a couple months before the end,
before we went to London,
I made the decision I'm going to stop the verification
because I want more databases computed.
I'll take a gamble.
And now that I'm in London playing the match,
I said okay, I'll start the verification running
because it's too late to compute any more databases.
And of course one of the databases
failed and sent me an email.
But there's nothing I can do it.
I'm in the middle of the match.
Nothing I can do.
After the match was over,
this took place in August and September.
I finally got back home and had some free time
and I started looking what happened with the databases.
And I tracked it down to a database.
The database was there.
It was the right size, everything.
The contents were all zero.
The file was just full of null bytes.
But in my compression scheme, a zero meant draw.
So if you ever got into that database,
it didn't matter what position,
it was all draws.
Guess which database?
It was.
It turns out that in the game,
we were in a drawn position.
And if Tinsley had kept playing,
it's possible we would have moved to a position
that was actually a loss.
And of course I told him information
that was actually wrong.
And we did draw the game,
and we were never in a losing position,
but had he kept playing, it's possible
we could have lost that.
So very scary.
So we're down one to nothing.
Now, game eight.
Game eight starts and we had prepared the program
with some complex moves
and it's a try and put Tinsley on his own.
And in game eight, an opening came up
that we were able to play a move that was quite complex
and everything went well.
Until about move 12, when Tinsley made a move
and Chinook suddenly said,
the game is no longer even, we have a small advantage.
And a few moves later, the advantage got bigger.
And a few moves later, the advantage got bigger.
And my eyes started bugging out.
I'm on the stage and I'm sitting there
trying to hold in my excitement.
And I got bigger and bigger and bigger.
And then finally, Tinsley reached out his hand
and resigned.
And I was stunned.
And the crowd rushed up and surrounded us
all excited and everything
because it had been an exciting game.
And they all started congratulating Tinsley
and okay, you know, I understand giving sympathy
but hey, you know, like we won, this is like,
we beat Tinsley, this is big news.
And everyone's congratulating Tinsley
and I didn't understand what was going on
until the match arbiter, Con McCarrick,
goes over to Tinsley and shakes his hand and said,
I, Narrian, that was a beautiful draw.
The depth of the games was such that people in the audience
didn't understand that Tinsley had resigned.
They thought it was a draw and Tinsley had to correct them
and then they were stunned.
One of the reporters at that,
because this was the last game of the day,
one of the reporters, I don't remember which media
out that was there, the end of the day,
he just ran out and filed his story
and of course the next day he says,
yeah, the games were all draws.
He had no idea that we had just made history.
Now, what do you do after you beat Tinsley?
It was like a dream of mine to beat Tinsley.
I mean, I had asked Laine in bed,
just fantasizing about beating Marion and Tinsley.
My wife looked at me sadly once while we were lying in bed
and she said, you're thinking about him again, aren't you?
I mean, what would you do if you finally beat Tinsley?
I thought I'd go out and party
and buy a round for everybody,
I'd get drunk and whatever
and me and my team, we went out that night
and it was like a wake.
We were truly sad.
Over the few years we'd known Tinsley,
we'd come to respect him
and we knew how painful this defeat was
and how upset and angry he was that losing
and we felt a little bit of humanity ourselves
because we knew this was a milestone
that computers are now beating
the very best humans at checkers
and if not checkers, eventually it would be chess.
And so it was a very sad event.
And that night, I got back to my hotel room
and at three in the morning a reporter phoned me up
and I poured out my heart and soul to this reporter
how upset I was.
Lesson, do not pour your heart and soul out to a reporter
because guess what appears the next day in the paper
is a lot of things that you probably didn't want to say.
It was actually pretty upsetting
and I learned a lot about myself.
And so in Game 8, we won.
It was the first time a computer had defeated
a world champion in any game
that was a non-exhibition game.
The next few games were draws
and in Game 14, it happened again.
He must have made an inferior move
and the advantage went up, up and up
and then the computer froze
and I'm panicking.
It stopped, what's going on?
I had to leave my seat and go behind the curtains
where the computer was to take a look at the screen.
What's going on? Oh my, we've crashed, something's wrong.
No.
The computer had searched all the way to the end of the game,
had looked at all the scenarios,
it knew it was winning in every possible scenario.
There was nothing left to compute, so it had stopped.
And a few moves later, Tinsley resigned and we won.
We were now up 2-1.
That night I had no problems.
We went out and we partied, we had a great time.
We were up 2-1 against the unbeatable Tinsley.
Fantastic.
On the way back home that night,
I turned to my colleague and I said,
do you think it's possible?
Do you think we're going to beat Tinsley?
I wish I'd never said that.
Okay.
This is
the most painful day of my life,
August 23rd, 1992.
It's game 18.
We're on move 17.
Chinook has a big advantage
and I'm sitting there on stage thinking,
actually sorry, let me go back.
I'm jumping ahead.
I did first thing in the morning,
what I always would do.
Get up early, go down to the room,
make sure, you know, run the diagnostics on the computer,
make sure everything's okay.
I get down to the room,
unlock it, open the doors,
and I'm blasted by heat.
It was a small room and it was hot,
really hot.
What was wrong?
Well, you see,
it's hard to get good help these days.
The hotel staff in the evening were supposed to
turn off the lights in the room
and turn on the air conditioning.
Off, on.
What they instead did is
turn the lights on
and the air conditioning off
in a small sealed room.
So it was really hot.
And when they opened the door,
the heat flooded out into the main room
where everybody would sit.
And so the first game that day
was postponed for an hour
because the embarrassed hotel staff
had to go out and rent fans
to try and cool the room down.
And so Game 17 was played this Saturday morning
and we played it and we were sitting up on stage,
which was even hotter,
and after five moves, Tinsley just said,
look, I'm uncomfortable, I'm sweating.
So we agreed to a draw and take a break.
And I said, I'm up with it.
So Game 17 was like a quick draw,
done, finished, we're off the stage,
spectators were disappointed,
but there was another hour break
while we cooled the place down.
Then we started Game 18.
Move 17.
Chinook's got a nice advantage
and I'm sitting there on stage thinking,
this Tinsley guy, he's not so good,
we got a big advantage.
We're probably going to win.
And then the computer comes up
and says, beep, Tinsley database.
I thought, oh, darn.
I had put into the program's databases
all of the games that I could find
that Tinsley had ever played.
And so when the Tinsley database message came up,
it had found a way to go from the current position
into a game that Tinsley had previously played.
And Tinsley had this incredible memory.
He knew every single game that he'd ever played.
And I knew his memory was amazing
and so I knew, even though the program said
we were really, really in a good position,
I knew that we were going to draw it
because he would know this.
And I'm sitting there on stage
and just waiting for the program to move.
Draw me my fingers.
We had about 40 minutes left on our clock
to get to move 20.
So you have to play 20 moves in an hour.
We're at move 17, so we only have three moves to make
and we've got 40 minutes.
And the clock takes by and I'm dreaming,
ah, we're going to be up three to one.
This is going to be fantastic.
Man, just think of all the good things
that are going to happen with this milestone event.
Hmm, it's been 20 minutes, that's a long think.
Wait a minute.
The program actually has a hard stop
of 20 minutes for a move.
We're really over 20 minutes?
Yeah, we are.
How could that be?
And 20 minutes became 25 minutes.
And then 30 minutes.
I'm sitting there on stage.
You've got all of the media there.
You've got a couple hundred spectators.
During a game, I can't interfere in any way.
The program has to make the moves.
I'm just the operator.
And I sat there panicking
because the program is just computing,
computing, something's going on.
And I watched there helplessly
as the minutes ticked off
and I watched the hour hand go around
to the top and then click
our one hour was up.
We did not make the 20 moves.
We forfeited.
And so now, of course, what happens?
Well, I tried to talk to the computer,
but I couldn't.
It was frozen.
It had crashed.
Something was wrong.
Actually, it hadn't crashed.
It was frozen.
I had no idea how that happened.
Tinsley was apologetic at winning this way,
but now the match was 2-2.
Nothing I could do.
And it was just absolutely terrible.
I spent that whole weekend
trying to figure out what happened.
Was there a bug?
I don't know how to freeze the computer.
I don't know how my checker program
could have frozen this 8-processor
silicon graphics computer,
but somehow it became frozen.
Was it a hardware problem?
The computer had been baked all night
in this hot room.
And I talked to silicon graphics
and they showed me a paper they wrote
where they took their 8-processor
silicon graphics computer out
to Death Valley in California
for a weekend and it correctly
in parallel computed pi.
Therefore, it works in really hot weather
that you can compute pi.
Well, I said, you know,
pi isn't like this.
We've got 8 processors,
complex interactions,
a lot of message passing,
a huge amount of disk activity
because you're reading the databases.
It's not the same thing.
Silicon graphics said
there was no hardware problem.
Was it a hotel problem?
I mean, it didn't happen any day before.
It never happened again.
It only happened on this day
when the computer got baked.
I have no idea what happened that day,
but we forfeited.
And I spent the entire weekend
at the computer working with it,
testing it, trying to recreate the problem.
And I showed up Monday morning
to play tinsley and he was dressed
as he usually is in a three-piece suit
and I had bags under my eyes
and stubble on my face
because I'd literally been up the whole weekend
trying to figure out what was going on.
And to this day I have no idea what happened,
except we lost.
One of the most horrible experiences of my life
was sitting on stage
for the last half of that 40 minutes
knowing that something is wrong,
helpless to do anything
and listening to the audience,
the audience talking in murmury.
As it came closer and closer
to the program forfeiting,
you could just hear the people,
what's going on?
What's going on?
Why isn't it moving?
What's happening?
And as the program ticked down to forfeiting,
you just hear people go,
what?
Move!
Do something!
And I'm on stage and I'm helpless
and there's nothing I could do
and it's just burned into my head.
And we lost.
The next day, or a couple days later,
Tinsley accidentally won Game 25
and he paid us the sincerest compliment.
He said,
I've had a scare.
I'm now going to play
dull, drosh, boring checkers against you
and I'm going to wait for you to make a mistake
and we made a mistake in Game 25
and he played dull, boring drosh checkers
the west of the way
and we never had a chance to win a game.
That was the ultimate compliment
because he had criticized other players
for playing that way against him
and now he was playing that way against us.
In Game 39, we're down by one game.
We need to win the game.
I set the program to have a draw
being equal to a loss
because a draw did us no good
and of course the program found a draw
and would not take the draw
because I'd set it to be a loss
and we kept playing trying to win
and we eventually lost.
So the final score was 20.5
Shinsley, Chinook, 18.5
and so, yeah, people were impressed
it was a great result
but it might have been different
had it not been for Game 18.
A couple weeks after the match
the nightmare started.
I started
reliving Game 18
those final 20 minutes.
I'd wake up in the middle of the night
in a cold sweat because
I could hear the voices in the audience.
Why isn't it moving?
What's going on?
It happened night after night after night.
People told me I had an interesting story
so I decided I had to write a book
and I wrote a book
but I could not write about Game 18
it upset me so much
and finally I had the whole book written
except for this part
and I said I gotta do it
I gotta do it, I gotta do it
and I sat down
and I wrote about Game 18
done
I never went back and edited
done, finished
and I never had the nightmares again
they stopped the next day
gone
if I had known
that this would be so
therapeutic to write this out
and express my feelings and emotions
I would have done it long ago
but in the end I tortured myself
by not writing it
anyway, the book came out in 1997
one jump ahead
challenging human supremacy
in checkers and I'm very proud of it
it's this, it's not technical
it's this talk that I'm giving
it's this and many other stories
I wanted revenge
so I had to spend two years
waiting for a rematch in 1994
1994, deeper searching
we're going 17 to 29 moves ahead
what human can think
we can't compute that far
but Tinsley could
improving our openings, improving our knowledge
improving our end games
we eventually computed all of the AP's databases
406 billion
positions in the program's memory
the match was played at the computer museum
in Boston
that museum has now moved to Mountain View, California
and it went off to a very strange start
on the first day
I phoned up Tinsley and I said
let's walk over to the museum together
and he said fine
and we're walking over and he's unusually quiet
and then he tells me something strange
first of all you need to know
that Tinsley was also a Baptist minister
he was
very religious person
and he talked many times about
doing God's work
and on the walk over he turned to me
and he said
I had a dream last night
and he said in that dream
God told me
that he loved
you too
that he loved Jonathan as well
and I looked at Tinsley in shock
because at times
he sort of portrayed me as the devil
and he's doing God's work to slay the devil
and I looked at him in shock
and he looked at me back and he shook his head sadly
and I said I know
it was a very upsetting dream
but this was so untinsley like
and then we played game one
and it was a draw
and then we played game two
and
Tinsley was in a lot of trouble
and
we thought he might lose it
and in the end he squeaked out a draw
and it came to a critical position
and after the game
he told me and he said there were six moves in that position
I knew that five of them lost
and the sixth one I didn't know
and then I thought
and I thought
boy this isn't like Tinsley
he's such a confident person
how could he just put his faith in God
and make a move and not know
very strange
a couple of games later
he asked me about
Derek Oldbury
Derek was the world champion
because remember Tinsley had resigned
Derek was now the world champion
but he got no respect
and he knew that I played
Shinook had played an exhibition match
against Oldbury
his preparation to play Tinsley
and it was all secret
and unfortunately Oldbury died
about a month before we played Tinsley
and Tinsley asked
well now that Derek's dead it doesn't matter
maybe you could tell me what happened in the match
and I said well we beat
Oldbury three wins no losses
thirteen draws
and Tinsley said
Shinook plays Oldbury
Oldbury dies
therefore
Oldbury must have died
of Shinookitis
ha ha ha ha
that is so funny
he dies of Shinookitis ha ha ha
and I'm sitting there thinking what's so funny about that
first of all his logic is terrible
but second of all
you know to tie Oldbury's death
that well if you play Shinook
you're gonna die
and so it was a very morbid discussion
anyway the first six games were all drawn
Shinook's play was flawless
Shinook looked bloody impressive
the next day I phoned Tinsley up
and I said let's go
walked together
and he immediately said
sorry
let me suggest the unthinkable
he said I'd like to resign the match
and the title to Shinook
and I said why
and he said well I had an upset stomach last night
I wasn't feeling well and I said
okay you're not feeling well
I'm sorry about that
we're gonna postpone the games for today
and he said no really I don't want to play
look let's take you to the hospital
we'll figure it out
let's get you better and then we'll worry about the match
and he said fine so I took him to the hospital
I did tests
and because of the upset stomach
the doctors gave him the okay
but they wanted to do X phrases
precaution I mean he was like 65, 66 years old
and at the end of the day
Tinsley was in a good mood and said
yeah we'll play again tomorrow
so I thought
dodged a bullet
the next morning
Tinsley says I resigned the match
and the title and you can't do anything about it
done
so what's wrong he said I had my upset stomach again
and I said but
you know you got your X-ray
we're gonna hear the results and he said no we're done
he was adamant we couldn't do it
but he agreed to postpone the announcement of the match
until after the X-ray results were known
so I went to the match site
and told the rest of my team and we were all upset
and we're sitting there
and the media's there and spectators are there
what do you do we're all set up to play
and there's no Tinsley
and we're not gonna announce that he's resigned
because he agreed to postpone it
what happens
Tinsley shows up what does he want to do
he wants to play checkers not a game
he wants to analyze some positions
so we sit there for an hour analyzing positions
and the match arbiter comes in
and says what the hell's going on
I said we're playing checkers with Tinsley and he said
the guy is apparently too sick to play
the match that he's resigning
what's he doing here
and I said that's what he wants to do
so what were the results of the X-ray
and I said I don't know he hasn't called
so the guy arbiter goes up and says
why haven't you called about the X-rays
and he says well I'll call now
so he disappears
and we're all sort of
perplexed at his behavior
Tinsley makes the phone call
comes back and I said well
what were the X-ray results and he said
they found a lump on my pancreas
and no big deal
he seemed bright and cheery
I would have been scared to death
a lump on my pancreas that doesn't sound good
but
the
match officials sent him home
because they're about to announce
that he's too sick to play
and you couldn't have somebody too sick to play
sitting there playing checkers
he refused to continue
and we won the world championship
after six games all draws
on forfeit
what do you do when you're in
Boston all set up for a world championship
and you have nothing to do
Tinsley said
why don't you bring in Don Lafferty
the world's number two player
and play an exhibition match
we were so upset
we just wanted to go home
we played Lafferty
we lost a game
we've gone like 150 games without a loss
I've been so careful in testing the program
a couple weeks before
I found something wrong
I fixed it and I had an if statement
which had an and in it
and it should have had an or
and I hadn't tested it
and we lost the game
we won another game
Lafferty played boring checkers to draw every game
so it was a draw
and match and we retained the title
so we win it on forfeit and we retain it
with a draw it was absolutely terrible
then the American Checker Federation
and the English Drafts Association
threatened us with legal action
of course there was a contract that said
whoever wins the match is world champion
but they threatened us with legal action
and then they wrote angry letters
to my chair, my dean
my university president and the media
there was an anti Chinook
internet campaign
it was a horrible time
in 1995
January we played
another match against Lafferty and we beat him
in April 95
he unfortunately passed away
it turned out that that lump on his pancreas
was pancreatic cancer
and he passed away
and in 1996
Chinook was
crushing everybody
because nobody was even close to Tinsley
in the U.S.
championship there were 32 games
we scored 30 out of 32 points
second place scored
22 out of 32 points
I mean the gap was so huge
it was a horrible time
and we got lots of accolades which made things better
first computer to win a human world championship
in any game
it's from the Guinness Book of World Records
we're a trivial pursuit question which is kind of cool
we're on who wants to be a millionaire
popular game show from a few years back
it was a 16,000, only $16,000 question
come on
but for me there was still a sense of
unfinished business
it was a long time
so I will speed up
and finish this talk my apologies
but
then I started getting all the hate mail
from the checkers player
Chinook doesn't hold a candle to Tinsley
in his prime Tinsley would crush Chinook
you know
Tinsley was almost perfect
he did lose three games
he wasn't perfect
and if I wanted to prove to everybody
that my program was better than humans
I had to be better than Tinsley
if he was almost perfect
I had to be perfect
so I had to solve the game of checkers
there are some games that you can solve
that they're simpler
they have smaller search complexity
or decision complexity
checkers is 500 billion
billion positions
that's a big number
I'm sure you have no idea how to comprehend
a number like that but I'll give you a good example
let's take the Pacific Ocean
and I know that you
probably don't study oceanography
but if you go to the deepest part
there's actually a big plug there
and if you remove the plug and drain all the water
it's really a big sink
and you drain all the water and it's empty
and you put the plug back in
now your task is to refill
the Pacific Ocean
so we're going to give you a house in Seattle
you can turn on the tap
and I'm going to give you a teaspoon
take the tap
walk over to the Pacific Ocean
and dump the teaspoon into the Pacific Ocean
and then go back and fill
another teaspoon with water
and go over to the Pacific Ocean
and dump it in
if you do it roughly this number of times
you will refill
the Pacific Ocean
I'll leave that as an exercise
for the ambitious student
basically for a non-trivial game
checkers was 10 to the 7 times
bigger than Awari which had been solved
so we're talking about 10
million times bigger
and I said
I'm going to solve this problem
and I'm going to do it
and people said well why don't you do it
incrementally bits at a time and I said no
my goal is I want one
fantastic paper in science
that's my goal
and then I got a review back
saying
what a moron Jonathan
don't you know how to play the publishing game
you're supposed to take what you got
and make it 10% better or bigger
and then you publish a paper
and then you take that and you make it 10% or 20% better
and you publish another paper
you can milk this for a dozen papers
and I said no
I'm not going to waste my time
I'm not interested in the papers
I want that one nugget of gold at the end
I want a paper in science
so I was
continued computing
end game databases
they started in 1989
at various points they were running on hundreds of
processes around the world
and eventually I computed up to all
positions with 10 or fewer
positions on the board
see not thousand
or million or billion
trillion
39 trillion
positions
that comes from memory
if ever you do the analysis
and you come down to 10 positions
or 10 pieces or less
you know the exact answer
win loss or draw
here's an example of the databases
this is a famous example
it's called the 100 year position
white to move and win
you don't care much about the position
the point was this was posed in the year 1800
and this is pre-internet
yes there is something called pre-internet
science magazines
so somebody in the year 1800
published this and said
I think white wins
and like six months later in another magazine
somebody published an analysis that said
no it's a draw and two years later
in another magazine somebody published
an analysis and said it's win
this went on for 100 years back and forth
in magazines before they concluded
it's a win
grandmaster Don Lafferty gave it to me and he said
you know there's 10 pieces on the board
what's the result for the 100 year position
we looked it up
and it's a draw
and it turns out
that
on the third move of the analysis
black has to play
a
unhuman like move
and once Don Lafferty saw what it was
he went like this
now it's obvious it's a draw
but it wasn't obvious before
because the computer looks at everything
and humans are biased
it's now called the 197 year position
because the first publication was in the year 1800
and in 1997
we solved it
here's how we did the solving
this is 24 pieces on the board
down to
0
the width here is the log
of the search space
so you can see that it's pretty wide here
because the log is
like 2
and 3
bigger
and the widest is at 24
actually 23 is the biggest
size
whenever you get down to 10 pieces
or less
we look it up in the database we have perfect information
I had
a master process that was
maintaining the main line of play
it would decide what pieces of work
need to be done to prove
or disprove whether a line of play
was good or not
each of those dots represents a piece of work
I had hundreds of processors
that would pick off pieces of work
like this one grab it
do the work
send the result back which would then update this picture
and so
for two years this process
would continue as we refined
the strategy
processors
working in parallel
for two years
and the proof
was 154 moves
at the end of it was a position
that was searched possibly
more than 30 moves
at the end of it was a database position
which may have been searched to 250 moves deep
in other words
it's possible that the longest line
in the actual proof from the start of the game
to the literal end of the game
was well over 400 moves
and it was a smart search because I put a lot of effort
into refining the search algorithms
even though the search space was 10 to the
20th we only had to look at
10 to the 14th positions
in order to do the proof
huge huge reduction in search space
I want to throw this in just as a warning
this was as much research
in AI as it was in reliable
systems because
you have to be careful of disk IO failures
I mean I told you I had a database full of null bytes
what the hell happened there I don't know
network failures memory
parity errors
somebody tried to reproduce my results
and we got different results
and we tracked it back and it turned out
that in 1992 one of my computations
was correct
and I had it on my disk and then
six years later when I looked at it
one bit in the database
had changed one bit
and it was wrong
and all my computations that depended
on that data since then were now flawed
and had to be redone
which meant every day I would do
a verification that the data had not changed
and every few months
you would find that a bit would be flipped
perfectly normal
it happens disks are
not 100% perfect
bugs and all sorts of other
problems so if you want to say
that you're proving something
you've got to be 100% correct
100% is a pretty high standard
so punchline
tada
and it's literally
tada
because I wrote a script to do all of this
and if it ever reached
the end of the script
it was to send me an email
and the email only said
tada
and I got an email one day saying
tada
so
here's the punchline
if neither side makes a mistake
then a game of checkers will end in a draw
perfect play
leads to a draw
so I now have a theorem
that perfect play leads to a draw
and the proof is constructive
I have a construction
the formal proof fits up on my web
and you can actually go through it
and see the proof
but I have something that most people don't have
when they do a proof
my proof completed on April 29th
2007 at 5.01pm
California time
I was in California with my daughter
and I had an urge
I said Rebecca
I need to check on the checkers computations
I need to check in on the checkers computations
so we checked into a hotel
and I went up and hooked up my computer
and logged in
and was pissed off
because all the computers were down
and I was about to restart them
when I looked at the log file
that was the time stamp
the computation had ended
and what shocked me
you know I said I had this feeling
I had to log in
the computation had
ended one minute
before
I looked at this file
which meant I was literally
online checking to see what was going on
within 60 seconds of the computation
ended and once even weirder
I'm in California
my postdoc who was working with me
was in Edmonton
I had this funny feeling too
and he logged in at the same time
and we were chatting back and forth
within like two minutes of the computation
ending it was absolutely bizarre
so
the corollary
is that
because perfect play
leads to a draw the corollary
is that Chinook will never lose
never lose
and so the implication
is that Tinsley
occasionally made a mistake
therefore
being human
I now know
that my program
is better than Tinsley
not the easiest
way to do that
some recognition
I published my paper in Science
and Science and Nature
ranked it as one of the top ten breakthroughs
for 2007
a great piece in their year-end magazine
called The Death of Checkers
and they have this picture that I love
it's meant to be humans
being buried under my
40 trillion
database positions
it was a great example
last word
this is from my wife
and I don't know why I put this here
because she doesn't know me well enough
you know
she said it was 1989
that's when we started competing
but it actually started in 1988
she said it's been 18 years
correct
this is not fake news, let's deal with facts
18 years, correct
obsessive compulsive behavior
that is not correct
there is nothing wrong
with being passionate about a problem
and pursuing it for 18 years
that is not obsessive compulsive behavior
now this really hurt
not normal
the commitment
to scientific purity
she did not understand
how important it was
the standard to reach 100%
scientists are perfectionists
we want to leave our mark
but then she struck
like below the bell
get a life, Jonathan
okay
well, I hate to say it
but
you really didn't think I'd give my wife the last word, did you?
I told her it was the end of the project
but I lied
I took my book from One Jump Ahead
which was challenging human supremacy at Checkers
and then I updated it
and added the next 10 years
and it became One Jump Ahead
computer perfection at Checkers
and that came out in 2008
so this is a story
it technically ends in 2008
but it doesn't end
there's rarely a week
that goes by when I don't get
email from a computer scientist
or a checker player or media
or whatever
and it's only with hindsight
that I can look back and I say
I went through an amazing experience
something that was life-altering
to me
and has had profound implications
for my life and how I live it
and
I feel privileged
to have known Marion Tinsley
and have gone through this
obsessive compulsive
quest
so thank you for your interest in my apologies
for going over, I have lots more stories
and I just
it brings back memories to give this talk
I give this talk
3-4 times a year now
still
and even some groups have asked me to give it
again and saying
we want to hear new stories
because there are lots of other stories
so who knows
so thank you very much
and please feel free to leave
you've been great staying as long
but I'm happy to stay around as long as necessary
and answer whatever questions you have
thank you
let's do a few questions
we'll see where it goes
questions, yes sir
do you want an update on the chess game?
they're still playing
is it a draw?
okay
this is the match between
American Fabiano Calrana
and Norwegian
Magnus Carlsen for the World
Chess Championship, it just happens
happened to have started today
it's going on in London
one move was a white to
D4
not a surprise, yes
so when you're faced with a question
that's massive
when you're just starting to write a program
that can play chess
what are the first steps
how do you approach starting
a problem
picking up a problem like that?
well first of all I didn't know it was going to be this big
a problem so I might have done it
differently and what I did is
I just wrote
actually a very simple program
to
just play
legal moves and
play things just to see how much
work it was and
whether it was interesting or not
if I was going to undertake anything big
I had to do something that I thought was
interesting so by just doing
something really small
just making moves on the checkerboard
was my interest still
I've taken on a lot of projects
and I start programming them and then
I lose interest and then you never finish the code
and so
I need to do something
with it
that
keeps the momentum going
because
the more you get involved with something
the more that you're going to end up putting into it
and I don't want to invest my
time and effort on something frivolous that
I'm going to drop
a day, a week, a month later
and I've done a few of those things
and I've regretted the time
I mean we've done this
and I seem to be addicted to long running projects
our poker project started in
1995 and ended
earlier this year so that's 23
years so it even
trumps the, oh I can't say that
even
is longer than
the checker's project, right?
so you
got to be
not obsessive, determined
and once I
think something's worthwhile then I'll pour my heart
and soul into it but I got to get to the point where
I see that I want that
commitment, yes?
Do you have anyone trying to challenge Chinook now?
No, I mean it's perfect
so you can play Chinook
but you'll never win
we have Chinook online
it's
it goes on and off online because the hardware
we have right now is
getting old and failing and so I haven't replaced it
and there are strong humans
that continue to like to play against
and use it as a sparring partner
but
no, you know the game is over
from the computer science
point of view there's nothing interesting left to do
actually that's not true there is one thing
interesting left to do and that's
if you don't mind I'll add some technical stuff
just one thing
this interests me and this, why does this
interest me? Well, Mary
and Tinsley or any checker player or chess player
they're really good at playing chess
or checkers
and they're not going to memorize 40
trillion positions. How do you play
a game? You use heuristics
you know in chess you might say it's good
to centralize my pieces
or I need to do king safety
you come up with heuristics
and I can explain a lot of those heuristics
to you but if I ask
if I gave you a position
with four white pieces versus
four black pieces and I say
here it is in the database it's a win
and the human says
why?
I have no idea the program says it's a win
so what I really want to do
and I'm going to try that this year
and I've tried before and it's failed
but with all the hype about deep learning
I want to try deep learning on this
I want to see if I can take
something like one of these databases
and run it through a learning algorithm
and try and compress it into
a smaller number of
explainable heuristics
so that
I could
I could use this to like write a book
so you want to learn how to play the checkering games
I have this program I run it and it will tell you
you should do the
following things if you're going to win the position
and I can't do that right now
and so I've got a lot of data
but I have no knowledge
and humans need knowledge not data
so I'd love to be able to do that
yes sir
like you said no one's going to
memorize 40 trillion
positions so
guess what my question is
what sort of
long term effect do you think this
will have on checkers at the highest level
they still play
but checkers is
not so popular it's
a dying game now I mean the
you know if you look at the
worldwide
the number of people in the American
and the checker federation
you're talking about a few tens of thousands of people
whereas in chess
worldwide you're talking you know
maybe a few million people
so checkers has been
dwarfed by chess and checkers
is not going to recover it's a fun game
it's a challenging game
the rules are very simple and elegant
but it does not attract people's attention
so that game is just
slowly disappearing
I guess to
clarify
do you think there
that we can
derive
any benefit personally
from solving these sorts of geometric
puzzles like chess
what do you mean
like if the
do you mean research wise what are the outcomes
for solving something like that
I'm just saying
hypothetically
it's possible to
solve
the chess puzzle
so if
just using chess as the
example since it's the more popular
of the two
I guess I'm just
wondering if this makes
the world would make the world of chess a better place
the world of chess
solving it I don't think
it makes a difference I mean we have superhuman
chess playing programs and nobody cares
they use them as sparring partners
but solving chess would be
interesting
and solving checkers was interesting
at one point
sorry I'm just trying to get to
here
one of the
effects of this is DARPA
held two workshops
on solving games of national importance
and this is because of the work we were doing
on chess and checkers which were very large
search spaces
and it turns out that a lot of real-world
problems can be couched as games
politics is a game
military is a game
certain kinds of legislation
laws like environmental laws
can be couched as a game
the way animals interact
is a game the economy is a game
multiple players and perfect information
things like that
and DARPA was interested in
how do we take games like
we solve the game of 10 to the 20th
which for 2007 is like a massive
is the biggest computational problem
solved today
and DARPA had done the work to take
some real-world games and try and express
real-world problems and express them as games
and they were coming up with 10 to the 100th
so how do you get
from solving games of size 10 to the 20th
to 10 to the 100th oh it's only a factor
of 5 right no
it's not a factor of 5 it's much
bigger than that and so
solving games bigger games like chess
would be amazing because
although the actual solving
of chess do we really care
whether chess with perfect play is a draw
or not no do we care
that checkers is a draw or not no
it's about what are the techniques
and the technologies that you would allow
you to get to solve such
really hard and complex problems
and again like I said at the beginning
I want to emphasize this is not about
games it's about
general purpose techniques
that you can use for other applications
this one
my talk became much more personal
so there was obviously a large game
component in my talk but
but the end result had to be
papers that were generally applicable
the back of it
I use your pattern
in case it's stuffed in
kind of solving just a little bit
I'm curious
what would be
most interesting to you
the result that somebody used
your research on
most interesting result that has used
my research
you certainly
extend a lot of playing research
well let me tell you one thing that
was completely unexpected and
it goes back to this slide
so
you look at that and you say
okay it's a big number but remember
we're talking about years ago
we're not talking about cheap
gigabyte disks
and you know how many what
that's a billion so we're talking about
39,000 gigabytes
or 39 terabytes
well back then I was
for a gigabyte I'm not going to afford
a terabyte it couldn't
so I spent a lot of time and effort
which is nothing to do with AI
in coming up with compression algorithms
so this whole stuff
got compressed down to
ah
was a
6
6 gigabytes
alright
and I had to invent new compression
algorithms application dependent
massive amount of compression
and then doing real time
searching on it because you're playing a game
which means you come across a business
you got to go and you got to decompress
part of the file
you can't take a 6 gigabyte file
and just unzip it
and then look up a position and zip it
but you can't so you got to take pieces
and decompress them pull things out
and okay fine
this technology and
thought nothing of it
until a couple years after
the second tinsley match
when two biochemists walked into my office
and said you know
we know what you did with the checkers program
and we think it has applications to
bioinformatics
well I don't know much about bioinformatics
I hated my undergrad biology course
and he said well
let's not talk about checker positions
win-loss draw
let's talk about
the letters ACGT
DNA
well
your database is just a string of
win-loss draws but it could be ACGT
and if we gave you large data
could you compress it similarly
I said well yeah we could try that out
and he said well and if you had large data
and you compressed it could we use some of your technology
to in real time
go and search it and pull information out
I said sure and he said
well we're working on the human genome project
we're generating
massive amounts of ACGT
data and
we want to have these programs
be able to analyze this data
in real time
and
instead of using big massive data
servers we want this all compressed
on something that somebody could do something on their laptop
we talked about it
within six months we formed a company
called Biotools
and we developed three products
Peptool, GeneTool and Chromotool
which did protein
and DNA analysis
and we sold those products to thousands
of research labs around the world
and I was very proud of it that
here was
DNA protein analysis software
with checkers inside
and who would have
I never would have made that connection
right?
and so yeah
we did it
we made a bit of money we sold the company
and in many ways
I'm proud of it because
one of the major companies
who did a lot of the DNA analysis
used our software
and they were very complimentary about
how much it helped speed up
their processes
and so
it's kind of an odd story
you never know where technology is going to go
and
that's cool I guess the other story I like
which was
really good to me
I've developed a lot of pathfinding algorithms
and you go and you publish them
these pathfinding algorithms can be used in GPS
systems but
I use these examples in computer games
and
we develop an algorithm hierarchical pathfinding
which is very fast
and
at a conference called
AIID artificial intelligence
interactive digital entertainment
which is on my mind because we're hosting it next week
in Edmonton
but one of the conferences
one of the major computer games companies
the guy comes up to me and says yeah we really like
your hierarchical pathfinding
we use it for all of our pathfinding
in games and I go
wow how cool is that
multi-gazillion billion dollar
company and my software
my algorithm
is in their products that sell
10, 20, 50 million copies
I wrote Chinook how many people in the world have ever played
against Chinook? Not many
how many people have played these games?
tens or hundreds of millions of people
and I thought that's cool
now how about a royalty
didn't get any
sorry
that's part of the problem of being an academic
because you publish things and you never know how they're going to be used
and you never know
if they're going to be used
but finally when you get that kind of feedback
it's very, very rewarding
yes sir
I think it would be ironic
if your compression helped solve pancreatic cancer
the other question is
well these
long projects seem like something
you could only do after you've got tenure
it seems like
how could anybody
I mean how
how could you
keep your
department happy
if you're just playing checkers all the time
so
that's a good point I actually started this project
in 88 and I did not get tenure till
89 but that was close enough
you've raised a good point
I kept my research group going and I had
other projects on the go but this was my passion
this is where I poured most of my time
and effort into it
but the interesting thing is that the two years
where I put the most
time and effort in which was 1992
for the first match against
Sinsley in 1994 which is the second match
of the Sinsley
there I poured my heart and soul
into those efforts
and there were almost no publications
that year because of
doing this
and those are the only
two years in my academic career where I got
substandard
evaluations
because I wasn't publishing
so
okay
it sort of reinforced the publisher
Paris paradigm
if you didn't publish well sorry
but I was doing something that I felt was bigger
and in the long run I was right
but you're absolutely right
most people can't commit to this type of thing
at an early stage of their career
it would be suicide
oh sorry it would be professional
suicide
I've got to be careful what I say
especially to graduate students
yes other questions
thank you again
thank you
wonderful thank you
