Skycom Analyst is a tool that processes thermal drone flight files to detect animals, automatically
determining their location, height, temperature and size, and showing all bursts on an interactive
display page.
In this overview, you will be introduced to Skycom Analyst's interactive display page.
Along the way, you will be shown how animals are detected and their characteristics calculated.
You will see how flight information and animal detections are overlaid to give understanding
to the user.
There is a lot of content, so I will be introducing everything step by step.
First, the user selects the file for processing and adjusts settings as required.
Once the file has been selected, other portions become visible.
The thermal and optical videos, the drone flight data, the drone flight path, and the
land contours.
As the video is processed, animals are detected and their details displayed.
The results are saved to a video and a spreadsheet.
This thermal video shows what is possible.
This is a three-second loop.
Each loop shows the same ball-shaped tree from above.
A friend confirmed there were possums in the tree.
Possums are warmer than trees and show as white hotspots.
Looking closely, each possum appears to be moving at a different speed.
This is because the possums are at different heights inside the tree.
So it's clearly possible to detect animals, their height above the ground, their temperature
and their size, even if they are covered by some foliage.
The tool uses image processing to locate and label animals.
Here the possums are labeled A1, A4.
As the drone flies, it creates a flight log containing drone GPS location data.
The ground under the drone flight path will rise and fall over time.
The drone can't measure the ground elevation.
The New Zealand Government Department, Toitu Te Fenawa, is progressively mapping New Zealand.
They provide phenomenally detailed ground and tree top elevation data.
Skycom Analyst automatically integrates this data.
Skycom Analyst shows drone height, speed, direction, etc.
As the drone twists and turns through the sky, height and location inaccuracies increase
and these impact the drone flight log accuracy.
Skycom Analyst has several automatic mechanisms to improve accuracy.
Also, when you fly your drone, if you follow our recommended flight protocols,
this will further improve the accuracy of the Skycom Analyst results.
On the flight path page, you can see where the objects were found.
You can see a summary of their size, their height above ground,
and the estimated animal density per square kilometre.
You can view the ground contours, or the tree top contours,
or view the ground area that the drone cameras imaged.
Or you can focus on one object at a time in the Object Explorer page.
This page loops through the video frames that contain the object,
providing a larger, stabilised view of the object.
You can categorise the objects and exclude those you are not interested in.
Skycom Analyst outputs a spreadsheet storing all calculated data
for later reuse or further analysis.
It includes a number of visualisations.
Future changes include automating the categorisation of some animal species
using machine learning algorithms.
Thank you for watching.
