Welcome, everyone. Today, we are very honored to have a keynote address by Barry Smith. Barry
is the director of the National Center for Romological Research. He's also Julian Park,
distinguished professor of philosophy, professor of biomedical informatics, professor of computer
science and engineering, and professor of neurology at the University at Buffalo in Buffalo, New
York. So today, we're going to hear him speak on command and control. Barry? Thank you, Ken.
So I'm going to start with a short video. It really is very short. The relevance of the
video will become clear later, but here it goes. Today, I'm going to be talking about command
and control. The birdsong that you just heard are going to illustrate a very important fact,
which is going to steer me through what follows, which is that control comes before command. So
the correct title for this talk should really be control and command, which sounds somehow
unnatural, but which is in fact doing more justice to the order of development in evolutionary
history. Now, the person who first explored control in the sense that we're interested in it in a
serious way, I believe, was Carl Buehler, who was a member of the Gestalt psychology movement on
the fringes, but he was central to what was then called the psychology of thought processes,
dengue, which we now probably would call cognitive science. And he was one of the founders of
psycholinguistics. He was incidentally supervisor of Popper's PhD, but he had many other famous
students, and so his influence is quite strong in not only in linguistics and psychology,
but also in sociology and behavioral biology. And Buehler's idea is that language is embedded in
behavior. So he was one of the first authors to talk about speech acts. And in fact, he was one
of the first authors to use the term speech act in his writings. And then language has three
fundamental dimensions. First of all, there's an innate dimension. So all human beings are born
with the innate capability to learn the language, and also with certain innate capabilities, for
instance, to acquire the use of the past tense or plurals and so forth. But of course, they don't
have an innate capability to speak Italian or German or Greek. They have to learn a specific
language. And one important dimension of everything I say and what follows is the dimension of
training or drill. And this is supplied by mothers, siblings, peers, and so forth, television.
That this is this is an inevitable compliment to the innate capabilities with which humans are
born. And then there are two types of behavior, which we find already in, for instance, nighting
gales that and illustrated by the the brief clip earlier that these are expression on the one hand,
which is what the the baby birds are doing and control, which is the main topic of what comes
next. So these birds are sending out an auditory signal. And they're doing this for several reasons.
So they are announcing a need to the parent or parents who are going to bring the food.
They're announcing a location and providing guidance for the parent to find them again.
They are out competing each other or trying to out compete each other. And this is a very
neat evolutionary trick to make them scream as loud as they possibly can. Because the ones who
scream loudest are the ones who have babies. And so gradually the ones who can't scream are
eliminated from the gene pool. But all that they are doing can be put together in one single function,
which is begging. And begging is a way of controlling the parent. What the parent does
is totally in the hands of what the babies want and what they express as what they want.
The parents are functioning entirely innately. The babies are functioning entirely innately.
The only thing which is new here is the begging function, which is switching the right switches
on the side of the parents to make them bring food. So this is control. Now it's not language.
What we have in the case of the Nightingales is not language. It's something which involves
audiovisual signals. So we can think about what the most primitive language might be. And Wittgenstein,
who was a contemporary of Bühler's in Vienna, although they almost certainly never met,
Wittgenstein has this idea of what might be one possible complete primitive language, which is
the language on a building site where we have a builder and an assistant. And the builder says
slab. And the assistant brings a slab. And so it goes. This is a similar language to the language
we find in a surgical theater where the surgeon says scalpel and the nurse brings a scalpel. So
this is a kind of language. And here again, we have multiple functions, but they're all unified
under a single heading. It's control all the way through. That's the only thing the language does.
Now, actually, there is some similarity between Wittgenstein's account of this primitive language
and Bühler's account of control, which was first identified in this paper by a long standing
collaborator of mine. And it's the paper describes the theory of language developed by Bühler,
which he called the organ on model. And it has three components, the sender, the receiver,
and the state of affairs in the world, which the sender is representing and which he wants the
receiver to represent. This is different from the more popular semantic triangle, which has three
components, which are symbol concept and referent. There's no real room for concepts in Bühler,
because he wants this to work for what we might think of as imageless or conceptless thought.
But what there is is the sign and the sound phenomenon in the case of auditory communication,
which are illustrated here in the middle. Everything else is concrete, or anyway,
it's concrete in the beginning, but it gets abstract as time goes by. So in the Nightingale,
we only have two components. We have the sender and the receiver. And there's control
affected from one side to the other. And there's control affected from the builder to the apprentice
in Wittgenstein's case. Now, Bühler adds to this organ on model what he calls the two-field theory.
On the one hand, there is deictic communication, which involves pointing or something similar
to pointing, because you're dealing with entities which are within the visual or auditory field
of both the sender and the recipient. Language allows a second kind of communication,
which we call symbolic communication, which relates to everything else in the universe,
the whole universe. I just referred to the whole universe by using a piece of symbolic
communication in the beginning of this sentence. Now, this means that we can effectuate control
in two ways. First of all, through deictic representation, where Boris tells his audience
to come and take this brick by pointing to it and holding it in his hand and showing it to the audience.
And then thereby asserting deictic control over the audience, they all want to come
and get his brick. I'm making up this story, by the way. And this is the symbol that he's using
in order to emphasize this pointing, expression, effectuating deictic control.
And then a second case, which is symbolic control. Boris wants somebody in the audience to bring him
a fly ash clay brick. And to do that, you might use a symbolic chart of different kinds of bricks
and compare the chart to the bricks that you have available and then bring one of those bricks.
It doesn't matter which brick you bring, so long as it is of a certain type. Such activities
are possible for human beings. They are the basis of language. And they are impossible for non-human
animals. Symbolic representation is what is new. So this is the two field theory. I'm just summarizing
it now. And you can see that the symbolic field can allow us to use language to relate to what
happens in the future. This is what makes planning possible. To what happens in some remote spatial
region, which we are not now present in, so we can plan our holidays in Mallorca, for instance.
But then there is an abstract realm. And this is the realm that we make.
Abula was not so interested in this abstract realm. But the beginning of his discussion of the
abstract realm lies in his account of group behavior. And for Abula, it's group behavior,
which is responsible for the origin of language. So human beings needed language,
because human beings started certain sorts of group behavior which were organized.
So organized group behavior is what is responsible, according to Abula,
for the origin of language. And we can see some examples here. Planning for the next harvest
is an obvious one, but also hunting and so forth. And why is language needed here? Because what is
needed is mutual control. Abula often use the word steering for control. Mutual steering of the
behavior of different members of the group. Now, this is easy in the deictic case. You can push
your apprentice around, take him by the ear and point to a brick and pull him towards the place
where the brick needs to be deposited. You don't leave language for that. You can use violence.
But when you're dealing with the goals which involve objects and states of affairs which
lie beyond the deictic field, then you have to use symbols. And that's why symbols, symbolic
language, that is to say language, began to exist. But now symbols are not enough. Symbols are really
difficult. No animal can cope with symbols. But humans, all humans cope with symbols. And that's
because the, our ancestors who were unable to cope with symbols did not have as many children
as those who could cope with symbols. And that's why we have an innate capacity to learn language.
What is, but then we have to learn a specific language. We have to learn the codes of the people
we are living with. And for that we need training, continuous training. So even when we're adults,
we're constantly being trained into the correct or appropriate use of language. And the training
involves sanctions if we misuse language. Sometimes we misuse language by using it incorrectly.
Sometimes we misuse language by using it too correctly. And then we're punished because we
sound too pompous. And this is a constant fine tuning of language among all the people around us.
Sometimes we speak multiple different languages because we mix with different crowds. And all
of this is possible because language depends on training. And note that this is a very important
point. And the more recent speech act theorists did not really emphasize this point because
they were interested in the philosophy of language. Bula was interested in the biology of behavior.
And so what he emphasized was that when, as we learn language, we also learn the behaviors
associated with those uses of language, including strictly linguistic behaviors such as promising,
but then also non strictly linguistic behaviors which are illustrated, for instance, by
football hooligans at a football match who shout rough things about the Liverpool football team
while at the same time defending themselves against the attacks, the physical attacks of fans of the
Liverpool football team. So behavior and language are interrelated. And we see this also in cases
like airline pilots who learn a special language which they use when they are piloting their planes
or terrorists, for instance, Islamic terrorists who use a special language when they are performing
their terrorist acts. Okay, now John Searle, of course, is the most conspicuous of the latter day
speech act theorists. And he has, he has explored the created world, the world that we create by
speaking. And this is the world of claims, obligations, rights and so on. And Searle says that
these entities exist because we represent them in language. And that's correct. What, what Searle
does not talk enough about, in my view, is the behaviors associated with these things, which are
learned as we learn language through the same processes of training and sanction. All right,
so these are all speech acts, marings, promising, and each one of these changes the world.
But there are various background conditions which have to be satisfied, which were identified
already by Austin. So you have to, when you're marrying, you have to use the right ritual phrases.
You have to have a legitimate authority. Everyone has to be sincere in their intent.
And the addressee, the wife who is being asked if she commits to the marriage,
has to accept the marriage. She has to say, I do. And they have to speak a common language. Everybody
has to understand the language in which the ceremony is being held. And sometimes, of course,
two languages might be used to make sure that both parties are understanding the details of
what is taking place. When the priest declares the couple man and wife, then he performs a speech act
and the world, according to Searle's view, changes instantaneously. But now we're not interested
in that instantaneous change. We're also interested in how this marriage bond between two people is
sustained in existence. So the initial creation can indeed take place just by speech acts or by
other evanescent phenomena, such as handshakes. And in a small community, in a village memory is
enough, everybody remembers that Jack married Mary. And so Jack remains married to Mary forever,
because if Jack behaves badly in the village, then he will be sanctioned. But if you're dealing with
a larger society where people move around a lot, memory doesn't work. And so the next important
component in this presentation is documents. So when you're in the larger society,
it's documents which preserve created entities like claims and obligations, they preserve them
in existence. And that's why we have paper contracts, why we have registry offices, why we have
magistrates, where we have written plans. The existence of these things documents the beginning
to exist of the claim or the obligation or the commitment. But then it sustains the claim or
the obligation or the commitment in existence over time and allows the original contract to be checked,
for instance. Now, Sol, in his book, Making the Social World from 2010, uses on the cover a very
interesting example of all of this, which is again the case of marriage. What sustains marriage in
existence? Well, in part, it's the marriage contract, it's the certificate. This is Elvis Presley's
marriage certificate or that is what I learned from the internet, at least. And this contains
what Sol would call a standing declaration. A declaration is normally something which is
associated with the Speech Act. Sol says that you can associate declarations also with documents.
And this document contains the phrase, join in lawful wedlock. So Elvis Presley joins in lawful
wedlock to Priscilla and Boliö. This means that as soon as the certificate is signed,
this relation of lawful wedlock obtains between these two people. Now, this is another standing
declaration. It's not from New Jersey, it's from the island of Jersey. It's on the Jersey £5 note,
which is always, and as a matter of necessity, identical in value to a British £5 note.
It's signed by the treasure of the states of Jersey who promises to pay the bearer £5 on
demand. Now, the nature of this promise is unclear. I'm using it here solely to illustrate the idea
of a standing declaration, which is how a document preserves something in existence over time. In this
case, something like the value of a piece of paper. Alright, now, documents too, all by themselves,
are not enough to guarantee sustainability, a value or whatever else it might be. What we need
further, again, is training. So when you become a lawyer, you spend six years or however long it is,
becoming trained in how to use documents, how to understand documents, but also how to use
documents. And the same applies in other spheres. Wherever documents are important. Nowadays,
wherever paper documents, but also digital documents are important. So this view that the world of
created entities is maintained in existence by documents is now being transformed because
digital documents are taking over from paper. And now we get to command and control. So as I think
most of you know, the army has a command called TRADOC, the training and doctrine command. Doctrine
is a set of documents, which is used as the basis for training the army so that the soldiers in the
army at different levels can perform certain acts, speech acts on the one hand, but also
acts of other kinds, including commanding acts on the other hand. And the army doctrine hierarchy
is a hierarchy of publications. So TRADOC makes the army. So the army is a created entity, just
like a marriage or a bond of wedlock is a created entity. And the army, of course, takes a lot more
effort to sustain it in existence. And that's what TRADOC is for. So it designs the army by changing
the plans which will hold of it in the future. Particularly, of course, the plans for training,
but these are also then manifested in the way the plans for training, the rules for training,
are documented in the corresponding planning and training documents. And then TRADOC builds the army
by isolating the people who are good enough to serve in the army, and then isolating
the subgroups of that group, who are then going to be developed into becoming leaders of the army.
And all of this is taking place continuously. Just as we are creating and preserving language
continuously, so TRADOC is creating and preserving the army continuously. It never ends.
And this is not just true of the army. All military services are subject to joint doctrine,
of which army doctrine is logically subservient. And this is the joint doctrine hierarchy,
which again includes more general publications at the top, and then more specific publications down
as you get into the collection of publications that you see here before you, each one of which
points to a PDF file. One of them points to a dictionary. And the dictionary is designed for
human beings. It's a dictionary in the sense in which Webster's dictionary is a dictionary.
And of course, there's a problem because nowadays, the army is employing not just human warfighters,
but also all kinds of computational digital artifacts. And that there is an issue about
how we will extend doctrine to apply to those artifacts also. So military doctrine is there
to establish the common ways of accomplishing military tasks, the common rules, the common
plans, and so forth. Thereby facilitating readiness. You train and plan all the warfighters so that
they are ready to follow commands of specific types immediately because they've been drilled.
And those LEGO bricks of activities that they can perform are used in the plans so that the plans
will require of the troops exactly those actions in which we have been drilled. So doctrine is a
guide to action, drilling people so that they can perform some actions, many kinds of actions which
interlock like LEGO bricks automatically and instantaneously. Just as we perform those acts
which are innate automatically and immediately the swallowing action, for instance, there has
to be no hesitation. And of course, the reason for this is because when the war starts, you can follow
the plans in the initial way because you have not yet met opposition. But you need this spontaneous
and automatic ability to follow commands also when the orchestrated part of the war breaks down
and you confront unanticipated obstacles. There you need to be able to accept new commands which
didn't fit into the plan but which still rely on your troops being trained to follow those new
commands spontaneously and automatically. All right, so the doctrine hierarchy contains a dictionary,
doctrine pub1-02, and the dictionary is made for human beings. So if you can see on the left,
it looks like Webster's dictionary. But for computers, we built the joint doctrine ontology
and you can see a small fragment of it here. The blue at the top are BFO terms and the blue
further down are terms from the Common Core ontology which was created by Kubrick here in
Buffalo to address the needs of large military organizations to have a very, very broad scale
ontology to support interoperability of military software. Just as the joint doctrine dictionary
supports interoperability of human actions, human systems, so the joint doctrine ontology
and the Common Core ontologies are there to support interoperability of machines. And then the idea is
that because the joint doctrine ontology is built to be logically identical to the dictionary which
underlies joint doctrine for humans, then the way in which the machines operate will be compatible
with the way in which they are supposed to operate if they follow joint doctrine. All right, this is
another example. The process is a BFO term and then activity is a joint doctrine term and then
there are various kinds of activities such as operations and one important set of activities
is control and here is where we get the relation then between documents and control and very soon
we're going to get the relation between command and control. All right, so the army profession,
army doctrine reference publication number one, this is how TRADOC builds the army. So the army
profession involves instilling in the people selected to join the army five essential characteristics,
expertise, honor, trust, esprit de corps and long-term responsibility. So this means
responsibility for things like veterans and it all starts with something which is a speech act
and we'll see what this is in the moment. Making the army professional rest not just on training
but also evaluating, testing and then those people who pass the test enjoy credentialing
and then they're assigned to various tasks which are appropriate to their credentials and then
their realisation of those tasks are evaluated and the cycle begins again. So there's a constant
cycle which is a cycle of promotion of medals consisting of sequences of evaluation, action,
evaluation, command, evaluation and so forth and the people who've passed the tests who pass the
evaluation are promoted and now I'm just going to check whether there are lots of activities on the chat.
No, so I'm going to keep going.
So the TRADOC is responsible for making the army professional on the basis of joint doctrine
so that soldiers will coordinate spontaneously when acting in relevant circumstances.
Now I said that we would get gradually to command. Now there are speech acts which are what happens
when the commander issues a command but this is a document act. The symbols here are parts of a
language which other people can understand, other people who need to understand them and the stripes
on the shoulder and the stars on the lapel are all documents which are understood by the people
who need to understand them so that the relevant speech acts by the person who's wearing the
relevant uniform will have the relevant deontic effect. And then this is the code to understand
these documents and on the right we have the way in which the army is organized in such a way that
we can see the command hierarchy from one level to the next and all the way down. And this starts
as I say with speech acts with a specific kind of speech act, namely an oath and the oath has
the structure of the promise. So the oath is to affirm support and defend the constitution of the
United States. This is a promise and this is the ontology of promising which we're going to use as
the basis for understanding the ontology of command. We will see that command is ontologically
speaking the other side of the coin from promising. So the promise is a person, the promisee is a person,
the promise is an act and it depends simultaneously on the promisee and the promisee.
The relation is a one-sided dependence relation. You can't have a promise without a promisee.
And the promise itself has a complex internal structure. It consists of an act of speaking,
an act of registering, and a certain content which is the content of what the promisee
promises to do. And the act of registering is needed because the promisee has to register
and not necessarily overtly or explicitly but by his registering consent to the thing which
the promisee wants to do. You can't promise to kill somebody unless there are very special
circumstances. And there we have a case of three-sided mutual dependence. So that particular
content is not just the content of a sentence. It's the content of that specific ritual act of
speaking accompanied by an act of registering by the promisee. And then immediately two things
come into existence. The obligation on the side of the promisee and the claim on the side of the
promisee. And what we have here is a two-sided dependence. You can't have an obligation without
a claim and you can't have a claim without an obligation. And then we have the felicity condition
to be a promise rather than a sham promise. The promisee has to sincerely intend to do F.
And another felicity condition is trust. And there are background felicity conditions. For
instance, the promisee has to use the same language. He has to have the required expertise. It has to
be possible for him to perform the act and so forth. And the promisee gives rise immediately,
not just to an obligation and a claim, but also to a tendency to realize the thing which was
promised. For instance, mowing your lawn. And that thing has to be done by or arranged by the
promisee. Now let's look at command. It looks very similar, but it is in fact a mirror image. Here
in the promise, the promisee has the obligation. Here the commander, the executor of the act of
commanding, the speaker has the claim and the commande has the obligation. And here the felicity
condition, the prime felicity condition is authority. The commander has to have authority
over the commande. This trust may be involved in commanding, but it's not the central felicity
condition. And the sincere intention also has to be there. And if we have time, we will talk about
what that means. But the sincere intention and the trust in the case of the promise are much more
central. In the case of the promise, the one who promises does the act. In the case of command,
the one who is commanded does the act. And so the obligation is also a duty. And then in the case of
commanding, you have what is very rare and perhaps impossible in the case of promising, which is
collective commands. This is possible. But then also inherited commands, commands which flow down
a plan hierarchy. So plans consist of subplans and sub-subplans. And the command involves
subcommands, which are themselves the result of duties on the part of subservience, subordinate
commanders, who have to follow the major command by performing subcommands to their commandees,
according to this hierarchy. Now, this is very similar to what happens in an orchestra.
There you have the orchestral score, which is the plan followed by the conductor, which is the
ultimate commander in the hierarchy on the previous slide. And then the individual performers
have their subplans, which are the staves for the separate instruments. And this illustrates
modularity of planning, which is illustrated both in the musical case and in the military case
on this slide. And here again, we find the hierarchy of different levels of expertise
and different levels of training, which we saw in the slides relating to trade-off
and in the slide relating to how to decipher the symbols, which are the lapel stars on the
uniforms of the commanders involved in some military mission. And this is how control
flows down. This is by now obvious. Each one of these steps involves the realization of specific
elements of a plan at the first level, a subplan at the second level, and a sub-subplan
at the third level. And so this modularity is present also in the case of the orchestra. So each
group of instrumentalists forms a module corresponding to the elements illustrated here.
And modularity is a necessary presupposition for massive shared agency. You remember that we began
with Bula's idea that language came into existence because of organized collective action, organized
collective action requires language. Massively organized collective action requires language
which is trained for specific submodules, which means specific subgroups of people who are organized
in a hierarchy. And then in both cases, the massively organized agency is possible because
of training. And now this training is in many cases more properly described by using the word
drill. So to learn to play a musical instrument means drill over years. And this drill continues
when you learn to play a musical instrument as part of an ensemble, a chamber ensemble,
or a whole orchestra. You have to be drilled in performing your action in such a way that it's
synchronized with the actions of all the other instrumentalists. And this is exactly the same
applies where the planners in the military are orchestrating a mission. This goes hand in hand
with the presupposition that you have troops which have been drilled in the relevant actions,
but also where you have troops who have been trained in the relevant mission, which corresponds
on the orchestral side to the relevant symphony. And this is how to do things with documents.
So you use the score to rehearse the orchestra. And you couldn't rehearse without scores and
the sub scores for the instrumentalists. And you can't perform without either having so many
rehearsals that they all know the score off by heart or by having the score in front of the
instrumentalists. So drill and documentation complement each other very nicely here. You
can't you can have one without the other, but you don't have anything without either one or the other.
And the same is true in the military case. So a joint mission is rehearsed and all its sub plans
are rehearsed. And the mission itself cannot exist without those rehearsals. And the mission
itself can't be performed without rehearsal specific to this particular plan. But then there
are differences of course. So C2 in the military has a much longer chain of command. And C2 in the
military involves an enemy. And there are no enemies, very rarely other enemies in orchestral
performance. And so you you orchestrate a war, but you never compose a war. You compose a symphony
and then you orchestrate it. All right, now the final topic I'm going to talk about very briefly
is the difference between a plan specification and the plan. So if you read a recipe in the recipe
book, you may do that for fun with no intention of ever cooking. But typically, you read the recipe
in order to realize the plan which the recipe specifies. The plan then exists in your head
when you decide, decide to cook this particular dish. So the plan specification is a document. The
plan itself is a disposition in the minds of its realizers. And now I'm not going to say very much,
but that distinction underlies the joint planning process. And I'll just go through it. So
we know that we're going to need to invade Iraq. So we analyze the mission. This is all performed by
the staff of the relevant commander. And then there is what is called course of action development,
which means developing alternative plan specifications. And then you test these plan
specifications. You war game them. You run tests in the field. And then you compare the results.
And then the general approves one particular course of action. And then we cease to, at that stage,
we have plan commitment, course of action commitment. At that point, the plan begins to exist
in the general's head. And then immediately the staff and the subordinate commanders
also acquire the corresponding subplans in their heads, no longer just plan specifications,
no longer just documents, but actual dispositions to act, to command subordinates,
to control subordinates in order to realize the plan. And that is then the end of what I'm going to
say. And thank you all very much. And now I hope you're still there. Let me see if I can.
Good. And now I'm not sure if I pause share, maybe I can see a bigger screen.
I have a question. Please.
I have worked in the space business for a long time, vaguely related to military,
but not exactly. And everybody likes the metaphor of Legos. And the problem is it's really,
really wrong. Legos fit together in only one way. All of the other components and conditions fit
together in multiple ways. And trying to think of them fitting together as Legos is a really bad idea.
It says me.
So I agree with you, actually. I think probably I will not use the Lego analogy
anymore. But just for the sake of argument, and this truly is just for the sake of argument,
I would note, first of all, that Legos fit together in multiple ways. So when you buy a Lego
brick set, you're not restricted to make just one item. You can make many items. So it's not
quite as bad as you make it sound. Secondly, in the military, they have something called the Joint
Universal Task List. And then they have the Army Universal Task List. So these are what I had in
mind when I talked about Lego bricks. In light of your question, I would agree with you that they
are to be fitted together in not in the way that Lego bricks fit together. It's much more complicated,
much more messy than that. But I would maintain the idea that to make the Army work, you have to divide
things up into small task units. Otherwise, you can't train, you can't test, you can't evaluate,
you can't war game, you can't do any of the things that the Army has to do to train its troops.
Agreed. So I think we're agreed. And I promise not to use the word Lego again.
Well, it's a metaphor that everybody understands. So I know why it's used.
Yeah. But it is indeed misleading. And as I think about how the juttles and the
outlaws are used, they're never used in the way that Lego bricks are used. There's always a lot
more going on. Okay. Thank you. I have a question. I love the notion that there's a strong link between
language and behavior. And you said a lot about the training of behavior. As I'm watching my
grandchildren grow up, and we've got one year old and two two year olds, you know, it seems play
actually is a big component of learning behaviors and learning language. And I actually believe
in the military play, play something. That's why there are war games. It's a play kind of thing.
So I wonder, just curious from your philosophy, because training and drilling is about taking
a language and and and really reflect taking a behavior language and refining it. But what's
the purpose in your larger construct of play? Yes. So that's a very interesting question. One of the
areas in which Carl Buehler was very influential was in the study of child behavior. And his wife,
Charlotte Buehler, was actually a world famous child psychologist. He published a number of
important works in child psychology. And they both lived in America at the end of the end of their
lives. So they survived the Second World War. And she lived a very long life. I think she died in
the 60s. And I was, as I say, very influential. Now, the role of play, I think the first thing
to be said is that boys play hard. They fight, they run risks, they run to the edge of cliffs.
And this is an important evolutionary, this is an innate tendency on the part of boys.
And it's important from the evolutionary point of view, what they're doing when they do that is
testing and discovering their limits and making making it the case that they push themselves
in their behavior to their limits. And then the ones that push themselves too far die.
Or anyway, they get injured. They are subject to evolutionary obstacles thereafter. This is an
evolutionary brilliant device to make sure that men come out as strong and as ambitious and as
gritty as they can. I'm getting carried away here. Now, play otherwise is clearly initiation
for following rules. So we play not only the dare games that boys play, that I dare you to
jump off this cliff. That is not a rule based game. But then card games and board games, they are,
I don't think that that's going to be innate, although I'm willing to be directed here. But
it's certainly something which plays an important role in allowing children then to learn how to
follow more important kinds of rules. For instance, when they join a large organization and there
are company rules that they have to follow. And so again, another question that would be
interesting to consider is the role of video games in a child development and whether it has
the same sort of positive role that old more old fashioned board games have. And I don't know the
answer to that question, but it would be an interesting question to explore. I agree. Thank you.
There's a quote from a movie, The Talented Mr. Ripley, where I think it's Gwyneth Paltrow says,
why is it that when boys play, they always play at killing each other?
Well, now we know. Yeah.
I have a question. This is Mitch Coker. So your representation of commanders and commandees
or reminds me like the pattern of client and server in computer science.
And so the question is, I can see that a commandee becomes a commander at a lower level.
So how do you model this in the ontology practically? Because in the client and server,
there is sometimes when you want to move a system from client server to peer to peer,
all of a sudden you need a different class peer. So do you need something like this in your
ontology or not? Yeah. So BFO deals with cases such as this by using the term role. A role in BFO
is something which is assigned to an entity and the entity itself continues to exist. It just has
a new role. And so the commander has the commander role at a certain time and in a certain situation.
But then at a later time and in a different situation, he has a commandee role. And it's
the same person all the way through just two different roles. Now, what we're going to have
to do, and this is the interesting next step, and I have to confess that BFO is not,
has not been tested here whether this can work. But what we have to do is to describe the authority
relations on the one hand between the commander and the commandee, but then also the obligation
relations. I have authority over you, therefore you are obliged to follow my commands. How we model
this obligation is still a work in progress in the BFO community. We need it in order to have a BFO
conformant ontology of law, for instance. We also need it to have a BFO component ontology
of everything which is involved in a hierarchical organization, which is something that we are
working on at the moment. So it's interesting that you mentioned now situation. So finally,
it's very closely related to the process. So the question is, do you have a notion of situation
in your ontology? Yes, so that is indeed an interesting question. I'll be talking a little
bit about this tomorrow. Is it tomorrow when we have the workshop? I'm going to talk about the
way in which BFO will start to deal not merely with the counterparts in the world of nouns,
but also with the counterparts in the world of sentences. And to do that, I need to talk about
situations. I have a respect for the situation calculus, but the situation calculus will not
work and I will explain why it will not work for our purposes. Very interesting, thank you very much.
Hello, I'm Gabriel Jacobson. I'm here. Hello. Your presentation had a kind of two parts. One is
a kind of Bueller's psycholinguistic theory of language. And the second part was about
the command and control language and speech acts in army. So I do have two questions or maybe
questions, comments. One is regarding the Bueller's psycholinguistic theory. You looked on
language mostly as an instrument of communication. At the same time during evolution, the language
had also a different role in terms of language for internal reflection of the reality, so
other words kind of thinking. So do you think so that these two roles of language as an instrument
of communication and instrument of reflection played an equal role or there was a kind of prevailing
on one of them? Now, that's a very interesting question. It throws light on my
thought processes in putting this presentation together. I was pushing towards command and
control, which is almost the paradigm example of language for communication in a big and powerful
way. You're not merely trying to communicate, you're trying to communicate in such a way that
you exert control of a very strong sort. Bueller tended to emphasize the relationship between
language and group behavior. In other words, language used in communication. In his earlier
psychological work, he was associated with a group of people which were interested in the
phenomenon of languageless thought. But now what you're interested in is languageful thought,
which is not a matter of communication. Now, Bueller was to some degree influenced by Husserl,
who was the founder of phenomenology, whose whole theory of language was based upon
solipsistic monologue. So for Husserl, that's where you start. That's the paradigm example
of language. And that leads to a view of language used for communication, which sees
communication as a kind of secondary, subsidiary effect. And I'm a big fan of Husserl and I'm a
big fan of Bueller. I think in this respect, Bueller is correct. Communication came first.
Thought using language was only possible because people had already been trained, drilled,
had language beaten into them in such a way that they could also use it for rather strange
kinds of things. For instance, private thought, prayer, writing poetry, and other sorts of
activities which have nothing to do with group survival, with organized group behavior in the
service of survival and reproduction. So I don't know whether that answers your question,
but it tells you something about Bueller. Actually, I have a very short follow-up
with the previous question. It just happens to be that I more or less equally actively speak
three languages. And it just happens if I am doing something myself and later on trying to find a
question in what language I actually was thinking. I have very hard time to answer. My usual answer,
I don't know. Maybe it's the reason is that we de facto think not by symbolic strings, but think
by visual objects or your visual perception of the reality. So that might I ask which three
languages they are? No, English, Russian, and Estonian. Actually, they happen to be very different
languages. So first of all, it's known empirically that some people think much more in images than
other people. So there are image thinkers and there are word thinkers. I guess you might be an image
thinker. And I'm not sure whether this distinction is innate or whether you can learn to be an image
thinker because that brings more benefits if you speak multiple languages. These are interesting
questions, but unfortunately, I don't know the answers. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. And sorry about my
second question is you talked about the flow of commands from top to lower hierarchies.
But in many cases, maybe not in the army, but let's say in the mission control, let's say moon
mission control. It's very hard to build very strict hierarchical top down command structure.
And actual people are using models which they call federated control, which means some commander
are given to a federation and federation itself by its own rules, maybe including sub
hierarchical structure. But anyway, in this federated command structure, we cannot see
very nice and control flow from top down and later on reconstruct from bottom to up again.
So what do you think about that? That's good. So this is a twin to the Lego question earlier.
I think that the army in order to make itself work, it's a huge organization,
needs to err in the direction of Lego bricks and clean hierarchical chains of commands.
And the whole the whole organization is based upon that structure. However,
it knows that in in particular war time situations where things break down,
that structure too is going to break down and the troops are going to have to be trained
to behave in in the right sorts of ways, even when the command structure is no longer in operation.
That's the first thing. But secondly, there are kinds of activities which do not
work well in a strictly hierarchical chain of command kind of structure. This may be true
of programming. It may be true of very creative planning. And so I'm sure I don't know the details
on this, but I'm sure that the army allows for let's say more innovative command structures
where they are needed. So the again, the basis is the Lego brick hierarchical command structure.
I'm exaggerating a little bit now the basis of everything is that. But then once you have that,
you can experiment with more innovative kinds of command structure in specific contexts.
