Good morning. Welcome to today's lecture. So I'm very told you, I think that today we are going to focus on once one computation, quantum computing. Why are we doing this?
So to start with a small spoiler. So quantum computers are not from the, from the point of view of quantum algorithms. So which algorithms can you run on quantum computers?
Quantum computers don't allow speed ups for the algorithms that are needed for AI training. So AI training, as you know, works with neural networks. Nowadays, most of the, at least the AI training that is, that is, you know, gaining traction among the general public,
that's trained using, using so-called neural networks, and they can't run on quantum computers. Well, they can be run on quantum computers, but they can't be run more efficiently than, they can't be run more efficiently than on a normal computer.
And so, but why are we still looking at, because we believe it's very important trend and so you should understand it.
So,
so we last time I was here in March where we spoke about computation. I would like to take up this once more, but last time I used for computation I use as a paradigm.
The
church approach with recursive functions. Now I want to do Turing machines as well just quickly, because I think it's very important paradigm to understand and then we will talk about logic gate based computation quantum mechanics and quantum computing.
And my goal is so is to allow you as philosophers to understand it and also as computer scientists for those who are computer scientists to understand enough of quantum mechanics, not as a mathematically but at the, you know, more verbal level of description so that you can get the basic idea of how quantum computers function.
And it. So, um, we saw last time already that if you want to understand a I agents need to understand models computable algorithms and complex systems and, and today we're going to speak and try again about computation.
So, I think Barry is spoken about this at length is right about models and modeling.
Yeah, so just to remind you. So what we are doing when we are programming computer, no matter what is supposed to run the it's a model in the sense of science.
So it's a representation of an aspect of reality using abstract symbols that is created to describe explain or predict the aspects of reality in question unless it's a purely mathematical task by calculating a huge prime number.
If you calculate you which prime number then that's not a model of reality.
And that that is something else which we can discuss now but most models that are put into computers are models of reality.
And we say that a model is adequate. If relative to some set of requirements, it can be used to engineer an entity or an emulation that satisfies the requirements like an Airbus a 320 satisfies of the requirement of transporting a certain amount of, of weight or passengers and cargo.
Over, you know, the Atlantic, for example.
And synoptic model is a model of a system that can be used to engineer given system or emulate its behavior.
So, now what's a Turing machine.
So, Turing asked, what is a computable function.
He, his answer in 1937 or 36 was a mathematical functions computable if an algorithm can be formulated that performs this functional Turing machine.
And so if the algorithm P computes a function F, which maps T to N with T element of the set N exponent K.
If P is the value F of N one to N K upon the input and one to N K element of T, after finite number of steps, then it is computable.
And it cannot yield an output if you input a vector so this.
This is a vector like vector N one for N K.
If that vector is not within T, which is the domain of the computation that won't create an output. So, for example, if you give LGBT an image.
It can't do anything with it because its domain is language and also mathematics actually.
It can't use images for quite a while he I think it's called is a neural network that is that that has its domain images so you can give it.
No, it has I think it's domain text and it creates images.
And, and but I think you can also give some of these programs an image and take create an alternative version of this image.
And so that, so that that just says that the computability requires a domain for the function to work on this is very this is super important slide I actually didn't think of it when I wrote the slide but
but what you can see from this last statement here is the narrowness of all a is because whenever I get an input that is not an element of the set of its domain it will just fail.
And so all I put by this definition, all I everything that can ever exist are always made for a certain domain.
Right, and if, and if you get out of this domain, it will not compute.
And so, and so I think with this slide alone you can already refute the notion of generally I because humans don't work like this right humans can always take vectors of input from a domain that they have not been prepared for.
Also animals can do this and that is what is called natural intelligence, but computers can always only compute something for the set of the domain of computation for which they were prepared.
So, the Turing machine is a model of a computable function a universal Turing machine can compute all computer functions so this is the universal Turing machine this is universal Turing machine.
This inside there's universal Turing machine right so all your, your, your mobile phones and computers yes they are universal Turing machines.
And so the Turing machine is a tape divided into cells each cell contains a symbol from some finite alphabet zero usually zeros and once the effort contains a special blank and one or more other symbols.
There's a head which is called q here that can read and write symbols on the tape and move the tape left and right and one and only one cell at a time.
And in some models the head moves at the tape station that doesn't matter.
There's a state register that stores the state of the Turing machine one or finitely many among these is the special start state with which the state register is initialized.
Now there's a finite table of instructions that given the state q one, the machine is currently in at the symbol a one it is reading on the tape so right now this.
The head is q one is reading the symbol zero.
And it's reading the symbol and tells machine what to do next.
It can either erase or write a symbol, and then can can move the head.
And so, so this is how it works.
And here you have a simple Turing machine that doubles the number of ones it reads and inserts a zero between the two series of ones.
So, it's defined by these parameters the M equals and then there's a series of symbols.
So q are the states of the machine.
Sigma capital Sigma is alphabet input alphabet gamma is the tape alphabet.
And, and these this is and so this, if you look at it, it has a delta has a state transition function that lets the machine move from one side to the other.
So the machine will replace a one one it reads on the tape by a one one one zero on one. So it doubles the ones it reads and separates them by a zero. That's all it does.
And to do this you have on this Turing machine you need, as you see here six states.
And so here we see what it does. So the tape it has to work on is prepared to have two ones and three zeros and at the end.
So here it will have two ones zero and two ones, and then it stops.
So that's, that's all it does.
Sorry, and, and let's, let's see how this works so instead as one, it, it actually reads the one.
And then it's, it replaces it by a zero and moves one step right. So you see here it has replaced it by zero is now in state two and has has moved one step right.
So in step in this now it reads a one.
And it's, it's staying.
It's staying in in state two, but then it moved but it moves on one to the right by moving one to the right.
It was he it gets here. Right. So now it reads a zero.
And it moves one further to the right.
And here it, it's, it reads a zero it's now getting it getting into into into stage three and so on. So this basically this the state transit it's called a finite state automaton.
This is what the machine does. And it perfectly determines its behavior. So you could now give it, you know, the tape was a million ones, and a million and two zeros, and it would then move through this algorithm.
As long as it would take it to fill the whole tape was another million ones and leaving two zeros. Sorry, one zero in the middle.
And so, and so this is, and all computers are like this only that the finite state automaton that is used is of course much bigger than this.
You know, but every computer can be in the end reduced to a combination of such finite state automata and even so even if even if I if I have software running here.
I think it's called on this, when I program software in the high level programming language like here I have.
I think it's called.
It's a some C dialect and Objective C.
So if I program for the iPhone with Objective C, I create ultimately many many finite state automata that work together to accomplish such computations.
So this is basically how this basically works at the level of the electrons at the level of the bits. And, and so so this is just basically all you need to know is just that the want to close the door.
Thank you.
It's basically just that that it gets more and more complicated with bigger Turing machine, but they all work like this in every computer that can be that exists, including the quantum computers can be represented with such with such finite state automata.
It's not done, because they get bigger and bigger and more and more complicated but basically to improve that this is the case.
And I have here an example of a, of a finite but not computer function which is non recursive.
And, and so, so when the functions non recursive you learned last time when I was here that it cannot be computed all to a machine. So it's on computable and it's called the busy beaver function I will not go through it now.
Because when I wrote this lecture I didn't realize how much work it was to teach you quantum mechanics. So I need more time for quantum mechanics, at least, you know, one or one.
So I will skip this but in the, but you can read this it's a super interesting problem was invented by, by Tiborado a mathematician.
And it's, it's very, very funny. It's, it's very funny.
Look how simple the Turing machine looks and it can't compute. It can't finish it's, it's just, it's just super and, and I go I expand quite well here you then you have one.
How it what it does how it works, you know its job is to put to put the whole table of ones.
And it's just so funny. And, and here you see that it becomes uncomputable and why. So it's a super cool problem.
If you want to work on it yourself, you will enjoy it and it's, it's the nice thing about it that you don't have to be a mathematician to understand it, but it shows you really clearly why many drums are not computer not computer but I just, I just have to have to skip it.
So I want to show you now before we move to quantum mechanics.
How logic. So, and do you have any questions on this Turing machine model with the finite set automaton.
I mean, if you if you study computer science you are you write the test about it. It's not too easy. Then they give you, they give you for example a piece of, of, of sort of code to the code and then say write down the sequence of finite set automaton to achieve the pseudocode so it's, but you get the principle I think
right. It's just if you want to apply to save it gets a bit tricky but it's, it's just, you know, in the end math. So, so now getting to to the logic gas computation so you have to the idea of of of by of the binological
was was invented. The first to invent this was a German called Conrad's and at the same time Americans were trying to do a hexadecimal computer, which you as a computation basis 1616 bits.
Right, so to experiment for and, and, and there is a hexadecimal is an important principle today in computation, but it's only used in high level but the lowest level the computations are all the two bit computers.
And so the each bit can have a zero and a one and conrad's who's a realized that this was, was easiest to do because, because you can, because for true reasons you can use binary not binary digits which have had invented by another German called Leibniz, you've heard of him.
And, and he realized that he could use the binary digit and it would use electricity. Now the first computation machine he built was was that rework that was put into production had, I think five or three or four hertz.
So it could do for computation. It had a clock of four computations per second. And, and, as we will see that the parallel suffices to add to numbers.
Think you need a few more steps to do this we will see it a bit later, but, but, but it, it, but it worked and then very soon he built also electronic versions and then of course IBM start to build electronic button and so on.
But basically the idea is that you're using Boolean logic to to to program the computer and you see it here.
So this this Boolean logic is called logic gate.
And so, if you take. So here you see an example of logic gate and gate will just, it's called gutter in German that's from the German media.
And it doesn't use use illustrations of the dummy because it is, along with the Russian, the best for mathematics, topics. It's just that I can't. I don't know any Russian.
And, and, but I always look at the French to German and the English version to select which one I should take and often the German is the best.
A logic gate is is an idealized or physical device that performs a Boolean function, which is logical operation performed on one or more binary inputs that uses a single binary output.
So there is a mistake here but I won't correct it now. So the end gate, right.
It's, it's basically taking. So if you have fear current and no current here, you have one zero, then you will have no current output here.
If you put no current in both you will not have currently either. If you put current in both you will have current and so on. So the transistor is set up in a way, basically, to basically implement this truth table.
Right. So that you get only one if both of the, of the inputs are one.
And an or gate gives you it gives you a electricity on this.
Why output a channel when with one of the channels is has current on it. Right. So, so, and, and if you have now many, many of these logic gates you can build a micro circuit.
And of, and of many micro circuits you can build a microprocessor. So in the end, in here, we have millions hundreds of millions of gates combined to.
To make up the processor that is working.
And, and so this is a multiplexer.
So, the multiplexer, and it has a truth table. Right. So how does it work.
It has a control signal called as zero. It has an input one and input two and output. And you see here that the control signal decides on on what is done with the input signals.
And basically, it's a data selector that select between several input things and forward to select the input into a single output line.
If the, if this control signal set to zero, you see the output here will only be easy role. But if it said to one, the output will only be one.
Right. So it basically suppresses based on the controls in the suppresses one of the input channels, and only put forward the other channel so it's a way of basically selecting which channel should should should move on.
And, and, and so here you, it's quite easy. You can see if, if this is zero, they're both zero, then the output will be zero, and so on. For example, if this is one, and you want is zero, this will be zero, but this is one and you want is one is will be one and
if I trust a would just says, if a zero is zero, then you will have the value of easy as output. If a zero is one, then you have a one.
Right. And so, and this is the symbol the official symbol used in in circuits to describe it. And, and it's made up of an and not and or gate.
So, so you have three gates that you need to put together. And so this truth table is basically what you get when you train together and not want or gate.
So you can see it all the examples how these small logic circuits or these logic gates are put together to create one small circuit.
And it's all about, you know, deciding how to which electrons should should move out here.
So the multiplexer is a very abstract, but everybody has used an adder, right, which is just if you type into your pocket cash, the three plus four and it puts out.
It puts out a seven and, and this adder works like this. So it combines an exclusive or and an end gate.
So an exclusive or is, is the gate that it does this.
So if you have two inputs a and b, what output do you get so if you have zero and zero, it will be zero. If you have one and one, it will be zero.
And one only is either of them is one that's why it's all right and and or as computer scientists saw and the other is is has of course this truth table.
And this one is like the Latin Bay.
Right. That's why it's always also in the movie with the B.
And this one is like out, out the Latin, which means either or.
And, and so if you if you have now the two inputs here I am B, then you have the carry bit and the output s. And you see, if either of them is one you will get a one here but if they're both one, you get a zero, but you will get the carry bit.
The carry bit will be put into the next adder to remember that you have over flown the bits of the of this unit and propagate this into the next adder so that you can get then what children one day.
So when you learn the cherry bit is just this, you know, when you do this.
You don't have a carry bit in the digital in the 10 digit system. But if you do this year.
Then I will, but we can still do it.
Get to put yourself a small one here.
Then you, because we have 11 and then you have this. It's easier to see when you do this.
You know,
then you get the one year you get the one year you have to get at the one year then you get the two year.
Sorry, the one year and two and then two.
Right so this is how to carry over bits.
Basically this circuit was to see it gives you a carry over bit.
And so this is how the so and you can see here really nicely how it's made of an exclusive or and and and and and and and gate.
And so this is pretty so so this is pretty nice, I think.
And the full adder.
This is just when you take. So this is, this is made of a this is the most elementary XOR and and get so these are the basic logic gates.
This is now one half adder and now if you put two half adders together and combine them with a with an or gate, then you get the this data, which which is called the full adder.
Right. And so, basically, with this you can build any processor, because all the other calculations multiplication division and subtraction can be modeled on the addition.
Right. So, so addition is just addition, like, subtraction, addition with a negative integer multiplication, just many, many additions.
So three times five times five times five times five.
And division is just inversion of multiplication.
So, so now you've understood basically how computers work.
It's really, it's really that simple. It's just that the circuit.
And so, and it's fascinating when you talk to specialists who have the profession.
They say, oh, you know, I had a friend working at Intel and she said, oh, you know, it's so annoying.
This morning, again, one of them mathematicians came to me. She was from England.
And, and, and, and very knows what I mean.
It's just certain socially, because they want to come to me and wanted again to have something that is not cannot be realized in binary logic. Why don't they get it.
I thought they were mathematicians. You was an engineer was so funny.
And basically, the trick is to imagine how you can put mathematical operations in this format cleverly that you can get efficient computation.
You can see just for completeness, how complicated you can get. So, this defines the output.
That's a lot of the formula best in the proposition logic.
And this year is the, is the as the as bit, which is a sum, and which you see it's a, these are it's all.
And you will get back to the symbols. They're very important. You want to ask the question.
Yeah, so these, I'm just wondering, I understand the logic of these days, but how is this done in the engineering in this actual circuit board, there is a set of predecessors that is set up to be an actual day.
Yes, yes, this is set and then afterwards you need to, when you're doing the software to computer, you're getting it all you see students sisters to calculate this summit.
This is, this is, this is the lowest level code is about this. The lowest level code is when the compiler gives out the instructions for the transistors, or the circuit and all the circuits and the second element of the professor, but the programming
language is, of course, exactly for this. Right. But but but when when you program for example in C or C++ or any other high level language, ultimately, when it gets compiled, it gets informed into machine code that tells the transistors, tells the processor what to do.
And in principle, if you build a very simple computer that just has to add her, then you wouldn't make it that you need to have this compiler.
This is what the book, but in principle, if you just want to addition, just a written vision, you wouldn't need a programming language.
So, so how do you tell what to do by putting electricity in a certain circuit.
You know, you can't tell them this but you just put the physical and then they do what what this circuit does just as a pattern does it and so if you want to have addition, and you have an adder then you have to put electricity on the circuit in a certain rhythm, and that
is what all of the computer does. It gives the reason of the pilot of the electrons, and then they moved in this reason through the circuit, and then then the calculations automatically performed.
And this is a deterministic device, it can only do that, it will always do that, you know, it's fascinating. And, and the idea that that was an Englishman for a change tracks by that he was the first to have this idea that you can set up such deterministic, you know, circuits, he did, and he designed it to be mechanical.
And his idea was to do this in a mechanical way, but but the gates were the same, they were just realized not as electricity but mechanically and, and so, and so even like this had already thought that the machine could be built based on this principle and so it's, it's, it's not one wants to
understand it's not so hard, you know, and yes, we don't need all this overhead if you at the very first product to the very first models, they were just taking mechanical points.
They simulated and said dry was throwing in points, because you're dropping in slots, and then the machinery of adding was performed, and yet several slots indicating the value of the digital ones to add is through into coins and then they got added.
You know, and all this was mechanical you realize that the compile there was a compile it was just the order wasn't by dropping the thoughts into the chorus.
And but, but, but I think it's still the same. It's just that now there's so many the circuit there's so many micro micro circuits and so many millions of of of of gates that I added but that's basically how it works.
So, the story about chat GPT is told, according to which, if they just printed out the next most likely syllable then you would get too much repetition.
And so to avoid repetition they added a little spot of indeterminacy or randomness to the output. How do you get randomness if everything is going.
It's, it's very, it's very simple that you're somewhere in the circuit, you're so you build a random generator. There are many ways to be a random generator the best ones are using actual radioactivity.
But there are also other ways to be a random you can also do it with software so that you can make circuits that reduce random numbers they are not as perfect so if you, if you analyze the output over long periods of time you can find patterns.
But if you only look at a few outputs they create quite they actually simulate randomness quite well.
And so then you basically somewhere in the circuit you put in the randomness. So, so this is in the, in the, the randomness is created by answering the, I think, but nobody knows but I think that the most likely way I think it works is that the input is slightly modified every time.
And the model itself, the core GPT format is the totally deterministic, but if you slightly at changes input of course we'll take it.
That's why, that's why when you give the same input to jet to PT several times you get different answers. But I think if you do it over a long period very long period of time you will also see a better horizon.
So, so, so, so how can it be that, that an algorithm that that does something like check it is I don't really want such a computer architecture.
Well that's because jet to PT is one quote merely a very long equation. It's a very long computer equation and it takes a certain input.
So the numbers of the symbols of the letters that are input are transformed into numbers and numbers are plugged into the big equation. Then the equation is computed.
Using using using using the regular CPU or GP was a regular CPU for for the operation of the equation.
It's not computed like like this, you know, so it's just a deterministic equation. It's a stochastic model, but once the equation is set up it's just a deterministic equation running on a normal true English universal machine.
We have a question.
Yeah, so in the first words, you know, machine will compute.
And also that seems a random what it's really happening is that it's compression going into a function that is machine for that point in point.
Yeah, so it is also random generator as a Turing function, right?
Unless it's a real random, so sometimes you need a real randomness.
Then you use quantum, then use quantum physics, so use
radioactive decay. And radioactive decay gives you a true random pattern.
And so if you look up random generator, random number generator,
you find all the different concepts and also as the holy grail of random number
generation, of course, radioactive decay, because that's a true random phenomenon.
So if you really need that, then you use it and transform the signals given out by the
physical random generator into electron and to put it into such a circuit.
Then you have a true random element. And random, so computation with randomness is
very important. So by doing computation with randomness on conventional computers,
you can actually get polynomial approximation to quantum computers for many, many problems.
That's why there's so little left to do for quantum computing.
Because now they've managed to find so many clever ways of using conventional computers
to do things that thought that where it was thought at the beginning of quantum computing
that there's a big difference between the conventional computer and the quantum computer,
now this has shrunk. And that's because, for example, by introducing randomness into
conventional computing, you can eat up some of the advantages of quantum computing.
Okay, so I think this is pretty satisfying, isn't it? Because now you know basically how
this works. And I think, as a philosophy, you don't have to know at all how certain special
circuits are now set up to do something. It's just to know now how simple it is. You just put
electricity on this spot, and this spot, and this spot, and then you get automatically,
you get the addition. It's quite nice. And it all works because of the Boolean logic.
That was an Englishman too, by the way, we defined it first.
Boolean. Yes, Boolean.
Iron.
Yeah, an iron, sorry, the Brit.
Yeah, okay, I give up. It's so complicated. So this is all I wanted to tell you about
computer data. I didn't do it last time, but I think it was important because it really,
really clearly shows you what is going on. Okay, now to understand quantum computing,
so actually, when do we have this morning, Barry?
So when do we have the first?
So anyhow, so we, so I want to explain to you how quantum computers work. And I think you can,
you will be after that, you will be able to understand it at the level we just understood
classical computers, I think, which would be already quite a lot, quite some good.
So let's start. So, but to do this, we have to start with quantum mechanics.
So, so I still want to talk, so we do the first break at 11 or 15 minutes and then,
then we do the rest. Okay, so, so I will try to not to do as little
mathematic as possible, but I have to introduce some mathematical concepts. So the very, very
important phenomenon is, is a wave, because the Schrodinger equation is a wave equation.
So you need to, we need to go through a bit, a little bit of mathematics and physics.
So if you have here two pure sound waves, one with a frequency cosine of 10 pi t,
and the other one was cos of 8 pi t, you will get a superposition. And if you, so if you have
two chords of an instrument that you, that you, how do you say this, that you stimulate to make
a sound, like on a piano, you have hammers hitting on chords, right? Yeah, but I don't even know what
the right unsubstant, what the right English word for this is, but anyhow, yeah, hit, you just hit
right. So, so if you hit on the piano two chords of pure, they are not, but if they were pure
frequency, then you would have, you get superposition. And so what is, what is happening is that, that
because this one is 10 to 8, and so, so you get them superposition of them. So they add up,
but here they cancel each other out because this here you see is positive and this one is negative.
So they cancel each other out so that you don't get much signal here. And then they start to add
up again here, they're both positive and they're in sync. And so they get high signal here, they're
slightly out of sync. So you get less signal, you understand the way it works, right? It's just
adding up the frequency. So at every, and so by doing this, you now get beats. So this creates beats,
when you hear beats in music, they're created like this. And so this is, this is just, just
to remind you of waves, okay? And now let's look at the classical, one of the experiments that,
that led to the discovery of quantum mechanics. So imagine that you have a
gun here that, that is shooting particles on a wall that has two slits. And if you, if you
shoot the bullets and now measure here, you have a detector to measure where they arrive.
And you have one slit closed, then you get, of course, this distribution because you get
most bullets hit here and then less here and less here because of the way they move through
the slit. So the slit determines this pattern. And so here you have very few and the most are here,
more or less right behind the slit. And the same is true for the second slit. So this is what you
see when you basically have one of the slits closed. Now if you open both slits and you have
these bullets, then you will get just an addition of the two waves as a pattern, right? And this is,
this is called, so the probability distribution of detecting P12,
bullets fired against the wall with two slits equals the sum of the probabilities measured
in each slit, just the sum of the two distribution. Now if you have a water source here, now you
tap into the water regularly with a small hammer, you will get this relation to the water waves.
And now you have two slits again and a detector here. Now you see something fascinating. If you
close one slit, you get this pattern or this pattern, which is the same as the pattern you get
with the bullets. But if you open both slits, you get what is called interference. This interference
is like the interference I've shown here. So they add up and create a pattern that doesn't
look at all like just add up the two probabilities because they sometimes cancel each other out and
so on. So they create this strange pattern. And so for a wave source, imagine the interaction
of the wave pattern resulting in an interference pattern with a different wave intensity. So
it's just not the sum, but it's actually the sum of the absolute. And if you calculate this out,
you get, according to trigonometry, you get this. So here the angle between the two waves is,
so to speak, determining more of the terms and so on. So the delta is the phase difference
between the two waves. So here it was 8 to 10, the phase difference. And that's what creates
the interference. And now, so this is just not yet quantum mechanics. It's just to remind you
what's happening when you have wave interference. Now we have the first, now let's go through the
principles of quantum mechanics. The first principle is that the probability that a particle
starting at s arrives at x is a square of an amplitude. The amplitude is written like this. So
this particle s should arrive at x and this is written like this. And it's just a complex number
if you calculate it. And so if you take this value and square, it's absolute, then you get
the probability. And the value itself is just called the amplitude. It's called the probability
amplitude. It's a bit irritating. That has historically reason why it's called amplitude,
but it's only the likeliness that s will arrive at x. And so just one important thing for quantum
mechanics, you also need to understand imaginary numbers. So this is the Gauss imaginary number
space. You see it has a real axis and it has an imaginary axis. And doing that, you can represent
square root of minus one. And so here you have the coordinates on the real axis. And the point z
is x. So that's this plus the imaginary number times y. This gives you the coordinates in this
Gaussian imaginary number sphere. And was it Euler? Yeah, I think Euler didn't present it
like this, but he implicitly used it and Gauss formalized it. And Euler was a Swiss guy, by the
way. And this is the complement. So if you exchange the plus sign here on this y-axis
by a minus sign, then you get the complement. And we will use the complement all the time
later on to just can imagine that the complement of an irrational of an imaginary number. So that's
what z is called an imaginary number. Its complement is z with the bar. And i is just equal to square
of minus one. So that's how you can imagine the small i. Square root of minus one.
Okay. So I still don't know what amplitude is.
Amplitude is just the kind of the relationship this term, the direct
term x bar s, it's called bra ket s x, x s bra ket bra x ket s. This bra ket just means the likelihood
that s arrives at point x. And we will see it in on the next slides. There's a good explanation.
You will just see it graphically. So, but before we go back to this bracket notation,
we look at Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. So everybody here has sort of the uncertainty
principle. And there's an explanation of the uncertainty principle that you can understand
without mathematics, almost without mathematics. And I want to show this to you because later on
with quantum computers, we also see how important it is to understand the uncertainty principle.
So suppose we have a single slit and particles are coming from very far away with a certain
energy. So coming far away, it means that they have essentially the same energy and that they
are horizontal. So they all have a horizontal momentum p zero in the classical sense,
classically when that's from Richard Feynman, when he says classically always means classically
physical not classical music. And so the particle is moving neither up or down because it came from
very, very far source. So the whole vertical momentum is lost. So it's now only moving
horizontally. This is by the way one of these instances of what's called Nancy Cartwright
called physics as theater. So you prepare, you want to make a statement in physics. Now you
tell a long story that justifies your assumptions. That's the theater. And then you have the great
thing evolving. And so it doesn't move up or down, just moves from left to right.
Now the particle comes out through the hole. We know that position vertically,
it's only in the range of B because B is the size of the slit. And now the uncertainty
of its vertical position is in the order of B, delta y. So and now we might want to say
since we know the momentum is absolutely horizontal, we might think that delta P y is zero,
but that is wrong. And why is this wrong? Well, we once knew that the momentum was horizontal,
but we don't know it anymore. Because before the particles passed through the hole,
we did not know their vertical positions. Now that we have found the vertical position
by having the particle comes through the hole, we have lost all information on the vertical
momentum. And because according to the wave theory, there is a diffraction of the wave
as they go through the slit, just as for light. Therefore, this pattern is spread out by the
diffraction effect. The diffraction means that particles can hit here and then they get, like
it was shown here, you know, they can rebound like this from the corners of the slit. And so this
means that basically we are losing the information about their vertical position.
That's super interesting, right? So the spreading out through this, and this is by the way,
this is from a dialogue between Einstein and, I don't know, Niels Bohr. So it was,
some of the great theoreticians, was contradicting to the uncertainty principle of
Einstein. Then Einstein came up with this. And it's very funny because they walked really
in a park in Berlin or somewhere and he explained to him, like, this was the slit,
and was losing the information. And then later, he wrote a letter to him again. And we still
have this letter. And so Feynman uses this letter. And he also describes, it is so great how Einstein
was thinking that he just, you know, the other one was challenging, but he just came up with
experiment and it's so beautiful. So now we have lost information about the vertical momentum.
So you know what momentum is, right? So momentum is mass times velocity. So it means that
it determines how hard this bottle will hit against this object, for example, this. And
then it will pass on some momentum to this microphone and so on. And so the momentum is lost.
And now we can detect this diffraction as a particle count. And when the counter receives
the particle, say here, the particle has a vertical momentum in order to get from this
blitz up to z. So the vertical momentum P y has a spread, which is equal to P zero times delta
theta, where P zero is a horizontal momentum. That's just trigonometry. And now you can
calculate how big the spread out pattern is. It's delta P y equals P zero times lambda divided
by B. And so we have lambda as the wavelength. And if we make B smaller and make a more accurate
measurement of the position of the particle by making the slit smaller, the diffraction pattern
gets wider because if B is below one, then of course, because it's in the denominator,
then the whole expression gets bigger. So the narrower we make the slit, the wider the pattern
gets and the more the likelihood that we would find the particle has sidewise momentum.
Such the uncertainty in the vertical momentum is inversely proportional to the uncertainty of y.
And in accordance to quantum mechanics, the wavelength times momentum is a blank constant.
So we obtain the rule that the uncertainties in the vertical momentum and in the vertical
position have a product of the order of the blank constant. So if you multiply this, so this is
the uncertainty expressed as a product. And this is greater or equal to the blank constant divided
by two. And so this principle is always valid in quantum experiments, no matter which mutually
rated properties of a particle are measured. And so this will be very important for quantum
computers later on because it actually means that if you want a bit, which is the equivalent of the
bit, so here we saw that is a bit, right? That's incomplete. That's not incomplete. That's an
ultimate and so on. We will have some similar bits in quantum computers. And they are called
quantum bits. And to get the such operators here that operate on bits and get offered are called
quantum gates and not any more logic gates are called quantum gates. These are called logic gates
because they operate according to the rules of proposition logic. And in quantum mechanics,
they will be called quantum gates. And of course, when we have an output here, we want to know what
it is to measure it. When something comes a bit after quantum computation, we want to measure a
bit. And then when we measure it, we can always only get a zero and a one. Nothing else. And we
will later on see why this is the case, what this has to do with the uncertainty principle. But now
I derived the uncertainty principle for you. And I think this was Einstein's way of doing it.
There are many, many other ways to derive the uncertainty principle. And it applies in many
places in quantum physics. But this is the simplest one. And it was made by Einstein. It's
funny because Einstein on a walk made a contribution to quantum mechanics. It's quite a full story.
It shows how he thought. And I think he also made with the EPR paradox on, he made the most deep
statement about quantum mechanics physicists ever made, though Einstein wasn't participating in
inventing quantum mechanics. He was witnessing it for decades. I mean, Schrodinger came out with
the equation 26. Einstein died in 55. And so he was for 30 years, he was commenting on it.
And he made the observation that quantum mechanics is incomplete. And we will get back to this.
So now let's look at what, so now we've understood quantum mechanics, the principle of
uncertainty without understanding. Are there questions to this?
I mean, why is, what, why is, because you introduced it on this slide, but you don't say
what why. So why is just the vertical place? So, so this is, this is the, this is a vertical
place. And this is a vertical momentum. Sorry. It's, it's, it's, it's an imperfection of the slides
due to, because I was when I wrote this so in this that I, and it's so clear always in physics
when you just have the letters x, y and z, it's just location, right? So, and this is, this is,
so this is the location, this is a momentum. And yeah, so it's, I say it here, vertical
momentum. And so this is vertical momentum, this is vertical position. Good. Now, now the double
now we don't have it. So this here was a gun with small bullets, like a classic gun, but tiny
bullets may be made of aluminium. Now we have a gun that shoots electrons. And so, so we have,
again, a wall with two slits, we have the detector, we have the backstop. And then now we measure,
we close the two and we measure and we get this pattern and we do the inverse closest and we get
this pattern. Okay. So now the, the, the electron gun behaves like a particle, because you measure
the pattern that you would measure with small aluminium bullets. Now, if you open both slits,
it looks like a wave, because we don't obtain this anymore, but we obtain the pattern like with a
wave. But wait a minute, we have short, we short particles with the electron gun, we can create
such a gun, right? And we short particles, but measure a wave. So this was, when this was observed
for the first time, they were almost desperate. They couldn't believe it. And, and, and I made this
joke already last September once, the Germans could, everything of, all of it was in Germany.
There was only one quantum physicist who was working in Germany, but not a German, a major one. And
then there was another French one. Iraq was a French one, there was a Danish one, all the others
were Germans. So the Germans could figure, still figure this out, but for the general
theory of relativity, they needed a drew. But this they could figure out, because they could use
their classical physics. And so, so when electrons with classical physics regard as particles are
fired against the wall, the probability of detecting the electrons which wants to close
is just this, but the probability distribution is not the sum of the two detected intensities,
as with the bullets, but instead the pattern looks like an wave interference pattern, which
you remember has this equation with the cosine term, right? And so, and so, so it seems that the
electrons behave like particles with only one slit, but like wave response. This was the
second important experiment which could not be explained using classical physics. Now,
now let's go to the second principle. When the event can occur in several alternative ways,
the probability amplitude for the event is the sum of the probability amplitude
for each way considered separately. So, so this is, this is both holds open is this amplitude
plus this amplitude, but you have to, you have to square this, so this is interference. And
yeah, so here you see it again. So I don't know why I have two slides here, but this is,
this is just showing this, that, that, that if you close the slits, now both slits are open,
now you get this pattern, and this is computed like this.
And now we also start to understand, so Barry, now you understand this notation. So you see,
this is the likelihood of, of getting from S which is here to X which is here. So this is
the arachnotation, it just describes like this. And so, and so now what you can see also what is
very important is that you have to add this likelihood to go through one from S to one to X
to the likelihood to go from S to two to X, and then square it, right. And
if an experiment is performed which is capital of determining whether one or another alternative
is actually taken, the probabilities of the event is a sum of the values for each alternative,
the interference is lost, right. So here, if you, if you close one of the slits, you can,
you can, you can lose it, you lose the interference.
Now we see here again, if you have now several two slits, this is super important to understand
quantum mechanics. Now we want to understand the likelihood of going from S to X and we have
put here two walls. So now we have, we want to, we have first to see, we have the possibility of
going from S to one, then from one to A, and then from A to X. That's one pass to go from,
from S to X. Then we have the next pass which goes from S to one, then to B, then to X, and then we
have the next one which goes from, it's not shown here, which goes from S to one, from one to C,
and from C to X. And so you see, now you can write this in an elegant way with a, with a,
with a sum sign, summing over the two holes in the first wall, and then the three holes in the
second wall, and then you can see, you can put, now you put in all the combinations. So, and if
you do this, so you put E for one, and then you put, so you have a one here and a one here,
now you put A for alpha, and then B for alpha, and then C for alpha, you get the three first
possibilities, and then you do it, and then you get all the possibilities of going through this.
And so you have to find the probability of going from S to X, you have to, you have to identify
all the combinations and sum them up, right? And this is, and this is basically what,
what also happens in quantum computers in a way. So, so quantum computers, and if you look at
advanced quantum mechanics, then you have an integrated, because then you're not anymore
looking at discrete paths, but you're looking at a continuum, right? But the beauty is, I can save
you from the integral today, because quantum computing doesn't need the integral. Quantum
computing is this artificial world, an artificial machine, that, that only looks at discrete states,
like you do it here. So this is a super, do you understand this?
Do you understand this slide? Not the quantum computer slide, just this.
Yeah, you will see this as a preview, you will understand that, but do you understand this
first part, that you have to add all the different paths together to get the total probability?
Right? And, and so this is, this is, this is what is done. And, and you will encounter this
notation very often now. So now you see the explanation of the direct, direct notation.
This is one explanation. The real one is with a, with a complicated integral, but,
but this is what I showed last September, but I won't show it, show it here because it makes
no sense. We would lose too much time. So, so how do we calculate the amplitude that we
were to get the probability? So if you have two locations, R1 and R2, and the particle
move from R1 and R2, it has waves like properties, the amplitude propagating as a wave with a wave
number equal to the momentum divided by edge. So this is basically this, this shows you how to
calculate this probability. So you, you take the exponential function, you have the, the
e from the unreal, from the complex numbers, you have, you have momentum, you have the distance,
you divide it by the plan constant, and then you normalize it by this distance.
And this is the probability of moving from R1 to R2 expressed in an, in an amplitude. So that's
a proper amplitude. And you can see why amplitude comes from, because that is like what you get when
you decompose sine and cosine into the exponential function, you get this exponential expression.
So, so remember the Euler equation, you all know the Euler equation, it just shows you
how you can decompose sine and cosine into, into the exponential function. And so basically this is
just exponential function style of expression of the sine curve. So that's why it's the amplitude,
because it, and it depends of course on the momentum. So, so if you have a lot of momentum,
the amplitude will be higher, right? And then you will, and then, and then, and then this value
becomes higher, and then you have a higher likelihood of coming from R1 to R2 with a higher amplitude.
And so, and so this is the way, it's a classical relationship between,
between the momentum and, and mass, which is the kinetic energy. Now, now comes the next
super interesting experiment. So the experiment was done already in the 19th century, but for
a very long time nobody could explain it at all. And then there was another experiment.
And now I'm skipping Max Planck's contribution, which was, which was,
which was the quantization of electrons, which was the being of quantum mechanics in 1905.
But I'm skipping this because we can't, we don't have the time here. And I'm jumping ahead. So,
so I need to say this. So Max Planck has discovered that the electrons
are not situated around the nucleus in an atom in a continuous way, but that there are probability
levels which are fixed. These are the probability levels of the electron. And if you look at the
modern electron model, or an atom model, we know it's like this, that we have,
that we have different levels at which the electrons can be the lithium or atom with three
electrons and three protons. And then they can be at different levels of, of distance from,
from the, from the nucleus. And if they're more away from the distance, they have higher energy
levels. And Max discovered that when the electron drops down, then a certain quantum of energy
light gets emitted. And that this light is proportional not to a discontinuous function,
but to a discrete function, quantum, a quantum of energy, not a continuous value. And G then
ran a two great British businesses had described a law that would use a continuous function.
And it didn't work. It was incompatible with, with reality. And so Planck looked at this experiment
again. And by great inner pain, as he wrote to a friend, he had to accept as a continuous,
non-continuous value nature. It was terrible because basically physics always assumed that
everything is continuous, like the laws of Newton, you know, laws of motion. And then there is now
suddenly a discrete amount that is there. It was all left white for quantum, because there's a
quantum of energy level. So, so this was already known. But, and there were some, you know,
Einstein had also worked on the, on the problem with, with his model of particle motion. So,
there was already some stuff was done, but, but quantum mechanics was still not really
kickstarted, you know, though Planck had already invented the electron quantization in 1905,
there was no quantum mechanical equations, but the one that he had invented. Now,
Stern and Gallant and Frankfurt at the University of Frankfurt, they made an experiment
where they, they had an oven that could create silver atoms. So, with a lot of heat, they could
evaporate the silver atoms, and then, then the silver things could move like this through a hole.
And with, we inside the vacuum, of course, so that they would not be disturbed. And then there was
a big magnet with a strong flux upwards. The flux is made by making the magnet like this. And then,
you know,
what's wrong with me this morning. So, anyhow, there were already the laws of electromagnet
system allow you to build such a magnet that has a strong magnetic field upwards because of the shape
of the magnet. And so, do they, sorry, the Maxwell, thank you. Maxwell's equations allow you to
construct this magnet. And so, and so then they had a glass plate and the silver atoms were flying
through this magnetic field. And then they detected the deposits of the silver from this beam on the
glass plate. And they expected to have a smear, what I have indicated here in red. So, classical
physics was a continuous vertical component of the angular momentum would lead to a vertical
smear, but they observed two points. They were shocked. They were shocked, you know, because
they thought that angular momentum, so why are the silver atoms at all distorted by the magnetic
field? Well, because they have angular momentum themselves, they act like small magnets. And
so, that's also why in iron we can have, if you put a magnet against iron, the iron bar becomes a
magnet itself because all the atoms, the iron atoms have themselves, they have themselves
tiny magnets, and they all arrange themselves in the same way so that you, then they become
like a magnet, you know, every child knows them. And so, they thought that this property, this
property of being a small magnet, which is called angular momentum, would be continuous,
but it was, and then somebody realized that this was like with the quantization of the electrons
in Planck's equation, right? And so, they said, oh, this property that makes the silver atoms
like magnets must also be discrete, like the electrons are discrete. So, they discovered this.
And then they called this property the spin. And spin is a property of particles that let some
behave in a certain magnetic field. Spin, there's no translation. And so,
yeah, it's maybe. So, I'll show you.
Let's take, I need the English page, but my browser is set in a way to always show the German way
one first, but we'll go to the English now. So, they call it an intrinsic form of angular momentum
carried by elementary particles and thus by composite particles such as blah, blah, blah,
spin is one of the two types of angular momentum in quantum mechanics. The other being orbital
angular momentum. The orbital angular momentum operates as blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, you
don't need to. So, basically, the spin is, it says the existence of electron spin in angular
momentum is inferred from experiments such as Zangala experiment, but that's all we know about
spin, right? So, we have a mathematical model of spin. We call it angular momentum, but that's
only because it's an energy to classical physics, but as Feynman says, we don't know what spin is.
We can't imagine it. We just have a mathematical model of it, which is super accurate, but we
don't know what it really is. It is what makes the electrons or the atoms fly in a certain way in
the magnetic field. That's all. But how it works, we don't know. We can't imagine it, actually.
All the geometrical analogues we have are wrong. There is no way to use our common sense view of
the world to measure what spin is. Spin is just this, the behavior of the particles in the magnetic
field. And this is fine. And this, when I realized this theory, that was the idea for our paper.
When I realized it, nobody can explain what spin really is. Then I found my uncle who was
asked what spin is. Oh, I don't know. Nobody knows.
So anyhow, let's continue here.
Do I still present the presentation on the screen? Can you check?
Is it still visible in the Google Meet? Good. And so now you can, with this,
indicate the strong magnetic field in one direction, this, what is it called,
flux. And which is called, this is a Napler operator that is used to describe such a field.
And physically, we don't have to look at it. And here you see now a different type of atom that
is split into three beams. So this is, so silver is split into two, but atoms of spin one are split
into three beams. And oh, let me look up. So just for completeness, what atom is, has been through one.
Anyhow, the particles are divided into those which have spin one and spin half and so on.
Yes. Yes, please. And, and, and so, but there are atoms which have spin one and they can be,
and they can be split into three beams. And now, if you see here, now we can imagine different
Stern-Galer apparatus, which has here inversion of the magnetic pole. So first it has north-south.
So the flux, and then the flux goes into the other direction, and then it goes back to this
direction. So we are changing the direction of the flux in this experiment. And now you see
that in the first apparatus, we split the, we split the beam into three, and then we can
put it together again in this apparatus. And then, and then it's changed in this apparatus,
and then put it together again here. So, and now you can, you can imagine to put several such
machines which are able to split and unify the beam. So this splits and unifies the beam.
Now we can imagine that you put several of these in series, but you can now put in a filter.
For example, for example, when you put, you have the first of these apparatus machines
with a filter that filters out the minus and the, and the, and the negative and the zero spin
beams of the, of the, of the split beam. You only get this. And then if you put the second in here,
only the plus will arrive, right? And so, and so now you can develop a kind of, you know,
alphabet to describe these machines. So this would be a machine that splits and reassembles
the, the atom beam. This would one that splits it and reassembles it, but that filters out the
zero and minus. This one filters out plus and minus, this one filters out plus and zero. And now
you can say, you can calculate the amplitude to pass the various combinations of pure filters
that you can express them in matrix notation. So here this is the start state is the end state.
And now you want to know the likelihood of starting in plus s and ending up in plus s. So this would
be, we put, we put these two filters here in a row and then determine the likelihood that
the iron, the, this beam, the plus beam is ending here. So there would be a second filter here.
And that's of course one. Why is it one? Because, because now after this filter, I only have
spin plus atoms left. And when they go through the second apparatus, they are not hitting any
obstacle, right? Or even if there would be an obstacle here, they get through. And so now you
can have a matrix telling you the likelihood to pass from through such a filter machine.
So for example, the likelihood to get from minus s to plus s is, is zero. And the likelihood from
zero s to plus s also. So you can only get with such a symmetric apparatus, you can only get from
plus s, from the same s to the same s. And you can also rotate the filters and put the,
the Stern-Gerlach filters in series. And then you get even other probabilities for the particles
to pass through the filters. And so now you can write, you have this matrix that, that describes
how the particles go through the filter. And now you can express this in terms of the likelihood
of a particle to go from one state to another state. And these states are now, and now remember
that we had the sum already here, right? This is the sum of going through both filters.
Or this was the sum, well, I meant this one, this sum of going with a certain path through both of
the filters, right? And now we can apply it to these types of filters as well. And now we can say,
so I have a certain, I go, I have, I have now, let's say, my three holes. And so now I have the
probability of going from three to hole one and from hole one to here. And then hole two and hole
three. And if I have three holes, then I will have all the possibilities. And, and, and, and, and
this is, this is basically represented also as a matrix. So we said that with the filters we just
saw, we can only get from the same s to the same s, which means that only that in this matrix,
when row and column are unequal, you have zero probability. And when row and column are the
same, we have probability one, right? And so this is called the Kronecker delta. So the Kronecker
delta just says that you can only get a one in the matrix if J and I are equal, which, so row,
row one and column one, row two and column two, row three and column three. And that gives you
the probabilities of going through the filter system. And here we have an example, a workout
example of this going, going through this, through this type of filter. And, and this uses the,
I think it's complicated for today, but this uses the turned around filter that we had here.
And, and to model the turned around filter, you need to calculate the complement.
So you, so when you square, when you want to know the, the probability of going
from plus s to plus t, you need to, you need, and to square this, you, you need to multiply
the probability with its complement. The complement was this, which we saw here.
You can also, it's also often expressed with the star. So you need the complement where,
when you have a matrix complement, you, it's a star. And so, so this shows you that you need
this complement. And now basically what we can see is that if this is supposed to be true,
now you can calculate this, multiply this out, right? You can say this is this plus this plus
this. So these are the three possibilities s to plus t, s to zero t, s to minus t, and they all
have to add up to one. And at the same time, this also has up to this here, the part that
without the trend, without the inversion also has to add up to one. This is, and so these two
equations are only consistent for all relative orientations of the t and the s apparatuses,
if we have these law, if the inverse of, if all these inverts are true. And so that means that
actually this amplitude is always equals to the exchange amplitude of inverted. And so, so these
are basically using the filters, the fundamental laws of quantum mechanics derived. So the first
one is the Kronecker delta that was, that basically only the ones in the matrix, only the
probabilities, so that only these amplitudes are one. Then the next one is that to get this
probability, you need to add up all the paths through the filters. And the third one says that
that the inverse of this bracket is, is the same as the, when you, when you exchange the two
target and the two, the two, yeah, the two locations, thank you, and build the inverse,
then it's the same then without exchanging them. And so this, and so you can derive those three
laws of quantum mechanics from the filter, from the filter experiments. And, and, and I think this
is quite elegant and relatively simple to understand. And you can read it, read it up in
the third volume of, of Feynman, I think it's chapter five, in the third volume of his physics,
Feynman lectures on physics, you can get it online. So if you, if you go to Feynman lectures on
physics, you Google that, you come to a page at Caltech, where he gave the lectures in the 60s,
and there all the lectures are beautifully for free, you can look at them, they are really well,
very well set up and chapter five explains all of this. And, but, but basically,
so I now very quickly, it takes a bit longer to do it properly, but very quickly I showed you,
these are the three fundamental laws, and this means I will do this a bit later. But, but, but
one very important aspect is the following. So if this is a location of a particle, and these are
basic, and basic locations, for example, in the three dimensional space with three dimensions,
you can express one of the locations, or the one of the amplitudes,
as a linear, as a linear combination of the basis states. So to take a complex number,
number one, you multiply by the first component, the second one by the second component,
the third by the third component, you add them up, and that gives you this number. So,
and this is what this also shows. So when you want to go from the left, have the amplitude of
going from that location to that location, basically you express each of the two locations
in the base, in the base dimensions. And that's in the coordinate system of two coordinates.
That's just like saying, this year, this, this vector is just a combination of x and y.
So, so this is just z is just equal to alpha y plus x, right. And this is, so this is basically
what is done here. So you are basically expressing a certain particle location as a linear combination,
or some other property, as a linear combination of the basic coordinates, right. So we could,
this is a one times x, so therefore there is no, there is no parameter here, but this is alpha y.
And, and, and so these complex numbers are just the parameters to express
the location or the quantum property expressed by this cat using, so by the way, why is it called
bra cat? Because, because these are brackets, right, these two are brackets. And then they
call this one a bra, this one a cat. And at this time sexism was still on vogue, you know, they
were not woke yet. So they were allowed to call it a bra. And nowadays it's still called a bra.
And it's interesting. And I've, this is no joke. I told this to my sister, she works in the cultural
area, she runs a beauty institute, and she told me, she asked her to ask a gender professor at
the Faculty of Mathematics or Physics, and she tries to get rid of the bra, because she believes
it's sexist. So that's how, where we've gotten, but when the bracket location was, was invented,
you know, the man invented, who invented was, was Dirac. And, and she just said, you know,
these are brackets, I call this bra this, he was a Frenchman, so they invented the bra, you know,
what do you expect. So, so, so that's how it came about. So, so, so this is, so now we have,
we have gone through the very basics of quantum mechanics, and using the filters. And are there
any questions to this? It's a bit of mathematics, but not very complicated.
Yeah, so I think, I think the best for you to do is to, is to, is to read this chapter in
Feynman. I don't, I don't have the time. Yes. So, so the, yes. So he's very, in the best sense,
very Jewish. He's great. And, and he is, so the, the, the, for each, if you go to his web page,
for each, for each printed lecture, there's also a video that you can watch. And he stated
really well is very fun. And, and so anyhow, but, but what you can take from this is that
this filtering allows you the passing of the, of the beams of particles through the filter allows
you to derive the basic laws of quantum mechanics. And that what was, that's what was actually done
in a way, you know, that they use these types of experiments to derive the basic laws of quantum
mechanics, only that it didn't happen in the order that is presented in the book by Feynman. So
Feynman, to explain it easily, he then invented a new order in which it was of course not done
in practice. But you know, that's normal. So if you look at Weierstrass, so when Weierstrass
started to systematize mathematics, he also invented a new order how each mathematical
truth is based on, on the basic axioms of piano. And, and of course discarded the way that mathematics
had evolved. He replaced it by an artificial evolution of mathematics. That is now the way
mathematics is taught in every textbook. But when he did it, he had to reorder everything to make
it more plausible in the way it evolves. And, and, and so this is how Feynman does it as well.
But basically, it's always about can the particle reach another, another position,
and what do I have to do to calculate this? And this way you get to these basic laws.
I think before we do a bit more of, we are, we will finish the quantum mechanics part today,
I promise, so that we can maybe do a bit of quantum computers already today or the rest tomorrow.
So now we do, we do a, how many, how much break, 10 minutes? Yes, how many minutes?
So see you at five past 11.
So you have one word for your
or
something, some of the things that low
how
Yeah, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at
any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point,
at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any
point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point, at any point,
at any point, at any point, at any point, at any much, much higher
fill.
Yes, very funny, very interesting.
Thank you very much.
I don't know how it's going to be.
Maybe even just in my eyes.
When we were talking about related things,
we were using quite a lot.
Just a bra or just a s.
Can you just remind me what just a bra or just a s?
Does the cat mean s?
Does the cat mean s?
So just the cat means the sum of the positions
of the bay state of the quantum system.
And you will see it much better here.
I'll try to reach down to it.
This.
This is the quantum bit.
And you can see it's distorted to be a sphere.
Because psi up there is quantum bits.
And now this psi is composed
as a linear combination of the 0 and 1 states.
And so alpha, delta, complex numbers,
which when squared together always give 1,
and they determine where on the sphere you are.
So you see the 0 and 1 is here,
the 0 is on the other side.
And basically, depending on the linear combination of the 2,
you end up on the point of the sphere.
And so that shows you that there are infinitely many points
that the quantum bit can take on.
And that's the point that Charles and Euclid
and Charles, like many, many people,
forget about what Charles consists of.
He seems to think that you can just have a bit.
The cupid is just like a bit.
Because when you measure it, you only get a 0 or a 1.
But the problem is that physically,
that for each issue with infinitely many possibilities
it has.
And when we have several qubits shared together,
you have a superposition pattern,
like the one I showed at the beginning,
all these single qubits.
And so the way is super complex.
And I think the use of quantum computing
is that you think that you take control of it.
But I think it's a positive statement
in the control of the problem.
Because the complexity of the quantum wave
is to have a quantum wave that continues.
And the bits, and the 64-bit qubits,
they are out from the qubits.
They are regular.
And they are always in this defined state.
And each of these has infinite numbers
of states.
Because that's what the equation shows,
especially the one on the bottom side.
You can suppose there's theta divided by 2 times
ket 0 plus a whole feet,
sine ket at the both by 2 times.
And ket 0 would be a mean.
Kept 0 and ket 1 are the base states.
They show the sphere.
They see extremes.
They are locations.
They are just locations.
But of course, how do you know where the base states are
as it were?
Oh, so you actually put the computer in the base.
So if you have a quantum wave to solve
8 qubits, for example,
put it down to 0 Kelvin.
And then you hope that they are all settled
at 0.
And then you shoot lasers against them
or try to put them to a higher level.
Okay.
But we know we can't get down to absolute infinity.
Yeah, they have sort of bits that are error problems.
Yeah.
Because you can't, that's what I wrote to Charles.
I didn't even answer that.
I was supported by this.
Because he failed to answer the call.
So when I write an email like this,
you always ask him for a question and post.
Sometimes you have a problem with it,
but always you see what I really mean.
He was writing around it.
It actually is a bit catalytic way
because it was thought in basic practice.
So which of course I know.
Can you send me this response?
Good.
So let's continue.
Sorry.
So.
So I am.
So this is.
This shows you
kind of
a precursor to the
to the Schrodinger equation.
Which is an equation that describes
the
the relationship
between the C,
which I will explain in a minute,
and the Hamiltonian.
So what is this?
So C I of T
is the likelihood to find
a particle
in step C in one of the base states
E. So this is like what I said here.
So this could be
a particle and
C I
is the likelihood of finding it in one of the base states
for example, the base states in the X.
The base states are
like co-ordinated in a co-ordinated system
and C I is the likelihood
of finding
a particle in one of the base states
and
as you can see this likelihood
is
time dependent and so if you
created
computer derivative by T that's equal
to summing up
over the different
base states of the system
and adding them together.
So this sum is again reminding of what we've seen here
that
such amplitudes are always made up of sums
of the elements
of the elements in the base states
and
this is the matrix that gives you the coefficients
with which
so these coefficients we saw here
are coefficient, right?
And this matrix gives you the coefficients
for doing this in higher dimensions
than if you have only one dimension
and
so matrix H
has to include the thing we are doing
to the system to cause it to change
if we know
the numbers that are in the matrix
we have a complete description of the behavior
of the system in time
and Hamilton was the first
who invented this matrix as a way
to calculate the position
of particles in classical
mechanics. So here there was
a guy before him who was called Einstein
and he formalized Newton's law
in a very elegant
frame using differential calculus
and then Hamilton
formalized it even more elegantly with this matrix notation
matrix notation
probably English.
And here
you can see how the elements
of the matrix are added together
multiplied with this amplitude
this is the picture of Hamilton
this is Daiglio Tupi because
when he lived there was no photo yet
so the precursor of the modern photography
and I don't know why he is distorted
he looks a bit better
if he is not horizontally distorted
so
it has to do with the arrangement of the screen
so the Hamiltonian
is equal to its transpose complement
so this means transpose complement
that's when you turn around the matrix
and exchange every element of the matrix
with the complement which was z
so that means when you
remember z
is equal to
x plus
e times y and z
complement is
x minus e times y
so when you take the matrix and replace
all its elements
turn it around like this and then replace all its elements
by their composite
that doesn't change the matrix
so it's a
unitary matrix and the total probability
is equal to its transpose complement
and the total probability of finding
a particle is
the sum of each of the amplitudes
and that's
of course
that is independent of time
and
so now to make this a bit
clear if we have only one single particle
like an atom address so if you would
freeze
helium atom to zero Kelvin
then it's addressed and it is
in only one state
so and then you keep it frozen like this
then
the physical circumstances
are not changing with time
and so h is an independent of time
this now gives for one single value
it gives you
so the matrix
bigger matrix of h
contains for example
one times two matrices could connect
h11
h12
h21
but now we have a matrix with only one element
which is
h1 and so we say
for this single
probability
or amplitude of cb
in the one state
if we
calculate the derivative this by time
this is equal to the product of the first
element of the matrix
multiplied by the value of c
and so and if
h11 is constant then the solution
is even simpler
if you do not calculate the solution
this is differential equation because
here you have a variable
and here is the differential of a variable one equation
so that's called differential equation
the solution of this is another equation
and this is c1 is e
the exponent of e divided by h times
h11 times
t and so
so this is
and e is also called
the matrix h is also called the energy matrix
because e
is the energy here
you saw this earlier
with momentum p
and that's
another form of momentum together with mass
gives you the energy and this is also
a form of expression of the energy
so this is a quantum mechanical
expression
of a system with one state
and now here
we have
if we have a two state system
so this is the ammonia molecule
and the ammonia molecule
maybe I should read this out first
this is so funny
now this molecule like any other
has an infinite number of states
it can spin around any possible axis
it can be moving in any direction
can be vibrating inside and so on and so on
it is there for not a two state system
at all but we want to make an
approximation that all other states remain fixed
because they don't enter into what we are concerned
with at the moment
it's very strong
in physics all the time
problems get simplified to one aspect of the system
that is interesting
and all the rest is abstracted away
we will consider only that the molecule is spinning
around its axis of symmetry as shown in the figure
that it has zero translational momentum
that it is vibrating as it is possible
and so you see you have this axis here
the molecule is spinning around it
and now it has two states
either with a
nitrogen atom up or
it can spin around like this and then the nitrogen
is down that's the second state
so this is state one
and this is state two
and so
if we express this with the Hamiltonian
we see we have basically
two equations
we have this equation describing
the likelihood of being in state one
and
and this is
the likelihood of being in state two
and you see that now you have a more complicated Hamiltonian
with four entries
I messed up the notation here
should be
like this of course
and
so now you see that the likelihood
of each of the two states
is composed as a linear
combination of the two states with these parameters
which are usually complex numbers
what is important
seems to me it's just about
clockwise and clockwise
spinning
it's up or down
in both cases anti-clockwise spinning
you see the arrow points
into this arrow here it's the same
both times anti-clockwise spinning
but
here the nitrogen is pointing up
and here the nitrogen is pointing down
so it's about the orientation of the nitrogen with regard to the spinning axis
if you take
so it's
does this have anything to do with spin
no this is another
so this is interesting
so each
I've shown in the example
that you can regard any property
as quantum mechanical property
and call it a state
so here we have two base states of the molecule
we have the base state nitrogen pointing up
and the other base state nitrogen pointing down
and there are now two
in this physics sphere
to reduce one to two states
each other to a basic state
in another situation it's the spin
up or down
in another situation it's the polarization of a photon
in another situation
it may be the level of the electron
on it
in the plant model of the atom
and so on
so you can always select
other properties of the system that you look at
call them quantum states and then calculate them
this may be a good
time to mention our
paper
bearing I wrote a paper
I can put it up on screen
you mean the quantum one
so which you might
find interesting to read
just
appeared on a heave
so I should be able to find
this one yes this is it
I guess
so they don't reduce paper
and it's a six
or they publish
an update
and I know
the director
of how he personally
is involved in
possible ground damage
and he told me that
the six weeks would not spend on
evaluating the quality of the paper
it was spent on deciding
under which category it should go
and in the end
it would be under
history of
history and philosophy of physics
history and philosophy
and so this is the
this is our new paper
and
it's
it gives you an ontology of physics
and it uses and it also does this
for quantum mechanics so basically our idea
was to give an ontology
to
show an ontology of classical
physics so classical mechanics and then
quantum mechanics to show
that our ontological approach can cover both
both types of physics
so anyhow
so this now here
these two states are selected as a base state
therefore the matrix
describe combinations of the two base states
and when you multiply elements
of the matrix with the two states and add them together
you obtain the probabilities
of being in that state
and so
this is basically
why only probabilities because
as you know quantum mechanics is only probabilistic
which is off now
and so this is
what it's about
now
here it's again
it's described
in
in bracket notation
so this is
the state you're interested in
this is so to speak
the amplitude of
c being in state one
plus the amplitude of c being in state two
multiplied
with the parameter of that state so this is
a linear combination
that expresses this state in terms of the two
of the two base states one
and two
and this is super important
so this basically
gives you an idea
how in quantum mechanics the state
of a system
is always expressed as a linear combination
of the basic states and if you have
a full-fledged quantum system
which we can't calculate with
you don't have a sum but you have an integral
over infinitely many states
so a full quantum mechanical state description
would be a Hilbert space
dimension and this is just a full-fledged
Hilbert space
and so this is just what I wanted to
demonstrate with this atom
with this molecule of
ammonium
so I want to summarize
the laws of quantum mechanics one more time
so
three and c are states of the electron
or state of the system
one, two, three, four are the base states
the states are orthogonal
so the base states are orthogonal
which means that
we have a matrix which is only filled with
ones on the diagonal and there is no likelihood
at all to grow from one
base state to the other
but only from one base state to one base state
to the same base state
c can be described as a linear
combination of the amplitudes of all the base states
these are all the base states
and now I say c might be
amplitude c to be
instead one times this complex number
two, three, four add them together
and then I can like we did it here
yeah this like here
and so this way
we get the
linear combination and if we consider
any two states c and c the amplitude
of the state c will also be
to be also be in the state
c can be found by projecting
the state c into the base states
and then projecting
from each base state into the state c
so this is c to one
one to c, c to two
two to c, c to three, c and so on
summed all together this gives you
the total probability and this is again
what we showed at the very beginning
with this analogy
of the matrix little hole
where I said this equation is so important
where is this bloody here
here this is so important
because this already gives you the idea
why you have to sum up
all these different amplitudes
okay now we
we are almost this is
the first law
and then there is another
very important aspect
so
if xn is a local state of the particle
then we can define the amplitude of p
in the state as this
since the base states are associated with
the location on the line
we can think of the amplitude cn as a function
of the coordinate x and write it as cxn
the amplitude cxn
will in general vary with time and are there
also forms of t so we obtain this
right and this is now
basically
derivative here he
tries to derive the
the scrolling equation in a soft way
but we are not going to go through this
so what have we learned so far
this is the kind of
very important summary
of the difference between
classical physics and quantum mechanics
so in classical physics
you have the phase space with
fluid points
we need to make this bigger
oh this is actually better isn't it
yes now you can sense
I would like to show you how
Hamilton he looks so much like a frog but he looks
better but anyway
so classical mechanics makes use of a phase
space whose individual points represent
possible states of a physical system
and with subsets of
points representing physical properties
so for example
you all know that
in a classical physics system
you don't have any
any irrational
complex numbers
but you have
you have only for example
classical coordinate system and then you have
a point some like another point and you have
locations defined of the point
and also you can define
it is a moving body
but you can also let's say define
its momentum
and then with time and momentum
you have a phase space defining
where the point is and how fast
it is moving
and so
this is the phase space of classical mechanics
quantum mechanics uses a complex
space and physical properties correspond
to subspaces
and the central subspace is what we call
the state
and so such a one dimensional
subspace is a line
and it's called array in quantum mechanics
and one ray is what is
so what is a
a single point in classical physics is not
array in quantum physics
and the ray expresses
that you can take
that you can take the
we had it here was
a very simple Hamiltonian
where is this
here
and this equation
we multiply this with one complex number
but we can have
infinitely many complex numbers
which we can multiply the C
and by doing this we get a line
so if you multiply it by one
we get a value, if you multiply it by two
another value and another and another
and so because there are infinitely many complex numbers
we can imagine that
we can basically parameterize
the particle to be
everywhere on the ray
so the ray is what is the point
so that means that in quantum mechanics
there is no single point where anything is
but there's always a ray
and
is it
drawing a continuum with the object now
doesn't that contradict the quantum idea?
no because
when you measure the particle
you get a likelihood of it being
which we are now referring to
occurs via the Planck constant
so we've seen the Planck constant
because
there is an equation that contains the Planck constant here
so
we have here the Planck constant in this exponent
but
we can still get an infinite number
of points
they are just spaced in a certain way
because of the Planck constant
so the quantization
comes in by the Planck constant
which expresses that only at
certain regular intervals
we can measure a quantum phenomenon
but basically
it's still a line because there are infinitely many
values of age
so that's
so there is a line
but we can only measure
certain discrete points along the line
yes exactly
and this is why
this is when we build
the St. Gallagher-Paradres that splits the beam
we basically have such a measuring
machine that measures two discrete
points
but we must
imagine
that the particle
itself can of course be anywhere
but with our experimental
setting we can only measure
certain points and this is the quantization
and now
so now
the logic
communication
in classical mechanics the logic
communication of the property p that corresponds
to a set of points p in space
phase page
which is to say the property not p is
represented by the set theoretic complement
pc of the set p
so here you see this
but in quantum it's actually
so this is the point
for example a certain point
and the complement are all the other
points in the phase space where the particle is not
in quantum mechanics it's different
in quantum case the negation
is an orthogonal complement
of the subspace
so here we have
for example
an array which is spin
in z direction
and its negation is the orthogonal spin
in z minus direction
so in quantum mechanics
the negation is
an orthogonal ray
orthogonal to the ray I was
to the first ray
and so
now you have to think
of
the
collection of all vectors in the space that are orthogonal
to every vector in the subspace
as the complement
and if p is the projector onto p its negation
is presented by the vector projector 1 minus
p
and this is the
picture trying to depict
in quantum space the basic dimensions
the states are raised
and
now
so there is a very profound difference
between classical and quantum properties
which is illustrated by considering a two-dimensional
hybrid space representing possible properties
of a spin-off particle
so a spin-off particle is schematically
shown on the right
the line p through the origin
of the physical property
of spin
of the positive spin one-half
in units of the Planck constant
again this is where the quantization comes in
the line p perpendicular
to this line is an orthogonal complement
and represents the physical property
of spin minus one-half
in the z direction
the key point is that there are many other lines
through the origin such as q
which is now
the spin
directly x
and
they are neither the same as the property
sz which is a spin
in the z direction nor
its negation z that
minus one-half and you see here that
also there is of course a complement
to x which would be x
minus which would be now here
and so
you have infinitely many
angles in which you can measure the spin
and each gives you a spin and a counter spin
you know you have infinitely many
and so you have infinitely
many possibilities
of determining the location
of your point
and so
this is
very important and what we say in quantum mechanics
is we have two properties
for example
p and q
they are
they are incorporated
incompatible when the projectors
onto the corresponding subspace do not commute
so when p times 2 is not
q times p and so when we don't
have commuting operators then we have
a situation that lacks the precise analog
and classical physics for example entanglement
and we will understand entanglement a bit
but quantum entanglement
entanglement doesn't allow such
subspace commutation and so
if there is no such commutation
then we can't
we can't have an analog
in classical physics
and so
this evolution from the Stern-Gallach
apparatus to Schrdinger
finding his famous equation took
only 5 years
and it was a great historical moment
marking the birth of the quantum mechanics
description of matter
it occurred when Schrdinger first wrote down his equation
for many years the internal atomic structure
of matter had been a great mystery
no one had been able to understand
what had mattered together
why there was a chemical binding and especially
why it could be stable
Schrdinger's discovery of the proper equations
of motion of electrons on an atomic scale
provided a theory from which atomic phenomena
could be calculated
positively, accurately and
in detail in principle
so that was why it was such
a big revolution because suddenly
could calculate
exactly why a hydrogen atom
is stable and which
different variants of hydrogen atom exist
so you doterium and tritium
could also be calculated
and also the helium atom
and so the equation is capable of explaining
all atomic phenomena except those involving
magnetism and relativity
it explains the energy level of an atom
and all the effects of chemical binding
so
this is so
so attracted
and you know
effective that now there are quantum
simulators that can
simulate the binding of a ligand to a protein
so it's amino acids
how they are constituted in space
and you know this exactly
and you know where you know which electrons
residues are
you can use Schrdinger equation
systems to calculate
to try to predict the position of a ligand
towards these electron charges
you have to then again abstract a little bit
but this is really fascinating
that you can now do calculations about
methods of resizing
but it's only true in principle
because soon the mathematics
becomes too complicated to solve exactly any
but the simplest problems only the hydrogen
and helium atoms have been calculated
to a higher accuracy however with various
approximations some fairly sloppy
behind the says
some fairly sloppy is so lovely
what many of the facts of more complicated
atoms and of chemical binding of molecules
can also so in quantum chemistry
you have to simplify a bit but you can still
use the quantum principle to calculate
the relationships of matter and it's very
fascinating and that was
possible due to the Schrdinger equation
which I'm not showing
because it takes a day to
to teach it how to get there
now
we know we have
already had a superposition a superposition
is that the quantum particle
is not in one
of the base states phi i
but that it is a combination
like I showed here for just
two states
combination of the values
it has in the two states
so if it's projected
on the two states and this is a quantum
superposition and basically
all quantum in a quantum
computer all quantum bits
are in a superposition state
so there are
when you measure
a quantum bit as we will see
in a while you obtain
an approximation of a pure state
but it's not really a pure state
so that means that
if you let's say you have two
base states like in a qubit and now
you measure it
you get almost zero or almost one
but you have still a very tiny
complex number in front of the other
parameter so you have something like
0.999999 times
one state 0.001
times the other so it's very
you don't get a so you have
always superposition in quantum
and that's why they are always
that's why it's a rail a line
because you have infinitely many points
however
however there is something else in superposition
which is entanglement
and so let me explain to you what entanglement
is so entangled particles
can be prepared experimentally
for example you can take a photon
and polarize it
to generate a pair of low energy
spin one-off photons
oh yes I want to give you an example
of a spin one
particle photon has spin one
so photon has spin one
and you can get
out of it you can get two
weak energy photons of spin one-off
and here
and so
the two spin one-off particles here
you have particle A and B
they are in the superposition of states
so if
x direction spin up is measured for particle C1
then spin down is always measured for particle C2
even if they are far apart
and this is also true
for
so actually this is I think
a wrong rotation but it doesn't matter now
so this should be C1, C2
but basically you see that the first particle
has
is
is a mixture
oh no sorry these are the two particles
no that was correct so these are
I had just to think about it a bit
so
this is the first particle, this is the second particle
the first particle
has
x spin up
and the second x spin down
and so this is
this is that
this particle
has the opposite
states then this particle
and this means the combination of the two spaces
it's called the tensor
and so
if you measure now this particle
in x direction
it will have x direction up
and the other one will always have the opposite
direction
but if you don't measure one of the particle
you don't know which one has spin up
and which one has spin down
now the interesting thing is
if you produce the two particles
and take them away from each other very far
and you do the measurement on one
then you always have the opposite measurement
of the other and that has
that is called
non-locality of quantum mechanics
though you know
the point is that when you create the particle
you basically encode already
this opposite information
now if you take them apart and measure one particle
then the other one always has the opposite
and they can't communicate
because they are so far apart
that even if they could only communicate
by some unknown means
above the speed of light now we know that the speed of light
is the highest speed that can be attained
in the universe so basically
you take them so far apart that they cannot communicate
and then you do these measurements and you find out
that their spin is opposite
and this is called entanglement and the question is
how can this be, how can it be
that we don't know which particle is which
but we know it upon measurement
and we don't understand this
but we can describe it with this equation
and
so
these states are incompatible
so
what does this mean
so
sorry this slide is messed up
the quantum part
of the phase space is the Hilbert space 8
and the complex vector space with an inner product
an element of
H
here it should be here
is denoted as Psi, the inner product
is written
like this
I should group them
so that it doesn't mess itself up again
it's not groupable
it's such a city software
you see that's
the consequence of Microsoft having the monopoly
on this so they don't have to make an effort
to make it really good
so
and so the inner product
that's
and so the counterpart of a point
in classical phase space is a one-dimensional
subspace of the Hilbert space array
consisting of all multiples C times C
of some non-zero
C
so this is why it's aligned
you can have infinitely many C's
arrays determined by the attic operator
so you can basically
say this here
this pet bra determines
array in linear algebra notation
and so if you take
this operator
and apply it to a cap then you get this
and
this basically
allows you to measure
quantum
quantum magnitudes
and so
this is a certain
interpretation of quantum mechanics invented by
Omnis and Griffiths we don't have to go
into this now but basically
I just want to explain a little bit to you so
that you know what a projector is so
if you have
two projectors P and Q that
measure
or describe some properties like for example spin
in X and spin in Y direction
and if the two projectors commute
so their products
are
with the order of
then they commute and only when this
condition is fulfilled the product itself is a
projector and it projects
into a subspace P and Q
in a grid with quantum logic
but if it's not like this
so then the conjunction P and Q is meaningless
in the sense that the history
of interpretation assigns it no meaning in other words
one cannot assign two incompatible properties
to one quantum system at the same time
therefore
we can't
interpret the singlet entanglement
because let's see
the singlet entanglement this year
this is the singlet entanglement where you have
two photons which are entangled
one in the one
point in one direction the other in the other direction
and now
so this is again
a way of expressing this
expression of this
and now let's look at states
A and B
so a projector A
tensor B is A tensor
this is the matrix filled with 1s
times this this represents
a property of the diatic
product space A tensor B
it is the conjunction
of the separate properties of the subsets since A and B
so basically
you have two rays which
describe a property of the system like the spin
direction and if you have
A tensor B then you basically have
the conjunction of these properties
so that means a particle having both
being projected
with this projector has both properties for example
spin A
and positive
and spin B
negative
is a
commuting operator
which assigns
a projector to the particles A and B
and basically it says
particle A is
the spin direction positive
and particle B
is x spin direction negative
so you could say if you have a
range like this
that is the z direction the particle
flies like this and if you turn it
by maybe 45 degrees
you get x direction of the particle
to be separated like this
and so this and so if you
do this on two different particles
one has gone through one standard
of apparatus the other one through the other
now both can be assigned
assigned the spins
to these particles and that's perfectly
perfect but in the entanglement
this projector
there is no projector that
commutes and therefore
we cannot so if we project
something into this singlet entanglement
there is no
there is no such tender product
and if there is no tender product
we cannot say anything about the spin of
A or B
we
in the direction
unless we measure the z direction
but we can't say anything about any other direction
because of the entanglement
and so
this just
is to show you
that mathematically
those
paradoxical points which correspond to states
for which we have non-commuting projectors
and this
why am I showing this to you
because we get to projectors with the quantum
computers and we will also
deal with entanglement there
so
what time is it now
it's still one o'clock until one o'clock
we have right
so
since you've been working so hard
well I do I will do
what I think I will do is
at least the quantum bits
so now we have
yes
or does everyone understand
entanglement
to be fair there is a lot of
people's work that I'm not planning
because we take way too long
probably to
to explain
so
let me see
if I can
describe the scenario
we have a photon
which we split into two photons
one of which has
a spin and the other which has a
complementary spin
and we send the second
photon
thousands of miles away
yes
and then we change the spin
of the first photon
and even though there's
no way in which they can be communicating
with each other no we don't change it
we measure it
so
maybe to make this one more
I think I misinterpreted
when I first saw this equation so what we see here
this equation describes the spin
in x direction this equation describes the spin
in z direction these are two
different entanglement one with regard to
x one with regard to z spin
so they are both
are describing
different entanglement apparatus
if you would like so
and this year
this is one state
of particles A and B
in which A has spin up and B has spin down
this is the other state of particles
A and B where A has spin down
and B has spin up so A and B are the two
particles I think I got this wrong last time
so this is
and so what this expresses is that
there is basically a mixed state
between this tensor
and this tensor
this tensor describing A being spin up
this tensor describing B being spin down
and this tensor describing
x being spin down and x being spin up
now when we make the measurement
we discover
that x is A has spin up
then we know that B is always
spin down though now they are
they are separate
geographically
and if we discover
that x has spin down and B has spin up
then we will always be up
so this is the same in z direction
however
the two projectors
these projectors don't really
commute although there is a tensor product
shown here the projectors corresponding to these
don't commute as is shown here
right so
so this tensor product
of A and B
which doesn't commute
projects
so the same project on to A
B with C but only commutes with the
projectors 0 and 1 on A and B
but it doesn't commute
with the tensor product
and so though there is a tensor indicated
here there is no mathematical commutation
because we cannot change the order of the two
projectors mathematically
and so therefore
that's what Omnis and
Griffith say therefore
this is not an interpretive mistake
right so you can't
because non-projective
non-commuting projectors which are measurements
of the quantum state non-commuting projectors
mean that there is no way
to assign
that the tensor
product doesn't need to assign
two reliable properties to the
particles in question
so the
the tensor
product of the projector doesn't
assign
interpretive
property to the particles in question
and so that you can see here
because you don't know unless you do a measurement
you don't know which of the particles
is spin up and spin down
you only know that they are anti-sensical
so in this way
the
this
the paradox
that you can have a
photon
being changed in some way
in one part of the universe
it rise to an equal and opposite
change in another photon
this paradox is eliminated by
Griffith's
it's not eliminated it's just
he just said
that basically
the entanglement
has no it's
uninterpretable and my interpretation
in this case is that
we created the entanglement
with the machine that created
the entanglement photons
but we
because we don't understand what's really going on
we can just say there is an entanglement
but we don't know in which direction which photon
is and this gets only revealed
when
when we measure the photons
the properties that say
we take the spin in the X
is this property
dependent
or independent of the spin in the Z direction?
yeah so that's a very good question
so they are not only independent
they are totally
for the same particle
they are mutually exclusive
that's because of the
that's another instance of the Heidenberg principle
that's why I introduced Heidenberg principle
so if I measure the spin in the X direction
I can't measure anymore the spin in the Z direction
because I have what's called the collapse
of the wave function
that's how it's called in quantum mechanics
and that means that I don't have a wave
anymore after the measurement
that I now have information
about this particle
with regard to a certain dimension
but I can't obtain it anymore
for
another dimension
and it's basically like
the particle
and now it hits
it's split and it hits the screen
I see it on the screen but now it has lost its properties
because now it's not anymore
flying in the beam but it's now
condensed on the glass plate
now I have information about it which spin it's head
but I've lost the quantum system
the wave is not anymore wave
it has now become a physical piece of dust
that I see on the glass plate
and so in this way I've destroyed
the wave character of the particle
by measuring it
and this is what happens here as well
and you can only measure in one
the spin in one dimension
and that's why on the quantum computer
you only measure always in one dimension
because you can't
afterwards the particle is so to speak gone
but then he said
given that there is an infinite amount of angles on which
you can measure spin
that the particle
has an infinite amount
of independent exclusive properties
yes
this is a very clever statement
and this we will see
tomorrow at the end of the lecture when we get
maybe we are faster
and that's by the way this infiniteness
is expressed by the
by the index w
so you know that you have x, y and z
these are three axes but if I spin my hand
like this they can be anywhere on the sphere
and w expresses this
that they are arbitrary
and now
so one qubit
has an infinite amount
an infinite amount of
it's a continuous variable
it can have an infinite amount
of combinations
and so that's the fundamental difference
between the quantum computer and the classical computer
the classical computer there is electricity
on the channel or not
on the gate or not and if there is no electricity
zero if there is electricity it's one
and
sometimes you can also have
errors in single bit measurements
but this taking a side
basically
in a quantum computer
each qubit has an infinite amount
of
possible instances
but when you measure
you can only measure one
and the problem is how do you
before you do the measurement
how do you manipulate this infinite amount
before you do your measurement
you can keep it so that you get
the regularities that you want
in a gated circuit
because in a classical gated circuit
everything is regular according to the
laws of Boolean logic
but how do you want to maintain this regularity
in a quantum computer
and that's what we are going to think about
so arenas and grittits
have a relatively sober view of entanglement
but there are some people who think
that we can use quantum entanglement
in order to do
quantum communication
over long distances
in a way which will be preventing
people listening
in the outside
do those people have a point
that we can use?
we can already
do it now
for short distances
because we can use the entanglement
I didn't prepare this
it's called quantum teleportation
so that the entanglement
then basically
there's a circuit
that has an experiment to set up
where you can basically
prepare a particle
and then you can
send this particle
to
another party
you can then
measure yourself the particle
and give this other part
a measurement result
and then this measurement result
is meaningless to anyone who doesn't have the particle
but if you combine this measurement result
with the particle you can then
decipher the code
and so this entanglement
can indeed be used for secure communication
because you don't even have to encrypt
the transmitted
measurement result anymore
because somebody who doesn't have the particle
will not be able to do anything with it
because there are infinitely many possibilities
and this is one
and now this property is used for the other
to decipher the particle
so with this you can create quantum communication
the big problem with this
is that we don't have quantum repeaters
and so
because quantum particles lose their properties
when they get transported over after a certain time
you would have to have a quantum repeater
that basically measures
the property of the particle
and then
recreate the particle in exactly the same way
and transport it to the next repeater
so that you always threshold
the particle
and we don't know how to build such quantum repeaters
so therefore right now
the dream of
secure communication by quantum teleportation
as it's called
which is not a teleportation because you need to transmit
in a conventional way your measurement result
but because of this
so this has been done
but only over short distances
because the particle
many particles can lose
their quantum state in a millisecond
so you need
at the speed of light you can travel quite far in a millisecond
so this is
300 kilometers
and so therefore
yes it's 300 kilometers in a millisecond
and therefore I think the longest experiment
is 200 kilometers
that has been performed
so because within 200 kilometers of distance
the particle did not lose yet its quantum property
that you wanted to use
for this quantum teleportation
but so you would have to have some issue
with the United States
now maybe we can build a quantum system
that the best
systems I think lose
the quantum entanglement property in a millisecond
so maybe you can build with half a millisecond
but that gives you
600 instead of 300 kilometers now
then you would have to have a repeater every 500 kilometers
so that would be 12 repeaters
across the United States
just to communicate within the United States
a little bit easier
because you just need two of the one repeaters
but you need at least one
in Luxembourg it works really well
or in Liechtenstein
but they are not the world powers
who look for quantum communication
so now in Luxembourg
you could already
inform the other one about a secret
today was quantum teleportation
Russia would have
from Vladivostok to Moscow
I think it's 10,000 kilometers
so you need 20 quantum repeats
so this is why it doesn't work
so you had another question
but this is basically
this entanglement
I have much more
I have a full set of slides explaining
the whole theory of grises
but this is not the right moment to show it
he has this book
if you are interested in this
it's called Consistent Quantum Theory
appeared in 2002 in Cambridge
there are three authors
who have Omnis, Griffith and the third one
who have written a book about Consistent Quantum Theory
all of them have the same trick
that they basically
trick
with the commuting
operators
but I think Griffith's book is the one that presents it
in the best way
but you need quite a lot of mathematical knowledge
but it's a great book
so what is a qubit?
quantum computers don't use
bits but qubits
and here you have a qubit symbolized
in a very primitive way
as the two basic states of some
physical system
so quantum computers
can speed up some computational
problems
but
what's that
but in practice
it has not really been shown
so in practice
the qubit has been built
and also
logical qubits have been built
which are several physical qubits
that make up one real qubit
one logical qubit
to do error correction
but nobody has yet calculated
anything useful as a quantum computer
like for example the Fourier transformation
which is what the quantum computers
would be much better at than classic computers
because we don't have
quantum computers of the sufficient size
now what are qubits?
there are systems with two base states
and many superposition states
an example of such a system is the spin vector
of an electron or two energy levels of an atom
and so now the base states
are always modeled like this
the vector for zero
is a vector of one and zero
and the vector for one is just the opposite
so this is how you model in a two-dimensional space
you do your base vectors
now
this doesn't come across right on this slide
because of the projector
maybe I could change it
but I'm afraid that then I will kind of
lose
yeah I think then I will lose the
completely lose it
but it looks like an old but it's really a sphere
perfect sphere
and on this perfect sphere now you have
to state zero to state one
sorry state one and state zero
and there was a size
here
it's much the
no
but suddenly the google
pudding is out of sync
I can stop it and restart it
no but try then backwards
to the slide in at a minute
and now go forward again
okay maybe I'm offline
no because I can see your face
the face is moving
just slide it
let me stop
stop presentation and represent
presentation
so
okay now the slide in
good so here you see
you see this sphere
and that's high
is one state of the qubit
and
this is expressed can be expressed as
alpha times zero plus
better times one that's a linear combination
that expresses the arbitrary qubit state
and as you pointed out
there are infinitely many of them
because A and B
are complex numbers and the only restriction
is that they need to be there
there some needs to be one why is that the case
because it's a sphere right so this is just
Pythagoras
and
but basically because
we have Pythagoras here
we can also express
A and B
in terms of the sine and the cosine
which works like this this is the Euler
theorem you don't you can look it up
but it's Euler's equation
applied to this
and now you don't have alpha
and beta as complex number as anymore
but you now have
Euler coordinates defined by the
angle so this angle which
which is used
to operate on the
zero state
vector is theta
and the one for
the other
is phi and so you see
here you now
combine theta and phi to define
the position of the psi
with regard to the two basic
dimensions
and because this
vector is not observable in qubits we can
drop it
and then we obtain this
so and there because there are infinite
number of qubit states so therefore quantum
computers manipulate continuous magnitudes
so they basically
manipulate quantum mechanical
waves in infinite space
while classical computers manipulate
discrete bits
and this is the fundamental reason why quantum
computers have the potential to be much faster
than classical computers however
it's much harder to manipulate the continuous
magnitudes than a classical discrete bit
which can only take
values of 0 and 1
this is super important to understand
other questions to this
what is it that
that is being manipulated
is it the angle that is being manipulated
so if you get
because that would just correspond
to the bridge
so what is being manipulated
so when you create a quantum
computer with one bit
only
so when you have a quantum computer
with only one bit
and
initialize it you try to set
the state to 0
and if you have 8 bits as well
you try to set
all the states to 0
now
when you now
initialize this
you can imagine that you have
a superposition of all the qubits
of the quantum computer into one big wave
so you do not have a wave
equation
for each single qubit but you now have
a superposition across
the two exponent 8 bits
and also that's
in this case 8 bits 256
continuous variables
contributing all to the wave
but you don't know the shape of the wave
so you just know
that you have a quantum mechanical
superposition
in this 8 bit register
and now you start manipulating it
by applying energy for example
to single qubits
by doing this you are changing the shape
of the entire curve
of the entire quantum mechanical wave
until at the end of your manipulations
you make the measurement
that's how you manipulate it
so you are basically manipulating
the whole register with the quantum paper
so this is what I mean
with manipulating
but before I can explain
I first have to explain the quantum measurement
so
quantum measurements are described
by a collection of measurement operators
these are operators which act
on the state space of the system that is measured
so when you measure
this
this year
you actually assign it
either a 1 or a 0
you can't measure
these angles
and that's now again the discretization
of quantum mechanics that we are asking for
although Barry you have an infinite
number of positions
on the two lines
of the two rays 0 and 1
when you measure you can only
get one value
0 or 1
so now we have again the quantization phenomenon
right
and
so
the index M here
refers to the measurement outcome
that may occur in the experiment so the quantum experiment
is just 0 and 1
in quantum computing
and if the state of the quantum system is 
immediately above the measurement then the probability that the result m occurs
is the following
so you have
a bra
ket psi and then you have this operator
in the middle that you have to
multiply
this means
complicated integration operation
but at the end you get a certain probability
and so after you've done
this measurement you get
this measurement operator times c
divided
by this
which is just a normalizing factor
to express that you have now
basically
that this is normalized between 0 and 1
and so the measurement operator
satisfies the completeness equation
so that means if you have two
of them and you multiply
these two operators this is the
inverted
transposed
complement or so this is a complement matrix
then you get the identity matrix
and
so the most important
measurement we have is the measurement
of a single qubit in the computation basis
so this is the measurement of a single qubit
with two outcomes m0 and m1
and now
you basically
get 0 or 1
if you apply this measurement to the system p
and
usually
this factor here
is not taken into account
but you only want to know the 0 and 1
so this is
what you measure
and of course
so this is the state that we had
before and now you want to see whether it's
1 or 0 and then you do this kind of measurement
and
now comes back to a question
so quantum computer
performs calculations by manipulating qubits
within a quantum register
so quantum register
is a set of several qubits
that are changed together in one quantum register
and the quantum computer performs
calculations by manipulating qubits
within a quantum register
the state of a quantum register is the two
exponent n-dimensional
space, the tensor product of the state space
of the single qubit so here you have
the single qubits
and their tensor
product
of the vectors gives the quantum space
here you see what a tensor product is
so if you have this vector and this vector
the tensor product gives a matrix
of size n times n
so it's z times z
and z times z
times z and so on
until you have filled the whole matrix
that's the tensor product which gives you
your new state space
and you have to
be aware that each of those is already
infinite
because each qubit
has a
it's a complex vector space
as is indicated by the c
and has
infinitely many values
so you can make this
this big Hilbert space
that gets more and more complicated
as you're adding more qubits
and with a thousand qubits you have now
the ten exponent thousand
dimensional Hilbert space
but which has infinite
but each of the dimension
of the Hilbert space is
continuous and not discrete
whereas in a quantum in a classical computer
they are all discrete
and they have a base on which the computation happens
and
so let's look at a very
simple
base of this vector space
that is of course the basis one and zero
and the register of
two qubits has then this basis
zero zero zero one
one zero one one
but of course the state of the register
is now a super position
of the base of the form
so what you have now is
so you have now two
base sorry two
bits
and so
this is
bit one and bit two
but now you can multiply
the first bit so zero one
and zero so this is zero one
this is zero zero this is zero two
zero zero and zero one
and now you can multiply them
or you have to multiply them
with
with a complex
number for each of the basis states
so this is the basis state
is multiplied with one complex number
the next base state
with another complex number and the next and the next
so that you now have the sum
of the four base states
each multiplied with one
different complex number and that gives
this is a very important equation
because it shows
that a classical computer would only have
but here you have to multiply
each of the four with a complex number
indicating where they are
on the way and so the
super position that you obtain
by the four qubits is really this
so this by the way uppercase c
to indicate that we are not talking about one qubit
but about a register and now
as you see we have now
even in the four qubits
you have four times intensively many values
that together form this
complicated way and now
this is the wave equation so to speak
of
your base
states and why is it a wave equation
because this cat here
that you see here is equivalent
to the Schrodinger equation
but now the Schrodinger equation is like a super position
of four different Schrodinger equations
each made up of two qubit states
and each
with its own complex number parameter
multiplying
and I think that when mathematicians
work with quantum computer theory
they often forget
how brittle this is
like the email we saw yesterday
it basically shows that
the mathematician we are talking to
in this case he was even visited
but still he forgot it
he forgot to see
that these are not just the four states
when you measure them
it's only the four states
but when you are calculating with some
at runtime before you make the measurement
of complexity you have to do is even in the four
even if you have just two qubits
and this gets worse and worse
the more qubits you are adding
because the number of qubits is in the exponent
so it's an exponential growth in complexity
and with a thousand qubits
so the thousand qubits by the way
is the minimal amount of qubits
that you need to have
a practically useful quantum computer
for example if you think of an RSA
so the RSA
you know this
the internet for encryption
when you pay with the credit card
the number of the credit card is encrypted
and how does this work
the browser obtain the public key
from an authority
that provides public keys for the security
and everybody has this public key
now the
now the browser
the browser actually
yes and then
there is a private key
known only by the authority
that is now also known
to the credit card company
and now when you send
your
encrypted
now when you encrypt
your transmission
you need both the private and the public key
to decrypt it
and with quantum computing you could
decrypt it quickly
with a quantum computer
without knowing the private key
by factorization
of
by prime number factorization
which is a quantum computer and an algorithm
you could track it without knowing
the private key very quickly
but for this you need at least a thousand qubits
or maybe many more qubits
but then you need to manage
two excellent thousands qubits
so more qubits
and these are more states
then we have
particles in the observable universe
so if we take our strongest telescope
and all the
our galaxy and all the other thousands of galaxies
that you can see with our strongest telescope
and count how many particles these are
these are less than two excellent thousands
so
two excellent thousands is a big number and that's a number
we are facing for quantum computers
that have the use for registers
so they need a register for thousand qubits
and we will see a bit later why that's the case
but they need big registers
so
so this
equation is extremely important
yes, question
I just want to clarify if I understand it correctly
but then the point is because
okay
there's one
one qubit
if you measure the state of the qubit
you will get either one or zero
so basically the northern hemisphere
or southern hemisphere or this way
before you measure it
you will get either one or zero
but if you have just one qubit
it's kind of useless because
any time it's only going to be one or two
but when you link
two qubits together
you don't have to
basically it can do a computation
with any of the infinite values
that it has and only after it's done
the computation you can measure the result
again and quantize it
the trick that you are doing
and we understand this much better
is that you are using
the qubits to perform
in a certain style of calculation
using quantum gates
we will see how this works tomorrow
and then you only have to measure
out of the many qubits in your register
one single one
to get all the information you need to solve your problem
that's why it's so hard
so you need to set up
it's very, you need a lot of cleverness
you need to set up a mathematical algorithm
that allows you to be
expressed in this amplitude
of a qubit register
but at the end can be
obtained, the critical result
can be obtained with one measurement
and tomorrow there's one very simple algorithm
the Deutsche algorithm
which was the first quantum algorithm
which works
with one or two qubits
I forgot it but we will see tomorrow
which explains the principle
from which you can understand
why it does such a beautiful speed up
but this we will look at tomorrow
and then you will understand
how it works in the same way you understand today
how the logic gates work
but the key is always
to
make implicit usage
of the complexity that this allows
and then you nevertheless
get all the results you need from one or
very few measurements
and this is the
trick of quantum computing
and of course it's not only
superposition but also entanglement
so entanglement
is super important
for quantum computing
so this is a two register
a two qubit register
with 0, 1, 1, 0
and now an entanglement state
this is the same way an entanglement
that we saw with the photon
so that we see that it's a mixture
of 0, 1, 1, 0
and this state cannot be
connected into a product of the states
of the first and second bit
this is quantum entanglement and the main foundation
for the high efficiency of quantum computing
for some problems so not only
is the wave superposition for several qubits
important but also the entanglement
and the entanglement here
it says
it comes back to it
into a product of the states of the first and second bit
that means what I said before
that the projectors are non-commuting
because we cannot factor
this sum into
product of the first and second bit
so this is like the photon entanglement
and these entanglement states
are critical
for quantum computing
and they give the quantum computing their power
because entanglement is a phenomenon
that does not exist in the classical world
of course
how
can you maintain a coherent
computation
if you have this kind of entanglement
just between two bits
so basically
as we
see in the Deutsch algorithm
you are making usage of the entanglement
for elegant computations
the problem is
elegant computations
that save you
so you are utilizing the entanglement
to save computation steps
because such an entanglement in the Deutsch algorithm
you can do one computation
instead of two
if you were operating on the entangled state
one operation is like two operations
and then when you do
the true algorithm
which is
quantum Fourier transformation
then you can
then it becomes more and more efficient
and so this is what we are going to look at tomorrow
but the entanglement basically allows you
because when you
manipulate one bit the other bit gets automatically entangled
and each computation
is a register manipulation
so when you hear the test of the computer
you are sending electrons through the gates
and that creates a new form of electrons
and this is how you manipulate
this is what is called a circuit
and at the end
you read out a register
that is connected to your circuit
to get your for example
the additional result
here it is different
here you are not
the quantum circuit consists of a series of manipulations
of a register
and each time you manipulate
you manipulate all the qubits
at the same time
and that is what
if you find an algorithm
where this creates less
computation steps then you have
the advantages of the quantum computer
and Deutsch
was not a German by the way
I think it was an Englishman
was the first
in the early 90s to figure out such an algorithm
and then
in the early 2000s it was implemented
for the first time
and I think that is the paper
that I was sent yesterday
as answer to my question
so a quantum gate
is a manipulation
of a quantum register
so for example
if you have as a quantum
a qubit
the state of an atom
at the energy level of an atom
and now you have the electrons
on the lower
on the lower energy level of the atom
and you shoot with a laser against it
you will elevate the electrons to a high level
and this way you will
be able to change the state
of the quantum bit
and this is
what a quantum operator does
it changes the quantum register
and the quantum gate
so if the quantum register
is up against psi
the quantum register maps
this psi to a multiplication
of the operator
u with psi
and so that is the quadratic
matrix
which has exactly the same rows and numbers
as the qubits of the computer
so if the computer has two qubits
then the matrix is two times
two matrix with three qubits
three and so on
and these three eights
and these rows and commons
are also normal with regard to
scalar multiplication
so
so that
it's a quadratic matrix
with this property
and so that also means
that you can always take it back
so every quantum operation
is reversible
because of the unitary nature
of the matrix that means
when you apply this
to a quantum register
which is a vector of zeros and ones
you apply this unitary matrix
you get a result you can always
calculate that
so look here for example on the or
once you have the result
that you have a zero or a one
the one can come
from three different constellations of the input
so it's not reverse seven you don't know anymore
what was it
what was the input
and the quantum computer
each operation
on the quantum register as a unitary
operator which is fully reversible
and
mathematically speaking that means
it's also normal with regard to scalar multiplication
and
so the
resulting product
is still orthogonal
so that means that the
resulting matrix
the columns
the columns are always
the columns of
the matrix are
orthogonal so linear
independent and also normalized
so
so this is
a quantum gate the quantum
to
repeat it once more we are starting with one qubit
which has
impossibly many states but if you measure it
you can get one base state
then we have
we take
several quantum bits together which we have the quantum
register
which is like a vector of zero and one
here is an example
this is
two quantum big quantum registers
with four base states
zero zero zero one one zero and one one
and all the
in this state it's like
a big drninger wave
which is linear combination
of those base states
and this is an entanglement
of two base states
and this is the quantum gate
so unlike
here where we have a
Julian table that
presents what the
quantum gate does
what the logical gate does
the quantum gate is like a matrix multiplication
like matrix multiplication
so that's the matrix
but
yes
but so at the technical
level
it's a technical level, yeah it's not a component
like a circuit but it's like a manipulation
of the energy level
of one or several of the qubits
and basically what it does
it is acting mathematically speaking
like a matrix multiplication
and so here's an example
so this is a negation gate
so it turns
around the state of
two qubits so if you multiply
this
with a qubit
which is in state one zero
you get out a qubit with a
register
which is states one and zero
you multiply this then you get out states
zero and one
and so
now we have a superposition
time on the basis
of zero and one on the two qubit
computer and now this
means that there are linear combinations
of alpha
times zero plus
beta times one and you know
that zero is in matrix
notation and zero
is this
oh no I think zero is always this
I have to look it up I'm very
bad at remembering
this was here at the beginning
yes
so zero is this
and one
is this
now if you multiply
if you multiply
so the linear combination
which is so near
so if you have alpha
times this
am I getting this right yes
plus beta times this
so I'm going to get rid of all of this
plus beta times
this
then this is alpha
and zero and beta and zero and beta
so this is alpha beta
so this is the representation
of an arbitrary
parametrization of your
qubit register with two
complex numbers now
you can take this
and multiply this alpha beta
times this gate
zero one
sorry it needs to be written down the other way
zero one one zero
times alpha beta
and then you get
zero times alpha
plus one times beta is beta
and then the other one is formed
one times alpha plus zero times
beta is alpha
so with simple math sorry it's
a bit covered but I don't have
so I put it back here zero one
one zero multiplied
by alpha beta
equals beta
alpha
so because of
multiplication right
and so this unitary
operator does
changes the order of the two qubits
and so this is super important
so
if you think of quantum computation
you have this register
and then you have just many many
such unitary matrices
multiply with a register until you get
a certain result of your register
and then you have one of the two qubits
and that gives you the result of your entire computation
the whole computation is just
a long multiplication series
of the register with different
matrices which represent the quantum gates
that's what is
mathematically
and
so this result comes from
that this position is determined by saying
zero times alpha plus one times
beta and this position is given by
one times alpha plus zero times
beta that's just linear
basically an algebra and now
you can imagine that you have a bigger register
now we have big matrices
and they all get multiplied
and after that you get the final result
and now comes the interesting question
so
from this you see that every quantum
computer is just a series
of matrix multiplication
so therefore every quantum computer can be
simulated by classical computer
because of course the classical computer
can also execute matrix multiplication
however it's not so
so
and it's
there are cases where
the quantum computer needs 10 steps
and
the quantum computer
the classical computer needs n steps
the quantum computer needs
the squared of n steps
for example if it would need 100 steps
then the quantum computer would need
would need 10
and if it would need 10,000 steps
the quantum computer
would just need 100
this looks pretty good
right, the problem is
that the quantum computer needs
many, many, many more bits
than the classical computer to achieve this
And it needs so many more bits that the only computations, the only speed up that is useful to
help with the computer computer is this, which is called, so this is called polynomial speed up,
and this is an exponential speed up, where you have basically this.
So, so if you have, for example, here two exponent 10 computations,
everything 8 is 156, 9 is 512. So that's 1024. Here you would only have 10.
So this is 100 times speed up. But if you have, let's say, two exponent 12,
that's 4096 computations. With a quantum computer, you would get down to 12.
You see, that's amazing, right? So here you need 12 computations, you need 4,000 computations.
And that's called exponential speed up, right? Now think of, I mean, it gets worse. So if you
think of you need on the classical computer 20 to exponential computations, that's
as many particles as we have in the, in the middle way, right? So it's a huge set of particles.
And now if you do the quantum computer, you just have 100 computations, sorry,
two to exponential. You just have 100 computations. So an exponential speed up,
and this is what you basically need for, if you want to crack encryption with a quantum computer,
you apply an algorithm that achieves a speed up. And now you see the difference. So 100 computations,
that can be done, you know, one clock cycle of a quantum computer is a tenth of a millisecond.
So then you can do this in less than a second, right, on a quantum computer, whereas you would
need two to the exponent 100 computations on a regular computer, which takes years,
or I don't know, thousands of years. So, so this shows you that an exponential speed up is very,
very effective. But even what you see here, you understand now that each quantum computer
can be, can be simulated with a, with a, with a normal computer, because it's in the end
just a series of matrix multiplications. I think for today, this was more than enough, I'm afraid.
And, and I, Barry, do you
