Fydd am gweith wr요l gofio gyda ifanc i erbyn,..].
Ac mae'n dirw wir ei wneud,dair am dos Tryg.
Mae'r oedd anhyglno Cymru.
Rhyw roeddeth bydd yn gweithio gyr lângais gwirigoeddnill i'r thysgaf yn byddions i anhyglno cyfan taxes.
Gweithio clients o ran gweddawr lleol.
Rwy'n ddiall pourdgoed yeg os ym confusion yn shops wrth fy rhyhydded hugrans,
ddylai fy g gdybyd degoson arfa'r cyf刻 metres o gwest mud hwn arddangosedd,
nad oedd imabur gwirddio ychynig sydd gennych i ffudidegr kidnappingIAI arna un.
... Completely original, but it's original as applied to mathematics.
It's also original in the sense it is still new which means that we haven't, by any means,
identified all the weak points and even the phrasing...
...in other words, the terminological choices that we want to make in order to make our view clear.
They're still somewhat uncertain, but that's partly because we can say something's very clearly in German
ond llwg moelio'r angwsia 말xio.
Mae'r ddadg diolch isloedd wedi gyfbeforeafol
ac mae'n cael benw おid aralu fanlwg o'u awesome.
Rwy'n cael panw'r fanlwg instance dill,
Ond om 1988 byddwn ni hadalku gwahbeld drwsleid.
R頭 nef amser beth sy'n gyfwynhau a'r cy unstable
dy ddweud bod ni wedi ddweud addreson eich bodauNI
Ofwyl nhw dafum hwn wedi'u garlicau am y dyst neladion,
os ychydignodd mud yma,
We haven't yet worked out all the details for all the subtypes of mathematical entities, such as 8 billion groups, imaginary numbers, real numbers and so forth.
Now, very, very summarily, I've distinguished five standard accounts of the mode of being of mathematical entities.
oherwydd sydd maen nhw'n dychynig,ddol iawn i'w bwysig yn rhan sy'n bias ychydig
ond y f Nigonesbeth i dyfad.
Dwi'n ur אומרu seron oedd i'w dïdd yn niadol o travelledlegha Win Firstly ym eu gymdeithas Hywbeth.
Felly yn ychydig syml yn hayf ymateb yn han yw'r gweithio bwysig,
oedd yn fed subdian fluids!
Ti wnaeth clygu yr astiwn bod ymvol o wybod i rhoi siw.
mai o'r byw nil ac yn barsbwywedd.
A gyd afiad dim, iechyd streamer diwylo sydd wedi gyfin credu
â blwysgawn ydyn nhw yw'r am pequeño,
sydd eisiau gyda maeth yma i logisismau.
Logisism is wnaeth eich
bod i moedwg ac o吗w bullhwyl yn modd eich
ac mae'n teimlu, ond mae'n behil.
Ond mae e Was Ariana Arnieni fickwyd o unbl yn swyddiad.
Mae'r bobl yn cerdbyn wedi hyd i fod mae cerdbyn',
ac mae math利unkno eraill mwyno â'n cy注ilyf yn bwysig.
Mae strong yw ar aw incredibleio swapndee gyda'r cyfeinau cyllid,
mae'r bobl yn adrodd i g Manni.
O cynl 충분ol cy quit yna'n meddwl a chi'n dech presume a diwy Slackwch.
ac mai ar beth yw waith am ddwyd niechorsio openerau.
Ond o gamcaf obydd BrydartНетog,
ac gweldugodd gofion,
a mewn i gaelol ar maarfyniaf.
Yn amser, ac wirio gweldiertad wedyn mewn i dderbyg eich Maron
a nhw'n gwneud i'r siarad nhw i dif期ffed yng Nghymledd Ty factions,
Plmouth i marchnod bydd wedi ffedig i f Shortly Ymryd.
Ie某 y proven إن,
ein bod yn enwedig i anhy energeticdau sprwf,
a gref ydy'r meddwl wedi arll waterproof wedi wneud
am gwy Gorllidol heil a hyn wedi addest gwiyntanteolfo glennis
ar y mar devot yn ymdd ..."
Veg ner o b rất ei hwn yn allwn
bwysig sut mae'r WYLT cum iawn.
Rwy rydych efallai ei firmdd.
Felly, mae'r planau i'r posie ao'r expl시�dd
fel Filaton relyr!
ac roeddwn ni yn ageeniol wedi eu chondegaddran nhw,
lleen wir ynrhau'r Mi Food precautions.
A then Filatonism,
Probably the oldest
That was not the most well developed theory
says there is a whole realm of mathematical entities
that are abstract or atemporal outside our purview.
They are not part of the empirical world
yw yoesir y antith blaenonied Dog Toy Holder'r Ystafell,
i fwy'i'r ein stafell ar y Cymysgol, yn ddaig i bywyd ru wedi fath arma yn efall Rhag debating,
yn fwy'i'r un s anders hisatha hynny roasteddantol yn ei bach i beth rydyn ni ar gweilliannod ar sicr wychd
dなes bod y pradd yma'u bod Llywodraeth fydd ar y gwyl fwy hwn i gwybry glorious yna yn fwy.
If a problem in the philosophy of mathematics is to how do we explain the applicability for mathematics.
Now, the final view and out view will be so view under this heading although you'll taste the idea that we might be social constructionists.
We are good social constructionists.
Final view says that mathematical entity are social construction and I will give you some examples about social constructionism
I hope you will be convinced that there is also good social constructionism and then we will argue that mathematics is one example.
I think there is another option, that is the fictionalism.
Oh yes, it was on my list but somehow I did it. Fictionalism is a bit like the error theory.
Fictionalism says that mathematical entities are like fictional entities.
In fact my very first publication defends of you like that, but in a good way.
Alright so fictionalism is whenever I use a zoom in the university internet breaks down.
In order to avoid the consequences of that I am going to record in the real world rather than in the zoom world.
I am recording if you want.
You are recording, I will record it anyway just for fun.
Ok now.
Let me get this with any luck.
I think that's stuff.
It really likes to believe things.
Are there any other questions while we wait so far?
Can you say fiction is a kind of social construction?
No because there is nothing constructed.
I guess so but that's not going to be an important question.
Logicism says mathematics is a branch of logic and so if you could express all the theorems and axioms or all the theories of mathematics in logical terms then in principle you ought to be able to deduce all of those theorems or all of those axioms from the axioms of logic.
Frager and Russell both believed that this was possible and they both presented their accounts of how you could indeed infer large bodies of mathematics from logic.
In Frager's case Russell showed that Frager's axioms were inconsistent in creating Russell's paradox which he created just before Frager's main work was about to go to the press.
Frager was able to add a paragraph at the beginning forward in which he said that Mr Russell has suggested to me that there is some problem but I believe that this problem can be addressed if you just add this extra wrinkle to some axiom.
That extra wrinkle did indeed work but only in a universe which had exactly one object or some crazy restriction.
And so version Russell then published his own version along with Whitehead and he did a much better job in the sense that he was at least as far as we can tell consistent but the job that he did was very very complicated and it was useful in the further development of logicism within the realm of set theory.
It was more complicated than the useful versions of that theory. So the useful versions of logicism say that not that all mathematics is a branch of logic but that all mathematics can be expressed using set theory, the axioms of set theory.
And set theory is somewhat more powerful than logic as we understand it and also set theory has problems with itself.
But I know recently there is a song chain called New Fragerism. So some guys may not be able to fix the problem.
These things come back.
All right. Anything that satisfies this and we've already mentioned, I've mentioned that Whitehead and Russell then work in three volumes is called Wikipedia Mathematica.
It's an amazing piece of work but as I said it came outmoded. A logicism we've talked about.
Now the next bit that is taken from a talk I gave 20 million more years ago hence the really old fashioned design of my slides compared to the new ones which are much more modern.
I deleted all the animation and this is just an extract, a few slides from this old talk because economics is one area where social constructionism would seem to be a reasonable choice.
But Austrian economics adds a very important dimension to social constructionism which I will try to explain very quickly and then later on we'll see the relevance to mathematics.
Carl Mega was the founder of the Austrian School of Economics. He founded a school, some members of which were associated with Austrian philosophers such as Brentana and so I published a book on the Austrian School of Philosophy which contained treatments of Austrian economics.
I also published several papers on Austrian economics and the two running threads which joined together the Austrian economists and the Austrian philosophers are a kind of reverence for Aristotle on the one hand and then a belief in a priorism on the other hand.
I will explain the a priorism in due course.
Now Mega had a reference for Aristotle in some of his terminology. He also had a reverence for things which were not Aristotelian in other parts of his writing so Mega is not a simple proponent of any kind of Aristotelian approach.
Now what is economics for the Austrian School?
So the economic domain domain includes things like buying and selling, valuing, pricing, putting a price on something and negotiating in many other things.
And if you take the state into account, it includes things like taxing and it includes banks in the account and it includes things like interest rates, loans, loans and so forth.
So there are lots of constituent parts of the economic domain and the Austrian School says well let's work out what are the necessary dependence relations.
So in order for something to have a price, does it have to have a value? I don't know but in order for something to have a value the Austrians would say it has to be such that someone values it.
So there have to be things like preferences so we have a dependence relation between value and preference or between value and wanting.
Now this is a very simple example of what we're going to be calling an a priori law and what that means is that it's not a matter of logic, it's not, in other words it's not purely empty, there is some content, some real content there.
And it's something which is intelligible. Anybody who understands what value is in the economic realm and what wanting or preferring is in the economic realm can see that value requires wanting or preferring.
This is called subjectivism in the Austrian School. The idea is that things have value only to the degree that the subjects in the relevant society are willing to pay or are willing to barter in order to own those things.
And there are many others such a priori dependence relations in the doctrine of the Austrian School which become very, very sophisticated and have all kinds of implications.
I've given another one here. You can't have an exchange without having an exchanger and an exchange. You can't have a buying without having a selling and you can't have a selling without having a buying.
There are lots and lots of relations like this.
Now some of them may be analytic in the sense that they are just a matter of definition.
But you see if we take buying and selling it can't be that both buying and selling are definable in such a way that it becomes analytic that buying requires selling and selling because of buying.
You have to start either with buying or with selling. You can define selling in terms of buying but then you have to accept buying and the features of buying as being something which is not analytic.
And I'll talk a little bit about that as we go along.
So this is an example of the kind of analysis that Menga created.
So for him a good exists only if there is a need.
A good implies value and value exists only if there is some kind of a need.
Whether this be a basic need or whether it's a need of the moment for instance when you see that some film is playing in a cinema and you feel a need to go and see that film.
That's not a basic need but it is a need in the sense of Menga.
A basic need would be the need for food or something.
And now the object has to be such that you can satisfy that need.
There has to be knowledge.
So good exists only where there is knowledge.
Knowledge of needs and knowledge of causal connections and not necessarily on your part they could be causal connections on the part of the seller.
Sorry they could be knowledge on the part of the seller.
And a command over the thing so you have the money to buy it.
Somebody has a copy to sell.
Now this a priorism is the Austrian school is defended in Menga but it's defended in a more radical way in Mises.
Ludwig von Mises who was a famous Austrian economist.
First half of the 20th century with a large school of followers and he says and he was influenced by Kant which may explain why he gets into Romney.
He says that there is only one axiom and that all the other axioms are economic to follow from this one axiom.
And the axiom is man and act.
This is the axiom of action.
If we understand action he says then we understand need value and all the other things.
Analyticism they all follow from this one axiom.
And then two of his followers one Murray Rothbard.
Rothbard in fact reviewed the books that I wrote on the Austrian school very friendly.
Herman Hoppe he's a German which is not necessarily a bad thing.
Who wrote a very nice book which I like defending sovereignty is called something like the mistake which is democracy.
And I like the some of the thinking of popular.
All right now so we've already mentioned many of the terms that we're going to need.
So it's something is analytic if it's a truth of logic.
And we're talking about truths or propositions or judgments or statements.
A truth is synthetic if it adds to your knowledge.
It's not it's not analytic in other words.
Truth is a priori if it's known independently of experience.
It means it's intrinsically intelligible in some way.
And it's not known by it means known by experience.
And that's it.
You could have picked a better photo for sure.
Absolutely I did but he must have looked like.
I mean there are better pictures of it.
So can't have the theory of the synthetic a priori.
But you thought that it only held for physics.
We have synthetic a priori knowledge about time space and causality.
And that knowledge is called Newtonian mechanics.
He thought we knew that a priori and maybe he's right.
But the point I'm going to be making in what follows is that there are many many other areas
which are such that we have a priori knowledge seemingly which Kant did not address.
So Kant may have got some aspects of the synthetic a priori right
but he certainly didn't get the scope right.
So I just said that.
Now I don't want to talk too much about reasons on mega.
These are just illustrations.
This is more important so this shows the Aristelian basis of mega's views.
And general essence and general connection
they are the two key components of our view of mathematics and physics actually when we get to it.
So in German that would be Wiesen and Wiesen's zusammenhand.
Now general essence and general and the general connection of economic phenomena.
They sound okay in a sentence like this but if you try and write about general essences
in a paper published in an analytic philosophy journal
which is the only type of philosophical journal which we're publishing in
then people will just turn up their noses and say this is something old fashioned.
So that's our problem.
So we would like to call the synthetic a priori truths which we are studying
basis of zusammenhand.
General connections of essences but we can't because it's German.
So why don't stick with the synthetic a priori truths?
Because we're not talking about truths anymore.
We're talking about things on the side of the mathematical or realm of physics.
Can you call the postulates instead of truths?
That's the same problem.
So postulates are on the side of truths.
We want to talk about what is on the side of objects.
We want to say that there are essences and the essential connections
on the side of the objects in themselves or objects themselves.
And that this is so in mathematics as well as in physics.
In mathematics it's if anything even more obvious than the case
but in mathematics the tendency to see things as being analytic is very strong
because of logic.
So this is another word for non inductive intelligible structures.
Now we know that every human is born virtually with the capabilities
to apprehend, recognise non inductive intelligible structures.
Differences between colours for instance can't be learned.
Differences between shapes can't be learned.
Differences between feeling good and feeling bad can't be learned.
And grasp those things.
They are intrinsically intelligible.
And as we get older and more and more of these intrinsically intelligible structures
become evident to us as well as a result of the fact
that we also learn a lot of them through.
Okay, this is Adolf Reiner who has a much more straighter face
than that of me.
He was a philosopher of law who was also a student of Hussal.
And in 1913 he published a book length monograph on,
it's called The Apriori Foundations of the Civil Law.
And it's that which is our model for mathematics.
We want to do the ontology of mathematics based on this Reinachian approach.
And I had a lot of slides now about Reiner but I'll go through them very quickly
so don't be disturbed by the fact that I'm going through them very quickly
because we don't need them most of the time.
Let me say a little bit more about Reiner just for interest sake.
So Reiner was sometimes referred to by Hussal's followers.
So Reiner was a follower of Hussal.
Hussal founded a school but there was a group of Hussal's followers in Munich.
And Hussal was in Göttingen and then in Freiburg.
He was not in Munich.
So the Munich School of Phenomenology is a kind of separate wing.
And they were accused by Hussal of practicing what he later on
when he became critical of some of the Munich School work
of practicing picture book phenomena.
What that means is that they would take a domain like aesthetics
or chemistry or ethics or the will
and they would draw phenomenological pictures.
Diagrams effectively.
Although they didn't use diagrams but they were thinking
in a way in which you could capture very well diagrammatically.
And that's why I like them.
I like diagrammatic representations of philosophical views.
That's why I became an ontologist.
So Reiner was almost certainly the cleverest of these people.
And he was referred to by other people later on
even when he moved to Göttingen to be in the same town
and same university and so forth.
He was referred to as the phenomenologists.
Because you should go to him if you wanted to know about phenomenology.
Not to Hussal.
He was a much better teacher.
Now another person who was in Göttingen is Edith Stein.
And I often see me all know who Edith Stein is.
Edith Stein.
So she was Hussal's assistant during this period.
She helped Hussal write at least one of his books.
Hussal obviously couldn't give her a job because she was a woman.
But she was Jewish but she converted to Christianity.
But she was sent to a concentration camp.
And her life was a kind of model of singingness.
And so after she died they made her a sink.
So the Munich school had at least one saint as a member.
But actually it had two.
Because another member of the Munich school
who was also a friend of Edith Stein's and Reiner's
and their correspondent in public
was a Polish philosopher called Roman Ingarten
who applied the Munich phenomenological method
to works of art, literature, architecture, music and so forth.
And one of Ingarten's friends in Poland
when he went back to Poland was, he became the Pope,
the Polish Pope who was now a saint.
And the Polish Pope was a professor of philosophy.
And he was focusing on Thomas Aquinas and Max Shaila.
Max Shaila is another member of the Munich school
who applied the phenomenological method, in his case,
to everything under the sun from aristocracy
to war, to the greatness of Germany
and the impoverishedness of the grocery in England and so on.
So Shaila was fantastically all-encompassing
but his book on ethics is also fantastic.
All right, so this work, like the speech act theory
of Austen and Stealth, starts out with a promise.
So the promise is a phenomenon which we're all familiar with
and which is obeying a priori look, just like buying and selling.
In fact, it's related to buying and selling
because there are some promise aspects involved
in many economic transactions.
Contracts are promises.
And now, this is a very good source book about Reina
and the whole Munich school.
Okay, I'll come back to Reina in a minute.
Let me just talk about social constructionism.
First of all, it's a big bad, ugly vegetable garden
with different kinds of views.
A very illustrative account of this big bad vegetable garden
is by Ian Hacking.
It's called the social construction of what.
And some of the examples he deals with in that book
are facts, gender, quarks, madness, reality and so on.
So the idea that madness is socially constructed
would turn on the fact that particular terms like hysteria,
which were very common in the Victorian times
but which are now completely not used,
would suggest that what those particular terms
referred to was a worse social construction.
That's the kind of idea.
Always a historical idea in Hacking
that Hacking uses to characterize, identify social constructions.
All right, now...
I'm going to talk a little bit about ingarden
because this will give us a clone to the complexity
that can be found on the side of socially constructed entities.
Now, the whole world of works of art is clearly socially constructed.
There are clearly different tastes at different times in the history of art
which make certain things beautiful to one generation
that would not necessarily be beautiful to another generation.
Now, ingarden's approach to unpacking
the ontological structure of a work of art
is in terms of what he calls strata.
So a work of art for ingarden has strata
which we need to apprehend in order to apprehend the work as a whole,
but we apprehend them as a unity.
And so this is a work of literature.
We have phonetic formations.
In other words, when we read a poem or a novel,
then we read in such a way that we read the words
as being spoken with a given alliteration, a given accent.
And, for instance, if we read a novel in which there is a German or a Russian character,
we may hear the German or the Russian accent.
But in any case, there are sounds afoot in the literary work.
If you don't have any sound associations when you read a work,
then you're not getting the full body of the work as any setting object.
Then there are meanings, simple meanings and complex meanings
of all the sentences and paragraphs and so on.
Then there are what ingarden calls schematised aspects.
So we are presented with the hero as having long black hair,
but we're not presented.
We don't know how long.
And we don't know whether it's genuinely black or whether it's dyed.
So that it's schematised aspects.
That means that we don't know everything.
We only know certain things, a finite number of things about the places
and people and actions presented in the work.
And then there are those places and people and actions and states of affairs
which are presented in the work and they form a stratum in and of themselves.
And then in some cases there will be value qualities and metaphysical qualities
which you have to attend when you read it.
And now the ingarden has a very complicated account of what it is to read a literary work.
And what the work is depends also upon the readings that take place.
So he has a theory of the literary work of art as being a product of human intentions.
Now that's a kind of social construction.
So if you just throw a lot of ink on paper and it comes out with words,
to be words, by whatever means.
But no, it's never sold, it's never given to anybody as a novel.
Then it does not exist as a literary work.
A literary work exists only if there is a readership.
Now it may be that no one reads it anymore,
but still it exists because there was once a readership.
So it's a social construction because the readership is a social entity.
And the author is relatively insignificant.
So the author doesn't decide what the meanings are or what the schematised aspects are.
I accept insofar as he gives all the clues that you can ever get when he writes the novel.
It's the readers who make those decisions.
And clearly they'll be guided by what the author says
and they will share lots of assumptions that the author shares,
but they may also have different assumptions.
So an example, well now I won't do the next one.
Now music has only two aspects.
In some cases only one.
So we're talking now about, not about opera, but about symfor instances of one second.
And some works of music have value qualities,
they have a kind of metaphysical quality about them.
But basically what music is characterised by in here as an era
is not by words sounds as it says here,
but by sound.
So a work of music is a sound formation.
A big one.
Yes, Carmella.
Are readers or audiences co-agents?
It comes down to that, yes.
It's not a symmetry.
So basically In Garden has a view
according to which the work of art has a life.
It's born when the author pushes the manuscript
on the publisher's desk a bit later than that.
And it dies when the planet is annihilated
or everyone stops reading it.
And during that time the readers determine
what the significance, meaning, the sounds even.
So Shakespeare, we hear now, if it's performed today,
may be in a kind of old-fashioned English.
But still it's English, where in Shakespeare's day
accent that people spoke in England
was a combination of what is today Yorkshire and Danish.
And that's quite different from what the way we hear Shakespeare now.
Shakespeare's plays have, in their life,
evolved to be different today from what they were
in the olden days that they might create.
And the examples come from set theory.
The best example of autonomous mathematical objects, I say,
are the numbers.
And so the German mathematician Chroniker had a saying,
which has been repeated many times,
God made the natural numbers.
All the rest is the work of man.
So I'm defending something like the Chroniker theory.
And then the second paper I published
was on the same topic, I should say.
I was already boring.
So I just went into more details about the historical aspect
of mathematics.
Although I didn't really say any of the things
that Jobs and I want to say now about history of mathematics,
because I was working with a rather narrowly constrained
phenomenological framework.
I was working to find a way of applying Ingard's ideas
to mathematical entities.
And then the third paper I will mention,
all of this is within 1970s.
I think this was not the third paper I published.
This paper is about this relation,
relation between representations on the one hand
and the real world now.
So there is this picture.
It was really published.
It didn't force me to make a real print quality graphic,
unfortunately.
So that's the real world down there.
The real world, of course, includes consciousness.
And the graphic doesn't even capture that very well.
And because there is consciousness,
there are all kinds of targets of intentionality.
Now, some of these targets of intentionality,
which are in the inner suburbs, if you like,
might exist.
So, for instance, the snow smoking zone in a restaurant
is socially constructed.
If it really exists, Poland really exists,
that's socially constructed.
But some of the things in the outer suburbs
are dependent for their ontological status
exclusively upon consciousness.
And examples would be fictional characters.
And now the question is where mathematics goes.
In the earlier papers, I had an argument for the role
for two kinds of mathematical entities.
This is about all the different kinds of entities
that we can be directed towards in our mental experience.
Some of them are autonomous.
Some of them are intentional,
but they really exist, like Poland.
And some of them are purely intentional.
So they can be targets, but they don't exist
in any sense, such as Hamlet in play,
or better Sherlock Holmes in the novel.
And now this is a slightly richer diagram,
so it's a better diagram.
So the inner suburbs now are counted as parts of the real world,
but the parts of it here are still dependent upon consciousness.
And these are intentional,
so the rocks and the planets are autonomous,
but everything above the line is intentional.
The outer suburbs then are fictional.
Now, how many people have heard of intuitionism
as a philosophy of mathematics?
A couple of you, three.
So intuitionism is one of the classic positions
that people developed in the philosophy of mathematics
after the failure of Frege.
People wanted a more grounded foundation for mathematics.
They wanted to have certainty.
Frege thought he had certainty, but the whole thing plopped.
Frege is fantastic.
His contributions are fantastic,
but his account of logicism was a failure,
and therefore his account of mathematics is a failure.
Brower and Heiting developed their own peculiar way
of shoring up the safety of mathematical claims,
and the way it said,
we can only believe in mathematical objects
if we've constructed them in a construction.
A construction is a kind of proof,
so you can construct numbers by counting to them.
There were some extreme followers of this kind of view
who said that since we can't count to, let's say, 600 billion,
600 billion is already infinite.
They were called finitists,
and the leader of the finitist movement is now dead, I assume.
This was called Yes, it involved it.
Maybe there were no other members.
Anyway, Brower and Heiting were much better than finitism,
so they developed a version of the calculus
on intuitionistic lines,
and the main way of understanding intuitionism
is to find out that it implies
that we cannot believe in the law of excluded middle, anyway.
So the law of excluded middle says
that if you've proved that not P,
then you can infer that P.
That fails for intuitionism
because you might have a constructed proof that not P,
but no constructed proof that P.
You can only assert P when you have a constructed proof.
This is a very interesting idea.
Some of you will know that I studied with Michael Dumit in Oxford,
and I attended a whole term's worth of lectures
on the intuitionistic calculus,
which is a very...
It's like doing calculus with one hand tied behind your back,
but you learn a lot if you have to do calculus
without using the law of excluded middle.
Now, but it died, basically.
There are very few people who believe in intuitionism
as a movement anymore,
but it became a settled part of what you might call
the lattice of mathematical options.
If you regard a mathematical theory as a...
So I say lattice.
I could say Boolean algebra.
I suppose we have each approach to mathematics,
sees mathematics as a Boolean algebra.
Then you can see the intuitionistic mathematics
as a special kind of Boolean algebra,
a weaker Boolean algebra.
To be precise,
it's a relatively pseudo-complemented pseudo-Boolean algebra.
Pseudo-complemented means that if you know A
and you know not A,
then you don't know that you've filled the whole space of options.
That's not quite right, but anyway.
I won't say any more.
You can work it out for yourself.
All right, so this paper I published.
This is chronic.
My example were Cantor set theory,
and then there are transfinite cardinals.
So Cantor set theory is a theory of sets
that works very well for.
Finite sets, people show that it works very well for infinite sets.
But now you get a lot of freedom
in creating more and more types
of really, really big infinite sets.
Clearly, there are different paths you can take
in building bigger and bigger infinite sets.
It seemed to me intuitive that some of those paths might be
meaning to truth,
but at least some of them,
you could make a fake one if necessary.
At least some of them are not leading to truth.
There are no transfinite cardinals of this sort.
Just a very messy sort.
But one clue whether a particular branch of set theory is useful
or is real, it's about real things,
is whether it's useful.
And some transfinite set theories are useful
for physics or in some other number field.
So they probably are about real mathematical sets,
but some of them are not useful
and they might be good candidates for being fictional.
So it's beautiful fictional mathematics.
All right, now the next topic we have to deal with
is structuralism.
So if we want to say that Pi is a socially constructed entity,
we still have to say what kind of entity it is.
Here the plate in his view is still embraced by many people,
including by many mathematicians, consciously or not.
But another view which is embraced explicitly
in a number of very influential publications is structuralism.
And this says that mathematical entities are structured.
And the locus classicus of this view,
which is also the first paper I read
in the philosophy of mathematics
when I started studying philosophy of mathematics in Oxford,
is that Bioman Corbyn Asra,
this is a classic of the philosophy of mathematics.
And his idea is you take Russell's theory of what numbers are
and you take, I think this is Cantor's theory of what numbers are.
And so three is the set consisting of zero, one, two and so forth.
And you get two logically incompatible accounts of what numbers are,
both of which have perfectly good application.
There's no difference in the degree to which they're useful.
There are many other accounts of what numbers are.
You could generate your own theory.
And so, Bernastre concluded that numbers are none of these things.
Rather, we have a certain structure
which we could call the number structure.
And this number structure is exemplified here and there
and in all of the other various candidate accounts of what numbers are.
So numbers are nodes in structures.
And they are probably themselves structures.
Everything is a structure from the point of view of structuralism.
Now, we, Jolffs and I embrace structuralism,
but we do not hold that all of mathematics are structures.
We think that would be, that would be turtles all the way down.
And so we want to have some basis, some vision, some essence
upon which the vision is examining the combinations of the vision
which are represented standardly and set theory in terms, could rest.
And so our resting place are going to be 0, 1,
and maybe the line or the point or,
and various other unitary things,
so non-structures which will be the basic elements
out of which the structures are built.
So we're not classical structuralists.
We are structuralists with bottom.
All right.
I think Noah has a question.
Yes.
So are natural numbers standardly grounding?
No, just 0 and 1,
because once you've got 0 and 1 you can get all the others,
basically by adding 1 and adding 1 again.
So 0 and 1 and what else?
Well, we don't know.
We almost certainly will never know everything about what constitutes the bottom.
Yours, I know things that you can do it with just 0 and 1, but I'm fighting.
Why wouldn't you be able to?
I just have this feeling in my phone.
How do we get the circle?
What is stopping us?
Is there any errors that we face when we just go down to 0 and 1?
We need to be able to construct the circle.
It's hard to see how you do that from 0 or not.
At least the empty side is a simple structure.
A what?
Empty side.
Is empty side a structure?
Empty set a structure.
Empty set.
When York talks about these things,
he identified 0, empty set and the null operator.
He thinks they're all the same.
Then he has 1, the set,
which contains the empty set as its only number,
and the progressive operator.
You had it on a different side.
Yes?
0 and 1 are,
if they're doing the grounding, where do they exist?
So that's a very good question.
Where does pi exist?
So 0 and 1 are going to have to be created.
They're going to have to be socially constructed.
So there are two kinds of mathematical entities.
Those which are socially constructed are the initial,
in other words, as part of the ground,
and those which are socially constructed
with the help of one or other structural,
combinatoric relations.
Part of our ontology mathematics includes
structure-generating relations, like set-all.
The historical idea would be that they'd discover pi,
and then they'd discover,
roughly at the same time,
they'd discover all of the geometrical relations
that you can construct with compass and ruler.
But first they'd discover how to construct those things,
but they didn't do it in the right order.
So they discovered pi before they knew of anything
about irrational numbers or about sets.
But if you reimagine the history of mathematics
so the things that are discovered in the right order,
then you get a chain from the very, very simple mathematics
to the more complicated,
and then our basic theory says
that the principle driver in creating
more and more complicated mathematics is physics.
So as physics develops, engineering develops,
the people's inventions develop,
they need more and more complicated mathematics.
That forces the development of more and more complicated
forms of mathematics,
and thereby mathematics then continues to develop.
And that's what's happened since about Galileo's time.
I'm not worried about the structure of an apocalyptic event
where enough of us die,
and the only remaining people are like the Amazonian tribes,
and do you really want to say those numbers
on how it exists?
Yes, so I'm afraid I don't have any choice.
I don't want to say it, but I don't have any choice.
What are the chances of aliens being born?
So as long as there are records left,
that is a problem.
Let's go through your possible scenario.
One scenario is that all records and all civilisation
is destroyed on Earth,
but there are tribes who survived,
and after a few generations they recreate mathematics,
but they do it differently in whatever way.
Maybe they do it inconsistent with what we did,
but maybe they repeat.
So they invent part.
Is it the same mathematical entity,
or is it a different one?
If you're a Platonist,
the answer to that question is easy,
if you're a social constructionist as well.
I'm one of those questions for which I have no answer.
Now, exactly the same case would be if, on Mars,
they did the Martians' Development and Mathematics,
which happened to the discovered part,
would it be the same?
The temptation is to say it would be the same,
but that's because Platonism is always the temptation.
Yes?
So is it not necessary that pie will be different?
No, it's not necessary at all.
For many thousands of years of existence of human beings,
they didn't discover time.
It took time.
We see it as being rather trivial,
but it wasn't quite complicated to reach that point.
It's complicated to reach the point where you could recognise
that hypotenuse on the right angle of triangle
is not necessarily going to be measurable
in a real number.
Yup.
So, now, zero, one, pie are constructed.
No, zero and one are ground stones,
they're foundation stones.
Pie is constructed.
Wait, they're ground stones, but didn't we also create it?
Yes, we have to lay the foundations ourselves.
Yes, so create it.
Is it a priori los or not constructed?
So, once we create certain mathematical entities,
then certainly intelligible truths are forced upon us,
is it where?
It's not that we create them, it's that we're forced upon us.
And now, this is always complicated at the time
that the things didn't happen in the right order,
but people who invented pie knew very well
as a matter of a priori truth
that pie is the ratio between these companies
and I am the top of the circle,
because that's how they discovered it,
that's what it was meant to be, so that's almost one of it.
But then they discovered various other relations
involving pie, and they proved to themselves
using the Hyperdian methods that those relations hold
universally for all circles,
and that means that they had more a priori truths
and a priori knowledge about pie
as the geometry, geometric understanding developed.
So, we don't make the synthetic a priori truths,
we discover them after we've made the objects which they're about.
And this, when I get to the law, this will become clear.
Anyone?
All right, so the structuralist that I recommend that you read
is Scott Stu Shapiro in Ohio.
There is a Stu Shapiro in Buffalo after me,
clear which Stu Shapiro I am referring to.
So, I think he's right about the first two,
but that he's wrong when he says just here.
It is structures all the way.
All right, so now we're going to develop Rhinathian structuralism,
and we're going to start off where Rhinath started,
which is in the ontology of law,
and as I said, he invented in 1913 much of the act,
but it is simultaneously a speech act.
So, it's not that you have a mental act
which you could formulate in words,
a mental act which is formulated in words,
but in the case of the promise, it has to be formulated in words,
vis-à-vis the promisee.
So, the promisee has to register that you have made a promise,
otherwise you haven't made a promise.
And all of that is a priorite, a synthetic a priorite.
And Rhinath recognised that.
So, and Austin had glimpses of that,
but they didn't want to embrace the doctrine
that there are synthetic a priorite truths.
And indeed, synthetic a priorite structures,
which is what Rhinath is all about.
Rhinath is about the synthetic a priorite structures
realised in these sorts of cases,
and also in many other sorts of cases,
which go to form the law.
So, developed a whole ontology of social reality,
which he expressed in terms of the collective imposition of function.
So, this is a president,
which is a physical thing,
but we imposed upon the president the function of ruling the country.
That was a collective imposition of function.
And so, that is the theory of everything in social reality.
It's always a matter of collective imposition of function.
And so, we can do it on objects.
So, we can do it with cathedrals,
we can do it with driver's licenses,
we can do it with dollar bills.
This is all captured in this slogan or formula.
So, a cathedral,
a building council is a cathedral in context,
if there is a bishop and so on.
So, this human being counts as a president
because we have collected the imposition of function upon this.
And this doesn't work.
So, I am one of the few people who showed to Sirle that he was wrong.
So, he printed a correction.
It doesn't work as a general theory of social entities
because a debt is a social entity.
But there is nothing upon which we collectively impose a function.
If you write IOU on such and such,
then the debt note is fitting with Sirle's formula.
But if I just say I promise to give Ali $100 tomorrow,
I should let's say $18,000 a year in six months,
which is not actually the end of the world.
I signed a paperwork,
or I will be signing paperwork today.
The other person has to release the money,
has not signed yet.
So, I just promise to Ali.
And therefore, I have an obligation to Ali.
But my obligation is not a piece of reality,
a piece of stone or a plastic or organic material
upon which I impose a function.
So, Sirle is wrong.
And he abandoned this formula.
He said he never meant it.
But he abandoned this formula
because of what I call freestanding wide terms.
So, x counters y.
There are some x's, which are social entities,
for which there is no y.
Sorry, y counters x.
So, there are some entities in the social world,
some y's, which are not such that there is an x
of grounding upon which they rest.
So, they are freestanding wide terms,
which you can think of as quasi abstract.
And now, I don't think I need...
So, the obligations and so on nowadays,
we recall them on paper,
but in the olden days, they were recorded in people's memory.
Now, a couple of years back,
there was a man called Julian Cole,
who was a professor in Buff State,
a professor of philosophy.
And every year also, he would come to you
and give a talk about social construction of mathematics.
And every year, I really attacked him.
He always came back for more.
I now think he was right.
So, it just shows.
So, this is the first of a series of paper.
Actually, I think there were two earlier ones,
but this is the first of a series of paper.
So, he is basically re-creating some of the things I said
in the Anto-Genesis of Mathematical Objects paper,
but doing it much better, much more statistically.
He captures the creativity and the freedom of mathematics.
The big problem is the authority.
So, how do you get authority for your mathematical discovery?
And now, which is the money phrase in this.
So, we have to authenticate the ontological commitments
of mathematical theories without curtailing
mathematicians' freedom to creatively introduce mathematical ontology.
I argue that these two constraints are best met
by a metaphysical interpretation of mathematics
that takes mathematical entities to be constitutively constructed.
And by that, he doesn't mean much more than socially constructed.
And then, in the next paper, he brings in the dimension of institutions,
which is what I've been pointing to when I talk about social memory
and the recordings which I've developed over time.
So, notice he uses the freestanding term.
And I'm not sure he got it for me,
but it's nice that he's introduced to serve representational functions.
And now, he's describing this institutional reality
and the meta ontology, whatever that means,
arguing that the philosophy of mathematics
that has its central thesis,
sorry, its central tenet,
this can account for the objectivity, necessity,
and atemporality of mathematics.
Now, these are the things which I was arguing with him about.
I said you cannot ground the necessity of mathematical truths
in a social construction account
of the ways mathematical entities begin to exist.
Because, particularly, you can't take creativity
and these other things into account.
You can't creatively create the necessary truths.
Now, I think what I would say now
is that you can creatively constrain,
create a mathematical object,
and by you describe it in a certain way,
it's the ratio of the circumference of a circle to the diameter,
and then you can infer necessary truths from your description,
which is an axiom.
That's what I would say now.
All right, and then the third one is called
Social Construction Mathematics
and the Collective Imposition of Function Onto Reality.
So, he's really being surly in here,
except he's following my freestanding correction of serve.
Stereotypes of social construction suggest that
the existence of social construction is accidental
and that such constructs have arbitrary and subjective features.
Here I explore a conception, so on.
In particular, I argue that the Collective Imposition of Function
is typically non-accidental
and the products of such imposition frequently
have non-arbitrary and objective features.
Now, this is, I think, where he addresses a really difficult point.
So, when we created pi, there were objective features of reality
that we had to confront, namely circles,
and we couldn't draw perfect circles,
but we could draw very nearly perfect circles.
And when we constructed pi,
we were indeed bending to those necessary features of reality.
But then the Platonists could say,
aha, what you mean by pi is a necessary feature of reality,
which was there already because, as we Platonists know,
mathematical entities are a temple.
They're not created by people.
So, there's an issue with that.
How do we distinguish the mathematical entity
from the features of reality
which have non-arbitrary and objective features?
So, that's an issue that Yorbson and I have to address also.
I won't talk about document acts.
So, Rhynna has a very complicated ontology of social acts
which speech acts, like promising are one example,
and of the parts of social acts,
whether the underlying experiences,
the underlying mental content are states or processes,
and whether they need to be addressed to other people,
whether they need to be registered by their addresses.
The founding relation is that you can't marry somebody
unless you have a certain authority, for instance.
All of these are a prior I choose.
What they give rise to.
So, a promise gives rise to a mutually correlated claim
and obligation, for instance.
And then the entities which have to obtain
in order for the social acts to take place
are such as relations of authority, that's an entity.
And then other parts of social acts.
So, when you make a promise,
there has to come into being a disposition on your part
to realize the promise, otherwise you couldn't make the promise.
So, the promise is necessarily dependent on the disposition
on the part of the promise.
All of these are a prior I choose
and you can represent them in diagrams.
And then there are, once you have these diagrams,
you can see that there are modifications.
So, there are different kinds of sham promises, for instance.
And different kinds of collective social acts.
And the modifications occur because some elements here are missing.
So, maybe that no one registers the promise,
or maybe that there's no sincere attention.
Or it may be that no action follows.
You never actually fulfill the promise and so on.
No trust, that's another dimension.
And you can apply the whole thing,
which is very similar to the case of commanding.
Commanding is just switching the commander-commandee relation
so that it becomes a commandee-commandee relation.
All right, now, the most important of all of these,
all of these social acts, is the act of enactment.
And if you have a dollar bill,
anyway, if you have a pound of British pound note,
you see that there is a declaration from the bank,
the governor of the Bank of England,
that he will pay the bearer of this pound note, one pound.
And then there's a signature underneath.
Now, when that signature was made,
when the relevant actor,
then the pound note came into existence,
both that particular instance and the genre,
the type of document,
came into existence through enactment.
And this enactment had a mathematical dimension
because a pound note was then, in the good old days,
worth exactly 240 pence.
And you could even make it worth 480 hapenies,
which is a half pence.
And that's important for some of the entities
who are brought into being by enactment,
which are very important, particularly in the economic domain,
namely that you can divide them mathematically
into perfectly equal fractions.
So, this is the first paragraph of the German civil code,
which Reinaf wrote a lot about.
And it tells us how a subject of rights begins to exist,
but it doesn't tell us as a fact.
It enacts a social fact.
The social phenomenon of a thing that is subject to rights
begins to exist at the completion of birth
as a result of this enactment.
So, it makes the entity, namely an organism subject to rights.
And that is the model for how mathematical entities come into existence.
It's a matter of enactment.
And here, the enactment is towards all the subjects in the society,
in Germany in this case.
And in mathematics, the enactment would be to all the subjects
engaged in a particular kind of mathematics,
both present and future.
All right, we don't need this.
Now, when we think about enactments,
then we realize that there are three sorts of history
that an entity can have.
So, numbers, if you're a Platonist or a believer in chronica,
have an atemporal or omnitemporal existence.
They exist all the time. They never change.
They don't have any causal features at all.
And then you have Bill Clinton, who's changing all the time.
And that's true of all other organisms,
buildings, everything in the real world of what happens
and is the case, that subject to constant changes through time.
And they have a beginning to exist in time,
and he, even Bill, will die in some stage.
And then, 19 minutes or so later, he will cease to exist.
Or maybe he'll have a bit of a longer time,
but he will die sometime.
But now, Clinton's presidency is different from these.
Clinton's presidency began to exist at a certain point in time.
It existed, and then it ceased to exist.
And this is characteristic of the way in which entities,
which are inactive, exist.
They are part of history, but they do not change.
They just come into existence, exist, and then go out of existence.
Now, mathematical entities may never go out of existence,
so they may just have this path.
They make this go on forever.
But certainly, things like presidencies, obligations, debts,
permissions, and the like, they have this shape.
And all offices, being senator, being, yes?
Are universities like one?
Yes.
Well, so that, some universities are like one.
Are universities dependent on an existence, on existence, on existence?
Yes, so I don't want to go into that story,
although it would be a story that we have to go into in the ultimate statement.
But yeah, it's a good question,
which means I don't have a good answer.
I will have a good answer.
All right, so in the first group, we have necessary objects.
In the second group, we have contingent objects caught up in the world of causality.
And in the third group, we have objects which are intelligible,
but have a starting point in time.
And so the, I think that Reina deserves to be honoured to a much greater degree than he is,
because I believe he was the first philosopher ever to recognise that there are objects of this kind.
So cancer didn't know about this, plate didn't know about this.
The In-Garden certainly developed it,
but I'm pretty sure that was under the influence of his teacher Reina.
And it's amazingly important because it applies to the whole realm of the law,
and the whole realm of economics,
and many other parts, and the whole realm of, many other parts of everyday life,
such as the whole realm of the teachers.
But people just didn't notice.
Still, very few people know how important that is.
All right, now, it applies also to chess.
Chess and game generally are another area where we find entities of this third kind.
So the chess game was invented, it started to exist,
and it has changed in small ways, but still not in ways which disturb the basic picture.
So many of these abstract entities, or historical, cultural entities,
these quasi-astract entities of the third kind,
have quasi-mathematical properties, and that's important.
These are some examples.
Your social security number is not a number.
It doesn't have prime factors or anything.
It's a social object, and you can't burn it.
It can only be created by a certain process,
and it can only be eliminated by a certain process.
All right.
So I have all the wrong views about that.
All right, so I believe that Rhaenars' apriori theory of law
is a very good approximation to the underlying ontology of the Austrian school of economics.
So where Rhaenars was talking about the micro-institutions of human life,
and indeed the meso-institutions of legal affairs,
the Austrian school are talking about the micro-economic realm.
So these are other areas where the Munich approach to doing ontology
could, in principle, be applied, and in some of them,
so that colorology and tone theory have been applied to,
that they've been developed in ways which are similar to the way the Munich phenomenologists worked.
And all of these have been developed by Munich phenomenologists.
So now, if Rhaenars points out that while there are some relations
and some essences or apriori structures which are subject to apriori laws,
there are others which are purely conventional.
In other words, you add conventions.
So an example would be an endowment mortgage,
or derivatives created by some formula on the stock market,
or football team managers.
So there are no apriori laws governing football team managers
in the way that there are governing parties.
But now what is involved in each of these is always,
they always have a grounding in apriori social institutions.
So the idea of a manager, or the essence manager,
is grounded in the fact that one person has authority over other persons,
and an endowment mortgage is grounded in the fact
that one person can loan money to another person.
And so what we have here are institutional modifications
of apriori institutions, or apriori institutional essences.
And then another example would be, let's suppose that it's true in New York State
that a miner cannot sign a contract and be liable for what the contract states
that the miner has to supply.
This would mean that a contract signed by a miner is not valid.
That is not an apriori institutional entity.
It's a modification.
So this modification, if you are less than 13, you can't sign a contract,
is a product of positive law, not a product of apriori law.
And Rhina was writing about apriori law,
but also about the ways in which apriori law is used as a grounding for positive law,
where lawyers and politicians make arbitrary, more or less arbitrary changes
to what should obtain in an apriori way of the underlying institution.
And you can see how we're going to have similar modifications in the rough mathematics.
All right, now let me try and move quickly to get to my...
I'll put these slides on the witty page.
All right, so the idea is we have a history of mathematics and a history of physics,
and physics is constantly feeding into the history of mathematics
to yield new problems issues, mathematics growth.
There will be some offshoots where mathematicians grow new kinds of creatures
which are not addressing specific needs of physicists or engineers at a given time,
but they may later prove to be useful.
That's a very common phenomenon that mathematicians are doing something crazy
that they are doing it for the sake of the beauty of the entity that they're building,
but it turns out to have an application in the next generation.
And this is something of an illustration of that.
But I found this, and as you know I like diagrams,
in the Wikipedia article on mathematical physics.
And of course I like it because it contains the word ontology.
Now, interestingly, the Wikipedia article doesn't mention the word ontology at all,
so I have no idea what they meant.
They just have a diagram, but there are some things which explain what this means.
So we have mathematics, mathematical physics, ontology and physics,
and in some way we get physics by taking mathematical physics and taking ontology
and smushing them together.
And mathematics is somehow feeding into both of those,
and I understand how mathematics is feeding into mathematical physics.
I don't understand what they might mean by this, but we've got three out of fours.
Mathematical physics is an approach to physics which emphasises mathematical reading, as well as theory.
Theoretical physics is an approach to physics that emphasises observations and experiments.
And so we're interested in mathematical physics which is looking at physics as a structure or an endeavour
which is aiming to utilise the rigor that you find in mathematics.
And I could simplify that by saying it's going to be using these mathematical structures
which the mathematicians are inventing.
So mathematical physics is import use application testing of mathematical structures
to physical phenomena, trying to find which mathematical structure fits a given physical phenomenon.
And now we can understand the diagram as follows.
So you start historically with a piece of mathematics,
and this might be a model of mathematics which is a model of periodic motion with constant amplitude
which you can define in purely mathematical terms.
And then you add ontology, and I'm going to take that to mean you add reference to a specific system,
in this case the harmonic oscillator, and specific magnitudes such as force and amplitude.
And when you add ontology to the mathematics where the ontology includes pieces of the physics ontology,
then you get physics.
So, and that's just a complicated way of saying that physics is the application of mathematics
to real world phenomena like oscillators.
So we finished exactly on time by my watch.
And other questions.
