Yeah, thanks so much for joining me. How are you doing?
Awesome. And thank you very, very much for having me.
I'm excited. This is going to be fun.
Yeah, I'm really looking forward to it.
Yeah, I want to shine the light on some of the younger people
that are doing some amazing stuff, and I'm really excited about your work.
So thank you. Yeah, me too.
Cool. Yeah, so maybe maybe just, you know,
introduce yourself where you are now and we'll go from there.
Totally. So I am Ali Hansen and I'm in Raphael
USA lab here at Columbia and how do I don't know that it's time yet to go
into a full background, but I'll just suffice it to say that I've completed
my psychiatry residency.
But my background was in sort of selling of developmental biology and sort of
jumped into the field of neuroscience and using Hydra as a model system
to sort of study, let's say, to be able to see the whole nervous system at once.
And from there, what really interested me is the role of spontaneous
neural activity, neural activity that's going on when the animal is not behaving.
So I'm now a postdoc finishing that and in the process of figuring out
where I'll go next to start my own group.
Yeah, yeah, why don't you maybe talk a little bit about your background
and just kind of your journey as far back as makes sense of how you got here.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And I mean, I think I think maybe far, far back, I'll just broad overview of a
person from Iowa thinking, I don't know, no one else is probably paying
attention to basketball, but Caitlyn Clark went to my high school and she's
the newest phenom.
And so I thought I wrote on my thing, I was going to play basketball in the WNBA
and then I never grew, but ended up playing basketball in college
and studied molecular biology and ended up doing the MD-PhD program.
And my PhD at that point was in, yeah, so cell and developmental biology
and the molecular mechanisms of wind signaling.
So very, very molecular.
And so I got sort of trained in that belief system that molecules are a king.
And that sort of explains, you know, not only how cells work, but how development works.
And so my thesis was on that sort of the molecular mechanisms of wind signaling
and ubiquit relation and these kinds of things.
But then luckily, someone clued me in to the physiology course at the MBL
in Woods Hole, which sort of was like, oh, there's a whole other way to do this.
You can sort of really zoom out and interact with other people in many
other different disciplines, right?
So there I was with peer mathematicians, physicists, computational scientists
and people who had no experience with biology.
And I was the biologist coming in.
And so it was like this awesome thing, right?
Where you go and you do two weeks with different scientists on different projects
and get really exposed to totally different ways of thinking.
And in that, I ended up with Goudin's Danizer, actually, as one of my mentors.
And I did a two-week course on modeling three proteins in the wind pathway.
And I was like, oh, wow, like you can really start learning something
really counter-intuitive, something that you wouldn't know by just saying,
hey, you're going to draw the cell signaling pathway in a two-dimensional
piece of paper and draw a bunch of arrows.
And that's understanding.
I was like, oh, shit, that doesn't actually explain anything, right?
So yeah, that was sort of my first worry.
And then, of course, the likes of like Mark Kirschner and Andrew Murray
were on the chalkboard doing all kinds of these things.
And it was like, oh, there's a different way to do this, to find the simplest
system possible and try to model as much of it as you can to gain some understanding.
And of course, that was right at the end of my PhD.
So I didn't have time to sort of implement that and then went back to do medical training.
And then I took another foray, which I think is important to how I ended up
doing this kind of research right now, which is art.
So I left in the middle of my MD-PhD training to go study painting in Santa Fe,
New Mexico with an amazing person who is Tony Ryder.
And that totally changed sort of, this is going to sound nuts, but how I see
and the way I think, it sort of opened up my mind to like how you approach
reality with a fixed idea.
And so I went in there and I'm like, oh, I got to paint here.
So it was classical realism.
So you're trying to do portraiture and nude models, drawing and painting.
I didn't have any experience with this really at all, except for, you know,
childhood classes or something.
And going in there just for an example of like, oh, a shadow is dark,
just black or something is like, no, as long as you have this belief,
you'll never paint a shadow as it actually is because there's no such thing
as pure black in nature or reality, right?
There's always some amount of light, some amount of color, something.
And I remember so Ted South Jacobs, those Tony's teachers, a very similar
sort of lineage in art and science who wrote a whole book on the anatomy
of human forms.
Like if you paint a human eyeball that looks like an almond with a circle in it,
you'll never ever paint an eyeball that is true to reality.
So it's kind of like, oh, all of these concepts that I'm laying on top
of these things are not real.
Like, can I get rid of those things?
That was part of that exercise for two years of trying to like
unlearn all of the things I had been told about what a human, you know,
is and the features of it in order to paint what it actually is.
And at the same time, there was a upaya Zen Center was in the back yard of this place.
So I learned of Zen brain, which is about conscious, complex, adaptive systems
and all of this kind of stuff.
Also, Santa Fe Institute was there.
So I was just all over doing all of this stuff and taking all kinds of classes
around all of that.
And ultimately sort of, you know, I was I was debating, do I go paint full time?
Do I do a postdoc?
And if I was going to just do a straight postdoc, I was going to do on the origin
of multicellularity, right?
Like, how do you go from one cell to a group of cells?
That was what I was interested in.
But then, you know, I got interested in, like, I really want to help people in quotes.
And I want to do that through sort of psychiatry.
So I was like, is there a way to put all of that stuff together?
I was like, well, shit, now I'm going to have to switch fields and study neuroscience.
Which I was like, that's not at the time of the I'm sorry, any neuroscientists out there.
But I'm like, that's not science.
That's not molecular. What is that?
It's it's you're putting a human in fMRI scare.
You're looking at blood flowing all around.
You're not even looking at neural activity.
I was like, this isn't understanding.
This isn't mechanism.
Because for me, mechanism, like, what's the amino acid on the protein?
That that's a mechanism, right?
That was the kind of thinking.
But going to that Zen brain conference, actually, was one of those things we're like,
oh, some of these questions, you just can't reduce to an amino acid and a protein.
Like that that model, that that way of thinking doesn't doesn't compute here.
So there was a lot of, you know, things going all around.
But then, yeah, deciding, OK, I am going to pursue a residency in psychiatry
and try to figure out what is neuroscience.
And so like, you had to do all these interviews.
And I was just essentially using the residency interview as a postdoc interview
to say, who's doing neuroscience?
Where what are they up to and what level of scale are people studying all of this?
I was just trying to see the lay of the land.
Yeah. And I remember, I think, actually, at one point,
somehow got a hold of Sidney Brenner when he was in the hospital in Singapore.
And I was like, hey, what level scale do you think we should be doing this?
You know, studying the nervous system.
And I'm pretty sure I can't remember his answer, but it was like single cells.
You could go down and you could go up in this kind of thing.
And so that kind of question of of where how do you tackle this problem?
And then I ended up reading Ralph's article, George Church
and Scientific American around that time of like, you know,
using complex adaptive systems theory to study the brain.
You need to see the whole thing.
I'm like, yes.
So on that interview, I then talked to Rafa and he had a hydra on the screen.
And it was just one of those moments where I'm like, what? No way.
This is amazing.
This is this is exactly what I've been looking for.
Like all of my dreams coming true on this screen.
Like it's a simple system.
You can see the whole thing, you know, I don't know.
And it's like it has a lot of, you know, obviously rich history
in cell and developmental biology, evolution.
Like it was all together in one thing.
I'm like, all right, that's what I'm going to have to do.
And yeah, in early saw that there was this spontaneous
interactivity in that animal.
And I was like, what is this? Right?
What is that?
And that got me very curious about where else that was found,
which leads to the human brain and all of these things and and the self and all of that.
So it sort of all was coming together.
And then I was sort of, you know, seeing patients as a resident.
And then had a little bit of research time.
So I was like really reading and thinking and looking and and all of that.
Yeah. And I mean, I'll just disclose, too, that I'm a Zen student.
And so it was also a scientist of my own mind.
So I've been, you know, exploring it from that angle a lot.
So first person point of view and third person with patience.
And then, you know, the in quotes, third person objective view of the system, too.
So there's all of that at play all the time.
So yeah, that's the longest version I can muster.
Yeah. Yes. Very interesting.
Yeah. The art at the art angle, I think, is also is also quite quite interesting.
I do know, you know, I can't draw anything like that, but I do a bunch of photography.
And I agree with you that that watching the light and like trying to trying to capture
what you actually see or what you think you see is is an interesting component of it.
Yeah. How do you how do you think about I'm curious,
as since you have you have a background in molecular genetics and also now neuroscience,
how do you think about the kinds of things that those systems are good at?
Like, how are how are molecular dynamics and the kinds of things you get out of those
different from what you can get out of out of, you know, for example,
electrophysiology, you know, in terms of the computations, the use of like,
how are the what's different about those systems?
You mean like sort of at the cellular level versus the system level or like the neural?
I mean, I mean, if you were going to if you were going to build things
and your options were gene regulatory networks and diffusion versus
electrical networks and synaptic kinds of things, what are the different,
you know, dynamics that you can expect to get out of those systems?
How are they different functionally?
Yes, great question.
Um, I mean, ultimately, this is what I sort of, I mean, and this isn't any big idea or anything.
It's just like one of them is slower, right?
So like molecules diffusing limits you, I think, in space and time.
Whereas electricity, right, allows speed and distance.
So it just speeds up processes, right?
So I don't think there's anything particularly special about neurons.
I think you agree with that, right?
That I don't know.
And if we're talking about, let's say memory or competition, any of those things,
those can be implemented in any, any material, right?
There's nothing special about neurons.
This can happen in those molecules.
If you put them together in certain ways and you maintain a pattern, right?
That's relevant to the organism that can be implemented in the molecules.
But it just sort of limits, I would say.
Yeah, the, the, the, the space and time of that, that molecules are on a shorter,
like length scale, obviously, and, um, take longer to move and communicate.
Whereas you can send electricity much faster over a longer distance.
So, yeah, I don't know if that's answering what you're asking, but that's sort of how I think about it.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, I agree.
That's, that's definitely, that's definitely an important, an important feature.
You know, people, people sometimes ask me, like, what's, what's magical about
bioelectricity?
Like what's different about electrical networks that's harder or maybe even,
even not doable in typical molecular, you know, the kinds of, the kinds of networks.
Yeah.
Right.
And I mean, because I, what, I mean, I'm just thinking of this, like, intuitively at some
point of like, you know, what do we as human beings use to communicate?
We use electricity because it's the fastest thing.
We use the smallest thing in electron that can go the fastest.
Right.
And that's how we connect globally via the internet and all of this.
So, of course, nature would be using the same thing.
And I remember looking it's up at some point in, in one of your papers, right?
Of like, when you get a wound, the first thing that happens is electrical
communication and then the molecules.
And then I was at some point thinking, like, one of the things I did, I mean,
shit every day, all day was running Jell-O-Lusher-Ferrisis in a lab.
Right?
Yeah.
So you're generating an electric field to put your proteins where you want them.
Um, why would it nature be doing that?
Right?
Itself, organizing itself, using electricity.
So the molecules are sort of, you know, and as you know, it's both bottom
off and top down, but that, you know, you're using electricity because it's,
it's the fastest way to communicate from head to tail, let's say, and it's
organism, something's up on this end.
And then you bring the molecules over there.
Um, yeah.
Is it, so for me, it's, it's, it's about sort of, yeah, speed and distance.
That's what I would say.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, um, yeah.
So, so what kind of, what are you working on now?
Talk to, you know, talk about your...
Totally.
Yeah.
And I mean, I don't know.
I have a few slides I could go up, bring up here.
Yeah.
Uh,
if you can see, I can't see that.
Right.
So this isn't, we don't really have to do a formal, formal thing, but...
Go for it.
Do as much as you want.
Yeah.
This is sort of the gist of it, right?
Um, as I've alluded to is, is what is going on with this spontaneous
neural activity.
Um, and this would be an outline of like sort of why somebody like me, mostly
interested in studying something like the human brain is some interested in
studying as something as simple as, as this Hydra.
And then sort of that brings us into some kind of history of the spontaneous
neural activity, what it might be doing.
The tools needed to study that Hydra and some of these future directions.
And so I don't know how much we have time for, but I'll just kind of go as
quickly as possible.
Um, and this is one of my favorite things to start with to say, like, just
imagine that you're a scientist and you're the first person to ever see an
image that looks like this, which is exactly what happened to Golgi when he
put the Golgi sound neural, like a nervous system for the first time.
And you're trying to make sense of what is this.
Um, and he thought, um, that this is just one giant reticular mesh work.
It's all one thing.
And other people at the time looked at basically the same image and saw
something else.
And they zoomed in on these little shapes here.
It would look like these little pyramidal things.
So Sherrington and Rimonica Hall say, oh, what about these little pyramidal things?
Like, what if those are how this works?
What if those are the functional units?
Of this system.
By the way, um, sorry, could I ask, um, the Golgi stain, was that random?
Was he just trying random chemicals or did he have some idea that that was
going to stain something interesting?
I have no idea.
Honestly, I would have to look.
That's a great question.
That he like, why, how that ended up happening.
But before that, like there was no ability to sort of see what it looked like.
So there was all kinds of speculations, I think, on behavior and all of that, but
no real way to see or visualize the nervous system.
Um, and then once you do, then you've got to make sense of it.
Right.
I think that this is just a fundamental thing about science.
It's like, first of all, the method that you use to view the thing will
determine what you see.
And this is exactly what happens in Neil Thies.
We'll, we'll talk about this.
And, and so this was happening at the same time as, um, um, you know, cell theory
with Schlein and Schwann, because at that time they see cell boundaries.
They see lipid membranes.
And so they're like, Oh, what the functional unit of that system of non neural
tissues is, is cells, but Neil will make the point.
If you had just had a nuclear stain, what you would have seen is just a bunch
of dots floating in, in liquid.
You wouldn't have known that there were these things called membranes as you
had sort of an Eastern conception of what's the functional unit of tissue.
Right.
It would be like, Oh, it's fluid with a bunch of dots floating in it.
So here you have this at the beginning, right?
Like this whole picture of a nervous system and then you're arbitrarily
deciding which parts are separate from the rest.
And so the, the decision at that point was sort of, we're going to go with cell
theory, um, and the neuron doctrine that these little pyramidal shaped things are
the units and at the same time, Sherrington was going nuts on in reflex arcs.
So that sort of, um, solidified this idea that the, the, not only the structural
unit might be a single neuron, but the functional one, because you hit your
knee, you get one sensory neuron that goes in synapses on another motor neuron,
your spinal cord, and that's your reflex.
Right.
So that sort of gave them two ideas.
Uh, a that single neurons are the functional units and that be the nervous
system is doing nothing unless you stimulate it from the outside.
So those are just these two sort of major paradigms, um, taken from mostly
spinal cord peripheral nervous system is sort of applied to the cortex.
Um, and that, that, that must be how it works.
But, um, I would argue that those two major ideas have left this in a situation
where you still don't really know the true functional unit, at least of cortex
or, or, or non spinal cord peripheral nervous systems really are.
Is it, is it multiple neurons?
Is it all one thing?
Is it some amount of, uh, let's say ensemble, how many neurons are in an ensemble?
How do those things interact to generate complex cognitive states and how do those
go awry, um, and neuropsychiatric disorders?
Um, do you think that, um, do you think there's a single, um, objective answer
to that question?
Like, is there a, you know, the, the optimal sub unit or is that, or do you
think it's more of a observer dependent kind of, you know?
Oh my God.
Yes.
We got to skip his head till like 20 slides from now, but yes.
No problem.
Keep, keep, keep going.
Totally.
And yeah.
And I think, I think it's, I think there's again, what I'm most interested
in, which I think most people are, are general principles.
And I think this is going to be, there'll be general principles in that.
There's not one answer of like what a functional unit is in a particular system,
but the general way that that works, I think will probably, uh, be general.
Um, and so yeah, I don't need to introduce a complex adaptive system to you,
but maybe other people, um, if anyone ever sees this would be, uh, interested.
So basically it's just, you have a bunch of individual simple systems or subunits,
right at this level of scale.
Um, and, and I should just say that, why am I talking about that?
And I'm saying, because if the brain is actually this complex adaptive system,
um, maybe we're studying at the wrong level of scale.
We can't see the functional units because we're studying, um, one thing at a time.
So this is a bunch of units, right?
These can be anything.
These can be electrons in the magnet, water, molecules and water, ants and
ant, colony birds and flock or neurons in a nervous system.
The key is you put enough of them together and they follow simple rules.
And if we just think of this as an electron, the simplest example, you have
an electron that's spin up and its neighbors spin down and it needs to become
a spin down and you put enough of them together and critically, that won't
happen with one electron or 10 electrons and it's a property of many electrons.
You get this emergent phenomenon at a higher level scale.
In this case, it'd be like magnetism, right?
And then that higher level scale can feed back down and coordinate and constrain
the lower, lower level.
And the key here, right?
Is that you, you're never going to see magnetism.
If you're looking at this level here at this single electron, um, you're only
going to see it up here.
If you're looking at a higher level of scale and that level of scale also is
going to be following sort of totally different rules than this level of scale.
So if that's what we're trying to do in neuroscience in general, we think of
this as a TV screen.
Um, like, you know, for the most of the history of neuroscience, we've been
doing these single pixels at a time, you know, single unit electrophysiology,
which of course is critical.
We need to do that.
We had to understand what a neuron is, um, and doing that one at a time, but
you can't really see the whole picture at once.
Alternatively, you can zoom out and do things like I was saying, um, MRI, EEG, MEG,
these kinds of things.
You get a global view, but it's very low spatial temporal resolution.
So you can sort of tell that something's happening, but it's hard to sort of see
what that is.
So the ultimate goal then, right, is to just look at that TV screen with
single pixel resolution to sort of see, okay, now that we can see all these
individual neurons, what picture is emerging at this higher level of scale?
What can we see by just looking at it?
Right.
Um, and again, I'm interested in this big thing here, the human brain, given that
I'm interested in the human mind and helping these kinds of folks.
Um, but it's huge.
It's 86 billion neurons, um, with trillions of connections.
It's not going to fit under the microscope and all of that.
So you can simplify that problem.
You can do it in a mouse brain, right?
But even here, how are you going to get all this hardware in here to record all
those neurons?
And even if you do that optically, if I don't know, right now we're up to,
let's say, let's be generous.
I think I'm really arresting by saying 20,000 neurons that's out of 71 million.
So it's just really not, um, much of the whole TV screen, let's say.
So you could simplify this even further.
Uh, and you can do zebrafish, right?
And Drosophila and even C. elegans, but even these systems are still quite complex.
Uh, depending on the, you know, developmental stage of the zebrafish, you
can have up to 10 million neurons still and lots of different cell types.
And they're all, I think, um, importantly, sort of shoved together in these
complex brains and ganglia that are also sort of hard to disentangle.
Um, so Sidney Brenner sat down with my mentor, Rafa, who, who we all know,
Sidney was the one who pioneered the work on C. elegans.
Um, and he said, that's even still too complicated, right?
What if we try something even simpler?
Let's do Hydra, which has 200 to 2000 neurons, depending on the size of the animal.
And depending on how you cut off the cell sequencing, single cell sequencing data,
you get 11 to 12, maybe 13 different, uh, neural cell types.
Um, and it doesn't have a true brain or ganglia as you'll see momentarily.
Um, I gotta get that off there.
Okay.
I say, um, right.
So then it also not only is it simple, but it's an interesting position on the evolutionary
tree, at least as far as I'm concerned, it's right.
After in quotes, the non-neural, um, lineage, and then right before the bilaterians,
which is the, the branch of life that we're sort of used to studying.
Um, and neuroscience, where you have a central midline structure structure in a
left and a right side, uh, whereas the Nigerians are sort of totally
readily symmetric, they don't have any of those things.
So it's, it's another instance where you can sort of say, Hey, what are these
general principles?
This nervous system looks nothing like that one.
And yet it's able to generate complex behavior.
Um, does it matter what the architecture of this nervous system is?
Because it's seemingly, right?
Everyone's very interested in, in obsessed with getting those, the circuit
diagrams, right?
Um, but does that matter?
Can you get complete, essentially the same functionality out of completely
different architectures?
Um, and I think that's probably what we'll find if we look.
Um, how do I go forward?
Oh, there we go.
So, so this is just what an actual hydro looks like with its mouth, tentacles,
uh, foot, and then this hydrobud.
So this is, um, uh, going to be important in a second because hydro
can reproduce asexually.
So, um, hydro essentially just can clone itself with it.
You keep feeding these animals instead of them just getting infinitely big or long.
Um, they start budding and, and reproducing and, and making a genetically
identical copy, right?
I think it's critical for you.
Um, and then they can also, uh, reproduce sexually too.
So the same animal can be their stem cells can then generate testes or, um,
ovaries, um, or an egg here and, uh, reproduce sexually.
So either way, uh, and then, right.
So again, it has essentially not exactly the same, but 20,000 genes,
very similar to our genome, right?
So the genes here are, are essentially the same thing, um, as you or I, and yet
it's building something completely different.
Um, and then it's small.
So it can be anywhere from 500 or one, one and a half centimeters.
And I'm currently sort of figuring out what's the smallest one we can get to,
to make so that we can fit that really under the field of view, uh,
transparent, sort of bust.
You can do all kinds of things to this thing.
Um, and then interestingly also is that it completely regenerates its
nervous system every 20 days.
So it's constantly making this nervous system, um, and maintaining itself somehow.
Uh, right.
A lot of molecular tools being developed and then it has these well-defined behaviors.
So these are just, so it's resting, right?
Just laying there doing nothing and then can just do a very simple longitudinal
contraction where it goes from long to short.
And then the opposite of that is elongation.
So it goes from short to long.
Um, and then it has complex behaviors.
I mean, these are arbitrary words I'm defining.
I'm just saying these are more complex.
And this one is eating.
So in lab, you feed Hydra, Artemia, Napoli, just brine shrimp.
And this is just glutathione, reduced glutathione.
We'll also have them do this feeding response.
So they'll rip open.
So they'll use their tentacles to capture shrimp, rip, rip open in their mouth
and shove a bunch of them inside of their body.
Um, and then the most complex I would say is somersalting.
So it will reach out, stick its head and tentacles down, contract, release its
foot, flip over, and then put its foot back down.
So in this way, it can sort of in quotes walk.
Uh, so it can do all of this with a very, very simple nervous system.
Um, and so this is just some quick, yep.
Sorry, sorry.
Could I just ask on the, on the behavior side, um, does anybody do, uh,
is, is anybody checked various, um, learning training?
Um, can you teach these things anything?
Right.
So this is, this is the new frontier.
Um, but there, it's also the new old frontier.
So as is all science, that, that there were some old studies, I think some of
the first was 1900 and then 1950, um, of habituation, uh, in Hydra.
So if you just sort of, if you pinch them or even stick an electrode in them,
they'll contract.
Um, and if, if you keep doing that over and over again with it, with the proper
interest stimulus interval, they'll stop, they'll habituate.
Um, but that hasn't, there hasn't been like in, in the last, uh, I don't know,
50 years, any of that has not been repeated.
And, and I don't think it's, um, because people have tried and failed.
I think most people haven't really revisited that.
Um, but yeah, that's, that's on the docket.
Yeah.
And, and I mean, there's so, I guess was, I think it was Nematostela showing
associative learning there.
So other Nidorians now have been shown to be doing, you know, more complex
things than meet the eye.
Um, right.
So you get this hypostome.
This is just a cartoon of the, of the same thing, this nerve net, the tentacles.
This is where they would have the buds coming off.
This is the basal disc and this is the tissue.
So it's a just two layers.
It's not a true three layer thing.
There's no true mesoderm.
There's just the endoderm on the inside and the outside.
Um, and it's thought that all of these, um, these are also myo epithelial cells.
They're epithelial cells with, let's just go over there, like muscle processes
at the bottom.
So they're sort of a dual cell type.
Um, and then it's thought that all of those are connected by gap junctions.
And then you have your, um, nerve net in the endoderm with sensory neurons
poking into the inside of the gut and then, uh, ganglion neurons in the
ectoderm with sensory neurons poking out to the outside environment.
And it's thought that these do not communicate, but I think that might
not be accurate, but that's the current idea.
And then these three different cell types.
You have eye cells, which are the stem cells that make the germ cells, the
gland cells, nomadicites, which are specific to, to Nideria are super cool.
Um, cell type that shoot out darts like with toxins, essentially.
And, and then neurons, um, and then these all self renew.
So the, the eye cells make these four and the actoderm and endoderm self renew
themselves also.
Um, so that's sort of just the, the gist of that.
And then this is the current view of sort of the, the connectome, if you will,
of Hydra.
So this is, um, from Charlie David at LMU using Anticadherin antibody that they've
just shown sort of, uh, stains all of the neurons in, in the animal.
And it looks, you know, like, again, this could just diffuse nerve net.
And in the ectoderm, it's sort of this, uh, North, South highway, where you have,
uh, more of a bipolar neuron and in the endoderm, it's a more multipolar thing.
That's sort of going more radially around the animal.
And then again, this is from Rob Steele at Irvine, where this is just GFP
expressed in eye cells.
And you can see that there appears to be a little bit of a condensation of
neurons in the, in the foot and in the head.
And again, I think this is another thing to keep in mind that what we're
seeing is depending on the tool that we're using to look at this thing.
So, which is true.
Yes, they're both true.
But when you look at that, it's unclear, like how that, there's no obvious
circuitry.
There's no, um, anything that you would say that would really tell you just
looking at that structure, how that's going to function.
Is it functioning as one thing, as many things, who knows?
Until Christoph put in G camp six.
So this is, um, a molecule that will fluoresce every time the neuron fires.
Um, and you, he made a transgenic animal expressing this in the eye cells.
So all of the neurons, how G camp six expressed, he then put the hydra in
between two cover slips.
So this is just a hundred micron spacer is swimming around in hydra media.
So it can still behave in two dimensions.
And then just put this on a normal wide field microscope and came up with a
movie that looks like this.
So it's sort of, um, you know, this, can you see all the pixels in the movie at
the same time?
And when you do, what, what do you see?
Are they all, uh, firing completely independently, total chaos?
No, and are they all firing as one thing?
No, it's, it's something else.
And in order to figure out what the something else was, Chris, I've had to
painstakingly circle every one of those neurons and track it over time, uh, to
analyze that data and figure out what, what is happening here and came up with
this sort of general model and saying that out of that seemingly simple nerve
net, you have these three independent sort of units, ensembles or circuits,
however you want to call that groups of neurons that are co-firing together.
And the one that's most, um, consistently associated with muscle
activity is CB, where every time it fires, you get a longitudinal contraction.
So it gets shorter.
That's very, very clear that that's motor.
These other two are less clear rhythm, potential one and rhythm, potential two.
When the potential two in that early paper, um, was most associated with radial
contraction.
So that's in the end of the animal.
When that fires, it gets skinnier and can do some ingestion.
So it will spit its food out or water, let's say from its mouth.
And then rhythm, potential one, um, is in the ectoderm and when it fires in that
paper was like correlated with elongation, um, toward light, but what was
most interesting to me was that this was also happening when the, when the
animals just sitting there doing nothing just there.
And that again, is not new.
We're noticing a theme reading literature is helpful.
So that, uh, this was found in the sixties by Pisano and McCullough where
they were just sticking an electrode into Hydra.
And they found the same thing that there was this rhythmic, uh, you know,
firing of some kind of neural network in the animal they didn't have access to.
They just knew that this was happening with their electrode when the
animals doing nothing and they're called this cryptic activity.
They said, what the hell is this doing?
Right.
Um, because again, at the time, the idea is that the nervous system is there to
generate behavior.
Otherwise it's off.
Like why at the base of the tree of life, the simplest nervous system, are we
seeing all kinds of activity going on, um, if it's not generating behavior.
And so they, he hypothesized in one of his early papers that is this thing
coordinating the nervous system, um, sort of the quarterback of the thing,
the conductor, whatever metaphor you want to use.
Um, and I've, I've been told that he went off and started selling
bikes and so never finished that work.
And so we don't know.
Um, but it was discovered there, right?
With an electrode and it was discovered rediscovered, let's say with calcium.
So it's, it's, it's method independent that you find the same sort of thing.
Um, and that is what got me interested and brings us to this very brief history
of what we know about spontaneous neural activity, which is very little.
Um, because as I was saying, Sharon, Tim, at that time, the, the, the big
mantra was reflexive brain.
It's doing nothing.
Um, otherwise, but his own student, um, actually was finding something very
different than that.
And he sort of, he cut the head off of a cat and deaffirmed to the cat, no
sensory input whatsoever, zero input to a nervous system.
He had all kinds of, uh, activity going on to the point where the cat could still
walk.
So this was clearly internally generated neural activity had nothing to do
with outside input.
Um, but that was just ignored.
That was like, whatever that guy's nuts, whatever he's up to, let him do that.
And then at the same time, or around the same time, Hans Berger was inventing the
EEG, EEG we have humans, um, just sitting in a chair, all kinds of electrical
activity going on there as well.
And like I was saying, so it wasn't just Bassano and McCullough discovering
this spontaneous activity in Hydra, it was sort of anybody looking at any
Nigeria were sort of discovering this kind of thing going on.
Um, but of course no one's talking to each other and soon no one knows.
And so it wasn't, of course, until the 2000s when Raeckel and others at Wash
U put humans into fMRI scanners.
And at the time, right?
It's sort of what was interesting is the task evoked activity.
Anything else that you couldn't explain was seen as noise, like white
noise on the TV, get rid of it.
What we're interested in is what happens to the brain when you go to do the task.
But at some point he was like, Hey, all of those areas in the brain that are
active at rest seem to be specific.
And they're specifically inhibited when the person is going to do the task.
So he's, he called up this default mode network, which became like, um, you
know, a very hot topic and has reignited interest in study of spontaneous
neural activity, um, which we now know is one of the most highly conserved
aspects of all brains.
And so this is from Buzaki's review, um, and that spans a wide range of
frequencies to 600 Hertz, very ultra pass all the way down, um, to ultra slow
of like the point of one to point one Hertz.
Uh, and this is something that's found in all mammalian brains, regardless
of size or structure, you find this, right?
And I think the current idea is that that's just noise, right?
That's reverb.
You have a complex enough electrical system.
You're going to get oscillations.
It's not functional.
It's not relevant.
It's an epiphenomenon of the system.
Um, it's not doing anything.
Um, and I think one of the reasons that that still is the, the, the idea is
because you can't really, uh, image it or manipulate them in a specific way to
determine if you, if you manipulate this oscillation in particular, does that
do anything?
Um, or what does it do?
Um, but again, it's taking 20% of total, total body energy and one of the most
highly conserved aspects of all brains that we've looked at.
So the question is why or what is it doing?
And again, one of the most, uh, highly studied is the default mode network.
And humans, and this is related to the self, um, in theory.
So it's most active at rest.
It's going on all the time and its function continues to be debated.
Um, but it's thought to be involved when you're internally focused.
So you're either remembering your past, um, thinking about yourself right now
or contemplating your future.
Um, and the same sort of midline structures that I'll show you in a second,
um, appear to be activated when you're doing self-related processing.
So if, uh, I'm shown a picture of a stranger versus myself, the default
mode network lights up when I'm looking at something related to the self.
And that's in any modality, whether that's pictures, whether that's hearing
my voice, um, those kinds of things.
Um, so, and then also it's linked to a number of neuropsychiatric disorders.
And so you can't throw like a dart at PubMed right now and not see the
default mode network linked to something.
Um, and the way I'm simplifying that is, is to say that the, the general
idea seems to be that you have states like depression and anxiety.
When you're too internally focused, the default mode network is too active.
This is associated with rumination and worry and depression anxiety and vice
versa when, um, in states like psych, psychosis, psychedelic meditation,
when you disrupt the default mode network, this leads to, in quotes,
ego dissolution.
So some of the best, um, data that there are in, uh, human studies are when
you put humans in and that they can self-report, you know, on either
psilocybin, LSD or DMT, that whatever they think they are sort of dissolved
and then you can see what happened in the MRI scanner and that correlates
with disruption of the default mode network.
Um, so the question is, how, how, why, or how would that have anything to do
with the cell?
What would be the mechanism by which the development network could
implement something like a self?
Um, and there's sort of, you know, the structural argument and the functional
argument, the structural argument being that it's a central midline structure.
So, um, medial prefrontal cortex, the posterior cingulate, the medial temporal lobes.
Um, that these are sort of these major rich hubs in the brain that are
connecting regions that would otherwise be segregated, right?
So you, you can imagine if you had a brain where the visual cortex was not
talking to the auditory cortex, it's not talking to the olfactory cortex, and
it was not talking to the internal brain stem system that, you know, that
would be a, a disintegrated system.
So is this this sort of central midline superhighway with these thickly
malignated axons connecting, um, all of those brain areas, sort of getting
input from all of them and then maybe giving, sending information back.
Um, so that's sort of the structural thing.
And then the, the functional piece is that it's one of the lowest frequency
oscillators in the brain of 0.01 to 0.1 Hertz.
And this is where we got to go real crazy.
And this is now finally going to answer your question about the observers in the
brain, which is, uh, so Buzaki was saying, right?
Like this is what we've been doing as a neuroscientist is looking at, at things
from it, quote unquote, third party, third party objective view.
You're looking at a brain with a bunch of squiggly activity, and then you're
looking at its output, this behavior, and you're correlating those two things.
And, and you can say, okay, if I see this squiggly activity, then I could
predict that the animal, whatever organism is going to do this behavior.
And that's helpful for us.
And that's very useful clinically, right?
We could use that.
Um, but that's not understanding.
That's not what the brain is doing.
The brain has to observe itself.
The neurons have to observe their own information and then, um, decide sort
of in quotes, decide what, what to do.
So, right.
So if, if you think of, um, neuron A, B and C here, neuron A has to sort of
observe the upstream activity from its inputs, neurons one, five, and nine.
And in order to do that, it has to be integrating that information over a
certain period of time.
And let's just say that's a hundred milliseconds.
So it reads that information, um, and decides and not decides whatever word
you want to use, um, will fire or not, right?
Based on that, that upstream input and same thing with B and C.
So you can think of those as sort of the, the highest frequency oscillators
in the system, the letters, if you want in the, in the neural code.
Then the downstream observer of A, B and C is Q, let's say it has to read
out the input from A, B and C, and therefore has to be integrating that
input over a longer period of time to give time to, for A, B and C to give
it its input.
So that would then say integrate over 200 milliseconds.
So it then reads out A, B and C.
And so reading out, let's say, cab a neural word.
So looking over here, that would be like this frequency.
And so you could say you would go from letters to neural words.
And then this is going to read out over a longer time scale to get
inputs from those to form sentences and then paragraphs and all the way down.
And so is it possible that you have this thing that's the lowest frequency
oscillator, getting all of the input on the longest time scale in the
entire nervous system to read all of that information out.
And so this is just sort of a, a picture of what that might look like
placed on top of the brain.
And I like to think of this in terms of the visual cortex as a sort of the
easiest for me to conceptualize.
And if we think of this little red thing here as, as the highest frequency
oscillator, sort of the letter of the neural code, if that's coding in the
visual cortex, at least for the simplest thing, like edges in the visual field,
then the next layer, layer two is getting input from that layer.
And that has to be reading that over a longer period of time.
So it has enough time to get input from, let's say, two edges for it to
read out a higher level object concept or shape that looks like this.
And then the next lowest layer, lower frequency reading out the input from
layer two, right over a longer time scale so that it has time to read out
this shape and this shape to form a high level abstract concept of, of this
shape all the way down, right, to the lowest frequency oscillator.
The, the, let's say in this case, the default network that's reading out all
of the visual information, the auditory information, the somatosensory
information, the factory and internal state of the, of the organism.
And in that way, getting all of the highest level view, the highest
abstract view of both the external environment, the world and the internal
environment of the organism or the self.
Right.
So, so that's sort of, okay, can it, can it be the reader sort of the
integrator of the information, but then can it also be the coordinator top
down?
Um, and in this way, we sort of went through that diagram, but in this case,
if we're thinking, is it possible that these low frequency oscillators, um,
can essentially organize higher frequency oscillators through various
mechanisms of cross frequency coupling of like phase phase coupling,
phase amplitude coupling and these kinds of things.
So is it possible that this lowest frequency oscillator is essentially
sort of critical for setting up this hierarchy of oscillators and organizing
them in sort of space and time of the brain, such that if you get rid of it,
that organization, that hierarchy might disappear.
Um, and there's some evidence, right?
That when you give humans psychedelics, the brain goes into a more
disordered or chaotic state and it's unclear totally.
If, if you get rid of this default mode network, do you get something like
this where you have all these other oscillators that are all like this,
or do the oscillators themselves go completely out of order and you just
get complete chaos, right?
And it seems to me that it's not the latter of that complete chaos.
Cause it seems like, you know, if people report psychedelic experiences,
it's like they're still having some kind of experience.
It's just less order that you might be having those ensembles playing in a
different order than you normally would.
Um, so all of this is complete speculation, right?
And so it, because it's very difficult, like I said, to image or manipulate
human brain.
So luckily this thing appears to be highly conserved.
So you have humans, monkeys, rats, um, a hierarchy of brain-wide oscillations
have been found in a bunch of insects also.
And then this gets into some, you know, really out there stuff where we're
talking about finding these things in, even in systems that don't have a nervous
system.
So people have been looking at this kind of thing in plants for a long time.
When you just put a microelectric array in their root and you see these kinds
of, um, let's say electrical spikes, um, in plants that Beluska and others have
been saying for a long time might be involved in information integration and
communication plant wide.
Um, and then Adamatsky putting this, uh, these electrodes into oyster
mushrooms, uh, and just finding the same thing.
Like, yeah, these, these global, uh, organism-wide electrical spikes.
Um, uh, yeah, in this animal that he's doing all kinds of interesting things too
about is this, is this a fungal language?
Um, and that kind of thing.
And then same thing with amoeba, um, finding these low frequency, uh, I guess
electrical like oscillations or spikes, it's unclear what they're made of, right?
In that case.
And then bacteria here in single cells when, um, Adam first made the voltage
indicators of putting those into single cells and saying that even bacteria are
having these low frequency electrical oscillations, um, that then, uh, if you
play that movie too, and you didn't, and I didn't tell you that those are bacteria,
you might think that those aren't like a dish of neurons, uh, uh, you know,
flashing.
And then once you put them together, as you know, um, into a biofilm, right?
So those individual bacteria, you put them together, they, they generate these
global sort of biofilm wide, uh, potassium waves that help them coordinate
themselves, uh, as one giant unit.
And then not only can they do that with themselves, but they can do this, you
know, long range.
So biofilm one wants to eat and biofilm two wants to eat.
If there's enough nutrients, they eat, um, at the same time, but if there's not,
they can coordinate nutrient sharing.
And then they sort of oscillate, um, in anti phase.
So the general idea then just being that are these low frequency electrical
oscillations, um, right, ways to coordinate otherwise autonomous units
into coherent holes, um, no matter where you are with or without a nervous system.
Um, right.
So this, this gets a little bit, you got to take a lot of drugs to watch this,
but, um, this is, this is what I just showed you, right?
We're all very used to this, the neural tissue being electrical, you get
ions flowing through, um, and, and that's how you, you know, you generate
action potentials.
We're all used to that.
Um, but this is where people get confused or get hung up, um, where
you're leading the chart.
This is, this is what, yeah.
Like when I, when I learned of your stuff, I was like, no way.
So yeah, it's like, of course, this is how this works.
Um, it's just a different, it's just slower, right?
People have a really hard time and I think this is going to be out there,
but like Einstein's thinking of like different scales of like planetary
or really small we can't deal with.
And it's like, even in the biological sphere, we can't deal with like
different spatial stuff.
Um, but yeah, this is just, it's just slower.
So you can have ions flowing through gap junctions and non-neural tissue.
And this, you know, I'd be very curious to know what you think or what
you're finding in terms of any of these, let's say non-neural bioelectric
networks, um, if, if you're finding anything of the sort, if there
are, if there are any kind of like, you know, higher frequency oscillations
or lower frequency oscillations and if there's any of that, that, that's
sort of organizing even the non-neural tissue, um, we can get there in a second.
But that would be the idea is it's a very similar thing as I was just
saying up here that, um, yeah, you have individual cells that would be, you
know, that, that the voltage there, if there's some kind of fluctuation would
be oscillating at some higher frequency.
Um, and then those can be sort of put into groups of a lower frequency to form,
let's say a subunit, like an arm, and then you can have a bunch of those arms
being read out, right?
Um, yeah.
Okay.
What time is it?
Okay.
Yeah, yeah.
Um, and, and, uh, and all not to sort of, to sort of like build chunks
of bodies based on, on a similar, let's say principle of, of these voltage circuits
being read out by lower and lower frequency oscillators.
Um, and then in single cells is this possible that instead of proteins
being sort of just the structural units of cells, which is what I've been taught
my whole life, is it possible that these things are actually themselves
conducting, um, electricity, which is what I'm forgetting his name now,
Stuart Lindsay at Arizona has shown that you get like nano semen currents
flowing through all proteins, no matter, um, he just picked six at random,
like BSA, collagen, some things that you just wouldn't be like, oh,
that's conducting electricity.
Why would it be?
Um, so is it the case that, that cells are actually, uh, true little living
computer chips where the proteins are forming electrical circuits on and off
and that metabolism itself we've been taught is sort of generating ATP and
energy, but it's also generating a bunch of hydrogen ions.
And so is it also just giving us a pool of hydrogen ions to be flowing
through the computer chip.
So that's, that's out there, but that's, that's what I was thinking on that one.
Um, okay.
So right.
So you can build all these things in these different ways at these different
scales and, and so what might they be doing again?
Could they be sort of maintaining systems out on your criticality?
Right.
Um, if in the human brain, for example, uh, with the default mode network around
it's thought to be at criticality where I can, um, sort of help the system form
patterns at a useful time scale.
Um, but you imagine you can also then, uh, have a system that's totally on or
totally off, you either have brain death, um, or totally on speed is a tonic
seizure or totally disordered, um, in terms of total, total chaos.
And this appears to be what happens, uh, you go towards chaos.
If you get rid of this organizer and at least the human brain.
So I don't know, uh, what happens in any of these other systems if you get rid of
that.
Um, so again, integrating all the bottom of it, electoral information in the
system and then coordinating at top down.
And so, uh, very quickly on that, not only, um, with this thing sort of maybe
maintain the overall electrical sort of organization or structure of the system,
but then it's the, the spikes, um, of, of that oscillator are not totally
constant, like a mechanical clock that you get, you know, every 60 seconds.
It's, it's variable.
Um, and I think that would be variable in terms of like external and internal
input so that it can sort of, uh, coordinate the entire system top down and
provide some kind of information about the overall state of the system by how
frequently it's firing.
And so that's complete speculation there.
Low frequency, you're sort of saying, okay, within a range of frequencies,
everyone that's local gets some kind of global piece of information that's giving
everyone that, that knowledge that this is, this frequency means everything is
cool, keep doing your local job, however you do it.
And a higher frequency signal means something else to the local, um, function.
And there, maybe you need to speed up their processes.
Right.
So, so again, is this, is this thing conserved in, in Hydra?
And so that's sort of what I want to do is just start testing this thing there.
And to just speed this up, is to just say, does the, does the Hydra cell phone
service the organizers, sorry, organisms, unifier, um, and ultimate integrator of
both its internal and external input to generate coherent behavior, i.e.
a unified self, and I'll just breeze through.
So again, just to quickly say that, first off, how to do all this manual tracking
by hand, and so what I've been spending my time doing is trying to get all this
automatic working with a group of people in Rafa's lab to sort of make a, I
don't know if people can see this or what, but, uh, the dual color animals so
that you can use that nucleus that never disappears while the animal's moving.
Cause keep in mind in all other neural systems, you're putting a microscope on
the head of the thing and it's not, um, moving much, but this entire system is
moving.
So you have to figure out a way to track it and extract all of those calcium
signals from each neuron and end up right down here with individual, um, spikes
from each of those neurons.
And, and what's another interesting or I think potentially unique thing about
Hydra is from Christos' initial work when he put an electrode in, at least in
one of the particular neurons in Hydra, it does appear that one calcium spike
equates to about one active potential.
So just using optical, um, information from this animal, you can essentially
capture, um, every spike from every neuron and get a real clear picture.
Cause in other systems, a calcium is, you know, equate to many, many
actual potentials in the mouse, for example.
So it's, it's hard to have that as you only read out.
Um, okay, right.
So I'll just show you really quickly this beautiful movie.
This is, um, right.
So those are the, all of the, the TD tomato and then the G cam seven, um,
neurons there.
So then you can track all of that and, um, do the signal
analysis and then you can write, then you can also do, uh, these, uh,
automatic behavior tracking using deep block cut so that you can, you know,
do automated behavior and automated neural signal and start making
sense of this stuff.
Um, and so with that, I'll just, I'll just end with a few like teasers, right?
So like this is just to show you prove that Hydra's lays there and rests and
it still has this, um, neural activity, which will flash in a second right
there.
So you can start asking, so what is the relationship between that network and
its other two networks?
Is that network actually predictive of, of global neural activity in this
animal and all of those kinds of studies?
What's really, I think unique about Hydra is this, right?
These two other things that you can do, um, where this is the parent animal.
This is the foot in the head and this is a bud.
This is an early bud coming off and you can start to say, okay, this is,
again, this is genetically identical animal.
This is one slab of tissue, but at some point the genetically identical
thing becomes two individuals, right?
And how does that happen?
You can like, so, right?
At this point and at this stage, uh, their global neural activity is essentially
looking the same and their behavior is, is essentially the same, but at some
point, uh, that tissue becomes three different individuals.
So this is a, a bud here, a bud here and the parent here and they're flushing
into, so asynchronously, right?
Like different Christmas trees and they start to develop completely independent
behavior.
So you can sort of, you know, go, go to town on all of those kinds of questions.
And then you can also do all kinds of other crazy shit, um, which is cut,
make these two animals with two heads and you would, you would, so it's sort
of like a split brain patient you're sharing one body, you have two heads,
one foot, um, in this case, uh, these, I would have predicted, uh, they're
gonna, you know, act independently, but it's also the case that it looks like
Hydra's brain, like the plant might be in its foot.
So these actually start acting basically the same, but you can, and I didn't
know if this would be possible, you can actually break a Hydra.
So if you make a split foot, um, then, uh, it starts acting.
So this was contracting independently of this foot.
Um, and then all of its sort of nervousness was sort of broken.
That it's not, it is no longer one coherent thing.
So even the tentacles, it's sort of the body here is, is, is, um, let's say
flushing independently of this foot, independently of that one.
Um, and so it's sort of having a hard time, uh, trying to coordinate, uh,
itself, um, as one coherent thing.
Um, right, right.
So, yeah, so just to, to conclude that these things, you know, low frequency
electrical oscillations are found through the living world.
We don't really know what they're doing.
This crazy hypothesis is that are they, you know, overall electrical
organism organizers that can do these three jobs, maintaining systems out of
near criticality that if you get rid of them, you go more towards chaos, um,
disorder.
Um, and then are they integrating the lower level information and then from
that top level view, coordinating everything, um, from top down.
Um, and then I'm going to start trying to test these things out.
These tools have been built.
So there's the, the world one tour and I'd like to think all those people
that have contributed all of this and you for sitting here.
Yeah.
That was awesome.
Thank you so much.
Yes.
Super interesting.
We're gonna, we're gonna have to, we're gonna have to schedule a part two
because, uh, uh, there's a, there's a bunch of things I want to, um, I want
to ask you and, and, and also talk about, uh, this, the cell full concept,
both in cells and embryos and then outside of, uh, electrophysiology in
general, because we're starting to see something similar in other systems that
are not natively electrophysiological at all.
Yeah.
So, so I think this is, this is a more, you know, what you've got here is a
very kind of profound generic concept that I think could apply to a lot of things.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Love it.
Yeah.
All right.
Okay.
Well, uh, yeah, thank, thank you so much.
Yeah, great.
Um, yeah, we'll talk soon.
All right.
See you.
Okay.
Thanks.
