Thank you for the opportunity to speak to all of you and to share some work and get your get your feedback.
So if anyone would like more details or to get in touch with me all the papers everything else is at these these websites here.
And so the there are four basic points that I would like to get across today.
The first is that there are really some very significant knowledge gaps about the control of large scale anatomical homeostasis.
And this is roughly it's it's it encompasses our understanding of the relationship between the genome and the anatomy and I'll show you why things are quite puzzling there.
And I will claim that fundamental advances and new biomedicine are going to require not only understanding the molecular mechanisms that are required for this process to happen, but actually also the decision making by cellular
collectives that is sufficient for it to happen, and that a key medium for computation and living tissue is something that is called non neural bio electricity.
I've developed some techniques to manipulate this layer of basically physiological software and I'll show you why I say that.
And fundamentally, looking towards the future I will argue that cracking this by electric code that will enable a kind of novel approach using electroseuticals for applications and birth defects regenerative medicine cancer and synthetic
bioengineering and boiling down the whole talk into basically two sentences what I'm going to tell you is that, like the brain, your body tissues form electrical networks that make decisions.
These are decisions about dynamic anatomy, and that we now have the ability to target the system to control large scale editing that can even override all kinds of genomic default states with lots of advantages and opportunities for regenerative medicine and synthetic
bioengineering. And I show you one of our five legged frogs to just point out that you're going to see all kinds of weird creatures today. None of this is Photoshop these are all actual living things that represent our attempt to test some of those some of the models that that we have.
So, let's look at, let's look at these knowledge gaps.
If we think about what is the end game of our field we you know where where are we going at what point can we all go home. What we would like to have is something that we call the anatomical compiler.
And the deal is that you ought to be able to sit down and draw the animal or plant that you would like to have at the level of the anatomy. So not at the level of pathways but at the level of final anatomy the way that we do with machine parts and things like
that and then you would be able to draw this this this three headed worm. And if we knew what we were doing, we would have the capability of having the software which would then compile this anatomical description down into a set of stimuli that would have to be given to
cells that would cause them to produce whatever it was that you just drew. So here's this three headed flatworm.
The reason that this is this is fundamentally important is that almost all of the problems of biomedicine so so except for infectious disease, pretty much everything else birth defects traumatic injury cancer aging.
All of these things would be solved if we had the ability to tell cells what to build. If we had the knowledge to control what it is that cellular collectives cooperate towards building.
So these things are in some important sense problems of information processing. How is it that cells work together to build these things. And so, of course, we are very far from having anything like this.
And only in a few very special cases do we know anything about how to make specific specific shapes shapes come up. So let's think about why that is so so where is anatomy specified, I mean, we all start life roughly like this so this is a collection of embryonic
structures. And then shortly thereafter, you get something like this this is a cross section through a human torso. So look at this incredible invariant order. All of these organs are the correct shape size position orientation everything is next to the right
It's absolutely staggering amount of amount of order and so we would like to know first of all where is this information coming from.
We're tempted to say DNA but of course we know what genome specified the DNA specifies proteins there's nothing directly in there that specifies any of this.
So we would like to know how is it that cells use the genomically specified hardware that they have to know what to make and when to stop in regenerative medicine we would like to know if a piece of this is missing how do we get the cells to rebuild it.
And as engineers we ask what's actually possible to get to build, given any particular default genome.
So the reason that in my group we frame this thing as a basically a collective intelligence problem is that individual cells are extremely competent. So here you see one cell this is a single cell organism this is called the lacrimaria.
And there is no brain, there's no nervous system, there are no stem cells, there's no cell to cell communication, just one cell, handling all of its local goals.
It's handling its physiological goals anatomical control metabolic behavioral, everything is handled by this one cell in real time. Okay.
And so the amazing thing is that these these cells which are extremely competent in their local very small sort of environment.
They work together to make a medicine body, they can work on much bigger goals so what you see is a is an inflation not only of body size but actually of their ability to pursue states in, in various kinds of problem spaces including anatomical morpher space
physiological space and so on. So a single cell can give rise to a collection of cells that self assembles into some incredibly complex morphology.
And we know that simply understanding stem cell biology is not going to be enough, because here we have a teratoma, and this thing might have hair and teeth and bone and muscle and skin.
And so, so, so the work of the stem cells has proceeded fine you have all your derivatives you have your various tissues, what you don't have is this three dimensional structures when you to understand how this works.
In standard developmental biology, the story that we're told is a kind of a feed forward open loop system, which is very much based around emergence so the idea is that there are gene regulatory networks so genes turn each other on and off.
Some of these genes are effector code for effector proteins so they're sticky or they diffuse or the exert force or something like this.
And there's this physical process where all of these things interact with each other, and then through things that are studied by the science of complexity and so on, outcome.
These amazingly complex results. So like the salamander here.
This now the story is certainly true in the sense that these things all happen, but it but it's incomplete, I think, and it has a fundamental difficulty which is this inverse problem the idea is that if we're committed to this feed forward
then making changes here require us to to to exert our interventions down here at the at the, for example at the genetic level.
And that means that we have to try to invert this process of emergence which is fundamentally insolvable so right so most of these inverse problems are just too difficult to solve.
We don't know what genes to tweak to make desire changes at the at the three dimensional anatomy level.
So, the current state of affairs is basically this we're very good at things like this at figuring out the lowest hardware level of which genes and proteins interact with which other genes and proteins.
But what we'd really like to understand are things like this the ability of plan area to regenerate from pieces, the shape of the hand and the shape of the foot, and why they're different and what you would have to do to get these specific shapes back.
Okay, it's very not obvious what you would do at this at this level. So the amazing thing is that some animals are very good at this and their bodies show remarkable plasticity in this kind of collective activity of the cell so for example here.
This animal is a salamander, it regenerates its limbs, its eyes, its jaws, its portions of the brain and the heart.
And so, so if they're amputated they will grow back. And what's what's cool is that not only is this process incredibly flexible, meaning if you amputate at the shoulder you grow the whole thing.
If you amputate at the wrist, you start here and you just and you just grow the parts you need, but then it stops.
That's the most remarkable part of all of this and so lots of people work on trying to kickstart regeneration. But actually how does it know when to stop, because when it stops is when it has built a correct salamander arm that's when it stops.
How does the system know when it's built a correct salamander arm. Now, it's important to note that this is not just some weird quirk of salamanders.
The human mammals can do some of this the human liver is highly regenerative that's been known for a long time unclear to me how the ancient Greeks knew that but they clearly did the human liver is regenerative.
Deer regenerate huge amounts of bone up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day, okay every day over a centimeter of bone growth.
And so, so bone vasculature innovation skin, and even human children can regrow fingertips, usually it stops at a particular age but if you just keep it clean the amputation will give rise to a cosmetically perfect finger.
So, the champions of this process are these guys these are planaria these are flat worms, they have a true brain central nervous system, the same neurotransmitters that you and I have.
The amazing thing about them is that you can cut them into lots of pieces, the record is 275 and every piece will regrow exactly what's missing, no more no less to give you a perfect tiny little worm.
While the new stuff is growing the remaining tissue is actually shrinking so that they will all as quickly as possible get to proportion to correct proportionality.
And the other thing about them is they're immortal. There's no such thing as an old planarian so if you're interested in aging, or these ideas that the things inevitably wind down and accumulate errors and so on, planaria have have are telling us that that is not absolutely required
here's a life form that's basically immortal.
The thing to understand about all of this is that we really are not despite all the amazing progress in molecular genetics we're really not very far along in understanding how the cellular collectives make make decisions.
And one of the easiest ways to see that is to just think about.
So here's a simple example which we're making in my lab right now. Here's an axolotl larva axolotl larvae have legs. Here's a frog larvae a tadpole tadpoles do not have legs.
And one can ask a simple question if I combine early axolotl tissue with early frog tissue right so so in early embryo genesis, I make a chimeric chimeric embryo they're perfectly healthy these are we call them frog allotls.
We have the genomes we have the axolotl genome we have a frog genome. And now we ask a simple question from to frog allotls have legs.
Right. And even though we have all this information we actually have no idea how to predict in advance, whether frog allotls will have legs and if so will they be made entirely of axolotl cells or both both types of cells or what.
So these are the kinds of things that we would actually like to like to understand.
And the one thing that's very important as part of this process is specifically the algorithm that enables robustness and the handling of novelty and I'll show you a simple example of that.
So we discovered this a few years ago so here is a tadpole, and it has eyes here it has nostrils and a mouth down here, all of these things have to move around in order to get to a frog face.
Okay, so during metamorphosis the face has to deform the jaws have to come out the eyes have to move forward everything has to move.
So it was thought that somehow what the genome did was to give each piece of the face a particular direction and amount of movement and that that way standard tadpoles become standard fraud.
Because we created what we call Picasso tadpoles so so everything's in the wrong position the eyes are on top of the head the mouth is off to the side that everything is mixed up.
I'll show you in a minute how we do it.
But the amazing thing is that these animals become pretty much normal frogs, because all of these different organs move around through unnatural paths and sometimes they go too far and actually have to back up, but everything moves around until it gets to a
correct frog face, and then the remodeling stops. So, in fact what the genetics does specify is not a bunch of hardwired rearrangements, but a system that executes a really flexible error minimization scheme.
It's able to start off at incorrect or abnormal positions and still get to where it needs to be. This apparently matches William James's definition of intelligence, which is the ability to reach the same outcome despite perturbations and starting
configurations.
So how does this system know what a correct face is and how and how do we get there. So we've been thinking about this, this, this problem and we would like to my background is computer science and so to me all of this looks like a problem of information
at different levels. And what I would love to know is, could we go beyond the hardware and operating at this level, and ask about the algorithms how are these decisions being made what do the cellular collectives measure, what are
their modules or subroutines and how are these global patterning goals specified and stored.
And in particular how reprogrammable is any piece of biological hardware. So, in computer science there was this really interesting journey that that we took from this is this is what programming looked like in the 1940s and 50s.
In order to get the computer to do something different, you physically had to rewire it, you have to rearrange the hardware you have to move the wires.
But what computer scientists realized is that if your hardware is good enough. And I'm going to argue that biological hardware is definitely good enough.
What you can do is something really interesting you can reprogram the machine without touching the hardware basically by giving it stimuli or experiences, basically inputs.
It allows you to program in a much higher level language where you're not drowned in the details of the hardware or even the machine language, which are actually able to take advantage of some really high level types of programming strategies to get very complex
kinds of outcomes. And I'm certainly not arguing that living things are computers in this in the sense that they're now of course they're not built to the same architectures that that our current computers are.
So the idea of reprogrammable hardware and of controlling your controlling a system by inputs and stimuli as opposed to physical rewiring is very powerful.
So, what we try to do is to is to come up with a scheme where there's a there's more feedback here so that basically when the system is deviated from its normal target morphology, be that with injury or teratogenic drugs or pathogens or whatever.
When the system is deviated from this feedback loops kick in both at the level of genetics and physics and we're going to talk about this physical one here that try to minimize the error, the delta between where we are now and where we need to be.
This is a classic homeostatic loop it's what the thermostat in your house does it measures against the set point, and if error is beyond the tolerable amount it will undertake corrective action.
Several things to note here the first is that of course feedbacks are not new in biology everybody knows we have feedbacks.
But there's something something different here the first is that the set point of this process and every homeostatic system has to have a set point towards which it tries to reduce error.
The set point here is not a single number or scalar like pH or or a metabolic hunger rate is hunger range or something like that. It's actually a fairly complex set of information that in some rough course grain way describes what a correct anatomy should be.
Okay, so it's kind of a complex piece of information. The other thing is that this is very much a goal directed process now when I say goal directed. I don't mean something magical or or mysterious it's goal directed in the cybernetic sense.
We've had devices that are goal directed agents for the since the 40s and 50s. And all it means is that it's able to execute this error minimization loop.
The whole thing about systems that work like this is the following. When you want to change what they do. You don't have to be rewiring the hardware back here. If you understood how the set point was encoded, you could change the set point and get the exact same cells to build something
right and that's the amazing thing about any any system that utilizes this kind of architecture that you can actually make changes without even necessarily knowing how all the parts of the loop works all you have to do is rewrite the set point.
And so our strategy for some years now was was was this we tried to identify some of the mechanisms that work here in particular understand the homeostatic set point.
How does the tissue store the pattern towards which it tries to remodel. And then let's rewrite that pattern and let's let the cells build and that's part of trying to decode the this this aspect of the collective behavior of these cells.
So let's talk about how how we've been doing it so we have started looking at something called developmental bio electricity and I'm going to show you now our first of all the methods and so how do we do this, and then show you some proof of principal
application so why why is this interesting. And I want to point out at the beginning that, you know, all cells in vivo sit with within this complex morphogenetic field of information that tells them what to do as part of a larger unit.
This information comes in many flavors so chemical extracellular matrix tensions and stresses or biomechanics.
And of course bio electricity so bio electricity doesn't do this alone it works with all of this other stuff I'm just going to focus today on bio electricity because I think it's, it has a, it has a particular aspect to it which is that it's not just another piece of
that you need to know to understand anatomies. It's actually a computational layer that gives some privileged access to the control of complex anatomical features, it is the medium in which the computations are being made to make decisions about the length and the size and the shape of
accessing this this bio electricity gives you gives you a remarkable insight into into what's going on beyond bottom up molecular mechanisms.
So, the, the kind of inspiration for how to think about this we took from from directly from neuroscience in neuroscience.
This story of course will be familiar to everybody the hardware is is is simple you have a collection of cells each cell has ion channels in this in the plasma membrane.
They said voltage values across that's that's the resting potential which can go up and down, and it can propagate to the neighbors via these electrical synapses. Okay, so that's that's that's what's what's there.
And those kind of networks underlie this amazing software.
And here you can see this this this this physiology and a living zebrafish brain as the fish is undergoing whatever cognitive activities zebrafish can do, and you can see you can see here, the electrical, the electrical activity, and the commitment of neuroscience is that if we were able to
decode this if we understood how to read this information, we should be able to throw a computational approach, we should be able to figure out what the animal is remembering what it's thinking about what decisions it's making.
The semantic and functional cognitive structures are to be read out from the electrical activity of the brain, that's what we believe.
So that actually all cells do this. Okay, all cells have ion channels, most cells have electrical synapses known as gap junctions to their neighbors.
And we have undertook undertaken this this project to try to do the same kind of decoding so here's, here's an embryo, and we would like to read all the electrical conversations that bind the individual cells into a collective that can undertake
so anatomical homeostasis towards large states like like build a limb build a kidney and, and so on. And on the one hand, it's, it's strange and surprising to many people to think about somatic cells as having this kind of neuroscience like aspect to them as if
they're processing information they having having goal states and so on. On the other hand, if you ask where did neurons come from of course they didn't just appear out of nowhere they speed up evolution just speed optimized things that cells have been doing for a
really long time since around the time of bacterial biofilms. All of the components of of neurons that that are really important for this that the channels the neuro transmitter machinery all this stuff existed before, even before multi cellularity and
even bacteria, we're using this to coordinate information across the across the film. So we, we developed some tools to study this.
The first is just is just how to detect and model them. This is a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye, which basically just reveals in the living state with noninvasively so you don't have to poke the cells with with
electrophysiological tools, every every cell is now reporting around its membrane all the voltages this is an early frog embryo.
So in time lapse sorting out which cells are going to be left and right and dorsal ventral and so on.
And, in addition to that we do a lot of computational modeling so try to say well if we know what I own channels and pumps are in the membrane.
Can we explain why the voltage is the way it is and why it changes as a function of time, the way it does. And so let me show you a couple of native bio electrical patterns.
This is what we call the electric face this was discovered by Danny Adams in my group, and she used voltage dies to look at the frog embryo putting its face together. Okay, and so this is of course is a time lapse.
And what you can see this is one frame taken out for taken from that movie what you can see is that long before the genes come on to regionalize the face into the eye the mouth and everything else, all of the bio electrical
properties set up a pre pattern a scaffold that tell you where everything is going to be. So here's where the animals right eye is going to be the left eye will come in shortly.
Here is the, here's the mouth here that some placards, this bio electrical pattern is a native instructive pattern for gene expression and for anatomy and the reason we know it's instructive is because if you go in let's say with optogenetics or with other tools, and
you can change this electrical pattern, not move any cells but just change the pattern, then you can get, for example those Picasso tadpoles you can move, you can move organs around at will and I'm going to show you that in a minute.
So, so this is, this is a normal pattern that is necessary for correct craniofacial development. Here's a pathological pattern so this embryo was injected with a human oncogene, and so something like.
A KRAS mutation or something like that. And, and here it's going to form a tumor right and the tumor is going to start to spread. But before that happens before it becomes histologically apparent.
You can already see with this voltage die here are the cells that have depolarized and shut off the electrical connections to their neighbors in a way that's going to basically revert them back to their unicellular ancient lifestyle.
Once you're electrically disconnected from this grid, the rest of the animal becomes just external environment that computational boundary, whereas before it was large it was a group working on a liver or or you know our kidney or something
like that. It now shrinks to the level of a single cell and all your goals become single cell goals proliferate migrate to where life is good and so on. And they're and this this ends up being metastasis and conversion and metastasis.
So so this is a pathological pattern. So what we then developed was a set of tools that design that that were designed to allow us to manipulate these bio electrical gradients in vivo.
So if we thought they were functional we ought to be able to control them to get the collective to do something different. And so this is important to say that we do not do any external field application we don't have any electromagnetic components here there are no
electrodes there are no waves. There's no magnetism. It's all molecular physiology and the way it works is, you can, you have two things you can control in any tissue you can control which cells, electrically coupled to which other cells and so we target
these gap junctions we can mutate them we can open them close them, or you and this is basically synaptic the controlling synaptic plasticity, or we can control the various ion channels opening again opening and closing them to actually set the
of the individual cells and this would be the equivalent of some sort of intrinsic plasticity if this was neuroscience. And again, we can use dominant mutations of channels we can use drugs we can use optogenetics light and so on.
And so, when you do this, something very interesting happens now, when I first this was, you know, back while around the year 2000.
It was first setting up these tools and and we wanted to control bio these these bioelectric states. It was thought that resting potential is a housekeeping parameter. And basically the standard assumption was that if we if we perturb it, the cells would die and you would get
uninterpretable toxicity that was that was the thought. So I'm going to show you that that in fact that's not at all what happens because these bio electrical states are not just readouts and they're not just just yet more molecular machinery but they're
actually the information bearing medium for these large scale modifications. So one thing you can do is you can take some cells in the frog that are going to become gut so they're endodermal cells.
And you can inject one of several types of ion channels that will set up are in this region that's going to be part of the gut will set up a voltage pattern a distribution of voltage that's very similar to what happens when the native eyes come in.
And sure enough, if you recapitulate that pattern somewhere else, the cells are using that pattern to decide what they're going to build and that pattern tells them to build an eye and here they go they will build an eye out of endodermal cells.
Now, in the textbook, it will say that that only anterior ectoderm is competent to become eye up here. And that's true if you use canonical inducers like pack six the master regulator transcription factor.
But if you go upstream of that and actually re specify the bioelectric pattern, then you can induce these eyes anywhere on the tail and the gut anywhere you want. And if you make these tails, these eyes rather they can have all of the same components that normalize
have so they'll have lens and retina and optic nerve and so on. And here's an interesting thing if you label the cells that you've directly injected with the science channel let's say we label them with better beta galactic society so they're blue.
And this is a cross section through a lens sitting out in the flank somewhere, which you'll see is that there are two, two, two inductions here the first induction is by us, putting a in a imposing a particular bio electrical state that causes these cells to decide to become a lens.
That's the first induction. The second induction is that these cells, with their aberrant voltage potential, actually recruit their neighbors the brown cells here which are not labeled which were never directly modified by us, recruit them into this project of building this larger scale structure
around lens. So, so it's a non cell autonomous effect and when we see this again and again that there's this this this ability of these bio electrical signals to not just to specify cell fate, but but actually specify organ type and position and things like that.
So we can make eyes we can make a topic hearts here's a here's a secondary heart we can make limbs and brains and some other things and then many things that we can't yet make.
Let's let's look at another another example here's a planarian.
And one of the most interesting things is that if you chop off the head and the tail this middle fragment knows exactly how many heads it's supposed to have it puts one head here, it puts a tail here.
And the way it does that is because as soon as you amputate there's this voltage gradient that's set up where the red the depolarized region tells the worm how many heads it's supposed to have.
And so as we can go in and target this region using drugs using basically I own channel modifying drugs to depolarize this region and when you do that you get a two headed animal these cells are perfectly happy to make a head.
The information of how many heads you're supposed to have comes from this electrical gradient if you change the gradient they'll happily make two heads, you can make two heads, two headed animals you can make no head and animals.
All kinds of interesting behavioral experiments to be done that we can discuss if there's time.
But what's important here is that they're much like.
There's no there's no genomic editing here so so this is this is purely purely physiological.
And not only can I ask this animal to make a second head of the correct type.
I can actually ask it to make heads belonging to other species. So here's we took we started off with a triangular headed worm like this amputee the head per term for about 48 hours the ability of cells to talk to each other electrically.
And what happens is the electric circuit is unable to settle to the correct attractor. And when they do settle stochastically sometimes they settle to the correct shape, but sometimes they make round heads or flat heads, and in doing so they recapitulate.
The, the state of flat headed species like this people in a, or round headed species like this as Mediterranean. It's not just the shape of the head. It's also the shape of the brain, and the distribution of stem cells that is exactly like these other species.
Again, no genomic editing here perfectly wild type genome.
Once, once the electric circuit settles there's a good chance a little settle into an inappropriate attractor that's actually associated with a completely different head shape that in fact other species are using natively.
Now, you can also knock the system into attractors that are not being used to my knowledge by any system, and you can really, you can really get far from the normal planarian shape.
You can make animals that are spiky like this, you can make animals that are that are cylindrical like this or a combination of a flat animal with a with a tube growing out into the third dimension.
Now, I'm going to show you in a minute that this is what this is all about is is predictive control over large scale anatomy this is not about making weird, you know, aberrant teratologies and so on.
The only way is that we can show how much of this is actually under by electrical control, and then use computational techniques to gain to gain good, good predictive control over it.
And so, this is, and this is a good time to think about the role of the anatomy in the soul of the genome and the in the in the anatomy of this whole process.
The critical metaphor that we hear is that the DNA or the genome is the software and that the cell is the hardware that that interprets this.
And that's not a bad analogy at the single cell level when you're thinking about phenotypes of proteins and pathways, but at the level of anatomy, I would suggest a different metaphor.
A different metaphor that works better in to understand anatomical control is is this. Actually, what the genome does is specify all of the hardware that the cell gets to have.
So all of the specific ion channels that are here are determined by the gene expression. But we know from from from basic neuroscience and also from from computer technology, that if you make a very simple circuit this is this is a flip flop circuit
or if you if you nail down the hardware, what you can have as a circuit that can store multiple different pieces of information, depending on the current flow through the system and store it stably.
Okay, which is a memory a flip flop is a basic kind of memory, and you don't need to move or change any of the hardware in order to change to store a zero or one in this very simple electrical circuit.
So with our modeling, you can, you can see that the same thing is true. If you set up a field of a field of cells with a particular where every single cell is expressing exactly the same set of ion channels.
What you actually make is an excitable tissue, where very rich patterning can take place. It's a little bit like touring touring patterns right there's self spontaneous symmetry breaking and self organization.
It depends with a completely constant proteome, you don't need to change these ion channels, because they can open and close and so now all of the dynamics are at the electrical circuit level, not not with the proteins underneath.
And so the prediction of this of this way of thinking about is this, you should be able to edit the software meaning meaning change the information stored in the system, while keeping the hardware constant.
So in particular just to remind you, the, the, the piece of information that we want to change is the set point, we want to change the, the set point towards which cells are working in this error minimization scheme.
So let's let's think about how to do that so so here's our normal planarian we've cut off the head and the tail, we got the middle fragment we perturbed the electric circuit according to this model that we've developed.
Here's your two headed animal now we ask a simple question.
Here's our two headed animal, we give it, you know, give it a couple weeks to get everything settled down.
Cut off the primary head, cut off this crazy a topic secondary head. Some people think oh you somehow epigenetically reprogram this posterior tissue fine well we'll cut it off we'll throw it away.
All that remains is a normal middle fragment here that didn't have any head tissue in it.
We do this in plain water no more manipulations of any kind. The genome is wild type we haven't edited the genetics, the genomic sequence at all.
So surely the prediction would be that you should have, but you should get back to a single headed worm once you cut off this thing you should come back to you should be back to a single head of work.
The interesting thing is that if you actually model the state space of the electric circuit that's involved here, what you find is that there are there are multiple stable points one is here, a very stable point around the single headed shape like this, but there's
another stable point around the double headed shape. And so that suggests an interesting idea that is it possible that when you amputate this thing.
The bio electrical circuit will still remember that it needs to make two heads. And sure enough, that's exactly what happens. When you amputate these in perpetuity as far as we can tell forever, two headed animals will continue to give rise to two headed animals, even despite their
wild type genome in plain water no more manipulation. And we can in fact, if we want to we can, we can set the bio electric circuit back to normal and it goes back to being a single headed animal.
So a normal planarian body was as you're going to see is able to store a couple of different at least probably more but we've nailed down to ideas of what a correct planarian is supposed to look like.
And this is what this is this is how you can see this. So here's a single headed planarian. And if we look at the molecular markers the anterior marker is here in the head, not in the tail.
And if you amputate you get a perfectly normal single headed animal fine. Here's another anatomically normal animal again molecular markers are all normal anterior in the head, no anterior back here, that no anterior marker back here.
But if you amputate this one, suddenly you get a two headed animal why would you get a two headed animal because, in the meantime, what we've done is we've bio electrically changed the stable pattern to say no now you need to have two heads.
Now, here's the critical part of this. This electrical map here is not a map of this two headed animal. This electrical map is a map of this one headed animal, meaning that the electricity distribution is not simply a map of whatever the anatomy is
doing. The same single is single headed anatomy can store at least one of two different stable representations of what it's going to do if it gets injured in the future.
If you're interested in neuroscience and how counterfactuals are remembered in the brain. This I think is sort of the evolutionary precursor to being able to remember things that are not happening now either things that happened before, or might happen in the
brain. It's a counterfactual memory. It's the ability to store a representation of a of a worm towards which the fragment is going to build if it gets injured. So it sits perfectly comfortably as a single headed animal with this pattern, until you cut.
And at that point that that that that memory is no longer latent and it's actually becomes functional and that's how that's how we get that's what we get this this this propagation of these two headed worms.
So we are building some some very sort of quantitative molecular biophysical models to really understand the state space of the circuit to understand how the circuit minimizes free energy and eventually lands in one of these attractors hopefully the right one but not
necessarily the right one, and tying it into exactly the same formalism for how people in machine learning, think about networks electrical networks that can store patterns, and can actually repair those patterns when pieces of the information
that this is all very well trodden ground in in machine learning and we think that some of these same strategies that we use now, were discovered by evolution, long ago, and be beyond frog beyond worms.
So this, this is a kind of this is the beginnings of a of our roadmap for for regenerative medicine because what we found is that for example, if you have a frog and the frog frogs do not regenerate their legs the way that salamanders do you amputate
the leg 45 days later there's basically nothing.
And there's no there's no regenerate what we can do is we can apply a cocktail of ion channel drugs that serve as a stimulus to kickstart a very complex cascade.
So what you see here is immediately the msx one blastima marker becomes turned on the leg starts the leg starts growing.
So already you have the toes and here's a toenail, and eventually you get a very respectable leg here and it's touch sensitive and motile. Okay, so the animal is can you can use it.
It's a couple of interesting things about this one is that much like when we created an eye, or induced second head on the planarian inducing this leg.
We can provide all the information to micromanage the process. Right, we have no idea how to build a planarian head from scratch or how to make an eye or how to make a leg.
What we have found is a trigger for a sub routine that this that that that this this tissue already knows how to do.
And the decision for what it's going to do scar or produce various types of organs can be is part of an electric circuit that we can guide we can we can we can manage.
The second thing is that in keeping with this idea from the beginning that that one of the hallmarks of the collective intelligence of these cells and in responding to novel situations is that they can get to the final outcome through through
and if you actually look at this at this intermediate stage of this leg, this is nothing like what frog legs look like when they're developing in the first place.
So we'd eventually gets to a very good frog leg shape here basically indistinguishable from the control, but the intermediate path through morpho space the ability of the system to navigate that anatomical morpho space is amazing because it does not follow
the same path that frog limbs normally follow where they make a paddle and then they, you know, there's apoptosis that kills off the space between the digits and so on.
It's not what they do they grow almost like it's almost like a plant meristem where you get the central stock with this nail, and then off to the side you get these toes and eventually the whole thing remodels into a leg.
So the remarkable ability to get its job done in a in a different way.
So, now we, this is, this is not just things that apply to to frog and worm we've done we've done some work with David Kaplan and Lauren black and others on human mesenchymal stem cells and cardiomyocytes, and you can control the kinds of things that you can
control the DTRO differentiation proliferation wound healing.
But I think that's not what the bio electricity is for what the bio electricity is really for in terms of why evolution uses it and why we should be interested in is because it allows us to exploit the modular nature of the anatomical decision
to control very large scale outcomes not micromanage the, the, the details, and here I have to do a disclosure so David Kaplan and I are both co founders of this company called more fasciutical zinc, where we're trying to take the things that we learned about frog leg regeneration
so our goal is now we're now in rodents trying for limb regeneration using the same strategies and using these wearable bioreactors, and the idea is to again kickstart regeneration not micromanage it not try to babysit all of the different cell types and and and growth factors and
everything else has to go in, but, but kickstart a trigger very early on, and convince the cells with an aqueous protective environment that it's basically that that regeneration can proceed in the way that it would in a salamander or in an embryonic mammal.
During this, during this adult phase. Okay.
So, so that's that's kind of where where one of the research programs is going.
I should point out this that it is already known how it is that voltage change impacts the transcriptional machinery.
People often sort of say that that it would be great if we understood how voltage controls gene expression.
We basically do there are we already know about six ways that that voltage change transduces down into second message your pathways and controls gene expression.
This has a typical mechanisms like like calcium which neuroscience is very familiar with other things like voltage sensitive phosphatases neuro transmitter transporters.
We already know how this works at a single cell level this transduction machinery is has been has been dissected.
In fact, also some of the downstream targets have been identified so the genes that are controlled by this all of your favorite BMP sonic hedgehogs FGF all of these kinds of things are in fact the redistribution of morphogens and the examples that I showed you.
All of this, this is known both from specific candidates, and through unbiased, let's say RNA seek and and the micro rate text of things.
We know this but but but what's interesting is that these, these answers as to how it works on a single cell level have been fairly unhelpful in understanding the large scale picture that we're really interested in.
There's very much analogous to this multi scale problem in neuroscience you can, you can track the pathway, and we do and in every paper you have to sort of go from the channel to the transduction machinery which genes are downstream so you can do all this.
But but that actually leaves open some some much deeper questions about how the collective makes decisions and so for that reason we make the we've made the simulator and this was created by our center member and collaborator Alexis Pytak.
And what allows us to do is to build models of both molecular networks like grns together with the various biophysics steps that happen, and you can simulate every cell having these various circuits, and then you can try to build a full stack model
that separates from the molecular steps to the tissue level physiology like every cell has various channels what is the electrical pattern and they're going to be in this tissue.
What does that look like on an axial polarity level you know where's the head where's the tail. And then, can we extract from this the actual rules of the decision making.
If we turn this into a kind of algorithmic description that looks like this, that makes it much easier for us to control the process, because now this is almost like a high level programming language where we can see.
Okay, here are the measurables and here are the decision points that the circuit is using to control large scale patterning modules like make a head make an eye and so.
And then what we would what we're what we're doing is is is literally integrating every part of this so that you can build it up, and then exert all your manipulations at this level.
So you could have your simulator and ask questions like why does the, the head tail gradient rescale when you cut the planarian into four pieces you know how does that work.
And that and you can't see that by by drilling down into single cells you have to come back out with that with that information and build these these collective collective kinds of models.
And the other nice thing about these models is that they are the perfect fodder for machine learning approaches to do two things to infer better models from data. Okay, and we've we've done we've done some of that.
And also then to interrogate those models for interventions. And so here's some software that that anyone can can can play with if you want to download and kind of simulate all this.
I've shown that you can actually use machine learning to find models that are really good at explaining functional data sets. In other words, you know you did something to the system and then this and then something else happen.
What what is a model explains that, and then find these kind of needle in the haystack interventions that are that are ways in which you could perturb it to get it to do what you want.
So that that I think is the kind of the future of using this for regenerative medicine. So let's, let's talk specifically about a couple of applications in the last in the last few minutes.
The first thing the first thing is is again the the cancer issue so so I've shown you that you can you can track the, the, the, the shrinking of these kinds of computational boundaries from from from that of the organ or whole body
scale to single cells, and you can use this as there's an obvious application here as a kind of diagnostic modality right.
There's screening for cancer and so on, but functionally what's what's really important is that first of all, you can induce basically a conversion of normal melanocytes so so here they are these these little little black dots or pigment cells
or melanocytes.
So if you summarize a very specific cell population in the animal, not the melanocytes themselves but but a different cell population, we call them instructor cells for an obvious reason, they those cells tell the melanocytes what to do in particular to stay nice
cooperative melanocytes under control if you block their ability to signal, what happens is basically metastatic melanoma, these normal melanocytes convert to these crazy.
And kind of a long stringy things that start to crawl or crawl away, they dig into the brain they dig into the neural tube they start to invade here they are all through the blood vessels, this is basically exactly like a melanoma type of behavior.
And you can see here, these blue cells these are the ones that we actually depolarized, they are the ones that are now failing to keep the normal melanocytes behaving correctly and the melanocytes are just at this point they're they're they're going on their own.
So it's a voltage change in the environment, there's nothing genetically wrong with these animals are no oncogenes there were no carcinogens know nothing nothing like that.
But but this voltage change is a is a physiological switch away from the cooperation of cells toward embryogenesis and towards single cell, single cell behavior.
Now what's cool is that you can override this. So if we inject an oncogene and they make these tumors of course they're labeled with the red fluorescent protein.
What you can do is co inject the channel, and you can force these cells to stay electrically coupled to their neighbors, despite what the oncogene is trying to get them to do.
And here while while that dominant negative KRAS p53 whatever while they're blazingly expressed, there's no tumor is the same animal there's no tumor because these cells are coupled to this electrical network that forces them towards a to a to a
proper tissue fate. Okay, so that's so that's so that's where our sort of cancer applications are going is to.
And we've done this with light with optogenetics and so on. And now we're in human human cells to try to try to use this to target target carcinogenic behavior in human cells.
The other thing that is important is again to think about the level of control that's possible with this.
This is a normal tadpole brain so you see for brain mid brain and hind brain. And what you can do is if you, for example, introduce a mutated notch protein so notches very important neuro genesis gene, you can mutate it and introduce a dominant
mutation you can see for brain is basically gone mid brain and hind brain and just a bubble. These animals have no behavior to speak of the, they, they, you know, they lay there they do nothing.
It's the same thing with alcohol nicotine various teratogen exposures. What you can do is build a computational model and again this is the work of Alexis pie tech pie who's a staff scientist in my group in our and a few collaborators.
What you can do is you can build a computational model that asks a simple question, what determines the shape and size of the brain.
And there's a particular bioelectrical pattern that's required for the brain. And then under on these backgrounds of teratogens or even not mutation.
You can ask the model a question you can say, if this pattern is disturbed, such as it is here, what channels would I have to open or close to get back to the correct pattern.
And the model told us and it said there's a particular channel HC and to which can help us sharpen these boundaries, even though there are massive defects in the notch signaling and you know with these various other pathways, you can still reinforce
these boundaries by opening HC and to, and sure enough, if you do it with drugs, or if you do or if you just miss express HC and to, you can get back to a normal brain shape, a normal brain gene expression and in fact normal IQ these animals get their behaviors
and their learning rates back.
So, so here's what this is. This is using a very specific computational model to to to rationally manipulate the electrical signaling to get back to a very complex organ morphogenesis.
So the whole, the whole sort of roadmap looks a little bit like this, if we already have expression data profiling data on which tissues in the body express which channels so that's already known.
This needs needs a lot more work which is if you knew what the voltage pattern was supposed to be in various healthy tissues under various conditions. So basically physiomic profiling is needed.
Then we have this computational simulation engine, which is able to say, if you want to go from the incorrect pattern to the correct pattern, which of these channels which you have to open and close.
And that tells you immediately what cocktail of ion channel drugs, you would need to use. And so we've, we've developed this, this pipeline you can you can again, you can you can play with it here and and and choose your tissue and so on.
The idea is that something like 20% of all drugs or ion channel drugs, and these things form an incredibly convenient toolkit of what we call them electroseuticals, because if you have the right computational model, you can repurpose these which and the human
safety data is is is done on on these things people already take them for all kinds of all kinds of uses, and they have a massive applicability in tweaking the bio electrical signals now.
And the next thing about this kind of approach is that, once the bioelectric circuit has made its decision that downstream steps that are in second messengers and gene expression everything else, you can be as long as you want so for example in the case of the
frog, a one day 24 hour application of a particular cocktail gives you 13 months of leg growth.
Right. And the, you know, it's it's you don't have to micromanage that whole process it's just figuring out what electrical state is going to shift the tissue towards a particular goal state that all of the cells are going to work towards.
So, I'm just going to close here and summarize as follows.
There's an important layer of physiological decision making that sits between the genotype and the anatomy, and it's becoming a really tractable target for biomedicine and also synthetic by engineering, because we can now see how the electrical dynamics that are operating
in that tissue encode particular anatomical layouts towards which the cells continue to build and evolution apparently discovered very early on that this electrical signaling is a really convenient medium for computation and global decision making.
It's not an accident that all nervous systems use it and and all of our computer technology uses it.
And especially the voltage gated ion channels are basically voltage gated current conductance is their transistors, right, and that's that's a very powerful architecture that evolution found long before we did for forming feedback loops memory circuits and so on.
And we think that cracking this bioelectric code can help reveal how cell networks make decisions in large scale anatomy, not just how individual cells decide what type of cell they're going to be, but actually the the real question of growth and form where where do these
complex patterns reside and we can now rewrite some of these patterns such as for example in the planarian or in the in the frog and new machine learning tools are coming online to help us design strategies for all kinds of all kinds of applications.
I would like to thank the people in my group who did the work. These are all the postdocs and students and, and, and others who did the work that I showed you today.
Here are some of our collaborators who are working with us of course the model systems that we work with all kinds of all kinds of animals, and our funders very grateful to them.
Again, Disclosure, Morphosuticals Inc is the company for our frog limb regeneration work. And, you know, just in the end I always like to show a video of these two headed animals. The first time I reported these data at a meeting, someone stood up and said that's impossible those animals can't exist and so now I make sure that I bring a video.
