I guess an underlying theme for what interests me the most, in biology and science in general,
to look for simple underlying principles, and my favorite, one of my favorite postures
paintings is this one that kind of illustrates that point where, as you can tell here, it goes in
this series of plates depicting a bull going from removing more and more detail until it gets to
the essence of the bull. And that's sort of my scientific reto that may be not fully embraced
in biology universally as it is embraced in math and physics and chemistry. And what I think is
one of the sort of big problems in the way biologists, and I mean by that mostly experimental
sort of mainstream biomedical science type of biology, is that we are addicted to complicated
and devalue what's simple and often confuse it with what's simplistic. And in my definition that
say simple is when you get rid of anything that's not essential for understanding the problem.
Simplistic is when you remove something that is important, and so it's you have to
get the right intuition not to confuse it. And complicated is when you add things that are
non-essential and that's I think we're all experiencing that phase in my medical research
now where there is too much of non-essential is added because methods are available to generate data.
And so that's what often makes complex systems look complicated, whereas as you all know,
the complex systems are not complicated. They have underlying simple rules. So what I chose to
talk about today is one of the aspects, one aspect of biology that we're interested in in lab,
which has to do with tissue biology and I would say cellular sociology or social
lives of cells and because tissues are complex systems composed of multiple
agents that are cells that interact in some way and generate all kinds of properties that we try
to understand. And the properties that we see these are observables and they don't tell us what
the rules are that generated them and that's sort of the main interest in that area for me.
So we think about the notion of tissue of course is very familiar. It's a textbook notion. It's
very commonly used. We all kind of sort of know what we mean when we say tissues, but at the same
time they're not well defined. If we try to give a definition to a cell, then we're fine to the
organ to organ systems. We can give formal definitions, but for tissues we actually can't
and all the available definitions are they're quite ambiguous
as our distinctions between tissues where one tissue stops and other starts and so forth. So
traditional classifications that are divide them into four major types, epithelial, connective,
muscle, neuronal. It has a limited utility. Mostly when we think in terms of development
of organism, when we think in terms of pathology, in terms of any kind of biology that operates at
the tissue level, we don't think of tissues as epithelial versus neuronal and so on. It's always
we think of it as a collection of cell types that belong to all these different types of origin.
So that's the first problem. So we are kind of on a shaky ground to begin with,
because we're dealing with something that's ill-defined. And that leads to these major gaps
in our understanding of tissues, what are the patterns of cell organization within tissues,
what aspects are pre-programmed versus emergent, and what are general themes and what are special
cases. And that's again something that I think biologists appreciate less than let's say physicists
distinguishing special case from general cases. And that's what makes this whole area so interesting
and challenging and fascinating to understand. To use tissue biology as sort of an umbrella term
for understanding social organization of cells to think of cells as agents in a complex system.
And so this is to just illustrate what exactly our gaps in understanding are. If we compare
organismal biology, cell biology, and tissue biology, it's very clear that in tissue biology we
are limited by understanding not so much by data, but by understanding. So in organismal biology we
can tell that these animals that look drastically different, they're all variations on the theme
of a mammal. And we can tell that there are some deviations from the common theme that we see in
whales, shrews and so forth. But we can imagine a generic mammal with all the universal parts,
all the organ systems, they all have a central nervous system to launch the kidneys and so forth.
And we know how they function, we connect it and we can draw a generic like a schema of a mammal.
And then we can also say that a mammal is a special case of vertebrate which is more general
schema and so forth. If we go to cells, the biology cell level is the same. We can look at this and
these are dramatically different cells, dramatically different looking cells, especially if they were
drawn to scale, it would be even more dramatic difference. And yet we know that this is all
variation on the common theme of eukaryotic cell or mammalian cell shown here on the right.
And we are not fooled by the fact that the most abundant and most easily accessible cell type,
which is a red blood cell, actually doesn't have a nucleus in mammals. We don't conclude from that
that most cell types don't have nucleus and that therefore this is something essential and important
part of the same. So we are not confused by that because we know enough cell biology to tell that
this is a special case. And the reason I'm emphasizing this is because in here it's an obvious
case of general versus special. But when we lack that understanding, we can be confused by looking
at something that's most common, most observable, and we don't have the right intuition to tell
if it's a general case or a special case. So at tissue level, at the cell level, at organismal
level, we have that type of knowledge. But if we look at the tissue level with different tissues and
then now we can't tell whether these tissues coming from different organs all represent
variations on a theme. And what that generic theme is, and we cannot draw that generic tissue the
way we can for generic cell or generic organism. And we don't know if there is one theme and these
are all some kind of deviations or variations on that theme, or there may be more than one thing,
or maybe there are no common themes at all. But presumably there are common things because all
tissues have to solve the same set of problems. They have to solve a problem of having the right
cell type in the right ratios, right quantities, right spatial arrangements and so forth. They
have some of the others. And these are the same problems every tissue and every animal has to
solve. And presumably it's been solved once in the beginning and then everything was built on that
solution. And therefore, we have a reason to think that there are general principles and
general themes and everything is some variations on these themes. And some of these cases may indeed
be special cases. And that's what we want to understand. And that's what we currently don't
understand. So instead we have this is a picture like this, which is a textbook picture of what's
supposed to be tissue. And so the questions we want to understand is what the rules that define,
for example, cellular composition of tissues, how these different cell types know that they belong
there in the right amounts in the right proportions in the right locations and so forth.
And if we approach it from the way that generally we approach something unknown, we try to kind of
catalog things. We describe them by shapes by whatever some properties that we can measure.
Nowadays, we do it by single cell analysis by imaging and so forth. And we generate this
ever more complete catalog of characteristics. And that catalog doesn't bring us any closer
to addressing the questions I mentioned in the previous slide. And there is a little doubt that
having ever more complete description of cells and tissues using whatever next generation
methodologies might be that may image every single molecule, let's say in so forth, the
amount of data will grow astronomically. And yet it's not going to bring us any closer to
addressing the questions that I mentioned in the previous slide. And let's just use an analogy here
for let's say if you're an alien and you're doing PhD thesis on human social structure,
you came to Earth and you look at people and you have these very powerful alien technologies that
allow you to characterize everything you want about every human being. And you get the characteristics
like names, height, weight, color of eyes, color of hair, insulin, glucose measurements,
heart rate, and you catalog that increasingly. You know how many cells that person has versus
that person has. And clearly that kind of data would be completely useless to understand
what the human social structure is. On the other hand, if you approach it from a different
perspective, you look at the human social group and you start noticing that there is some ways that
these different individuals relate each other that may define not identities like identity
characteristics like name, height, weight, and so forth. But rather that some of them are parents
and some of them are children, some of them are husbands and wives, some of them colleagues,
some of them friends, some enemies, and so forth. And what all these words mean, these are categories.
So there's a category of the parent, category of scientists, category of neighbors. But these
categories are defined if we compare category of a parent or neighbor or friend versus the
category of a good person or bad person or a scientist or a profession. So the profession
category is still the cataloging category. It's just like the names and heights and whatever
body mass. Parent, friend, neighbor, these are categories that are defined by relations.
And what I think is needed, we have the notion of a cell type and we have increasingly detailed
characteristics of cell types. And that's just like getting more and more data about individuals.
But what we need is to go from cell types, which is a useful and fundamental notion
to the notion of cell categories. And the way they can be defined is just like the
aliens who define social structure. They need to be defined in terms of relations.
So just like relation parent-child provides deep insight into social structure or relation
friends and enemies and so forth. Those are provides deep insights that
can explain social structure. Similarly, if we define cell relations,
appropriate types of what would be the appropriate types of relations, that will
give us insight into social organization of cells. And so what I think we need to do is to,
rather than being obsessed with getting more and more granular data about the identity
characteristics, we need to define some categories based on relations. And so we need to ask
what are different cell types equivalent in some ways in terms of their roles in
tissue organization. So that would define their relation, right? So if you have a teacher in
one school, teacher in another school, they may teach different subjects, but they're defined
by the relation of teacher and student. And if we know that relation, then we can say, okay,
there's a category of teacher and there's category of student. So what are the appropriate
relevant categories for cells? And also, I would mention that not all relations are equally
informative, right? So the category, some get some relations are more fundamental than others.
So the same would apply to cells. And so we can define this, what would be called the
cause. So relations here, I mean, in more like in mathematical terms, like the way the relations
are defined on sets, and they can be symmetric, reflexive, transitive, and so on. It's in that
kind of spirit of the way that relations defines on sets, it's basically a way to partition set.
So we have a set of cells and what are different ways we can partition it, just like we can take
social group and partition it into parents, children, teachers, students, and so on.
And that I think is what is missing and what's limiting, that we don't have that kind of a
perspective. And this is something we are actually working on, sort of from theory perspective,
I'll just give a sense of what we're thinking now, because we don't have a complete list of that yet.
So this is the visual representation, what I mean, that we go from cell type paradigm,
where we describe cell types, type A, B, C, and D, to cell relations paradigm, which will define
cell categories. And here, for example, one relation will define between these two cell types,
another relation between these two cell types, and so on. And importantly, this relation, let's
say relation A, may apply not just for this epithelial and this mesenchymal cell, it may apply
to other pairs of cells that belong to different types. And that's what's critical, because that's
where we hit the wall when we try to understand general principle, and then we find, oh,
macrophage is doing something here, so therefore macrophage is a cell type, it has this kind of a
property. And then we don't find that example somewhere else and say, oh, whoops, it's not
generalizable. It may not be generalizable for cell type, but as a relation it would be. So that's
the general idea. And what are the types of relations? So I'll just use a few examples to
illustrate it. And the first example also deals with the notion of what is the general theme and
tissue organization. And if we think about what's the simplest setup for an animal,
we would see that all animals have epithelial mesenchymal units as the most fundamental,
most ancient units of organization of tissues. There are no animals that don't have epithelial
mesenchymal units. Even the simplest, like spongy and plakozor, that's basically, they pretty much
don't have anything else, but that's what you have to have an animal. And they always have
a particular type of arrangement. Epithelial cells, of course, form a polarized sheet.
Mesenchymal cells are underneath and they're separated by basement membrane. So that's a
general structural setup. But what's interesting going beyond that is that there is a particular
type of relation between mesenchym and epithelium. And that relation in one instance is based on
a symmetry in information transfer. So mesenchymal cells, for example, have positional information
encoded by Hox genes. That translates into the choice of appropriate morphogen signals that
they produce, for example, and then epithelial cells have several fade choices. And then mesenchymal
cells through this morphogen signal dictate the fade choice that would be appropriate for a given
positional information. So we have this type of instructional relation here. And this is seen
as a common theme in development where mesenchymal will affect the epithelium to shape it into
different organs, different spatial structures and so forth. And you can particularly well see
to this development of different types of glands, which you can see in the next slide even better.
We can say now you go from this generic organization of epithelium mesenchym. Mesenchymal is not shown
here for simplicity. And then you can get all kinds of structures through a process of continuous
transformation. So if you think about it as geometric transformation, it's an example of
continuous transformation. There's nothing fundamentally new added here. All that happens
is continuous transformation. These are all topologically in bearing. And that means that
by just using that simple module and just adding the variables that affect the degree of branching,
you can generate all sorts of structures. And from a simple gut tube, you can go to making
various types of glands and ultimately you can make pancreas and liver and lungs and all by
process of continuous transformation. So that's how powerful that effect of a relation between
mesenchym and epithelium is. And of course, this goes back to Mangolton-Steven classical
experiments of transplanting epidermis from one part of a bird to another part of the bird and
observing that the appendages formed by epidermis are entirely defined by the underlying dermal
structure, which is underlying mesenchym. And from that came the notion that mesenchym has some
information about the map of the body, which we now is encoded by Cops genes, and that the
epidermis or epithelium has several features, in this case forming different kinds of appendages,
feathers of different sorts of scales, and that's dictated by mesenchym. So now we take that. So
here we're talking as biologists, mesenchym, epidermis, feathers, and we abstract from that and say,
okay, we have one type of cell, let's call it M cell, doesn't have to be mesenchym. We have another
type of cell, let's call it E cell, doesn't have to be epithelial. And we define this as categories
based on the relation between them. And the relation is as follows. M cell has some information
in one instance of positional information. E cell has some fate choices. In one instance,
this would be feathers and things like that. And M cell dictates the fate choice of E cell.
And this we can generalize them and sell, but these are definitions of these two categories of
cell that are based on the relation between them. And now we don't have to be attached to dermals,
feathers, scales, and things like that. Now we can say there are two categories of cell.
And in addition to dermal and epidermal, as a relation between M and E, we can have
other types of biological scenarios. For example, M cell could be niche cell and E cell could be
stem cell because they also have the same relation. Niche cell defining fate choice of stem cells,
cell renewal differentiation and so forth. Then we have relation in immunology between
dendritic cell and T cells. So dendritic cells have some information about what kind of pathogen
they encounter. Naive T cells, which is T cells that haven't been yet encountered any signals,
they have fate choices. They can become different types of effector cells, memory cells, and so forth.
What dictates that fate choice signals produced by dendritic cells? Because dendritic cells have
that information, in this case it's not positional information, but information they receive them
encountering pathogens. And more generally, we can say for any control circuit, including
homicidal control circuits, sensors and effectors are two types of the circuit that where sensors
has some information about whatever it monitors. And the effector can do something about it,
has some choices. Thermostat and AC, for example, like thermosensor knows what
temperature is, AC has options to increase or decrease to turn on and off and so forth. Same
with beta cell and liver, beta cell knows what glucose concentration, liver knows what to do
about it. When beta cell tells it what to do through insulin. So this is a general relation.
What are other possible types of relation? I'm not going to dwell on many of them, but I will
just mention one or two more. So the second type is a functional relation. And this relates to a
more familiar notion of division of labor. So here we have a classical textbook division of labor
when two cells are specialized on performing two different functions, A and B, independently of
each other. The second type of relation would be division of labor, would be when two cell
types both contribute to the same function. And if you remove either of them, there is no function.
So modern neuron and skeletal muscle form a motor unit, and you need both types of cells to have
that function of movement. So they are functionally complementary. So that's now a type of relation.
Here we can say this is also a relation, but it's a null relation. Here it's a complementary,
functional complementarity. The third type of relation that hasn't been described in literature,
but I think is equally important, is a relation when one cell type is specialized on a particular
function. Another cell type is fully dedicated just supporting the function of the other cell.
So example would be, for example, again, this could be modern neuron, and the supporting cell
would be Schwann cell. So the whole purpose of life for Schwann cell is to support function
of the neuron. Neuron is the one that performs primary function. Schwann cell just helps it to
perform it better. There are neurons without Schwann cells. There are no Schwann cells without
neurons. Schwann cell doesn't have meaning outside of neuron. It's like a gold player and caddy.
You can play both without a caddy, but caddy without a gold player makes no sense.
And that's what how some cells are, a pericyte and the trivial cell, the same example and so forth.
So there are many cell types, particularly in more complex metazones, that are of this type,
where they perform supportive functions. And then other cell types perform primary functions.
So here we have, again, a relation. It's like
somebody who has, let's say, servants, like cooks and drivers, cleaners.
There is that type of relation. So what happens is that the driver, cleaner and cook, in this case,
are defined by their relation to whoever they serve. And what that also illustrates is the way
that this type of relation evolves is that when this cell type gets more and more specialized on
particular function, what it means that when you specialize on something, it means you do
fewer things better and better. Fewer and fewer things, better and better. If you're like a
famous, whatever, piano player and you don't have time to clean and shop and do chores,
you hire people who do that for you. But what it means you delegate some of the functions
to supporting staff, supporting cells. So Neuron delegates a lot of functions to
weigh your cells, for example. And the same is true for all the other primary cell types.
They can be bothered to perform the same functions if you expect them to be
optimal at performing one function. That's what happens with humans. Also, of course,
we get progressively more specialized. And in the process of that, we delegate some of
the functions to other cells. And that in itself raises an interesting question, what can you
delegate? So obviously, you can delegate functions that are not cell autonomous, but you cannot
delegate cell autonomous functions. You can delegate cooking to somebody you hire to cook for
you, but you cannot delegate eating. So certain types of functions are delegated and these are
non-cell autonomous functions. And the genes that perform these functions can now be expressed in
cells that are supporting, that perform the supportive function. And that's what's seen
in expression profiles and tissue-specific characteristics of cells that are ubiquitous
in tissues, like macrophages and so forth. So these are some other examples. I'm not going to
go through all of them, but these are some other examples of cell relations
that we can think of. There's, I already mentioned, instructive relation, functional relations,
then there could be supply-consumer relation, hierarchical relations, and there could be
also relations based on mutual exclusivity. For example, if cell A is present somewhere,
it's never in a company of cell B. These are mutually excluded. We don't know, I mean,
the examples like this exist, but we don't know if these are, they need to be defined
in more strict way. This is more for illustration purposes here. Okay, so from here, we can now
go back to this picture we had before, and now we can look at it in very different light.
We can say, okay, what do we have here? We have these various types of cells. They're not all
equally important because you can remove some of the cells and tissue will retain its architecture.
You can remove T cells, and you lose some functionalities, but you still have the same
tissue architecture. You remove fibroblasts and colapses. So they are unequal in that regard.
And what that means is that some cells are more important than others for tissue architecture.
They all have their distinct functionalities, but in terms of tissue architecture, they're not
equal. And that raises the question, which ones are the most important ones? And so on. We can
also now look at it from the perspective in structural relations, functional relations,
and so on. So now instead of being concerned with cell shapes and whatever, transcriptomics,
proteomics, these sort of things, we can label them as different categories, and the patterns
would start emerging. And so if you imagine them just as little circles, it is different colors,
and we defined relations between colors. So the colors will represent categories.
And so if we start thinking about what are the most fundamental categories and what are the most
important, important cell types for tissue architecture, for organization of tissues,
not for functionalities, for organization of tissues. As I mentioned in the very beginning
of MetaZone Life, it was a particular mesenchymal unit with the basement membrane between,
and that's what led to diversification of various types of organization. In vertebrates, I think
it's, we have a minimal tissue unit that is based on that original theme. And that minimal unit
consists of four types of cells, so four categories. Three of them correspond to types, usually,
for most organs, but these are categories. So we have a category of a tissue-specific cell
that is responsible for core tissue function. This is the cell type responsible for the primary
function of the tissue. In the brain, it would be neuron, in the gut, it would be gut epithelium,
and so forth. And then we always have three additional cell types that are nearly universally
present in all tissues, and that includes, of course, microvascular endothelium. It includes
stromal cell, fibroblast-like cells, and it includes tissue resin macrophage. So these three
correspond to cell types performing supportive functions. So now we define this minimal unit
based on relation between these supportive cell types that are universal in every tissue,
and tissue-specific primary cell type that obviously perform these different tissues,
because it performs tissue-specific primary functions. Now in the gut, we have, let's say,
intestinal epithelium, then we have these three cell types. They are not involved in the primary
function of the gut, which is digestion absorption, but without these cell types, of course, it
will do cells, you know, perform that function. In the brain, we have neurons and glial cells,
in the same idea. So these supportive cell types are always there to
support the function of the client cells. So we can call this a client cell by analogy with
chaperones. And so then what we have is that client cells delegate some of the functions to
supportive cell types. And some delegated functions need to be performed all the time
constitutionally, and this become tissue-resistant cells. But some functions only need to be performed
on demand. And these are delegated to cells that are not resident in the tissue, but can be
recruited to the tissue. And this is the case for vertebrates, or any animal in this close circulation.
And that would be the case of inflammatory cells. So neutrophils, you only need them when there is
an infection. Whereas macrophage, you need in tissue all the time, because macrophages have
many jobs. They are like butlers. They can do a lot of things. But when there is a really big
problem, you need specialists, and there would be neutrophils. And so then we can think of
the way that the biological development of tissue architecture goes from this base case,
which is what the beginning of animal life history, as well as the beginning of any animal
during development, embryonic development. It starts with a pithelium, then generates mesenchymal
time by EMT. And then from there, you go through this process of instructive relations and generate
all kinds of tissues. But the derived case that is universal theme now for vertebrate
architecture, organization, this is only talking about compositional organization,
not spatial organization. The general theme would be that you always have the primary cell type,
which is the primary function of tissue. It's tissue specific and three supportive cell types.
And that's what we can think of as a first approximation. This is of course,
in very broad strokes, and this is only thinking about the compositional organization of tissue,
not structural. But even from that perspective, there are many deep questions one can ask.
We don't know the answers to most of them, but mostly I would say because the questions
have not been asked that way. So one has to do with one of my big interests for me
is understanding biology of cell communication and particularly biology of growth factors.
So every cell in the animal, every normal cell that is not cancer cell,
requires specific growth factors to stay alive and to be present in the tissue.
The cells that don't have their specific growth factor will die by default.
So cell composition of tissue is dictated by local availability of these linear restricted
growth factors for macrophage to BCS at one from fibroblast PDG of beta and so forth in
endothelial cells, whether they're Jeff and other angiogenic factors, and this cell will have
different growth factors depending on what the identity is. So then the question becomes that
the cellular composition, because it's a function of local availability of specific growth factors,
what kind of cell, in what amounts, in what location you will have in the tissue is entirely
dictated by provision, local provision of growth factor in particular place in particular amounts.
So then the question then becomes what are the rules and mechanisms that ensure production of
appropriate growth factors in the right amounts in the right places. And that because we don't
know those rules, I think that that provides a major, major conceptual gap in our understanding
of development and tissue biology. So we're interested in this question and this is of course,
this is not one set of rule, it needs a systematic study and of course in the lab we can only do
you know proof of concept studies. So the question is as follows, so the growth factors of that type,
the type that are called linear restricted growth factors that are necessary for each cell to survive.
Production of these growth factors is typically, the source of them is another cell type.
If this is growth factor for cell Y, it's typically produced by cell X, which is a different cell type.
So cell X makes growth factor for cell Y and the amount of that growth factor determines
the number of cell Y's where they are, location, because these growth factors typically have
small diffusion radius and they're often deposited on ECM. And then the question becomes how does
these cells, cell X knows which growth factor to make and how much to make. Okay, we can say
well which growth factor to make could be hard wires, it could be part of the identity that if
you cell X you program to make growth factor for cell Y. That's fair assumption and there are cases
when it is indeed the case that it's a produces, it already knows which growth factor to make.
In other cases it needs to be tall and it can be told by cell Y itself. Cell Y tells it that I
need, my identity is Y and I need growth factor that supports cell Y. And what that communication
is like, that's the part that we also interested in understanding and we still don't know all the
details but we know that there is indeed this type of communication. So the question is what
determines this controls the appropriate production level and I'll go through this example
very quickly because it was published but we use microphase fibroblasts as a case study to,
as a proof of concept study to characterize in exchange of these two growth factors which are
well defined for these cells, it's CSF1 for macrophage produced by fibroblast and PDGF for
fibroblast produced by macrophage. Now what we found in that study a few years ago is that if we
define conditions such that if you take individually the cell type and don't provide
exogenous recombinant growth factors they will die as expected, each of them will die but because
they can each produce growth factor for the other guy we ask whether they can support each other
under those conditions where there is no external growth factor and they can indeed and not only
that they could also reach stable ratio even if we vary initial ratio by 100 fold they all
convert on stable ratio which implies that they're not simply feeding each other growth
factor that would lead to uncontrolled growth but rather there is some kind of a circuit design of
the exchange of growth factor that results in stability and indeed there is a circuit design
that results in stability and it's shown here so that's what we found both experimentally
and through modeling that the for the two cell types to be stable one has to be limited by
carrying capacity which is limitation external to the system just like in ecology carrying
capacity space food and so forth and the other cell type has to be limited it has to have a
negative feedback on a growth factor it receives from the first cell type and as long as these
two conditions are met you can you will have a stable system but these conditions are met only
in 24 out of 144 total cases of total number of possible cell circuit topologies of them only
24 stable and all of them have these two conditions met and this is what it would look like if x1 is
here would be fibroblast x2 macrophage this is a phase portrait of that and behavior we have the
same experimental data and this is the predicted on state which is what we observe and as you can
see the system will evolve towards the stable on state and this is stable off state when there are
no cells but what was interesting in this case it also we also found additional on state stable
on state for one cell type for fibroblast but only when the density of the cell was above some
threshold and in ecology this type of phenomenon is known as Ali effect Ali effect is means that
population will undergo expansion only if it is above some critical density so for example
and for penguins they cannot survive in the in the wild if there is not enough of them because
they need to huddle to keep each other warm pack of wolves one wolf would not survive because they
hunt in packs and things like that so this is Ali effect and we see that there is Ali effect in
cell ecology as well and specifically for fibroblast it requires if they reach critical density they
now can support each other without macrophage and the reason for that is this auto crime scene
and that signal is provided by ptgf alpha and hbgf and so that that's what type of scenarios we see
that for this is stable observed state with auto crime signal you have this additional stable state
that could be pathological because when you have fibroblast without macrophage this is basically
the case of fibrosis so this type of circuit design creates vulnerability for fibrosis
but then there are other designs that we find through computation only and they presumably
exist also amongst cell-cell interactions in this case if you don't have auto crime signal
you don't have this pathological stable state with cell x1 alone but on the other hand so these type
of tissues that have the cells with this circuit of interaction will not be vulnerable to fibrosis
but on the other hand the basin of attraction to the off state is much bigger here which may
suggest that these type of tissues will be vulnerable to degenerative diseases instead
of fibroblastic diseases and this is something that we're still exploring that's indeed the case
so from that what we find is that there is this relation between cells
based on growth factor production that is dictated by critical growth factor topology
and that these there is a simple sort of requirement for stability that we can define
and that this can be generalized to other types of interactions where it's the same topology present
and from that we then wanted to ask the next question what controls
the size of the compartments and tissues and there are two paradigms that existed side by side
for decades one paradigm for compartment size control is basically space availability in that
cells you know if you if they have cells to expand to they will expand when they don't have
cell space to expand to they stop is extended this is contact inhibition in vitro but in vivo
this would apply to cells that use mechanosensing for example to determine when they have to stop
dividing and this type of mechanosensing for example famously operates through the hippo pathway
and that paradigm works for these types of tissues but it would not be applicable to
tissues that are not limited by space like macrophages lymphocytes and hematopoietic cells
so then the question is what control this compartment size and that's where second
paradigm is applicable and that is that every cell needs growth active to survive
and to proliferate and if you fix the amount of growth active to the appropriate level
the cells will expand if there is more growth active than the cells that it can support
but once they reach that level further expansion will result cells that now don't have enough growth
active and they will die and so it's above that level it will go down if it's below that level
they will expand and that's how you can and that it clearly that's how it works for hematopoietic
cells that's well known you can change the amount of retropoietin for example or
gcsf while seven and you can control different hematopoietic cell size numbers
but what was striking for us is that these two paradigms apply exactly to the two cell
type cell types that we use in our study and again if we think from the cell category perspective
we have one category of cell that is limited by one
population size control paradigm and the other cell type that's controlled by another paradigm
and we asked whether this is just purely a lucky coincidence or curious coincidence or if there
is some deeper inside here and specifically we asked whether because fiberglass controlled by
space availability so carrying capacity of the environment and macro phase by growth active
availability we asked whether production of growth active by fiberglass is a function of
space availability it can detect and that's exactly what we found that we when we looked at
fiberglass growing them at different densities as to mimic space availability we find there's a
number of genes that the control and density dependent manner and amongst them growth factors
like csf1 and many others and so that indicated that csf1 for example would be expressed at higher
level when cells are at lower density and as density increases it will be at lower level and
this way you adjust the numbers of fiberglass dictated by space availability to the number
of macro phases dictated by csf1 availability that they produce as a function of space.
I have a quick question sorry to interrupt you but so I know that the ECM plays a large role
in growth factor availability it acts like a sink it acts as like a release factor have you looked
at all at because you know in cell density you start to build up a certain amount of ECM as
well as the number of cells have you looked at whether or not if you co-toplate with the ECM
that these cells would normally lay down if that would have the same effect as the cell density?
Yes we have the the answer is a bit more kind of involved to you it's a very important question
and we're really interested in understanding the how ECM contributes to that we know that
it's a little bit it will take us a bit far from the main topic here but what we know is that
in this in the case of macrophage and fiberglass interaction the exchange of growth factors is
cell contact dependent moreover fiberglass that receives PDGF from macrophage will
only receive PDGF from macrophage if it provides that macrophage with csf1 so if we remove csf1
from half of fiberglass mix them with the well type ones give them macrophages in the same system I
describe fiberglass that don't contribute growth factor do not receive growth factor so it operates
in a cell it's like a you know gangster movies where you give the drug and the case with drug and
case with money and you exchange it like this in contact you don't just give and trust the other
so it's a it's some kind of a maybe anti-cheater strategy but it is a direct exchange in this
case there are some other interesting very interesting scenarios as you mentioned because
there is a form of csf1 that is a proteoglycan form but in this case it it wasn't a factor we
tried to simplify to look at from the with a minimal number of variables but it is a very
important point there is a mechanosensing by both fiberglass and macrophages also a thing that I'm
not going to discuss which where we find that macrophages use very fundamentally different
mechanosensing strategy compared to fiberglass or epithelial cells
sorry so just to finish this quickly this part what we find is that there is a density
sensitive enhancer in fiberglass that controls expression csf1 and when we perform motif enrichment
analysis we found that tad sites were enriched in density sensitive genes and tad is DNA binding
transcription factor controlled by hippopartway and basically we found that hippopartway controls
through this distant enhancer controls expression of csf1 and fiberglass but not in other cell types
these these enhancers are only active in fiberglass and tad1 indeed is recruited there is shown here
by a chromatin IP and that's what controls expression of csf1 leading to this kind of model
where we have homeostatic or density sensitive enhancer in csf1 gene that is operative in fiberglass
and it controls homeostatic expression of csf1 where it adjusts the number of macrophages to
number of fiberglass what the parameter for the ratio this is exactly the kind of characteristics
that would be dependent on the tissue and properties of ECM and so on that's where the tuning of this
parameter will change this ratio in a tissue specific way because not every tissue has exact
same ratio and doesn't need to or should not have and then there is this the inducible
enhancer and that could be dependent at the last expansion of macrophage on demand during
infection inflammation and so on so that's the picture we see with
this type of relation of macrophage in fiberglass establishing appropriate cell numbers
and of course this is just one of the principles there are many additional as mentioned ECM how
they both sense in CM and whether signals is delivered through cell contact through diffusion
or through deposition on ECM these will provide important variations on the theme
which need to be individually explored but what I want to finish here is with the notion that there
is a how this can be generalized where we have a cell type for example fiberglass that senses
for some aspect of tissue environment for example space that space sensing is coupled in this case
through hippo pathway coupled with control of growth factor for another cell type and because
space availability cell numbers these are characteristics of tissue communities of homoesthetic
variables here we just have this simple type of relation unrelated to function because space
availability is not related to function of macrophage but then we have other types of
relations where it is related to function so for example sensing oxygen availability in other
environmental factor in tissues now sends through heat one pathway and negatively regulates
expression of edged which is a growth factor for endothelial cell now endothelial cell
functionally is related to oxygen availability so if oxygen level is low if derepressed
undiogenesis occurs oxygen delivered and oxygen level goes back to normal
and that type of relation now can be expanded as I will elaborate in next slide but there are
additional types so this raises the question of what are aspects of tissue environment that are
sense all the aspects of tissue environment that are sense in a way that translates into control
of specific growth factor production and how that because each growth factor controls specific cell
types how the cell type is related to this factor that is sensed that controls production
and that I think what defines the rules it's one set of rules it's not all rules but it's one set
of rules that defines how growth factor expression is regulated so here we have the homoesthetic
control which is unrelated to this functional role of the cells it's just it's calibrated you
always need enough macrophages so it's calibrated on evolution timescale you always need this many
you know this ratio this percentage of macrophages but then in addition you can have expansion on
demand if there is infection need more macrophages so this growth factor will go up if you have hypoxia
you need more endothelial cells this growth factor will go up if there is this x some other
environmental factor of tissue you need more of cell x and you produce growth factor for cell x
and then we when we looked at imposing different kind of perturbations on cell to mimic these
deviations in tissue environment so we used hypoxia, glucose deprivation, I mean acid
deprivation, ER stress, osmotic stress and so forth oxidative stress and then looked at the
expression of genes and fibro less and we find a whole range of growth factors are regulated
by these perturbations which brings up the possibility of exploring what the logic is
in each individual case because for each growth factor there is a corresponding cell type that's
controlled by it often for a given perturbation you will need more than one cell type of course
and that's why you will see that some of them induce most of them induce more than one growth
factor so sensing of the environment by one cell type is linked to control population size of
another cell type that is functionally related to whatever that environmental perturbation
reflects and so to generalize this we can say it acts as anything that determines the requirement
for y let's say there is a lot of I don't know garbage you need more genitors right and then you
have a sensor that determines that there is a lot of garbage so that would be the cell that
determines that x is there and therefore you need y to take care of x if it's hypoxia you need
endothelial smells if it's infection you need neutrophil if it's some kind of other type of
perturbation you need a particular cell type and then the way that it operates is what I call
functional demand so in this case what the underlying logic is that if x is detected
that means there is a demand for the function of the cell y that can take care of x
so this is a sensing of functional demand by cell x so it sends demand for function
of cell y produces growth factor for cell y cell y expands performs the function functional
demand is eliminated and it goes back to steady state and in this fashion cell x knows which
growth factor to make remember the question of identity what which how do cells know which
growth factor it knows which growth factor may and it knows how much to make it depends on
how much of functional demand there is and it doesn't have to be only growth factor it could
be any signal that can fulfill this circuit it could be expansion of these cells but it
could also be a recruitment or it could be activation of the function y that will remove
that demand and that now goes to a more general type of control circuits that operate also in
physiological settings and so forth but for growth factor production I think that's what
determines their functionality okay so I will instead of continuing in the same way and what
I will do I wanted to finish with something very different not different but with notions
related to what I started with thinking about what I talked about most of my talk is about
examples of approaching these questions of tissue social organization of tissues social
lives of cells from the perspective of trying to look for underlying principles and rules
and of course as you all know this is the general sort of strategy in general paradigm
in complex systems where you have multiple agents that interact with each other according to some
rules and that generates generates various emerging properties that are consequences of
these interactions and of course then the pictures like this that are emerging properties of
interactions of agents patient or birds these are the observables and the observables often
fascinating but understanding them from the perspective that would be the first instinct
to understand them to describe the size the number of fish and what they're thinking what
they you know what their glucose level is measuring their RNA expression levels and proteomics and so
forth these are going to be totally useless to understanding how you form this type of structures
and instead we need to understand what are the rules that generated them but again what we're
dealing with is these observables and I made this very kind of a toy example to illustrate
something that I think for you would be very familiar intellectually that let's say this is
the observable this is what you see in microscope or through some other type of experiment
and you try to understand how is this generated this is some kind of a structure you see it could be
some arrangement of cells in the tissue or whatnot and of course this would be very misleading if you
tried to kind of use your immediate instinct to think that there is something that generated
curve structure right then if we know that actually it's part of this structure is just that
you can see there are four repeated units and three of them are black and you cannot see them
or three of them are made up by cells that died in the as a part of the developmental program and
you left only with this one on the left and but in reality it's actually symmetrical structure
not only it's curved by cement but it's still curved so you're still thinking well how do you
generate curve structure and then we unmask additional layer and now we look here and now we
see that huh these are actually curve structure now we the white stripes become visible and once
they are visible now we see well this is just slightly skewed hexagon and we know exactly how
to make a hexagon and this is just one line of code to say you know draw a hexagon and instead of
instead of 120 degrees you turn by 121 degrees and now it's slightly skewed and you iterate that
and you get curve structure and if you remove some parts of it and end up with what's on the left
then there is no way to tell how you made it so the point being that the rule to generate this
is very simple rule just drawing hexagon and slightly skewing the angle as a result you have
this spiral of structures then you remove parts of them and you can have a curve and if you look
at the curve there's it's a very hard to tell if not impossible to tell how it was generated
and so what we deal with often is these observables which which are several steps
removed from the rules that generated them the rules themselves are extremely simple
but the observable the curve is immersion property here originally but how it's generated
and we can see that more clearly with some self-automated types of examples where you look at
this final structure here and you try to understand how it was generated it's hard to tell by looking
at it but that's the observable now if you look at it carefully you start seeing well there is
some symmetry here and if you look at symmetry you you know why of course grinding and see that
well this unit actually repeated four times this one in this unit you also start seeing symmetry
it's also repeated four times and then this structure then it's repeated four times in this
structure and that is generated by these types of rules so these are two rules I mean these are
completely randomly chosen just for illustration purposes to say that these are the rules that
generate this the way they generate is through iteration and based on local information only
and based on only information available at the time of basic execution of the rules you don't
need to have memory you don't need to have global information but the point is that if we know the
rules of course we can generate easily these structures and we understand them completely
when we know the rules but if you go the other way which is the way we usually force to go because
what's observable is going from the other end we have this structure we try to understand the rule
and we can't because we don't know there are no universal methods to do so so we have to
instead of characterizing more and more detail what that is which we need to try to figure out
what are the original structures that generated them and and and this is what basically
uh point that what we need to understand is what are the rules of interaction
and of course then there are many fascinating questions about specific mechanisms pathways
and so forth but if we simplify it to down to the bare minimum if we think about what cells can do
cells can do five things they can do nothing so that's an identity operation they can die
they can copy they can change identity and they can change location sorry they said
identity twice a method in different ways this is cell identity and this is identity operation
meaning that it's a it's unity it's like it's doing nothing so these are five things that
cells can do there's nothing else everything is variation on these five things of course most
variations comes from changing identity which is cell state cell type or and so forth but ultimately
this is everything is a combination of these five actions and this first action do nothing is also
an active action because you don't just stay as you are you often well a cell always needs
a signal that tells it to stay as you are don't die don't proliferate don't move
it's also an active process so for each of these there is a corresponding types of signals that
tell them do a b c d or e and so now if you think of all the language of cell communication
all the words that cells can hear and utter all of them we can say can fall into five categories
whether they tell cells to do a b c d or e and that is sort of the direction we are going
in our thinking of defining the language based on of course the interpretation of different
signals also depends on the function of the state it's not just that a particular
biochemical signal always means a b it also depends on cell state just like in any communication
and those are the very basic and general sort of description of the types of rules we are seeking
to define so i'll stop here and take any questions thank you
