and then so today I'm going to talk about the evolutionary transition and my most recent
Confession Assimilation Demonstrating ETI. So this is part of the project, the Skilling
Up Purpose in Evolution funded by John Tammerton and the PI is Richard Watson. So as we all
already knew that ETI is referred to the key events in the evolutionary history where organisms
evolve new levels of organizing the complexity. This process often involves the integration
of previously independent biological units into a new and cohesive entity. And the classic
example is a transition from the single cell life to multi cellular organisms and also
the evolution of eusociality or eusocial super organisms. And the program was set
like 30 years ago by in the classic book, Major Transition in Evolution. So the evolutionary
puzzle here is that the classic evolution by natural selection theory focusing on the
combination between cell interest units. So it's harder to imagine how natural selection
can explain the emergence of an evolution of new higher level units from interactions
among lower level entities. And here we are facing circular problem or chicken and egg
reasoning because most existing theories often presuppose the existence of higher level
units which only emerge after the transition. And so the process of ETI can be divided into
two phases. The transition phase or the group formation phase and some quick questions in
this phase that how do individuals entities initially come together to form cooperative or
coordinated groups? And what mechanisms drive this aggregation? Is this period random or is there
any underlying biological process? And the second phase is what we call post transition phase or
the group transformation. So since the aggregation of the group is formed, there is a transformation
process of that group into a more structured integrated organization as a new level of
individuality. And some quick questions here is what processes guide the transformation of
this transformation? And yeah. So our plan is that today we'll explore the mechanisms behind
ETIs and talking about some limitations of current theories. And I will introduce my approach
based on the combination of self-organization and emergent selection processes, which will be
demonstrated in an artificial life simulation. So there are several theories of current view
viewpoints of ETI. The first and famous one is kin selection. This says as natural selection
favorites, the reproductive success of an organism's relatives and some famous proponent
like W.D. Hamilton. So it has the strength of providing a robust explanation for the evolution
of altruistic behaviors in a closely related group, but it's not adequate enough to explain
that the cooperative behavior among unrelated individuals. And the second one is more controversial
one is what we call group selection. And the basic idea is that natural selection will operate at
the level of the group rather than the individual. Some proponents will be like Dave Sloan Wilson.
And it has the strength of explaining how traits beneficial to the group can evolve even if they
are costly to individuals. But this theory is very debatable and a lot of debates in the history
of biology like Richard Dawkins and Dave Sloan Wilson or even E.O. Wilson about this.
Yeah. So this debate encapsulates the fundamental question in evo-bio. So does natural selection
act primarily at the level of the genes? There's more reductionist view individuals or groups.
Another view point is the fitness decoupling proposed by Richard Micho. And this is processed
where the fitness of individual components is integrated into the success of the entire group.
And it has the strength of allowing for a higher level of specialization and division of labor.
Yeah. But it's of course, it has some witness too. And the most obvious one is that it does not
explain the initial step. It's still worth performing these interdependent relationships
between entities. And all these theories and viewpoints are post-transition
focus. And it highlights the gaps in the research of ETI because it does not explain how the initial
group and it is formed. What is the mechanism behind it? How is the drive of it?
Another view point is called ecological scaffolding. This means that
environmental structures and interactions that facilitate emergence of new biological
individuality by providing some scaffoldings in the environment, right?
Yeah. It's crucial in the early stage of the transition.
Some mechanisms of this is like physical structures, like it can provide a boundary
to protect new groups. And the concept of niche construction is here also. This means that
organisms modify their own and each other's environment or niche is leading to new selective
pressures. For example, like it can change the environment in a way that reduce the
selective pressure that forces them or a coordinated or cooperative behavior in the first place.
Yeah. Some classic examples of ecological scaffolding, like in bacterial biofirms,
or eukaryotic cell evolution. Of course, it has some limitations too, because it's
often presupposed extreme conditions. And the ecological scaffolding more effectively explains how
certain environmental structures can support the maintenance of higher-level individuals
once they are established and less quality on how these structures emerge.
And it has both theoretical gap and experimental gap in this view point. And a more recent view
point proposed and supported by my PI in Southampton and also with Mike in the paper. They call it
connection-need approach to ETI. So the basic idea here is that they saw some analogy between
evolution and learning as an optimization process, or they call it the ball rolling down here.
And so this means that because evolution is analogous to learning in neural networks. So
they saw the similarity between the ETI and the process of hierarchical concept formation
in deep learning. And the idea is that self-organization can drive adaptation autonomously
without resorting to natural selection as a primary drive in evolution.
Yeah. So in the most recent paper, like they call it natural induction, a spontaneous adaptive
organization with natural selection is a really cool idea. But of course it has limitation too
based on my perspective because the biggest difference here is that the structure of most
deep learning of neural networks is predefined by the experimenter rather than a spontaneous
emergence in ETI. And there is no inheritance mechanism at the component level and also the
production process as a component level to say that there is a transition in individuality
in that way in a sense. So it also means a transition in level of inheritance and reproduction.
And it lacks some empirical support too.
And so it goes back to the debate between self-organization and natural selection as the
main drive of biological adaptation, like the debate between Stuart Kaufman and Mina Smith
years and years ago. But here I think that self-organization and natural selection can be
complementary rather than mutually exclusive. For example, the easiest way to think about is
self-organization can initiate the formation of complex structures which natural selection
then can act on it by refining and stabilizing it over time. Or another way, the ability to
self-organize is an evolvable adaptation. This means that we are talking about the evolution
of self-organization. Yes, this evolutionary process can promote the emergence of collective
self-organization as an adaptive response to environmental challenges.
So I propose that by combining natural selection and self-organization we can
study the spotless emergence of pre-transition group formation and also the spotless emergence
of group selection, host transition selection.
Yeah, so I use an artificial light approach to ETI. As we may know that AI life is a study of
life as it could be rather than life as we know it. So we study the basic underlying fundamental
processes and mechanisms of life regardless of the material it's based on.
So it allows us to rewrite the tip of life in the computation or by artificial chemistry.
Yeah, I think AI life is a unique platform in order to test and observe how complex interactions
and evolutionary pressures can generate higher level biological organizations as in ETI.
Right, right. And actually there have been many models of self-organizations in AI life like
cellulite or automata-like model of cloud-based game of life or long-term slope or even the most
recent one, linear. So in that, in all those models we have the formation of patterns and
the replicating process of patterns over time. But it's they are not adequate to say that it's an
evolutionary transition in individuality. The same reason as in recharge conditionist approach
because there is no inheritance at the component level and no selection at the component level
also. So by this I mean that in order to model an ETI in an artificial system we need inheritance
selection and reproduction at the component level and by some way these combinations can be
priced to an emergence of the reproduction or replication at the group level as if the new
level of individuality emerged. And then so I recently I developed a life model I call it
Vitanova. It means new life in latency and in this simulation there is no explicit fitness
function. So I reuse the fitness as an emergent property and selection here is also an emergent
property from the interactions of lower level units. So it's closer to biological natural
selection rather than using the fitness function in normal evolutionary computation.
And here's a design methodology of Vitanova. So we have 2D square and some
agents I call boys. So the green boy is a worker boy and the blue boy is a soldier boy
and the red one is a predator. One of these is in the environment and each boy is controlled by
its own new network which will model the course during behaviors of boys. We know that it's
separation alignment and cohesion. So it's different from the classic boy simulation
of Vitanova when he used the pre-fixed parameters too for these behaviors. The input to the new
network will include the relative positions and velocities of nearby boys and predators
and also the current energy level. The output as we know is a tendency for separation alignment
and cohesion and also predator avoidance and the role tendency. The role tendency here is the
likelihood of being a worker or soldier in the next step. This means that in my simulation
that we have plastic division of labor governed by neural network. It's exactly the evolving neural
network. And the predator still will, the behavior of the predator is that to detect
and move towards nearby boys all reverse direction if facing three or more soldier boys. This is a
setup of the simulation. Here's the basic architecture of the neural network. It's the
simple fit forward neural network with one hidden layer and equations for boys behavior.
And here's a pseudo code for reproduction and mutation. So there is no explicit selection. So
the reproduction here is, so in this current simulation there's no
autonomous, there's no neural network output to control the reproduction. So when the boy
reaches a certain amount of energy, it will reproduce and reduce some energy. And the reproduction
is a repetition with some mutation in the ways of the neural network.
Yeah, so the neural network's ways are the genotype of boys which are evolving and the concept of
fitness here is just an emergent concept. And here's the video demonstration of boys
of my virgin nova. So initially we saw that they are trying to, I put some statistics on this,
a number of flocks and average flock size. Some are trying to form flocks, but not good enough.
Yeah, so most flocks are destroyed until like one flock in the corner survives. So it moves
towards the corner. And here I think it starts growing or we can call it kind of development
until an adult stage. Yeah, so there is a ring structure here. It means like there is something
inside and on the circle. It starts growing. The average flock size is increasing.
Yeah, some predators around to put pressure on it. There are some blues here to block the predators
from attacking the flock. Yeah, it's growing, it's developing. And the critical moment is
around steps to 2,200 I think. Yes, yeah, I suddenly it starts spreading into two
entities and a new ring structure emerges here. And also people use this again. A new ring structure
moves downward the screen. Yeah, they move, they move in different direction. Oh yeah, sorry.
Yeah, we can call that the first flock on the screen is flock zero and the first
ring structure is flock one. And the flock one after moving, it starts reproducing again into
two ring structures. Right. And also you see the second child. Yeah, it starts reproducing again
in the bottom of the screen. Okay, so yeah. So the result overview is that we have observed
a margin of cohesive groups, a transition from solitary boys to organized flocks
and the formation of ring structures, exhibiting both stability and capacity for division
and potential mechanism for group level reproduction.
And also we have observed the adaptation and survival at the group level.
And there is some spontaneous emergence of group selection because some groups are formed but
they're not good enough to survive. And the only one who the only one survives
then reproduce it itself. There's some snapshots of the screen, some critical moment and we observed it.
Yeah, so yeah, so it's just statistics. We observe that there is a number of flock count
over time until the step of like a 2000 times step. Only one flock survive for more than
1000 times steps and the flock size starts increasing until the critical point of the
transit of the production. It reduces the size because there are now two flocks.
Yes, and again, it supports the hypothesis and observation.
And here we observed another, we call it, I put this figure for observing the role distribution
and collective adaptation. So here we see that the soldier and worker ratio is inversely proportional
to the change in flock size. Yeah, why? Because remember that the flock zero, the first flock,
it's reproducing under the pressure of three predators around. So it will, until the critical
point of transition, it will require more soldiers for protection.
And here is the same figure for flock zero, the first ring structure. When it reproduces, we see
that it is the soldier and worker ratio is proportional to the change in flock size because
we observed that the flock one reproducing in the less threatened environment or surrounding.
So it will favor more workers. Yeah, so it's kind of collective adaptation at a collective level.
Yeah, we observe it.
Yeah, so we have demonstrated an artificial ETI or a kind of ETI in an artificial system.
And this process is akin to the transition from solitary to social super organisms.
The whole process is that we have the group formation by a self-organization capacity,
which is an evolved and which is evolved and selected by natural selection.
And we have observed spontaneous group selection. Some groups are better to survive.
And there is interdependency within groups. Agents depend on each other to survive and to
reproduce. This makes a collective cohesive collective.
And surviving agents present adaptive plastic division of labor because we know that the ability
to switch between rows is an evolvable ability because we are evolving new networks and new
networks are controlling that ability. And we have observed a spontaneous group production
by a process akin to binary fission that observed in mitochondria. We see that mitochondria,
there is a ring structure also. And some comparisons with other frameworks.
And unlike in selection, we don't require genetic homogeneity for groups formation and survival.
Unlike multilevel selection or group selection, we don't be supposed the formation or the
existence of the group, but the group is positively formed from the bottom up.
There are some talks after my simulation is that we can ask some questions like what are
the critical tests for population density and resource availability that facilitated the transition
to use sociality. And also we can study how there is communication within a group
evolving facilitated the organism of that use social super organism.
And I'm more interested in how it can change the generation of non-genetic inheritance,
such as from social learning, can support the establishment and maintenance of
use social structures. And my whole research before my current process is about the bow and
effect of the interaction between evolution and lifetime plasticity. In the next step I will
investigate is this bow and effect can foster or hinder the process of ETI, especially when the
environment changes. So we will require some ability to learn to predict environmental changes.
And here in this current simulation, the predator is just presented as environmental
challenges, but it's not evolvable. So the next step is let's say if we allow the predators to evolve
also and we include the self-organized ability as an evolvable trait like invoice.
And can be observed an evolutionary arms race in the transition. This means that
the predators should evolve and should evolve the transition into a bigger hole so that they
can eat the predators and then the the ring structure should evolve. The ring structure of
the boys could evolve into a bigger one, which will be the next transition.
And also that I'm interested in whether the process of self-organization and naturalism
in Vitanoga can be generalized into other ETIs in nature. And yes, so in this simulation I'm using
simple neural network to simulate the transition from solitary to sociality, but in evolution,
in classic example of the transition evolution of multi-cellularity, the cell doesn't have
neural network in it. So how can we extend Vitanoga to model multi-cellularity? And
the first thought is that I can use gene regulatory network in the place of neural networks.
And yes, some other technical steps, especially how I need to define more
metrics to measure emergent collective behavior and how can we define the collective genotype
from Vitanoga. Yes, and measure the difference in change, the change in genotype at the component
level of boys and the change at the genotypic level as a collective level to compare it. Yes.
Thank you.
