I'm going to talk about certain cabling and how living systems construct the objects that
they found in the niche.
This is an old idea, due initially to Kant, and then developed first in the 20th century
by Jack von Weitzkuhl, that living systems are active devices that create their universe.
Then I'm going to talk about this idea of what we have been doing lately to advance.
Then for the people who don't know, I come from the lab of Madurana and Varela that they
created many years ago in the University of Chile, that they created the idea of otopoyesis,
and the idea of otopoyesis is that an otopoyetic network is a network that has two properties.
First, it has a circular organization in the sense that it's a network of processes that
produce components, and these components are essential to the existence of the processes
that make them.
This is the idea of a circular organization.
The other idea is that this network, by its very functioning, produces self-encapsulation,
and that this is the secret, according to Madurana and Varela, that this otopoyetic organization
is the real secret of biological systems.
They created an idea around 1970, between 69 and 72, and this idea that self-agrication,
because this is a notion of self-agrication, is the core of biological phenomena, is not
new.
At that time, before them, Robert Rosen, 10 years before at least, has published a theory
called MR Systems that is also a theory of self-agrication that is very obscure at that
time, and for many, many, many years.
It was a very obscure theory because Robert Rosen only wrote for himself.
Then, it has very appealing ideas, but for many, many years, nobody pays attention to
the work of Rosen.
And these two ideas, otopoyeses and MR Systems, are more or less interlinked.
And if you want to read about this two theory, I recommend two books.
Rosen wrote at the end of his life in 1981, a book called Life Itself, where he summarized
his life work.
And the big summary is that Rosen thought that he found a demonstration, a demonstration
of how self-agrication can logically appear in a network of processes that are coupled
through the fabrication of components.
He thought that he has a mathematical theorem.
From my viewpoint, this is a very appealing idea, but it's not correct.
But even if it is not correct, it's extremely interesting, and we should devote a lot of
time to reinterpret Rosen.
What is nice of the work of Rosen is that he understood that self-agrication can lead
to anticipatory behaviors in systems with self-agrication.
Then in summary, Rosen tried to demonstrate how self-agrication can appear in a network.
And Maturana Varela, on the other side, they analyzed the consequence of self-agrication,
the consequences for the immune system, for evolution.
They didn't try to demonstrate how self-agrication arises.
They put it like an axiom.
The central fact of the immune system is self-agrication, and they put a lot of attention
to the notion of autonomy.
They demonstrate that self-agricating systems will show autonomy.
And they wrote, it's initially in Spanish, but that book, Autopoyesis and Commission,
was written, was published in 1980, and from then on, it has been a very terrible explosion
of different words exploring the notion of Autopoyesis, with different degrees of quality.
And I'm going to use a lot of diagram in this presentation.
This is the symbol of an Autopoyetic system, it's the Ouroboros, the snake that it's
itself, and remember that the important thing is self-agrication and self-encapsulation.
Also, very few people know that Autopoyesis, that this theory about metabolism and about
self-agrication, in fact, began as a theory about the organization of the immune system
by a paper that Maturana wrote in 1969, in the then very advanced laboratory in Illinois
University called Biological Computer Laboratories, and here's the fundamental idea.
We are used to the computer metaphor where the brain captures external stimulus, analyzes,
analyzes the stimulus using logic that we think that is a universal tool, and then it
produces a correct response, then this is the metaphor for the brain as a computer.
On the other hand, Maturana in 1969 said, no, no, no, no, no, the brain doesn't analyze
an external reality, the brain, the only thing that he does continuously, he's in a loop,
action perception, action perception, and is in this loop that the objects are created,
and the nervous system does not analyze a reality, but it creates internal correlations
between action and perception.
Because essentially a living system, also a very important point here, a living system
is before anything else, an acting device, they need to act.
Because they are the self-applicating device, but they exist in a universe that demand action,
and a living system always must answer the fundamental question, what to do next, and
this is valid for a bacteria, or for us, for a way, for everything, and like in some sense
the fundamental question of a living system is to retreat or to advance.
This is the ever-present question, then you cannot analyze a living system in the void.
Here I show that a living system is always in a relation, you know, a living system is
always in a relation with the medium through action and perception, and here is a new concept
in the theory, a living system is a relation between an organism and its medium, you understand?
I will put here perhaps a living system is in a relation between an auto-polytic system
and its medium, you know, they don't exist in a void.
And here I will show you the next slide, is the fundamental idea that I'm going to touch
today, and this is the idea that Maturana thought was his great contribution, and also
Varela thought that it was a great contribution, Maturana called this idea structural coupling
and Varela in action.
The idea is as follows, here, let me change my color a little, at the right, not the left,
you have a living system, an auto-polytic system that is in a very elementary relation
which is medium, then initially, because it's the first encounter between the auto-polytic
system and the medium, the relation is undefined, you know, it's not clear what is the loop
action perception, but if the living system, the auto-polytic system continues to exist
in that environment, in a recursive manner, little by little the relation begins to be
more defined, and the living system and the medium change in a complementary way, and
here in T2, you have that the living system is complementary, totally complementary to
an external object, and an external observer here will reach the incorrect opinion that
the living system adapted to the external object without understanding that the living
system in fact co-created the external object because of this recursive interaction with
the medium, and this process is called structural coupling, and Varela called it in action, then
this is why it's so important the relation between the living system and its medium,
and then I will repeat it that initially the interaction between the organs and the
medium is not established, but little by little if the interaction is repetitive and recursive,
the medium and the organist change in a congruent manner, and I must insist also that a naive
observer will think that the organist has adapted to the object while the real phenomenon
is totally different because the organist has produced, has organized and the medium
that didn't have, excuse me, didn't have a structure, has organized the medium, excuse
me, has organized the medium into an object, and here it's a very important thing to this
very theoretical idea can be put in the context of variation inference, and here you have
the basic idea of how it happened, you have the medium here that affects the sensory lamina
of the living system, and it produces a very complex set of internal signals, and these
internal signals are used by the organist to compute in some sense the future, the action
that the organist must produce, then the first step that the organist must take is to compute
this probability, which is the probability that I am facing object X due to the fact that I am
seeing the internal signal S i, then the auto-projective organization inside the organist
solves an inferential problem, that is what is the probability that I am facing object Y
given that the internal signal are S k, then this is the core of the mathematical problem.
Then you can make this idea a little more precise, imagine that you have a universe with three
objects, three objects, alphabeta and gamma, and every of these objects produce an internal signal,
and these internal signals are not simple molecules, but are family of molecules, and they are very
complex manifolds of molecules, and then you have the internal signals that are produced,
and the object or actions, and then in every single second, in every single encounter between the
organist and the medium, you have a conditional probability matrix that represents every entry
of the matrix, which is the probability that I am given an object alpha given that I am
seeing the signal three by example, and what is interesting is that you can consider
an updating equation in order to transform this very generic formulation into an updating
mechanism and transform it as a classifier, and in this way it's very similar to the FEP theory
of Dr. Friston, but in Chile we don't think about this problem in this manner, we add a little twist,
because in this figure what you see is a universe where the objects alphabeta and gamma
pre-exist, pre-exist to the organism, then this goes against the grain of our theory where the
objects are produced by the encounter between the organist and the medium, then the idea that
is a classifier, we don't agree with that, we have another view that is as follows. Initially,
then this is why this is called a structural coupling by Asian influence and object construction.
Initially, when you have an organism that is facing a medium, he's facing like,
he doesn't have a precision about which are the perturbations, you know the perturbation
can be many, many, many different things, which is the set of internal signals that every one of
these perturbation triggers, and which are the actions that this organism takes, then initially
nothing is defined, not the signal, the actions or the objects.
Then our idea, and this is what we're developing now, is that an object then is like a random
walk in the space of action and signals, because the organism initially, he doesn't understand
what an object, the boundaries between the different perturbation cannot be asignated to a given object
or to another one, then you have in the face space of action and signal, you have a random walk,
and it's this particularly random walk that little by little it gets refined,
that is an object, then an object is this particularly trajectory, and then it's not a point,
you know it's not the final point in the trajectory, it's the trajectory itself,
and the trajectory itself changes because of random event, depending on what you are encountering,
and by an updating mechanism that is more or less like a heavy and updating mechanism, then
an important that the autonomy, the autonomy that you discover in living system means that the
objects that the living system created are not necessarily equal to the object that the
experimental observer detects in his own world, then currently we are developing this theory
of like stochastic random walk, and in this sense it's very different from
Feb, because now we don't treat the organism as a classifier, but as a constructor of distinctions,
and after talking with Wesley last week and seeing his wonderful setup, you can imagine
how this theory can be applied to the neural culture that he's planning to use with this
amazing technology of 1000 and 1000 of electrodes, where you obtain an electrical
state of the network, and this electrical state of the network constitute the actions of the network
upon the environment that is defined by electrical stimulation and chemical stimulation,
then an object could be a sequence of electrical and chemical stimulation, an object would be a
very complex chain of events, and that initially you will not discover easily what these objects are,
but you can put the experiment of Wesley in the framework of structural coupling, and here
I have developed two different ways, new methods to assess neural activity, one is something that
we call the coefficient of variation of the envelope that detects how much a neural signal
is similar to Gaussian noise, and the other is that we use the framework of filter Poisson process
to interpret collective signals as not as being created by the addition of sine waves, but by the
independent activation of pulses that generate the overall signal, then we can, in this way, we can
I think measure, quantify the electrical state of a neural culture in a new dimension, then
this is what I wanted to tell you at the very beginning of the meeting, I am open to questions.
Thank you very much.
