Our next speaker is quite an honor that he is here to speak to us, David Crackauer.
He is an evolutionary biologist and the president and William H. Miller professor of complex
systems at the Santa Fe Institute.
He also co-directs the collective computation group at the Santa Fe Institute.
Prior to all of that, David served as the founding director of the Wisconsin Institute
for Discovery as well as the co-director of the Center for Complexity and Collective
Computation and as a professor of mathematical genetics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
That's only part of his introduction part of his resume.
David has also held positions as a visiting fellow at the Genomics Frontiers Institute
at the University of Pennsylvania.
He's also been a sage fellow at the Sage Center for the Study of the Mind at the University
of California, Santa Barbara, a long-term fellow of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton,
and a visiting professor of evolution at Princeton University.
And if that wasn't enough, in 2012, he was included in the Wired magazine smart list as
one of the 50 people who will change the world.
And he's here with us today.
So I am thrilled to have him join us today, and it is my absolute pleasure to introduce
to you all David Crackauer.
Hello, everybody.
Morning.
Thank you very much.
Can you all hear me?
Great.
Yeah, those sort of little introductions.
Who are they talking about?
Who is this person that's not me that's being introduced?
So I'm just going to jump right in to my slides to make sure this all works.
And let's see.
Is that all visible to you?
Great.
So I'm going to start in some sense, anti-system, and then we're going to migrate towards system.
This is a quote I rather love.
This is a quote from Murray Gellman's 1969 Nobel acceptance speech.
Murray is one of the founders of the Center Institute, as some of you will know.
And he said, how can it be that writing down a few simple and elegant formulating
like short poems governed by strict rules, such as those of the sonnet or the waka, can
predict universal regularities of nature?
The waka, by the way, is the ancestor of the haiku.
It would be a little bit too pedestrian for Murray to say haiku, so he says waka instead.
So and this comes out of the work that Murray had done that won him the Nobel Prize on recognizing
fundamental symmetries in nature.
And he wrote down what's become famous as the so-called eightfold way, which is the
symmetry group of the hadrons, which are fundamental particles.
And it's an extraordinary achievement because you write down this, what seems like an invention
of the human mind, that is the Lie algebra for the special unitary group three.
And out of that pops a prediction of a hidden facet of reality, a subatomic particle.
This is the great mystery, if you like, of applied mathematics.
So that's that Murray.
But there's another Murray that was associated with the founding of the San
Defense Unit, the Murray who asked this question, which was think how hard physics
would be if particles could think.
Now, this is in some sense the rallying cry for complexity science.
It says, instead of a world dominated by conservation laws, conservation of energy and
matter and fundamental symmetries, it's a world dominated by agency, self-awareness,
consciousness, reflexivity, system two.
You know, you pick your favorite phrase.
How do you understand those kinds of worlds where the system itself is learning and adapting,
responding to your observations in such a way as to stifle, stymie your future efforts to predict them.
And that led quite naturally to this remark, which I think would resonate with everyone at this
meeting, where he essentially makes the point that the complexity of connections in the modern
world is so dense, that there's a real argument for studying some emergent system, which he
calls the whole system, rather than pursue that disciplinary convenience of dissecting
the world into its individual components of the kind that Murray had worked on as a physicist.
And I've often wondered what Murray meant when he said whole system.
That's been confusing to me.
It's almost as if what Murray did is he started as a reductionist physicist working on the atoms
and quarks and gluons and took some kind of long jump by helping to construct the Santa Fe Institute
and landing on the whole system, which is the planetary system itself.
And I think this is a significant challenge.
And I think what Murray actually meant was looking at that point, if you like, of highest
elevation, where we're not studying the whole system, I think that's actually arguably impossible,
but we're studying the systems of the world.
And I want to argue throughout this presentation that the systems of the world should be thought
of as verbs, not nouns. And I mean, when I go to meetings, people will say we should study
the energy sector or the communication sector or the global banking system.
These to me are objects and artifacts, as opposed to studying processes that actually transcend any
given one of those systems, if you like. And that's what I'll argue for, not to say that you can't
do the former. That would be perfectly reasonable and fascinating.
But I'm more interested in the generalities that span them.
And so this will be essentially the table of my talk in a nutshell, and we're going to
dive into some of the details, because I think the interest of this approach to working on systems
lives in the detailed way in which we analyze them.
And so, for example, conflict, it's obviously all of these topics I imagine are of great
interest today in the world. Can we understand conflict, both at the individual level,
right, that is individual fights, if you like, all the way through to wars at the level of
nation states. Is it meaningful, for example, to describe them both as conflict?
Or is that just a sort of historical accident that we use the same word to describe events
at different scales? And I'm going to argue that the only sense in which it's meaningful
is if you can find the mechanics or the models that are constitutive of the process,
right, and demonstrate that, that actually, yes, they are, because what we mean in both cases
is a certain notion of criticality, and I'm going to jump into that in a second.
Another one, culture, how does culture actually work? You know, where it's suspended
ambiently in a world of beliefs and ideas, how do we acquire them? How do we transmit them?
And that this notion of culture is very diffuse, right? So we go from the culture of individual
beliefs and norms all the way through to, you know, enforceable legal systems. And again,
is that real? I mean, are we correct in asserting that these are elements of culture?
And I think the answer is yes, because in each case, we're talking about attitudes towards
imitation transmission, if you like, the sort of essential modules or atoms of cultural evolution
and so forth. Again, what is constitutive of that notion of culture? And I'm going to focus there
on the evolution of constitutions. And finally, revolutions, social revolution, scientific
revolutions. Why do some institutions emerge and then freeze, and are extraordinarily difficult to
change? Whereas others seem to be in flux all the time, can we come to some fundamental understanding
about why that's true? And again, here, I think the answer is yes, we can, we have to think about
structures and orders that have multiple time scales, and the way learning rules percolate
through those time scales. So as to either engender, fixity, stasis, or evolution and change. So that
will be the sort of that sort of a talk. And I'm going to jump into empirical case studies with
mathematical models. Don't worry too much if it all looks a bit heady. Just to say that I think
that to do this, to study this, you have to do this. In other words, the essentials of this
scientific method, that is empirical data, model building and experiment are no less important
here than they would be in any disciplinary pursuit. It's just that we're doing something rather
differently. So let's start with this conflict of contagion issue. Let me just talk about
criticality first. This is a plot that you would have all seen if you're watching the news at any
point in the last three years, which is sort of flattened the curve, right? So this is a series
of projected epidemic profiles of COVID, for example, assuming different critical exponents
are zero or are not in England. This is that thing which we've all become familiar with,
which is the number of secondary infections initiated by a primary infection. So in that little
picture on the top right, you can see that if r0 to r0 is five, then a single initial infection
will lead to five secondary infections and so on. And we've all learned that as you move the critical
exponent r0 closer to one, we flatten the curve. And if r0 is below one, the epidemic would peter
out. So this is what's meant by contagion, this propagation of infection, and it's also what is
meant by a critical exponent, which is this threshold value, magic value, below which
an infection is subcritical and above which it's supercritical. Okay. Many people have claimed
in the literature that conflict is something like a contagion. It spreads from one person to another
through a mechanic, which is somewhat dissimilar, I imagine, what we know, to an infectious disease.
And moreover, it shows critical phenomena. That is that there is some threshold value
of aggression or adversarial interaction above which conflict becomes supercritical
and below which it would be subcritical. And the idea, I guess, of the Pacific Dream would be to
get those critical exponents below one. So it's to move into subcritical regimes. Is any of this true?
There's a huge literature. Well, to answer that question, we have to look at the data and we have
to build mathematical models and answer this question of whether or not conflict really is a
contagion or not. So here's the kind of basic questions we might want to ask ourselves. Is it
true? Does it have a critical transition? Is there a relationship, for example, between the
conflict duration, the number of fatalities, the geographical area that it encompasses?
And if that's all true, what are the normative implications? That is, we're not just doing
descriptive natural history of conflict. We want to intervene in such a way as to minimize it.
The way of, for example, a physician might make recommendations for mask wearing,
so as to minimize the spread of a pandemic. So those are the sorts of questions.
So, you know what a chance it's got? Now, I wonder if I can see, if you can see this.
Is anything blocked here, by the way, Laura, or can you see the whole screen? Is it all good?
We can see the whole screen. Oh, great, great, great. So the way we do this is we look at two
kinds of systems. We look at experimental systems, non-human systems that we can intervene into.
And so these are small populations. Every individual can be monitored. And we're looking at
the individual conflict rules that individuals are following. So very micro. On the other hand,
we have large-scale observational data of human populations, very macro. And in that case, we're
inferring quite different kinds of scaling relations, not individual decision rules.
And so, I just want to make that point about model systems versus observational systems.
It leads to a lot of heated debate. I think one should look at both, because they each have
strengths and weaknesses. So let me just give you one example. This is something we've been
studying for many years, non-human primates, macaques, spider monkeys, and so on. And here,
just to give you a sense, we can look at any given moment in time, these are animals in captivity,
at who is fighting or not fighting, at any given point in time. So very micro. We can see who
interacts with whom. We can reconstruct social networks of their interactions and so on.
And out of that kind of data, you can get all sorts of interesting insights. But let me give you
one example. This is the scaling of the unlog log axes of the conflict duration and conflict size.
Just notice that as the number of individuals in a particular conflict increases, so does the
duration of the conflict. And it increases, polynomially, it increases as the square of the
number of individuals. You can also look at the variance, not just the mean. So this is the
distribution of how long peace bouts last. So for example, no one's fighting anyone for 10 seconds,
10 minutes, an hour, and so on. And conflict durations. And you'll notice that if you look at
the distribution of durations, as they get longer, the variance increases. So the scatter
around that distribution increases. So here's just some data. And what one can now do is write down
a whole family, don't worry about the details of mathematical models, and explore the full
configuration space of possible contagion processes, not just one or two, but a very large
number. And ask which ones of those mathematical models are consistent with the scaling relationships,
for example, the one observed in the data, the scaling of the mean and the scaling of variance.
And you'll see that most contagion processes actually can't recover the observed data. And this
is quite important, because in many studies, people will assert contagion without checking
carefully against the empirical data, which would either refute or confirm transiently the
hypothesis. And what we find just is a critical role of agency. It is a contagion process,
but with one really interesting characteristic, which is long term memory. That is, the memory of
the first conflict and its duration is felt throughout all subsequent conflicts. That is
not a property of a mathematical, of a biological epidemic. There's a very different kind of contagion.
It's contagion with significant memory in it, which is that sort of agency fact, that self-awareness
fact. And we all know that and resentments are very long lasting. So an attempt, for example,
to intervene on a human conflict contagion, as if it were a biological contagion,
without taking into account the sort of psychological fact of memory would fail. So that's just one
example. We've also looked, as I said, at the more core screen data, we've looked to you,
this is the so-called ACLED database, extraordinarily rich. And we've been studying conflicts in
continental Africa for two decades, looking at things that are very similar, actually,
to the micro data I just showed you. And here you don't have who's fighting whom at a given point
in time. But what you do have is data like this, where over the course of time, you have
battles, the number of fatalities, exact geographical locations and so forth.
So we can study time and space, but at a much more low resolution than we would in the experimental
system. And as with the experimental system, we can look at things like the distribution of
conflict sizes, the distribution of fatalities, duration and spatial extent. And as with the
micro data, we can write down mathematical models as a rather complicated model. And then you
cannot describe this one in any detail. But just the idea that contagions grow as a kind of a
fractal, like branching pattern on a two-dimensional surface. And one of the things that these models
predict is that at critical points, like for example, r zero equals one, that is that critical
point below which an epidemic is subcritical, above which it's supercritical, something really
interesting happens, you get a complete collapse of complexity. And all of those scaling exponents
become related. It's actually a really beautiful feature of complex systems that at critical
points, they become simple. And for those who are interested in the form of analysis, this is
using something called renormalization group theory. It's a way of looking across scales.
And you can see, and just take my word for it if you like, that if you look at the ratios and
empirical data against the model predictions, they're extraordinarily close, which suggests
two things again. Yes, this is a contagion-like phenomenon, so that's a correct statement,
but it's also a contagion-like process that's near-criticality. And this is very surprising
because it's not clear why that should be the case. So if you think about an epidemic with r
zero, why would r zero hover around one? Why would it live by a critical point? And we all know the
answer, actually, because we're observing it today. And that is that if r naught or r zero, I never
quite know, I've sort of been in the United States long enough to want to say zero, but my
answer, my early life was in England, so I want to say naught. So I'm going to be at the critical
point where I say both. And if you think about it, when the epidemic is in full blast, we start
taking precautions. We wear masks, we get vaccinated, we get boosted, and we shift r zero down.
But when r zero falls below one, the epidemic starts petering out. And what happens, we take
off our masks, right? Because we think, oh, look, we've won. And then what happens, the new strain
emerges, and it propagates back in, and we put our mask back on. And this is one of the so-called
routes to endemism. And that phenomenon of a system hovering around the critical point is
called self-organized criticality. And it seems as if conflict is manifesting this phenomenon
of hovering by a critical point. So, okay, so is it contagious? Yes. With a strong agency memory
effect. Does it have a critical transition? Yes, but we don't know exactly where it is.
We don't know the r zero of human conflict. You get this incredibly interesting simplification
of the system of conflict at the critical point where all the scaling exponents become related.
And the normative implications for us are
deliberative techniques to move systems away from critical points. And that's a whole
era of investigation we've pursued. And perhaps we're in questions, we can deal with it. But
if you look on my website, there's some things on that there. So that's just one example. Let's
keep jumping. Look at culture. How on earth should we model culture? And this is, again,
my view is you have to take a representative model system where good data is available. And you
could look at Twitter, you could look at newspapers. It almost doesn't matter, as long as you're rigorous
and consistent in the way you do this. So we've been looking at constitutional history. And so
this is a very famous painting. It was painted in 17 in 1940. It relates to the signing of the
Constitution, the American Constitution in 1789. And you can see in that picture, I'm sure, a few
familiar faces. And what we do, working with constitutional historians and lawyers,
is we take a constitution and we atomize it. We break it down into its essential themes.
And for those interested in machine learning, or natural language analysis, these atoms are
called topics. So for example, oops, these are my questions. Let's just skip them. We'll come back
to them. So here's a constitution. We're going to break it up into its basic lexical atoms,
the way it treats general rights, the way it treats sovereignty, public order.
And we're going to ask, how do these themes diffuse forward in time through constitutions?
The way that constitutions are written is you don't sit down in a room and write one
for your nation, de novo, out of nowhere, ex-ovo. You look at prior constitutions and you borrow from
them. And what you can do, mathematically, is reconstruct the phylogenetic tree of all
constitutions that have ever been written. And if we zoom in on this, you can see here's the
Constitution of Egypt of 1923. It was highly influential on Barundi 62, Albania 25, Yugoslavia
31, Iran 1925. These are obviously a reading chronological order. What's going on here?
Which topics are circulating? How is borrowing taking place? And why? What's the impact of
local culture and geography? And I'm going to skip all that for today, but just give you a sort of
sense of what you can say in this kind of structure. We can sort of leap in and look at the
micro geometry of that tree. What you're looking at here, if you look at the center,
you have the focal Constitution of interest. It has a number of parents that it borrowed from
that we've inferred using some techniques and a number of offspring that it influenced that
borrowed from it. And we can reconstruct this kind of zoo of geometries of all the constitutions. All
of these are essentially that structure on the left, but giving you a sense of the diversity
of constitutional forms that we can reconstruct going back to 1789.
And these actually correspond to particular constitutions. You can look at the bottom one,
that's the Constitution of Montenegro. We had three parents, no offspring.
The interesting one is the South Korean Constitution of 1948. That's that one sort
of third from the bottom. It has a small number of parents, but a lot of offspring.
That's a very influential Constitution. And so we can start asking which constitutions are highly
inventive, which ones had disproportional impact, which ones are sterile and actually never led
to offspring and so on. And so complicated plot, but what if you look at the lifespan of a Constitution,
the lifespan is defined as when it was written and when it stopped being borrowed from.
No one looks at it anymore. The US Constitution is very interesting. It was very influential early.
But it was so influential on secondary constitutions that they borrowed from those
instead of the founding Constitution. And top left, you see a tree of all the
constitutions. You see three clear epochs, founding 1789 up until the Second World War.
This is a period of a relatively slow rate of constitution writing and all the
constitutions are very long lived. Then during the war subsequent, you get an acceleration
of the production of constitutions, most of which are very short lived.
So quite distinct cultural phases in relation to this particular object, which seems to think
is what are constitutions they establish branches of government, the separation of powers,
property rights, issues about freedom of expression. These are in some sense the operating systems of
societies. And they have a very interesting dynamic. And out of that, you can then answer
these questions. How is cultural transmitted? Culture is transmitted a little bit like genetics.
It's not genes, it's core constellations of concepts like rights, property rights,
structures of government. Which ideas are most influential in constitutions?
Strong early mover advantage. We see quite unequivocally that if you're early in the
writing of the Constitution, you will be an influential one. It almost doesn't matter what
you write about. Because you become a source of influence on subsequent constitutional authors.
This is a preferential attachment dynamic that many of you will be familiar with. It happens,
for example, with Uber, having an eBay, having Etsy. The being there first and becoming the
preferred market for ideas is a long lasting effect. And it's no less true for these ancient
cultural forms and it is for contemporary technological forms. Even though many have
claimed the dynamics of software is different, it actually isn't. It seems to be a more
universal dynamic of culture than a particular mechanic of the contemporary world.
This really interesting point that it's better to be revolutionary than evolutionary if you're
writing constitutions. That is, the highly inventive constitutions that add new topics,
if you like, new categories of thought of the ones that people look to. Not the ones that
add one or two increments on what came before them. Be first and be radical is the message of
constitutional history. Finally, revolutions. Like everyone else, I'm interested in revolutions,
particularly scientific revolutions, but during the last few years, social revolutions.
The whole Black Lives Matter protest is of great interest to me personally.
And how can we understand what's going on here? Why do societies seem to go through
periods of stasis and then these incredibly rapid bursts of change? Is there a sort of
unifying framework for evolution and revolution in social systems? The kinds of things I'm
interested in, things like this, why do we go from extraordinary intolerance of homosexuality
to accepting it? Going so far as to allow for gay marriage, which to me is a real
fantastic evolutionary move of society. What changed in people's thinking? By the way,
there's a nice typo here. This is Oscar Wilde 1985, which is not quite right of history.
So this, you know, attitude towards, this is because of fiction on the left. For anyone interested in
rock history, you realize there's two very different people. But this sort of scare tactics
that people have used to sort of discourage people from taking recreational drugs and maybe
they're right, maybe they're wrong. But then this shift towards a much more permissive society.
Political beliefs, I mean, endlessly oscillating back and forth between political parties.
Can we sort of wrap this system up in a common mathematical framework so that we can understand
properties of all of them? And as I said, I think the answer is yes, because they're all characterized
by having multiple time scales with individual learning rules that percolate up through the
time scales, often in invisible ways, leading to very dramatic shifts. The kind of data that we
look at to see if your senses is like this, all across the board, why, for example,
did seat belts once they're adopted lock? It's very unlikely that we're going to move back
to a state where people say, you know, let's get rid of the mandatory seat belt law.
It seems like a bad idea. Whereas political parties, fortunes are constantly shifting.
Attitudes towards the death penalty are constantly shifting and so on. I mean,
it would be kind of nice, right, if attitudes towards same sex marriage or the death penalty
look more like the seat belt in a progressive sense. And once we'd adopted them, we stayed
that way and didn't constantly fluctuate back. Can we understand one of this? And so these are
the kinds of questions we're asking here. How did these systems evolve? How do we as individuals
or as collectives contribute to these institutions? So I use this word institution by the way to mean
scientific belief systems or organizations, companies could be IBM. How do individual micro
learning rules percolate through to the emergent structure of the macro properties of the institution?
And what does an institution do that wants to change but finds itself like the seat belt locked
in? You know, are there normative implications just as there were for conflict? This is the basic
structure of these models. You have collectives at the bottom. They express their support or
opposition to an institution through voting mechanics. And we think of the institutions
as a ledger that records in its entries, votes, it aggregates preferences and beliefs,
and it has a public position. And that public position feeds back to reinforce or inhibit
the collectives that are learning to support or inhibit them. In other words, members of a
Republican party will support their own party, but they will do everything in their power to oppose
the Democratic Party and Democratic beliefs and vice versa. So the same kind of logic applies by
the way to scientific revolutions. Here's the so-called Copernican revolution. You have Copernicus
saying, you know, everybody, the sun is at the center of the solar system. It's kind of the
possibility thing. But you've got the church saying, well, no, it's kind of a little bit of odd with
what we've been saying for the last however many thousand years, we'd rather you shut up. And so
again, that's sort of dynamic of voting opposition and support with feedback from the institutions
because that's crucial, right? Because if the institution helps you, you gain power. And we
can take that and baptize it. For those of you with keen eyes, you'll see this looks like a
perceptron. It's a very simple neural network, but it's all analytical. It doesn't matter.
Mathematize it and explore. This is going to be the technical point. And it's coming to the end,
which I would sort of get your heads around. The crucial role of learning rules, which are the
rules that reinforce your beliefs and support or opposition based on the success of your
corresponding institution. So let me just show you what I mean. So here's a case, let's say
x supports ix and y supports iy, the institution y. One learning will be to say, look, if there's
lots of us, lots of x's, lots of, let's say, supporters of the Copernican revolution, we're
going to support Copernicas and all publications that promulgate the heliocentric position.
Vice versa, if you're a member of, let's say at the time, a religious fraternity or church,
if you're more numerous, you'll support your institutions. In that case, they say the Catholic
Church. That's one kind of rule. It says you learn in accordance with your success.
Another kind of rule is quite opposite to that, is that actually I might just attend,
if I'm being successful, why bother? Why bother doing more work? I've already won. I'm going to divest
from supporting my institution because I'm in the leading position. Here's an interesting one,
an arms race. An arms race says, I'm going to support my institution in proportion to the
success of my rival. So think about nuclear expansion. If your opponent doesn't have weapons,
then why should you? So your support of your institution is in proportion to your competitor's
abundance. So you can write down all these simple rules which tell you how to construct
institutions according to their abundance, if you like, or power or size. And on and on you
can go and you can actually mathematically look at all possible permutations. And if you do that,
you make some interesting discoveries. If you use, for example, this rule which says
invest in your institution in proportion to its size, you get lock-in. You're going to fix
on a single institution and never change it. And you can sort of see intuitively why that's
the case because you're not attending to the competitor at all. And the bigger you get and
the bigger your institution becomes, the more you support it. Lock-in. The same is true with the
other rules. The arms race is the opposite, right? It says, I support my institution in proportion
to the competitor. That leads to endless cycling, periodicity. So what this sort of work is showing
is that the incentive system that society puts in place, that is the reinforcement learning rule,
has strong emerging consequences on the stasis or the ability of the corresponding institution.
And that suggests that you could change them. So, for example, let's say you were in a lock-in
situation and you're a company like Kodak and you say, well, look, we make the best film in the
world. We should make more of it. And then all of a sudden the market changes and you're extinct.
You could, as a leadership team say, I'm going to create a new learning rule amongst my employees
that instead of investing in proportion to our market share, we're going to look at the competitor.
Change the norms, change the incentives, and move into an oscillatory regime
where you allow for the possibility of flexibility. So this is just an example of
these very counterintuitive ways in which local incentive learning systems
have emergent properties at the institutional level. And I just wanted to make that point.
That rule there is an institutional black hole. This is Kodak. This is research in motion.
You follow these rules, stasis. So, okay, so how the institution evolves, in this particular case,
feedback from the institutions that are established through some collective voting dynamic.
How do you construct, use different learning rules to do so?
These rules, in a very non-intuitive way, bias the stability of the institutions.
And how do you change? You have to change the learning rule.
That's the key, and that's very hard. So let's just end with this Murray statement. Murray
making that point that we're living in this highly connected world. Someone should be studying the
whole system. I think that the correct interpretation of that kind of insight is that we should be
studying global representative systems that have a mechanic that is constitutive of that system.
We should be studying culture, conflict, institutions, cities, pandemics.
These are the kinds of processes where we have a principled means of attaching to them,
mechanics, and dynamics. The whole system, I have absolutely no idea, it's a spaghetti.
And you'll note that these aren't disciplines, they span them, but they're as disciplined as the
disciplines, which is the mantra that I try my best to follow. So for those interested in SFI,
go to our webpage. If you scroll down to the bottom of the Santa Fe Institute webpage,
you can subscribe to our publications, you can join our podcast. There's all sorts of
information available there for you that you will need the hate or love according to a disposition,
but it's worth having a look because there's a lot of material. And with that, I'll wrap up. Thank you very much.
Thanks, David. That was fantastic. We'd need a whole day on this. Fantastic. And I do encourage
everybody to go to SFI and check out what they're doing. It's a very special place.
Do you still do tea, David? Of course we do tea. Tea was sort of the most amazing thing where you
get to meet these people from all over and talk a little bit about tea. Well, it's interesting.
We've all been debating this move towards this world, this online world, which has
extraordinary, like this. I mean, you can do this thing, which is fantastic. But what is missed?
And I think the obvious point is that this is very telegraphic, right? In other words,
I just waffled on for 30 minutes, but we'll have questions for 15. And most people won't have a
chance to ask. Whereas if you're in person, someone can really pester you. And it's great.
But also you can move back and forth, clarifying what people mean, because it's very often
takes two or three questions to sort of get to, oh, that's your sense. That's what you mean. I
sorry, I misunderstood you. And so tea is our sort of mechanic for doing just that. We pretend
it's this informal thing, which it is. But it really is, it's recognizing the complexity of human
interactions, and that it takes time to understand each other, right? So that's what tea is for.
So at SFI, they have a courtyard and people just have tea and, you know, all manner of conversations
are sparked at tea. And you could have a physicist and a sociologist and a mathematician and a,
you know, all kinds of different people sitting at a table talking about an issue. It's fantastic.
But one thing to say, I'd like to point out, I didn't talk about SFI and its structure,
but to do the kind of work that I just described, and it's a tiny slither of work,
it happens to be work that I've been involved with, I could have talked about other people's work.
You need a different kind of organization. And so we don't have obviously departments,
we don't have deans, we don't have that stuff. And so we, and in offices, which are typically
shared, you'll have an archaeologist with a quantum mechanist, right? And by the end of
the summer, they're working on a problem together, because they like each other. I mean, it's sort
of simple as that. And so the structure respects, I think, the mission in terms of what we want to
accomplish. Yeah. So I'm curious, you started with the one of Murray's quotes, think of how
difficult physics would be if atoms could think as a fantastic concept. And Murray Gelman also
wrote a very short paper called, let's call it Plectix, which really got at the root definition
and root word forms of simple and complex. Can you talk a little bit about that relationship
between simplicity and complexity and why that's important? Yeah, I have lots of slides on it.
I didn't want to do this because there's so many times, but I will do it verbally.
So one way to think about this is that where have the, because we are a quantitative department,
I don't think you need to be to work in systems or complexity, quite frankly,
think philosophers do it very well, only natural language, but we could do it that way. The one
way to say this is that, you know, physics has been so successful, the kind of Murray worked on
that I illustrated, because it's so simple, meaning there are laws like conservation of energy
matter and so forth, the second law, fundamental symmetries. And that's what mathematics likes.
Okay. It captures in a very compressed, elegant form, regularities, the essence of mathematics,
like Pythagoras theorem. At the other end of the spectrum have random things, like the ideal gas
law. And it turns out, maybe counterintuitively, the highly random systems also can be compressed
with very simple laws. In the middle, between the world of extreme regularities, like the
celestial mechanics, or on the right, you know, thermodynamics and statistical mechanics,
you have this domain, which has randomness in it, but randomness that accumulates regularities,
like evolutionary history. Right. That is the domain of complexity, it's the domain of living
systems. And people say, well, you mean you're just biologists. And we'll say, well, in one sense,
yes, but we're studying markets as well. And we're studying ancient civilizations and archaeology.
It's the living world that we study. But we study it through that hubristic lens of,
can we find theories that are general for the living world? And it turns out that theories in
that domain have a different character, in part, because they have to contend with agency.
And I always say, if you ask me, what is the challenge of our century,
it is this, it's that two paradigms have emerged to contend with that machine learning
and complexity science. And I'm willing to make that a very broad church,
but I am a deserfite. And one of them is highly predictive and opaque machine learning.
The other one is less predictive, but gives you the possibility of understanding
how it actually works, explaining to people what's going on, pedagogy.
And I think that we're at a very interesting bifurcation point in our history, where that's
never happened before. And if you look at the 17th and 18th centuries, those two things were very
close. Newton could be both predictive, but also teach you how calculus works,
and you can write down how people's M.A. I mean, it's that simple. Nowadays,
that's not true. And I think we're now contending with these two churches,
the predictive, opaque, and the explanatory transparent. And I'm very interested in that,
in that schism. And you also talk a little bit about that schism with the human dream
and how that relates. Can you share a little bit about that?
Can you just expand on that? Well, just that then there's human thinking. And so you have
these agents that aren't seeing the transparency of the system and their behaving. A lot of what
you just talked about in contagion and culture. And how do we have that loop back to the agents
so that they can change their learning rules or whatever to change? Yeah, yeah, I mean,
that in a way, but this is our, this is part of our agenda, right? To understand individual
freedom in the face of institutional constraint. I don't think we have answers to that. I think we
can analyze cases. We still valorize the individual certainly in the United States and the West is
a very strong emphasis placed on individual creativity, perhaps overstated. We all know
that theories aren't really invented by single people. They're hidden history, they're hidden
figures that made huge contributions that get neglected or ignored. But I think that is right,
carving out the space for individual freedom and free will in the face of these very powerful
constraints, which are market driven. I mean, this has been one of my crusades, you know, I mean,
there's nothing wrong with platforms that harness collective power. But when those platforms
have an incentive that is misaligned with human freedom, I sort of go to war on them.
And so, and it's, you know, an example of my own field, the journal system, scientific publication
in peer review, it's a perfect example of a corrupt system, because we all know it, everyone's not
doing it, of course it is. It's embarrassing. Here we are, researchers, and we are completely
beholden to a system that does not have the progression of science at the forefront that
sales. And so, it's not that I'm anti-market, it's just one of those things become misaligned,
then we have to rethink. So we're constantly having these battles, I wish we had them more often,
and we had more victories under our belt. Yeah, so an audience member asks, how can we use these
complexity models to appreciate better the external drivers for the changes we see?
Yeah, I mean, I think, yeah, that gets back to your question, Derek, earlier, which is they,
in some sense, formalize the contributions of the constraints. I mean, that's partly what they're
all doing. I mean, they're trying to, you know, where do we have freedom to move and where the
constraints are established by the institutional feedback. And I think in every case, we sort of
have to sort of analyze how much is being driven by the constraint and how much is being driven
by our decisions, which is made even more complicated by the fact that our decisions
emerge through a history of institutional feedbacks. It's not even clear that we are free. I mean,
there are some very difficult issues hiding in these circular feedback systems, where you,
how to attribute causality. But they do, I mean, just to get the question, you can actually do that,
you can partition for any given synchronous observation, how much comes from the constraint
and how much is coming from your internal state. You can start getting at those things.
I want to give you a chance to talk a little bit more about learning rules that
based on the success of the corresponding institution there. Say a little bit more about,
are the learning rules merely evolutions of the original rules, meaning like their schema that
are just evolving as a result of feedback? Yeah. So what the paper actually that goes into
digitalness is actually going to be published on May 16th. And it's called on institutional
dynamics and learning rules. So that will go, that might help people. That was for that particular
model, a full discrete enumeration of all possible learning rules. So we can do that in this very
simple setting. And then pick any given one, right, and ask what are the implications if that
were being used. So we don't have, we don't look at the full continuous space between all rules and
so on. But I think the purpose of that work was to show that there is a, I think, quite counterintuitive
relationship between the local incentive reward system and the ensuing institutional dynamic,
that that's the purpose of that work. Because if you look at the literature on institutions,
it tends to work at the institutional level. It doesn't have these multiple time scales,
which is mathematically by the way of heart. And this is something that's a hidden
idea here that one should surface, which is that much of theorizing for good reasons is led by
analytical expediency. I mean, especially economics, where they love that. And the question for our
community is, when are we willing to forfeit that? And that's really the move to machine learning
or simulation, right? Where you say, you know what? No, I mean, it's so far from reality,
I don't care if you understand your model, it's useless, you know. And then that's a kind of,
people set that threshold at different points somehow. It would be very interesting, you might
know, why do we do that psychologically? Why do we have different preferences for that?
I think we have time for one, do we have time for one more?
Laura?
Yes, we have time for one or two more.
Okay, good. So another audience question, it's actually two questions. Does your work provide
any insight into the role of relationships of the agents of systems? And second, does the fact that
contagion hovers around criticality have anything to do with enhancement of adaptive
capacity of the agents? So, yeah, I mean, I think the latter, that's very interesting.
I think the answer has to be yes to that second part, because as in the example, right, of hovering
by r0 equals 1, it's precisely because we are so adaptive that that happens, right, because
as soon as we observe the information bearing on the subcritical regime, we take our mouse off.
If we weren't adaptive, we wouldn't, we would fix. And actually, the pandemic would go away,
it's sort of a peculiar, perverse situation to be in. So yes, absolutely, I think you're absolutely
right. Adaptability is, I think, the key ingredient of tuning to criticality.
What are we going to do to get rid of adaptability?
The first part seemed to be a more obscure, I wasn't sure I understood the first part of the
question. Well, I think that's interesting. I want to follow up on that. So a lot of the systems that
our students deal with are is, you know, so you found this, this results from a mathematical model,
but how do you feedback that, that learning to the agent, like in the case of COVID,
if the, if the individual agents could change their schema or their mental model, so therefore
changing their, you know, behavior, you would get, we could get rid of COVID, right? So how do we
take, you know, it seems to me the hard part is we learn these things about the, at the systemic
level, but how do you get the individual agents to change based on that awareness? I mean, that
seems to be like the crux of the whole thing. It is. And actually, it's even worse for climate
change because it's interesting. I was in sabbatical at Harvard actually, when the pandemic hit.
And I was actually working at the Center for the Environment, which works on climate.
And immediately the conversation we were having is, oh, dear, how do we deal with systems that are
massive, global, tragic, collective commons problems? Yes. Like, ameliorating climate change.
But also operate on time scales where the, the change of our behaviors, the implications of
changing our behavior are not obvious. Yeah. So you just gave a good example, I think that
in COVID, at least we see it, right? Now, part of seeing it is we adapt in the wrong direction
to the earlier question. So climate's a problem because there's no feedback.
There's no learning rule, can't, no learning. No learning rule happens and there's so much delay.
There's so much delay. And what I've heard discussed here is how do, what are the appropriate
metaphors that we could start inculcating in people's minds that would help them understand
delayed feedback? For example, gardening, gardening. Anyone who plants a garden,
right, and I'm very impatient, I'm not, I'm not going to, but there are people who are very good
at it. And they, you realize, I'm going to do all this now, but I'm not going to see the fruits of
my labor for probably about three seasons, because it's going to be really scrappy next year and then,
you know, and so on. And I think there are things that humans do that have those longer
time scales where we're willing to operate with delayed gratification, right? Delayed more.
It doesn't seem to be the case here. And I think I don't have an answer, but I suspect
educating people to think about pandemics and things like them, the way they would think about
gardening or something would be very powerful. And, but unfortunately, we do the opposite because
we say we're going to have an RNA vaccine in a month, right? And so whatever virtuous long-term
thinking we started to mature is immediately obliterated by the expediency of an instantaneous
vaccine, right? I'm not blaming vaccine development, that's fantastic, but these things are actually
kind of in competition in our minds. Yeah, I love the idea of the metaphors and kind
of metaphors we live by, like the fruits of our labor really is built into that is a metaphor of
delay. Yes. And so if we had these sort of systems metaphors that we could, you know, raise children
on, then when they get to adulthood, they would sort of understand that cause and effect aren't
always neighbors on the timeline. And Derek, you just recursively used the metaphor by saying
raising children. It's another exercise. Exactly, that's right. Well, thank you so much, David. I
really appreciate the talk. It's an amazing talk and amazing ideas. And I wish we had many more
hours to chat, but thank you for your talk and answering questions. Thank you very much, everybody.
Thank you, Derek and Laura for inviting me and hope to see you some point at SFI, virtually one
person. But yes, much appreciated. Okay. Bye. Bye.
