Today we return to the wonderful desert landscape of Klai and we're gonna be
talking about an issue that is well in a way dominates the next several decades
in philosophy. Now at first glance you might think it's a very surprising thing.
What is this issue? It's often referred to as the problem of
quantifying it and dealing with the issues that arise from a quantified
model of combining ideas about possibility and necessity or for that
matter various attitudes on belief and knowledge with quantifiable apparatus
that allows you to use terms like sum and all. Now at first glance you might think
why is this significant? Why does this pose serious philosophical problems? The
answer is roughly this. There is a traditional way of looking at metaphysics
where you think about objects. As in Aristotle for example there are
substances, they have properties, they stand in relation and some of the
properties of these substances are essential to them. They couldn't lose
them without altering what they are. Okay other properties are accidental. They can
change without affecting the identity of the object at all. So for example what
are some accidental properties of me? If they could change I would still be me.
Yeah. Where you're standing? Where I'm standing exactly. I'm standing here right
now but I can move around I'm still me. Okay if I do this can't suddenly say
well we just keep getting a new professor in this class. Right? I'm still me. Other
properties that are accidental. What are you wearing? What I'm wearing exactly. I could
wear different things. I'm still me that I'm wearing this kind of sort of cream
colored shirt that is an accidental property of mine. What are some other
accidental properties of mine? The color of your hair. Color of my hair? Yeah I guess I
could do something about that. It used to be different but I was the same person.
In fact somebody recently saw me. I guess they hadn't seen me in a while. They said
when did your hair turn white? I don't know. Actually I do know. It all happened rather
suddenly. But anyway that's something that is an accidental property of mine. What
about essential properties? These are property properties that are necessary
to a thing. And in fact Aristotle gives us three ways of thinking about these
properties that are necessary to a thing. One is just that. The thing cannot
lose them without stopping to be what it is. A second is that they are the things
by virtue of which the thing is what it is. We might say that they are the nature
of the thing. That's the way he sometimes refers to it and Aquinas later calls it
the nature of the thing. It's what makes it what it is. And then finally we could
think of it as something like the definition of the thing or what
corresponds in the thing to what would be a definition of it. Now could there be a
definition of me? Aristotle talks about the question of whether there could be a
definition of Socrates for example. But there could certainly be a definition of
a general kind. So we might think we could have a definition of bachelor or a
definition of human being even. And that these things would express what is
necessary to being a bachelor or a human being. What makes somebody a bachelor or
a human being. What would correspond in the thing, the properties in the thing
that would match the definition of those terms bachelor and human being. So are
there such essential properties? Well from one point of view yes in the
Aristotelian tradition in fact not only are there such properties but they're
crucial to understanding the nature of the world. After all the accidental
properties aren't really very important in detailing what a thing is but the
essential properties are. And so Aristotelian essentialism is this doctrine
that some of the properties of a thing are really substantively identical to it.
Right? No, not identical to it. Essential to it. And constituent of it's
identity in some way. Now there has been throughout the history of philosophy
some resistance to this idea. And so there are people, I think John Locke would be a
good example at least in a certain respect in another respect not at all.
Maybe Hume is a good example of someone who is doubtful about this idea of
essentialism. Why do I say that? Well Locke distinguishes the real from the
nominal essence of the thing. He does think things have a real essence
connected to the real and internal constitution of the thing. But most of
the essences he thinks are taught that are talked about in the Aristotelian
tradition are actually just nominal essences. They do correspond to something
like the definition. But the definition you might say is something that depends on
our categories, our way of understanding the thing. So understand me as a human
being and certain things will look essential to me. But we could also ask
well am I essentially a human being? Maybe, maybe not. And if I'm not
essentially a human being then those properties that are essential to me
qua human being might not be essential to me, qua soul let's say or qua
something else. And so it depends how a thing is described what is essential to
me. From this perspective you might say essence depends on the description of
the thing. It's something that we use to understand the thing but it's not in
the thing itself. And so one way of framing this issue is if we grant that
some properties have this status of being essential either to a thing or to a
kind of thing then is that something that really is about that object? Is it
really about that kind? Or is it something that we are supplying as part of
our conceptual framework for understanding that thing, that kind? It's
really a question of realism versus a kind of anti-realism about those
essences. So almost nobody is going to say oh just nothing's essential
anything in the sense that we never can talk about something being
necessarily this or that or we can't really talk about definitions. It's a
question of whether that distinction is something that we find in the world
among the properties of the thing or the kind. Or whether it's something that
really is just our creation. Now suppose you're a logical empiricist and you
think well first of all you're going to be uncomfortable with this talk of
necessity in the first place right? And we'll get some more about that in a
moment. But whether or not you're willing to talk about necessity at all
you're going to think well what is necessity from a logical empiricist
point of view? It's basically analytic truth. It is coming from our verbal
conventions. And so you're going to think that of course to the extent that we
can talk about essences at all there are things that are coming from our
conceptual capacities. They're coming from our linguistic
framework. And so sure we can have definitions of terms but that's not
expressing some fundamental distinction between properties in the thing.
It's simply a function of the definitions of the terms we're using.
So it's all coming from us. From a more traditional perspective though
you might think no there really are things that are essential to me
and I couldn't lose without ceasing to be me.
There are other things that may be well certainly I can lose and still be me
like the color of my hair or the color of my shirt or where I'm standing.
Now if we start asking well what are the kinds of things that are essential to
me it's much harder right? Easy to list accidental
properties. But if I say suddenly well one is essential
to me then that's a really hard question to answer.
Yeah. Do these essential properties have to be unique to you?
Well not all of them certainly right? There could be some things that are
essential to me. For example you might say I've got
an idea. Self-identity is essential. You are necessarily you.
Okay so Dan Bonovac is necessarily Dan Bonovac.
Now that seems pretty safe and also a good example of something that seems
analytic right? It's not something that really expresses
something you might think about the deep nature of me but about the way we use
identity. And certainly it's not unique. Every
object would have that property and have that property essentially.
So not all of these are going to really be unique to me.
On the other hand you might have the idea that what makes me different from
anyone else is that if you take the collection of
these essential properties there's something that's unique to me about
that collection. So individually they might not be
unique but that combination might be. On the other hand
maybe not. Suppose have you ever seen a movie
Multiplicity? The guy gets cloned and then the clones
start cloning themselves and it all gets sort of
outrageously out of hand. But anyway suppose we did have a cloning
mechanism so that so that there were just a bunch of duplicates
of me. Would those be me? Would we not say oh Dan Bonovac used to be a
particular but now he's a general kind and there are a bunch of them.
He's multiply instantiated or would there be something that distinguishes me
from them? Something about my origin maybe. The way in which I came to be.
They came to be in a very different way by means of the cloning machine.
Or maybe it's a transporter malfunction in Star Trek.
You know you get in the transporter and actually we don't send your particles
down. We just rebuild you on the other side killing
you here. It's a really disturbing view of the
transporter system but suppose you have that view.
And then suppose it malfunctioned so that we don't kill you here so you're still
on the ship. But also now there's a clone of you running
around on the planet and then the clone comes back
and what that means is now there's a second one of you on the ship and that
guy's still stuck down there and they all claim to be you.
Well I don't know what to say about such cases so
it's not clear to me now whether we have three of you
or whether no you're still you. There's something essential to you about the way
in which you were created. These are copies of you but they're not
you just as if you produce a copy of a file
of a computer. You've got copy of the file you don't have that same file.
In any event however that may be does this whole idea of
an essence of the thing make any sense? Well I've already mentioned one reason
why is a logical empiricist. You might think it doesn't
but there are other reasons you might think it doesn't and
they are more general. After all Quine is not a logical empiricist. He's attacked
the analytic synthetic distinction. He's attacked the idea of truth by convention
so you might think he's the kind of guy that's actually going to be very
friendly toward this idea of essential problems
really being in the world but not true. And why not? Well really let's go back
and think about the essential nature of empiricism.
What is an empiricist?
An empiricist thinks that all knowledge comes from
what experience? Well well uh
analytic and synthetic truth but fundamentally experience right?
And then yeah there are these things that are really well knowledge of a sort
but really in the end knowledge of linguistic conventions or something
like that you might think. But all of our knowledge of the
world comes from experience. Now if you're Quine you're not actually going to
single out some of these analytic judgments or
conventional judgments or something like that as an exception. In the end it's
all really about the world and so it's all coming from experience. It's all
judged by the triunl of experience. So in the end it all comes down to
experience but now there are going to be things
that are hard to explain in connection with experience.
So think about the kinds of things that Hume has trouble accounting for for
example. Okay we can talk about the color of my shirt
but now there are going to be other properties of me
dispositional properties of me that you might think are not so
evident. What do we say about dispositional properties?
What are some examples of dispositional properties? You can't directly observe
them. They have to do with the way I would behave
in certain circumstances but those circumstances might actually never
come about. Like the match let's say. We say it's
not soluble even though it's never placed in
water. So we never really have the experience of finding out.
Similarly the salt in my salt shake. I say it is soluble but
actually it might never encounter water and so we might never find out. Look
your temper. Sorry would your temper be one?
Okay good my temper. Am I somebody who is irascible
easy to anger or am I somebody who's gentle, mellow, difficult to anger?
Well you might think I don't know. Not much happens in the average
analytic tradition course to really upset me.
And so you might think this is like the match that's never been placed in water.
Right? I mean nothing's ever happened in your in your experience to
really test whether I'm easy to anger or not.
And the same thing is true with respect to you given my experience.
Right? Are you easy to anger or not? I don't have any experience that's
relevant to that. I mean you might be the sort of person who flies off the
handle. You say what? Analytic judgments? No!
And you know analytic philosophy does that to some people. There's the famous story
about Wittgenstein threatening Popper with the poker.
But ordinarily you might think yeah it doesn't really come up in the context
of this sort of course. So we don't find out and maybe I never find out
that about you. Yeah?
We're saying that these dispositional probabilities are like essential to you?
Oh no no no I'm not saying anything about them being essential. I'm just
thinking yeah well I should make it clear what I'm saying here.
What are potential trouble for an empiricist? Things where we say gosh
what experience could that be based on? Right? Now maybe
I do have experience. There might be some people who see you get angry and they
have a sense you're either easy to anger or hard to anger.
But maybe we never encounter that right? You just go through life and it's all
pretty good. Go through life it's like you know all
right there's this story about a kid who you know never spoke.
Parents took him to all sorts of specialists had him examined.
He seemed normal in all other ways but just never said a word.
Well finally they gave up right? They take him to this specialist. That
specialist do all sorts of brain scans and so on. He seems absolutely normal.
Seems to be intelligent. Nobody can figure out why this child does not speak.
So eventually they just kind of give up. And then one morning
the kid's sitting down before going to school for breakfast.
Mom gives him this piece of toast. Kid suddenly looks at it and says
this toast is burned. Well suddenly she and her husband they're all like
you spoke! You spoke! They're so happy right? And kids say well of course I can
speak. Why haven't you said anything up to now?
It's been 12 years. Kids say well it's all been okay up to now.
Okay so it might be that the kid goes through life the whole way right? I mean
we never find out whether this person is easy to anger because just nothing
ever happens to upset them. Yeah why would that really be a problem?
Because we don't have the knowledge then. So I mean you don't have to justify it
with imbibuism if you don't know it. Okay good you might just say no but we
don't know right? Whether this person is
irascible or gentle or what have you. And so that's fine. It's fine to have
things we do not know. But now you might think well here's
the problem. Remember we were talking about this
in Karnap where Karnap was trying to define terms like
soluble in terms that were strictly observational.
And he found he couldn't do it with a regular conditional. He needed something
like a counterfactual conditional. So it had to be something like if
blah blah blah were to happen right?
Then blah blah blah would happen.
And now the problem is that were to and that would.
It seems to refer to things that actually well aren't part of this world.
The way philosophers now, following Leibniz, tend to think about this
it's talking about other possible worlds. If you were to be placed in this kind of
situation right but maybe you never are then this would happen.
And so it's not just that we don't happen to know.
It feels like the kind of thing that actually it would be hard to explain
our possession of such a property. What could it even mean
to attribute such a property on empiricist grounds?
Because you might think gosh I it's not just that to notice I have to somehow
have contact with these other possible worlds. The very definition of what it
is that such a property seems to refer to these other worlds.
And so there's something strange about that.
Yeah. I mean you could just like arrive at that
knowledge inductively and say salt dissolves one
or salt dissolves one place in water right? I don't really,
I remember talking about this before but now that we're revisiting it like this
I don't really see why you need counterfactuals.
Good, good. Well you might think look I don't really need
any mysterious knowledge here. Here's how I do it.
I have inductive evidence about this rule right?
And on the basis of that inductive evidence
I conclude certain generalizations and some of those I actually consider laws.
Now some of these generalizations I consider accidental.
It just so happens that this takes place. I can't infer it to have any
rid of lawline character. It's just been a matter of chance that
it's worked out that way. However some of these other things might
seem to me to reflect some deeper pattern and so I think that's a law.
Now what's involved in my going from the generalization
that G puts salt in water and it dissolves to
the law. Put it in water it must dissolve. Where does the must come from?
Where does the necessity come from? And you know what I'd say?
Look it's just if we have enough inductive evidence right?
We do this in the United States. We do it in Europe. We do it in Africa.
We do it in India. We do it in China. We do it in Russia and
gee no matter where we go no matter when it is it seems to all be the same and
we start thinking this isn't just an accident.
This is really lawlike. And so one way of looking at this is to say
we start attributing something like necessity, like the must,
like calling that a law, when the inductive evidence is just very broad,
very powerful, seems very, what, kind of a huge
scope in space and time and so on.
Which is by the way why it would be so hard to come up with equivalent laws
in the social sciences because you might think it's very hard to have
that kind of broad inductive evidence. Maybe in psychology you can do it
because you can observe lots of people in lots of cultures and so forth.
But if you're thinking about political science you might think gosh where's the
science?
Because here we call that a department of government right? We don't
claim it to be a science. But you might think the problem is
really we can't get enough inductive evidence.
I mean how many countries are there in the world now?
Quite few but not in comparison to grains of salt for example.
And what kinds of experience have we had let's say with revolutions?
Well some but not equivalent to putting salt in water and finding out what
happens. And so you might think there the inductive
evidence is just sparse enough, very hard to make that move.
Anyway I don't have any real objection to that.
In fact I think that's the way Locke thinks all of this goes.
It's Hume who after all says wait a minute look at
what's happening in these cases. We observe this happening, we observe that
happening, we never see the causal connection.
We never actually observed the link. Yeah.
I don't really see how this inductive evidence would work. Like
if someone were to tell me that salt doesn't dissolve in oil I wouldn't
necessarily have to do the experiment over and over again to
understand that for certain but I could still believe it conceptually.
So I feel like inductive evidence isn't necessarily the only way to get
some kind of dispositional property or something.
Right.
Well here's the problem. Sometimes you're right we do take one counter instance
is enough to establish either a connection or the lack of a connection.
But I'm thinking of cases like the cold fusion experiments.
People claim to have discovered cold fusion and then for at least a decade
there was a huge attempt to try to replicate those
experiments to figure out whether there really was a principle
underlying this and there was really a technology that would enable cold fusion
or whether this was due to some the results they got were due to some kind
of weird phenomenon in their lab and for a long time it was unsettled what it
was. I think now most people dismiss the possibility
though I think there are still some authors who think that
there may still be something there that one could do but many of them
from one experiment people thought oh that's intriguing it made them want to
do more experiments but people didn't immediately say
we've got the technology in the future let's start building cold fusion power
plants and so forth. They felt the need to do more experimentation
so I think in some contexts especially when something refutes along
you know then it's very powerful we say wait a minute this is going to
happen we put the salt in the oil and then what happens when we put the salt
in the oil we've never done it before we're doing it for the first time
and we might say aha this is what happened it did dissolve so salt does
dissolve oil or it didn't dissolve but the evidence for that is rather
thin until we repeat it and if it's the kind of thing that we can't repeat
then it's hard to know what to do which is again part of the reason why in
say political science it would be so difficult to come up with something
law like you can't sort of say whoa wonder if that would happen again
let's hold the last presidential race over again and see if Trump still wins
under these conditions or something yeah can't do that
and so in short it's the kind of thing that
well yeah it's going to depend a lot on how this fits in with the rest of our
knowledge and so quiet at least will say yeah you're right this is how it goes
but a lot of that is driven by where this is in the web how close we are to
experience how much other theoretical support there is and so
anyway we're getting sort of off track because i don't want to spend a huge
amount of time thinking about how we can account for this positional
properties except to say that there's a sense in which
essential properties raise the same kinds of questions
i was hoping here to be referring to something we all
agree about but oh no um anyway essential properties are kind of the same
because we think well yeah i'm saying here gosh
if the object were right to lack the property
it wouldn't
be what it is
and that's similarly modal right it's similarly talking about what would be the
case and maybe i'm never in fact lack the property
and so you know for example would i still be me if i were bald
well let's suppose i just never go bald and then
you might say well gosh we never find out now in fact we think oh come on it's
still be himself to be involved and so we think we know
something about that and yet it looks like in a sense what
what we're knowing here goes similarly beyond experience
directly so if you're in the school of lock as an empiricist you're gonna say
well we reach inductive conclusions about this just as we do about these
scientific laws just as well just as we do
dispositional properties if you're more humane you're going to see a deeper
problem here and think that the very idea takes you
beyond the bounds of experience in a way that makes you uncomfortable
so
why did i stand all that time i don't know it was really just to make the point
that there is kind of this distinction between the lockians and the
humians here and that there's a sort of parallel problem here
so just as carnap worried a lot about this and a lot of people start writing
about counterfactual conditionals and how to understand them and what the
nature of laws is and so forth so similarly we have an
analogous problem with essential problems now we can characterize
certain contexts in language and in thought
as referentially transparent and others as referentially opaque
and that's an important distinction for calling so here's the general idea
we've got this notion of identity okay and there or just
expressed by is in english and ordinarily it allows us to substitute
so typically we can substitute identicles
for identity
so here's an example two plus two is four
four plus four is eight well i should be able to substitute two plus two for
four in that equation to get two plus two plus two plus two
is eight
and that that seems right right that works out just fine
and so ordinarily this is a legitimate rule
Leibniz's law in general says that things are identical if they have exactly
the same properties and if they have exactly the same properties
you should be able to substitute one for the other and typically we can do that
if Dan Bonobak is talking and Dan Bonobak is the professor then the
professor is talking etc but now
there are some contexts where that prevails so we'll say that a context is
transparent
if that works that is to say if substituting
identicals for identicals always preserves truth value
so it turns true sentences into true sentences and false sentences and
false sentences and opaque
if it sometimes
fails
which means it doesn't always preserve truth value
so Quine is worried about these opaque contexts
where we've got some situations where substitution doesn't always work
here's one of his examples basically well yeah we can say
things that involve quotation either directly
or indirectly so
um yeah here's one of these examples Cicero
the name right contains
six letters
this fall by the way there's going to be a course on Cicero and Catullus
in the classic story so you should all take it it would help a few new
laps
yeah well i never mind i'm very fond of both so now Cicero what is his actual
name well it's Marcus Tullius Cicero and so he's
sometimes called Tully as a nickname so Cicero is Tully
but then we might think ah so we can substitute Tully
contains six letters
call that obviously fails right we don't preserve truth by that kind of
substitution we can't substitute in direct
notation and that's sort of surprise really because after all this is about
the name Cicero and not about the person
and so the identity of the person here doesn't mean that the names are going to
share the properties so it's easy to explain why that
fails now this can also be indirect so for example
he gives up this case Giorgione is called Barbarelli
or sorry Giorgione is Barbarelli Giorgione Barbarelli
was the first of the great painters of the Italian Renaissance
and in particular is thought to have painted a painting called The Three
Philosophers which is perhaps why Klein knows about it
sort of mysterious character he died when he was around 30 of the plague
and only painted a few paintings so little is known about him
but anyway here's Klein's example Giorgione was so called because of his
size big guy okay
Barbarelli was so called because of his size well that's not right
okay so so called here is something that sort of sneaks in
a reference to the name and so it's kind of an indirect
one not literally an indirect quotation but nevertheless it's something like a
quotation context it sneaks it in
so there are those kinds of cases but there are much more interesting kinds
of cases so in particular necessity
is one of these one way of thinking about an essential property is that it's
necessary to the thing or to the kind of thing
but now we can think oh wait a minute necessity is weird because it's opaque
in this way so here's an example that might show
the number of planets
is nine
necessarily
nine is greater than seven therefore necessarily
the number of planets
is greater than seven
now does that work
no what's gone wrong
there's no necessity that there'd be more than seven planets
exactly there's no necessity there being more than seven planets
i think could have been six planets i mean a little while ago they demoted Pluto
for me now i gather they promoted Pluto back up again so
they're nine planets again yay go ahead because it makes it easier to teach
quiet here but um actually somebody said well
wait a minute i i'm not sure the earth is a planet
and you might think oh wait we're going to change the definition of planets so
even the earth is in a planet maybe it will turn out that only i don't know
what would satisfy their new definition of planet
those people got their way but there might be way fewer than seven planets
by that criterion in any case you might be yeah look it's highly contingent
whether or not there are more than seven planets that's not a
necessary truth but this surely is a necessary truth nine is
greater than seven that seems necessary something that
follows from the laws of arithmetic and the number of planets is nine so why
can't we do this substitution well here's what quiet ends up concluding
is this property so we can frame it this way
is the property of being
necessarily greater than seven
um well maybe i don't want to
we could just say is that true what let's say is the property of being greater
than seven uh necessary
two nine the object nine now one way of looking if you're a realist
you think you can answer the question if you're a realist about his essences
right because then you think yes the essence is in the object
and so what is the realist going to say about this question
is the property of being greater than seven necessary to know
yeah sure it is
because nine is necessarily greater than seven you couldn't make it
less than seven for example or equal to seven without changing
what nine is but suppose you were one of these
anti-realists
then how are you going to answer that question
depends how you designate it right if you call it if you're thinking of nine
as nine then yes it's necessarily greater than seven
has that property unnecessarily but suppose you're thinking of this the
number of plants that it doesn't nine qua nine
you might think necessarily has that property
but the number of planets nine qua the number of planets does not
and so it sort of depends on how it's described
and that's in the end client's position it depends how it's described
so we can talk about things having essences but only
as when described as such and such nine described as that number
we're already sort of describing it in terms of its position in the number
sequence and so yes it's necessarily greater than seven
but nine described as the number of planets no that's not necessarily greater
than seven nine just without any description he
says I don't think I could make any sense of the idea
yeah well why is nine described as the number of planets not necessarily
greater than seven because there could have been fewer than seven
but there aren't there aren't yeah there aren't
hey that's that's where I'm confused like there could have been
but if there would have been then it just wouldn't have been nine in the first
place it would it change it would be different so wouldn't us you know yeah
yeah okay good you might think the number of
planets wait a minute um I'm not sure what to do with that
when I start thinking about other possible circumstances
after all you say it could have been fewer than nine planets
well we're now talking about some other possible and so
what about one of these worlds where there are now fewer than here's the
sun and here's mercury let's say and
here's venus and the big bang worked out a little
differently in this world so all the other planets flew off in this space
and there only those two remain okay so in this world there are two planets
now what does the number of planets refer to in that world
two okay one wavelength yeah look the number of planets here
is just two but then it looks like the number of planets
is nine in this world two in that world so it's not necessarily greater than
seven on the other hand you might think wait a minute
no when I said the number of planets is nine I mean the number of planets in this
world and so I don't mean the number of planets
let's call the actual world here w in this world
w prime let's say then really I have to distinguish the number of planets
in w prime from the number of planets
in w and the number of planets in w is still nine
right because it is what it is it doesn't matter what world you're viewing
it from in that world in our world the number of planets is not
and so you might think wait a minute when I say the number of planets do I mean
that to vary with world so ooh now the number of
planets is this or do I mean the number of planets there actually are
and that actually would be something that ties this to this world
the actual number of planets that that sort of means
that's not going to vary from world to world but if I don't sort of pin it down
with actually then it looks like it could vary
on the other hand people don't ordinarily go around
unless they're teaching seminars on motor logic they don't go around using the
term actually much in that way and so often if we just say the
number of planets the number of students in the class etc etc
we mean the actual number we're not talking about
something that might vary you know I say the number of students in the class is
what is it in this class like 25 and somebody says
well what if a bunch of people dropped well yeah then the number of planets
the number of planets would change the number of students right
that are in the class then would be different on the other hand the number
of students who were in the class now would remain the same
and so you might think that actually there's a sort of
hidden ambiguity here which I think is part of this you might think look it
depends on how it's described and here's an additional way in which it
depends do I mean the number of planets that happen to be
in a given world right do I mean the number of planets there actually are
in this world and those would be as it were two
different descriptions and that too would affect what we end up
saying about this question
okay well that's one sort of problem it's connected to a problem about
quantification because now if I say so there is
something
that is necessarily
greater than seven how do I evaluate that
now quaint doesn't have any problem with necessity applied to a sentence
he doesn't have any problem with necessity on the outside of this you
might say it's a necessary truth that
blah blah blah blah he worries about the necessity being inside
okay there is something that is necessarily greater than seven that has
being greater than seven as an essential property of it
and why does he worry about that because this something
isn't described as being any of any particular kind
and if it really does depend on how it's described then it doesn't make any
sense to talk about whether the object itself
is necessarily greater than seven or not what makes sense
is to say the number of planets is not necessarily
greater than seven but nine is necessarily greater than seven
and yet we're talking about the same object so it depends on the description
and so he's worried that things like this don't fully make sense
now the same sort of thing can happen with respect to
attitudes and that's what the paper quantifiers and propositional
attitudes is about this begins by the way with one of
my favorite passages of analytic philosophy the incorrectness of rendering
tceus is hunting unicorns in the fashion there is an x
such that x is a unicorn and tceus is hunting x
is conveniently attested by the non-existence of unicorns
but it's not due simply to that zoological lacuna
it would be equally incorrect to render earnest hunting lions as there is an
x such that x is a lion and earnest is hunting x
where earnest is a sportsman in africa the force of one is rather that there
is some individual lion or several which earnest is hunting
stray circus property for example the contrast recurs in
i want a sloop the version there is an x such that x is a sloop and i want x
is suitable only in so far only as there may be said to be a certain sloop that i
want if what i seek is mere relief from slooplessness
then two gets the wrong idea okay now this is something that actually linguists
have worried a lot about what do you do about cases like hunting a unicorn or
hunting a lion or wanting a sloop and so forth
and then he kind of leaves that problem behind but it's an interesting
problem anyway that's that's one difficulty where we
want to say wait hunting uh actually yeah i should
sort of put in here we've got this additional thing now
um of attitudes hunting is something that does
involve some kind of attitude um hunting searching for
um wanting
but there are others so here is a wonderful story
um consider the difference between there is an x such that Ralph believes
that x is a spy and Ralph believes that there is an x such that x is a spy
they're two very different states right they may be ambiguously phrased as
Ralph believes that someone's a spy but they may be unambiguously
phrased respectively as there's someone who Ralph believes to be a spy and
Ralph believes there are spies the difference is vast
if Ralph is like most of us eight is true that is to say
he does believe they're spies but there's no particular person of whom he
believes that that person is a spy well
here is the marvelous story there's a certain man in a brown hat
whom Ralph has glimped several times under questionable circumstances on
which we need not enter here suffice it to say that Ralph suspects he's a
spy also there's a gray haired man vaguely known as Ralph
as rather a pillar of the community whom Ralph is not aware of having seen
except once at the beach now Ralph does not know it but the men are
one and the same can we say of this man Bernard J.
Orcutt to give him a name that Ralph believes him to be a spy
if so we find ourselves accepting a conjunction of this type
W sincerely denies blah blah blah and yet believes that blah blah blah
with one in the same sentence in both of these blanks for Ralph is ready enough
to say in all sincerity Bernard J. Orcutt is no spy
he's that upstanding member of the community right if on the other hand
with a view to disallowing these situations
we say man believes Ralph believes the man in the brown hat is a spy
Ralph doesn't believe the man seen at the beach is a spy
but wait a minute the man in the brown hat is the man at the beach
now what do we say about Ralph's beliefs so here the problem
is well in general about belief but also specifically
about this does Ralph have a belief about Bernard J.
well here's Ralph he believes
the man in the brown hat
is a spy but Ralph
doesn't believe
that the man at the beach
is a spy in fact he would outright deny it
but those two are identical right they're both
Bernard J. Orcutt so does Ralph believe that Orcutt is a spy or not
well under one description the man in the brown hat yes
under the other description the man at the beach no
and so it's very tempting here to say that actually belief
is not something you have about an object it's something you have about an
object under a certain description
