When I signed up for studying at the university, I thought being a physicist was my dream job.
But here I am on YouTube. How did that happen? I think I owe you an explanation.
When I started studying at the university, my expectations were based on biographies of scientists.
They wrote a lot of letters to each other, they went to conferences, they were thinkers and tinkerers
and had sometimes heated but usually respectful arguments. This is what I expected.
Yes, that was hopelessly naive, I know. But in my defence, I don't come from an academic
background. I come from a family of teachers and accountants and post office workers.
They're normal people. I did an internship in the chemical industry and another one in a bank,
gleefully stamping transfer slips. I just didn't know anyone with a PhD. And those were the early
1990s. You couldn't just ask the internet and within a day you'd have 2000 people giving you
advice and some marriage proposals along with that. The first years at university were glorious
because for the first time in my life, I was in the company of other people who were like me.
At school, I had always been the weird one for actually being interested in science and maths.
But at the university, everyone was like that. We talked about everything from maths to philosophy,
physics and politics. And yes, alcohol was involved. It was a really good time. And that was all very
nice except I was getting older and still didn't have a decent job. I made a little money by selling
oil paintings, those were the days people. But I didn't seriously think I was a particularly
good artist. I really had to get a normal job and stop asking my grandma to help out with paying rent.
I thought that the Institute of Physics would give me a job when I'd finished my master's degree
with good grades. They technically at the time that was called a diploma. I thought they'd give
me a job because that had worked for all the other students previously. If your grades were good,
they'd offer you a job as a graduate student. It wasn't particularly great pay, but it was a real
job. And that's where things started to go wrong. Because I finished my exams with excellent grades.
I don't mean to brag, but I think you need this context. But I wasn't offered a job because I'm
a woman. I'm not guessing that that's what happened. I know because they told me. You see,
the guy who was head of the Institute told me that since I'm female, I should apply for a scholarship
that was exclusively for women in the natural sciences. Because then the Institute wouldn't
have to pay for me. Makes sense, doesn't it? So, well, I applied for the scholarship and got it.
All right. But these scholarships don't come with any benefits like pension savings and health
insurance. And I know they sounds very German, but these things matter to us. Also, I was now
reminded on various occasions that I wasn't actually employed at the Institute. I was just there
because I had this scholarship for women. And that was totally true. This, by the way, is why I'm
against programs or positions that are exclusively for women. I think that treating women differently
just reinforces the prejudice that women are less capable than men. But I digress. All right,
you might say, stop whining. At least I did have an income now. Yes, so far, so good. At this time,
I was the only woman at the Institute who was not in the administration. The next problem was that
the head of the Institute made a lot of money selling textbooks. He wrote very little of these
textbooks himself. Rather, he gave assignments for parts of the books to students and postdocs,
which is why, in case you've ever wondered, these textbooks are so discontinuous and partly
repetitive. He expected me to also work for him, to which I said no. I was then ordered into his
office in which he gave me a very angry speech, according to which I wasn't loyal to all the
other students who did their part. I told him that I was under no obligation to work for him
and didn't care what the rest of the students were thinking. He got angry. I laughed at him.
He started shouting that I was fired and physically shoved me out of his office. True story. The irony
is that he couldn't fire me because, if you remember, he had refused to hire me in the first
place. I was paid by that scholarship for women and that wasn't managed by the Institute but by
the Office of the University President. I'm not just telling you this because it's entertaining.
It was also a rather rude awakening. It made me realize that this Institute wasn't about
knowledge discovery. It was about money making. And the more I saw of academia, the more I realized
it wasn't just this particular Institute and this particular professor. It was generally the case.
The moment you put people into big institutions, the girl shifts from knowledge discovery to
money making. Here's how this works. If a researcher gets a scholarship or research grant,
then the institution gets part of that money. It's called the overhead. Technically, that's
meant to pay for offices and equipment and administration etc. But academic institutions
then pay part of their staff from this overhead. So they need to keep that overhead coming.
Small scholarships don't make much money but research grants can be tens of millions of dollars
and the overhead can be anything between 15 and 50 percent. This is why research institutions exert
loads of pressure on researchers to bring in grant money. And partly, they do this by keeping
their researchers on temporary contracts so that they need grants to get paid themselves.
While the administrators who are paid on the overhead usually have permanent positions,
but you get used to this kind of crap. And the overhead isn't even the real problem. The real
problem is that the easiest way to grow in academia is to pay other people to produce papers
on which you, as the grant holder, can put your name. That's how academia works. Grants pay students
on postdocs to produce research papers for the grant holder. And those papers are what the
supervisor then uses to apply for more grants. The result is a paper production machine in which
students on postdocs are burned through to bring in money for the institution. Most of that money
comes from your taxes. After my PhD, I applied for another scholarship and got that and then I got
a postdoc job and a grant and another job and another job and another grant and so on. And I began
to understand what you need to do to get a grant or get hired. You have to work on topics that are
mainstream enough, but not too mainstream. You want them to be a little bit edgy, but not too edgy.
No, it needs to be something that fits into the existing machinery. And since most grants are
three years or five years at most, it also needs to be something that can be wrapped up quickly.
The more I saw of this, the more I realized this wasn't how I wanted to spend my life.
The other thing that happened was that the more I saw of the foundations of physics,
the more I became convinced that most of the research there wasn't based on sound scientific
principles. I know this sounds wild, like I'm the crank next door on YouTube and maybe that's
what I am. But I like to think that my argument was and still is very academic. I never intended
it to be offensive. I just explained why thinking up new particles isn't a good strategy for progress
in physics and why that had gotten an entire discipline stuck. And naive as I was, I expected
physicists to think about it. I expected rational debate. But that never came. No one was interested.
No one is interested. They were interested in writing more papers. And that's what they need
all these particles and other wild ideas for, to write papers, to get grants, to get postdocs,
to write more papers and round and round it goes. Meanwhile, I had moved half around the world
because that's standard for postdocs. It's just expected of you. And at some point you just accept
the constant moving as normal because the only people you know also do it. It's incredibly
hostile to personal life, detrimental to mental health. And women suffer from it more because
our reproductive reality is that we need to start families earlier than men. By my mid 30s, I had
somehow miraculously managed to get married and have two children. But I couldn't find a job
anywhere near my husband. So for several years I commuted from Frankfurt to Stockholm. And yes,
those cities are actually in different countries. After five years of my murder commute, I just
couldn't do it anymore. My mental health was worse than ever. I was permanently stressed out. I was
feeling guilty for not working more and not spending more time with my kids. I had several
nervous breakdowns. I was constantly ill. I decided I'd go back to Germany and not move
out of the country again until the kids were out of school. Instead, I applied for research grants
on projects that lasted one, two or three years and that could be located in Germany.
A lot of water has flown under the bridge since, so let me be honest. At this point, I'd figured out
what you need to put into a grant proposal to get the money. And that's what I did. I applied for
grants on research projects because it was a way to make money, not because I thought it would leave
an impact in the history of science. It's not that what I did was somehow wrong. It was and still
is totally state-of-the-art. I did what I said I'd do in the proposal. I did the calculation. I
wrote the papers. I wrote my reports and the reports were approved. Normal academic procedure.
But I knew it was bullshit. Just as most of the work in that area is currently bullshit and just
as most of academic research that your taxes pay for is almost certainly bullshit. The real problem
I had, I think, is that I was bad at lying to myself. Of course, I tried to tell myself and
anyone who was willing to listen, that at least unofficially on the side I do the research that
I thought was worth my time, but that I couldn't get money for because it was too far off the
mainstream. But that research never got done because I had to do the other stuff that I actually
got paid for. Then Covid came and it reminded me how short life really is. I pivoted, applied for
funding on the research that I wanted to do, that I was rather afraid wouldn't get funded. It didn't
get funded and so here we are on YouTube where I talk about why I love science and hate it at the
same time. This sounds like a sad story and in some sense it is because it's the story of a young
scientist whose dream died. And it's the story of an old scientist who thinks they could have made
a difference if it hadn't been necessary to get past five reviewers who didn't share my interests
because that's what it comes down to eventually. It's not that they say there's something wrong
with your proposal. It just doesn't excite them because it's not the main current interest.
My problem has always been that I just didn't fit in. But there's a happy ending in that I found
you, a community of people who share my interests, well more or less, or why the heck have you not
been watching my video on indefinite causal structures. It's been quite a change to switch
from academia to being self-employed. I had to learn how to write invoices. I had to register a
business. I have a tax consultant, two agent and a 12 person team that's distributed over half the
world. Very steep learning curve. Mistakes were made. But eventually today I feel good about it
because unlike academic research this is an honest trade. You get some of my knowledge, I get some of
your attention. I like the simplicity of that. And I'm also heartened that there are so many
people who care about obscure problems in the foundations of physics, though I think you underestimate
the relevance of indefinite causal structures. So that's my story, no more and no less. Please
do not think that my experience with academia is universal or that I've claimed it is. I know many
people who love academia the way it is and you think it's working just fine. I'm just not one
of them. Have never been and I don't think I'll ever be. I'm not sure if I'm going to post this
video. It's a bit too much, isn't it?
