What's up everybody? Welcome to another episode of Conversations with Tom. I am here with
Daniel Schmackdenberger and dude, you were the guy that showed up on my feed when I
started researching the end of the world, which is a pretty fascinating thing to become
known for. And I'm super curious, how did you, you've touched so many different things
from the neurohacker, hacker collective and self optimization and actually creating businesses.
How did you end up getting so deep into civilizations and how they fall apart?
What a good civilization is and how to improve things in our world, I'd say was my interest
since I was young and kind of the center line. So how to improve.
How young are we talking?
Well, I was very fortunate to be homeschooled growing up and homeschooled in a way that's
closer to what people would call unschooling now, where I didn't have a fixed curriculum.
So I got to study what I wanted. And so seeing the things that seemed like the biggest problems
in the world and finding out why are these things like this was actually what got to
be my curriculum. So now are, were you taught by your parents or did they have give you
access to natural teachers?
My parents facilitated and sometimes I'd go to a public school or a private school for
a while, but they were very actively engaged in how I was processing the information. And
then other times finding tutors and other times just working with books. It was before
internet. So I couldn't Wikipedia things, but we could certainly use books and encyclopedias
and what was their logic? Did they not like school? They didn't think it was going to
be a good education. What was the, the reasoning?
Yeah, they, they were kind of educational philosophers intuitively and had the sense
that kids ask lots of questions. They have a deep curiosity in school, mostly doesn't
facilitate their questions. And so when the kid asks, why is the sky blue and why is
this fire hot and what are emotions and whatever questions they ask, they're actually very
deep questions that if you want to address, why is the sky blue? There's atmospheric science.
There's understanding the wavelengths of light. There's understanding the nature of our solar
system and astronomy and what a sun is. And then there's the neuroscience and optics and
eyes. And there's like a lot that goes into it that naturally starts to unfold that helps
people understand a lot of topics and also interconnected rather than fragmented way.
If you follow the curiosity, but most parents and also most teachers don't know how to answer
those things. And so then I was going to ask, like, how, how did your parents answer that?
Like if my kids asked me, and not that I have kids, keep in mind, but if my kids were to
ask me a question that I didn't know the answer to, I'd be like, yeah, let's get you to public
school real fast because I don't want to keep answering these questions. So did one of your
parents stay home? Yeah, both of them worked to work from home as much as they could be
pretty available. And if they didn't know the answer, then it was, let's go see how
to figure that out. And so that would be, you know, going to the library and pulling
out cards to find the right book, pulling up encyclopedias. Also, something even better
was them asking me, why do you think it might be? How do you think it might be? So my answer
was not instantly just defer to outside authority. It was to take the interest and facilitate
my own thinking on it, but then to not just stay there because the answer I come up with
might be totally gibberish, but to investigate. So it was facilitating interest and facilitating
the process of learning how to deepen the knowledge and deepen the interest as it goes.
And of course, as you learn some things, you become aware of how much other adjacent stuff
that's interesting you don't know is. And so if you do that, and you don't force the
kid to focus on and memorize stuff with fear of punishment that they have no interest in,
then you don't break their interest in life and you actually facilitate deep end interest
and people tend to become good at things they really care about that. Yeah, that is a powerful
thing. When I think about part of getting good is building desire. And if you can capitalize
on something that you're already on fire for, and I've heard you talk about this in the
perspective of how you create that next civilization, you likened it to an iPhone's like, you don't
have to convince people to get excited about technology, like it works and it brings some
benefit to your life. And so people just adopt things that they're really into. I'm super
curious. So you, I think you have a brother, right? Or by coincidence, there's a guy on
the board of one of your companies with the exact same last name. Is it just the two of
you or there more? So what's the age difference? Three years younger. So how did your parents
handle that? Was he just sort of forced to come up to your level? Did they split it up
and talking to one of you at one time and the other to another?
Like I said, they had kind of intuitions about things that were wrong with society that
related to how we developed humans. And that kind of was a sense of how to do education
differently, how to do parenting, how to do family differently. But it was very experimental.
They actually called our family a guinea pig for four of us and was an experiment. And it
didn't have the benefit of studying Montessori and Waldorf and lots of other systems that had
figured some things out. So there were a lot of mistakes that could have been prevented, but
they were also the benefit of they were in their own kind of authentic inquiry and interest. It
happened that my learning style and lately worked with what my parents knew how to do better than
my brothers did. And so he had a bit of a rougher go because I think they expected his path would
be more similar to mine. And it took a little while for them to figure out that he had a very
different set of interests and learning style. He ended up excelling at entrepreneurialism and
political activism and things that were not my areas of focus. Once he kind of figured that out.
Do you have kids?
I don't. So that would have been interesting to see like how you handle that. Have you given a
thought to how the way that you came up and the fact that it wasn't crushed out of you could be
systematized and it could be something that could be rolled out?
Thought about that quite a lot, of course.
So what is that in terms of the ideal school system? What does that look like?
I think it's less to think about it as an ideal school system and as a civilization, because by
the time the kid goes to school, they've already been profoundly imprinted. By the time they're five
or six years old and they're going to first grade or kindergarten or wherever it is they start,
they've already fully learned the language in which they think and all of the ways that that
language predisposes patterns of thought. They've already learned the beginning of emotional
dispositions and social values and lots of things. And then obviously if the educational system has
to prepare kids for the workforce, so we think about economics as it is, then it has to do
certain things that are not necessarily what would make them the healthiest, happiest people if
it's preparing them for a workforce. As the workforce changes through technological automation
and peak resource issues of the planet and AI automation and other things like that,
obviously the role of education gets completely recontextualized. So instead, if you were to
ask, how would we redesign civilization from scratch that included the thing we call education,
but also we mostly evolved in small bands and villages where we didn't just have two parents
that were influencing us. We had a whole crew of people that we had pretty deep connections with,
sub-Dundar kind of connections. Is even the nuclear family within a very large city metropolis where
you don't know hardly anyone else but have interactions with lots of people and then the
mostly have huge numbers of superficial interactions via online social media platforms?
What does that do to develop humans? So this question of ontological design, we build environments,
whether it's schools or economic systems in the nature of the incentive of economics,
as long as the forest, I go and enjoy the forest, gives me no economic advantage,
but if I cut it down and commoditize it, it gives me a lot of economic advantage,
the economic system itself, the perverse incentive in the economic system is conditioning value
systems in people and whoever does better at getting the value systems that go along with
the economic incentive system will end up getting more power within the system and thus
continuing to evolve the system in the direction that benefits them and the other people do well
with it. So if you think about... Let me ask you so that I can make sense of the worldview. So
everything that gets designed has a goal in mind. So when you first started talking, I thought that
your punchline is going to be sort of happiness, health of the individual. Is that accurate or is
it more the perpetuation of the species? If you had to say a highest value, would it be that a
happy and healthy populace that... Imagine the movie, was it Children of Men, where there are no
more kids and so population is basically the world's just ending because they're not able to procreate
anymore. But imagine that, but it was like everybody was having a great time right until the moment
they died or a civilization where people are not exactly loving life, but we find a way to get
in balance with resources and we're able to go on and on and on. Which of those to you is
better? I think you set it up to make it obvious that those are both gibberish desires,
that a civilization that is an enduring hell.
Well, I won't go that far. I'm really trying to find the perfect way to ask a question where I can
find out if it's more meaningful to you to find a way to continue on. And so because I'm looking for
what to optimize for and you can optimize for continuation. You can optimize for happiness.
You obviously, I would assume, want to do both. But I find it is very edifying when you force
people to force rank things so that you can't have sort of two number ones. Because I now have
spent enough time in your world and sort of where you go. I know sort of the ending points of some
of the arguments, but I'm super curious as to what is the big driver for you in terms of how you
think about waking up in the morning and constructing a civilization. Optimization
theory itself is one of the underlying problems. This is actually super important, so indulge me
a moment here. Yeah. If we do the thing you call stack ranking, which is an idea that comes from
computer science. If I think about computers and I'm stack ranking trying to optimize things in a
software system, that software system is a complicated system, as opposed to a complex
system, and I'm going to define those formally, the difference. The software and the hardware it
runs on didn't self-organize. We didn't get spontaneous self-organization of hydrocarbons
into protocells and cells. We got somebody did the lithography to make the computer chips and
there's a blueprint for the hardware and a blueprint for the software. In a complicated system,
you'll notice like this computer and the software doesn't repair itself if it gets harmed. It doesn't
self-evolve and the phase space of all the things it can do are fully explicated and it has formal
causation. If I hit this key, this will happen. Necessary institution causation. In complex systems
like biology, there isn't a blueprint. The genome isn't a blueprint. It's a generator function to
code new proteins under new environments where you can have it do things that it's never done before
if you expose it to a novel pathogen or a novel environment. A generator function and a blueprint
aren't the same thing. In a complex system also, it does self-heal and self-repair. It does also
self-evolve. It's different in type. Optimization theory from complicated systems, the metaphor
where we thought our mind was a clock when we figured out clocks. Before that, Native Americans
might have thought of the mind as an ecosystem. Then we got a clock. Now known, the mind is a
computer. We pick whatever the metaphor that we're operating with is, but where the metaphor is wrong,
it really fucks stuff up. It can give you some very partial insights and also some really dreadful
differences. The definition of a complex system is that it has some emergent properties beyond
what any complicated model of it assumes that the complicated model doesn't show. Basically,
if I take a cell and I try to model it, I try to make a software program for how that cell works.
The cell will do some things that that model doesn't do. As I keep making the model better,
it'll keep doing some things that the model doesn't do. That's what we call an emergent
property. What that means is, if I make a model, because my model of reality isn't reality, that's
the first verse of the Tao Te Ching. The Tao that is speakable is not the eternal Tao.
My model of the thing isn't the actual thing. If I think the model is the thing and then I try to
optimize for the model, where the model and the thing are different, I actually destroy the real
thing. Can you put that into real-world example? Yeah, I make an economic calculus. I make an
economic system for humans or these rational self-serving agents and they follow specific supply
and demand economic models and laws. I can get more advanced things to be able to look at the
laws of how they'll do with things like derivative, black skulls, whatever, but they're basically
simple mathematical laws and say, here's how we optimize maximum productivity and generativity
for everyone. They don't work. They kind of work and then they also lead to environmental
destruction, which wasn't part of the metric set. This is why I'm trying to get you to stack
ranked things, which is interesting that for you, that's where it breaks down. For me to understand
what you mean when you say it doesn't work, I have to understand what you're trying to optimize for.
Once I understand, because in the beginning, when I first started diving into you, I thought,
okay, this is about optimizing for what all sort of round to human well-being,
but I think there's an important caveat in there, which to you, it is sort of beyond critical and
I think the whole meaning and purpose for you is that as long as it is not a hell, that continuation
is a critical thing that is sort of behind every word that you say, but I'm not sure I'm
interpreting that right. Okay, so let's say that we're maximizing for subjective happiness,
decoupled from objective measures, and so we're going to find some types of states that we can
subjectively report on. Well, then the matrix might actually be the best way to optimize for it,
right? Disconnect from any kind of objective reality outside of brain stimulus and just brain
stimulate the fuck out of the dopamine, urgic response and say, great, we optimize for human
happiness. And I don't think anyone actually thinks that's a maximally meaningful world.
Or if we say maximize for the happiness at the individual level, well, some individuals might
be sadists and really get off on hurting lots of other things. If we say maximize for continuance,
a continuance that is really shitty, it's like, why? What is meaningful about life that you would
want to have continued? So what you're, what I hear that you're trying to ask is what is
fundamentally meaningful? What is, if we cannot, I won't use the word optimize, but if we can
act in ways that benefit different things, we can say optimize, but what you're going to end
up seeing is that it's not optimizing a single metric. Let me, let me actually make that clear.
Let's say that I value the life of rhinos and I don't want them to go extinct.
And then I also value the life of coral and I don't want it to go extinct, but I also value
kids that I don't want to starve in the third world and I also value subjective happiness of poets.
Now, how many dead rhinos are worth how much dead coral are worth, how many dead kids are worth,
how much lack of happiness are worth, how many tons of CO2? How do I commensurate those metrics
to then be able to say what my optimization algorithm is going to optimize for? I have to do
some kind of weighting and then I say, well, but in the context where the rhinos get below a
certain number, they're worth more, but then when they get above a certain number, they get, oh,
but then I didn't even account for all these things, these soil microbes without which everything
dies and I didn't even account for them and this is now I got to bring soil microbes into it. And
then I didn't account for the fact that subjective reporting will have these biases or miss these
things or orient towards addiction. So whatever my optimization set is, there will be things that
matter that are outside of it that I have to continuously bring in. So the optimization is for
the evolutionary integrity of the whole or wholeness itself, which is different than how we
think of theory of optimization. So do we care about people's subjective experience? Yes,
we also care about objective metrics of the quality of their life like longevity and physical health
and things like that. Yes, also care about that. Do they correlate one for one? No, there are some
very happy people who are crippled and there are some very physically able people who are miserable.
There are some people who are happy who make other people miserable. And so and do we care about
just individual quality of life or also the relationships? What about happiness versus
evolutionary rate? What if we could be happy but stagnate versus evolve quite quickly but never
enjoy the things we're evolving to? And we all have this in our own life, right? Like if do I
want to be bettering myself but in a way where I'm bettering myself because of the driver that I'm
a piece of shit who's never enough so I always have to get better but I never actually enjoy
any of it? Or do I accept myself in a way that makes me complacent? Well obviously neither of
those. I want to enjoy what is fully and have my love of life have me want to keep growing
not because of a dysfunctional driver, right? So I'm optimizing for if anything the product
of the dialectic of my experience of life now and my ability to experience life more deeply into the
future. Now if I take both sides I say I want to be able to enjoy the beauty of life as fully as I
can now. I also want to be able to add to the beauty of life for other people. I also want to
deepen my capacity to experience the beauty of life and add to it. Being, doing, and becoming.
And then you say how do we optimize for a virtuous cycle between the modes of being,
doing, becoming individually and collectively? Now we start to get in the right direction.
So basically this shit is complicated. So when I think about, so you, I don't know how much you
think of yourself as being tied to Game B but certainly your name comes up a lot with this whole
idea of Game B. That'd be great if you can quickly sort of break down what Game A is, what Game B is
and then what I find interesting is, okay, can what, one, do we believe it to be conceivable
that we can actually construct realistically Game B by putting systems or whatever it is
that's going to be in place there? But first I think people have to understand what it is and
then we can go down the road of that conversation. So if you don't mind really fast, what's Game A,
what's Game B? The term in Game B was coined by Jordan Hall and the Weinsteins and Jim Rott and
a number of other people that were brought together at Santa Fe Institute back in the day to think
about a new civilization that had fundamentally new and better characteristics. And so in
contradiction to the idea that this thing, which is obviously the US civilization today and 100
years ago in the US versus Chinese civilization are different but that they're all part of a
meta system that has certain system dispositions like environmental disruptions happening across
the whole thing, wealth inequalities happening across the whole thing. So Game A is basically the
idea of game theory, which is individual people, individual corporations, individual races, nations,
whatever competing against each other in ways that maximize their benefit as much as they can,
even if it harms or externalizes harm to other players or the commons. So roughly Game A is
the civilization that emerges dominated by game theory. Which is basically what we're living in
now. Right. And there is a recognition and I wasn't part of that crew, I made friends with
them after they actually disbanded that thing and then it kind of recycled and I was working on
similar things in a different context. So Game B is the idea, what would the Game B, what would
the kind of game dynamics or how people show up and play of a game that doesn't orient toward
self-termination? So we'd have to unpack about why we would say Game A does intrinsically
self-terminate. What are the properties about it to say what would categorical solutions to those
look like? Yeah, so I don't know. I'll answer the question, at least as I understand it. Basically,
you have a world with finite resources where you are incentivized. So whaling is a great
example I've heard you use before. If you capture that whale, then you can sell it, you can monetize
it. It has basically value to take it out of the ocean, has zero value in the ocean. And even if
you were to say, no, no, no, I want to live in the world where the whale stays in the ocean,
there's somebody else who goes, huh, all right, motherfucker, I'm going to go get the whale then.
So now it's like you're going to lose the whale anyway, so you might as well be the one that
takes it. And in a world of infinite resources, you could actually get away with that. But in
a world of finite resources, as you say it, it ends itself eventually. So you will run out of
resources. Specifically because it's not that me seeing the whale in the ocean doesn't provide
any value to me that I call value. I might feel a sense of all seeing it, right? I might feel a
sense of interconnectedness or beauty or whatever it is. But that doesn't increase my game theory
of capacity to do anything. I can't extract and exchange that value, that experiential value.
But if I kill the whale, and I sell it as meat, and I get that money that I can then go buy weapons
or building materials or employ people with that actually increases my power. So there are kinds of
value that are extractable and exchangeable, extractable, accumulatable, exchangeable that
increase power. And there are types of value that are appreciatable, but don't increase power. So
those who orient to the power increasing value end up getting more power and then dominating the system
dynamics. So then that creates a race to do that thing. Because like you said, if I don't kill the
whale, I am not protecting the whale, because somebody else is going to kill the whale. Now
those guys might actually be my enemies and use that increased economic ability, because they're
going to feed more people, their population is going to grow, and then they're going to come
kill us in war. So actually for my own security, not only do I have to now kill the whale, I have to
race to get them faster than that guy, because now we're in a growth race, which also means I'm
going to advance whaling technologies to be able to take way more than I need grow my population
base, start exporting to other population bases so that I can get the optionality of money to
build other kinds of things with. And so what we end up getting is being able to see the industrialized
fishing mechanisms that we have operating today that can fish more fish in a single net than maybe
all of human history could in a year, you know, at previous points of human history. And it's like
that kind of arms race multiplied by the ability to keep increasing the tech. And when everybody
increases the tech, whether it's military tech, you build an AI weapon, I have to build AI weapons
and counter AI weapons, or I lose by default. And then I have to try to get an advantage on you,
because you probably have some advantage, you're trying to get the secrets, I have to spy on you,
I have to lie to your spies and hide the stuff, and I have to try to keep advancing it. But
when you're advancing your weaponry, and so am I, and I'm advancing it relative to you,
you're advancing on the base of what exists, you get a compounding curve, which is an exponential
curve. And we've only recently started to get to the verticalizing part of that curve, started to
go steep with the industrial revolution. And then it started to go very steep with the information
kind of revolution. So we're just in that phase of what has really been a process that started
since stone tools. It was just a very slow curve in the stone tools thing for a long time. Now it
is in the quickly verticalizing. So the thing is, when you look in nature, you see, well animals
compete, they don't increase their competitive capacity rapidly, or irrespective of each other.
Right, the tiger can't just become way better at hunting. It has a pretty fixed killing capacity.
And it can only get better through natural selection, which is a pretty slow process. But
the key is that it's a slow process that is evenly distributed across the whole forest.
Because the things that lead to gene mutation in the tiger also lead to gene mutation in the deer.
And the slightly faster tiger that eats the slightly slower deers makes the better genes,
the faster genes in the deer is inbreed together. And so everything steps up together very slowly
in the whole environment does. What happened with stone tools is humans were able to increase
our predative capacity way faster than the environment could increase its resilience to it.
And so we could start extincting species and devastating whole environments, turning them
to desert and moving on. That was the beginning of something very different. So when we think of
social Darwinism, where we try to model ourselves as apex predators, we're just not fucking apex
predators. Apex predator theory doesn't apply. Because an orca can kill a tuna at a time and it
misses most of the time. We can pull up 100,000 of them in a fishing net at once. And so since the
orca can't destroy it whole ecosystems, and we can, if we keep modeling ourselves with apex
predator theory and having to exponentially increase our destructive capacity, exponential
destruction, whether in the form of extraction, pollution or military destruction, or disinformation
when you start getting into the space of being able to win through information warfare ends up
destroying the commons. So one thing I want to put a fine point on that you just said that I've
heard you say this before and I've missed until just now is what's causing that ever escalation
is because you're doing that in concert with people who are essentially your enemies. So
like with AI, it almost certainly will be a winner take all game because if somebody can beat you
by a month and for a computer that's like 100 years worth of learning, you can see how just
being the first is they're going to be the victor. And so now you've got the sort of ever
escalating desire to either protect yourself or to monetize and thusly the tragedy of the commons.
So this is part of the reason that I was trying to figure out sort of what you value most because
for me, everything comes down to if you want, if you want to build a business, I will speak in
those terms, which I understand very well, you have to have a goal, you have to know what you're
trying to accomplish. And the clearer the goal, the more likely you are to hit it. And if you don't
have a clear goal, then you're just sort of steering by a vague sense of what you want to
accomplish. And it's going to become very difficult. But there are what I call the physics of being
human. And what I'm obsessed with is humans are a certain kind of way there, you're having a
biological experience, your brain is a certain way it processes data in a certain way. And
whatever you do has to align with the reality of what humans are like. And so
going to game B and thinking about constructing that and building something, it's like,
when you were describing how interconnected everything is, how complicated it is.
It really gives me pause about like thinking about Jesus, man, to really do something.
It is going to be it's going to be really fucking difficult. And when I when I go back through and
look at the people that were a part of the game a game B conversation, it's like,
I'll be very interested to see if ideas keep coming out and they're iterative. And we find a way
to actually migrate to an entirely new approach. I mean, it would be a new financial system,
it would be new architecture at every conceivable level of society. And my first question is,
what are we aiming at? Like, what, what is it that we're, I want to say optimized, but I know
that that trips something that I don't fully understand yet. But what are we steering towards?
I can give you a very concrete set of examples that will make this make more sense.
Let's take COVID and say when we're the CDC or the White House or the WHO or whatever
institutions are trying to respond competently to it. What should our goal be? What are we trying
to optimize for? Well, let's say we pick the goal of optimizing for the least deaths from COVID.
Okay, so we will definitely institute quarantines and contact tracing and a bunch of things that
will decrease total transmission. Well, there's a chunk of that that we did that led to the
breakdown of the supply chains for food. And we're still in the middle of that rolling catastrophe
and the new cycle has moved on to other parts of the rolling catastrophe. So we aren't paying
attention to it. But when we wanted to stop travel because the virus can travel with stuff,
right? Well, that meant that we stopped the shipment of pesticides to areas that completely
depend upon pesticides for their agriculture. So Northern Africa and parts of the Middle East
got covered when the worst locusts in recent history because they didn't have pesticides and
they lost a huge amount of crop. We stopped the flow of fertilizer to places in India and other
areas that make the food supply for hundreds of millions of people and they lost crops.
We also stopped the ability to ship foods from where they were to where they need to get so huge
amounts of them just rotted. We were actually culling animals, right? Killing thousands of pigs
and millions of chickens and whatever when people are going hungry in other parts of the world because
we couldn't send them to McDonald's. If people weren't going to McDonald's, we didn't know how
to supply chain route them on the other side. And so we just were dealing with no change in demand
no change in supply and a complete break of the food system, right? Now we damaged the food system
in a way that pertains to about two billion people. COVID could have never killed that many people.
So if we're optimizing for don't like the least people die from COVID, we can destroy the world.
Or we, so that's the example of what I'd call a second order effect, right? It wasn't the or an
unintended consequence or an externality. The solution that we implemented to a narrowly defined
problem or optimization goal caused a worse problem. So when we define our goals in very
narrow ways, like make maximum amount of money from the thing, I can do the whaling and destroy the
ocean, right? But is that what you hear me saying? Because I'm not saying it needs to be narrowly
defined. I'm saying, what is like, what is that as, as somebody who is really fucking thoughtful
about this topic? How do you think about those second order consequences, third order consequences
like that crazy biome of interconnected things? Now, now that how do we think about the interconnectedness?
How do we think about not one thing that matters, but all the things and the relationships between
them? And then think about how to make not just individual choices, but whole complexes of choices
that benefit all those things and the relationships is how we start to think about it properly.
And it's a much higher level of complexity of thinking. So when I think about COVID goal, think
okay, well, we want to minimize the total number of COVID related deaths. All right. But there are
people who can die and I mean, there are people who can get it and not die, but have permanent
disabilities in terms of damage to heart or lung or kidneys or whatever. We'd also like to do something
with that. Preventing ICU overwhelm was actually a really critical goal before prevent total number
of deaths because the death spike would go up radically. So you have to think about upstream
ones, both downstream ones. But then we start to think about, okay, let's make sure that in doing
that we don't damage other things significantly. So when people are on quarantine, how much does
domestic violence go up? What happens to addiction patterns for kids who don't have school and just
have six months of solid screen time? What happens to an economy where you have 40 million jobs that
go that are lost? Now we see a lot of violence. We always see more violence, whether it was systemic
racism as the trigger or other triggers. We always need more violence when people are out of work.
Right. So they aren't being met by a system. They don't stay complacent with the system that's
failing them. So if you think of this as like four or five dimensional chess, where is the human
animal's capacity to deal with this? Are we actually going to be able to get people to think
in that many ways? We're already failing to do it with COVID. Do you think that
that is when I go back to the physics of being human, my hypothesis is I'm not sure. I'm not
sure that we'll be able to... I take a very optimistic view of most things, but on that one,
building a brand new civilization without people first having to suffer a level of intolerability
seems tough. Seems tough to get them to believe the things that they would have to do to leave
the whale in the ocean or whatever example we're going to use. Do you have thoughts around how we
give a simple enough narrative that people can latch on and understand, okay, cool, I get what we
have to do here? For the most part, we aren't even trying to think about second or third order
effects currently. Like it's not even a thing we try to do. Do you think nobody's thinking about
it or that people aren't listening? Because it's not sexy. When I think about what's going on right
now, with everything that was shaking down with the death of George Floyd and how everything
sparked off that, I started really looking into it. I didn't want to just say some bullshit to say
bullshit. I wanted to actually understand really, truly what's going on. I end up seeing this
discussion about the difference between Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X. Martin Luther
King Jr. had a meta narrative, which was religion. It was about unity. But he was measured and I mean,
he was very passionate, obviously, when he spoke. But it was like this sort of calming soothing
thing about bringing people together. Whereas Malcolm X was black power. There was energy.
There was aggression. It was tapping into that anger that was right there below the surface.
There was nothing counterintuitive about it. And so he was able to really get people motivated and
rallied. And I thought that's interesting. Like when you think about human animus, there's something
that pisses you off and it gives you the energy. I mean, literally, the world was burning last week.
And you gave people just a little bit of a justification to tap into that. There is something
about tapping into that aggression, that level of animation, there's an intoxication to rage.
And when you can even just nudge people a little bit into that, you get that. So my thing is,
I hear people talking, you're talking about this crazy eloquently. But is it giving people that
sexy level of animation to get visceral, to tap into something that's aggressive and that feels
so powerful? I think about the house that I'm in right now, it probably took about a year to build.
And I could take it down with a record ball in minutes or fire. It takes 20 plus years to grow
an adult human and kill him in a second. It's easier to break shit. And the motivational complexes
that break shit and motivational complexes that figure out how to build complex things aren't
the same. So yes, there's power in. Can you give me a little bit about what the motivations are?
You've talked very well about human motivations, status seeking, like earlier when you mentioned
power, I almost stopped you because I wanted you to actually define what is power? Why do we give a
shit? I think it would help people, it would help me. I want to understand what is the difference
specifically in those motivation types. I can't stay enraged for all that long in a certain amount
of time. I can stay enraged long enough to break this house, but I couldn't stay enraged long enough
for that to be the motivation to build it. That's fucking yeah. And the rage wouldn't
be the right frame of mind for me to learn the structural engineering to make the blueprints
or to try to evolve metallurgy to be able to make bigger buildings that had better trusses.
That requires a very different frame of mind that is doing planning over a longer period of time.
And for the most part, the limbic process you're describing and the prefrontal process I'm describing
are inversely proportional in the brain. The degree to which you're in one is the degree to
which we're mostly not accessing the other. And so what kind of motives are useful for what kind
of goals is an important question? And to the degree that we want to build things that have
complexity long term, we have to be able to access the places of our mind and capabilities that can
think long term and complexly. Can we nudge people in a direction?
Okay, that's actually a great question that I want to take in a slightly different place.
Can we nudge people in a direction is a very interesting question, which is,
so who is the we that would be doing the nudging and who is the people that
some we is saying we want to influence them? We want them to think and feel differently and
change their behaviors for some goals we have that they may not have. How can we change their goals
and change their behavior and manipulate their emotions? Do you want me to answer that question?
Sure. So this is exactly what I have given my life to, which is
I, for a long time, I tried to help my mother change. And my mother smoked my entire life,
morbidly obese. She's amazing. And I want her to live as long as humanly possible. And I,
as I say, you can lead a horse to water, but you can't make them drink. And then people say,
folks, I'm making them thirsty. And I'm like, Oh my God, this is all amazing. Yes,
I just need to make my mom thirsty. This is going to be amazing. Make her want change.
And I realized I can't. And now it may be that I just suck. And I'm not able to find that thing
in her. So it got me obsessed. So I, people that are that have followed me will have heard this
many times, forgive me. But I really, I had at my last company, I had 1000 employees, a group
hard as hell in the inner cities, like, fuck, crazy shit. And shot my sister shot in the heart
with an AK 47 in my front yard, I held my stepfather while he bled to death from a gunshot wound
to the head. Another kid hit under a car, well, his best friend had to hold his intestines in
from a point blank, rain shotgun blast. I mean, it's just story after story after story is insane.
So I started thinking, okay, how do I help them make change? Some people, you can just
tell them think like this, act like this, they do it. It's radically transformative.
It opens up avenues of learning and growth. And it's amazing. But I'll say that's about 2%
of people, at least with my skill level, 98% do not, they hear the information, they may even
get excited about it, might be spiritual entertainment, but they don't do anything.
And so over the course of a month, like, I remember so many of them would show up to a book
club, not put on by me, put on by other people, they would get amped up, but then they wouldn't
read the books, they'd stop showing up. So it was just like, it, it's just so short lived.
So I started asking myself the question, no bullshit, what would it take to
give somebody a growth mindset, even if they were antagonistic to a growth mindset?
And I thought, okay, if I can solve for that, which by the way, I have not, but if I can solve
for that, somebody who doesn't want to change, not only doesn't, they're not apathetic, they're
actively opposed to changing. If I can find the magic sequence of things, of words, of whatever,
to get that person to be like, Oh my God, like I can actually do something, I can learn, I can
express myself, whatever. But now I'm moving in a positive direction, where before I was moving
in a negative direction. So it is, I have come to the conclusion with my desires and skill set,
the storytelling is the way to do that. So I think a lot about nudging people,
like how much can you shift the pop culture narrative in a non sinister way, but to
have a kid. So the more I looked into it, the more I realized, yo, I need to hit kids at the age
of imprinting. I'm not talented enough to do this with adults that are truly antagonistic.
But if I can actually get somebody who is at that stage where they're a sponge, they're drinking
things in, and I can introduce them to characters, ideas, thoughts, the way that Yoda led me to the
Dao De Jing, which I've heard you talk a lot about, I became obsessed, I self identified as a
Taoist, but all because of Yoda. So it was like, when I read the first page of the Dao De Jing,
I was like, Oh my God, this is Yoda. So it was like, I was so instantly connected to it. So
that has given me that obsession to be like, maybe you really can nudge people, like maybe you
really can plant these ideas at the right time, and things from there will blossom. I don't know
if I'm high on my own supply, or if that's actually real. But it gives me so much hope
that that's why I'm keen. So I am the, the sort of we have like, I'm well intended, but maybe
there's a second or third order consequence, and I'm about to fuck everybody up. I, I'm very open
to that. But well intentioned, the goal is to give an what I think of as an even playing field,
I'm a game aid person. I'm super open. I want somebody to show me there's a better way. But
I'm, I'm sort of locked in game makes, I don't know any better. I'm, I'm again, happy to admit
that that's just part of an evolution. And I'm stuck there. But I'm, I'm at game aid trying to
find a way to get more people to play game a well in a way that is supportive and uplifting to other
people. But that is the we and the people that are antagonistic are the day that I'm trying to nudge
in a positive direction through a story.
Do you think the Chinese Communist Party wants to nudge the worldview of people in the U.S.
in particular directions? Yes. Through influencing media and what happened to social media?
Yes. Do you think Russia does? Yes. Iran, Turkey, North Korea. Do you think they all want each other?
I would assume. Study project Mockingbird, which was when the CIA started influencing
Hollywood was when Hollywood started to become a very powerful force and it's like, oh,
shit, we need to make sure these memes do the right things and predispose,
particularly when the counterculture movements started to take off and there were parts of
it that were dangerous to U.S. interest because people protesting against Vietnam and some of
those ideas needed to be shifted. So how do we use emotionally compelling things that
use narrative because our evolutionary biology works with story well to be able to control
humans for the purposes that we care about is a very ancient story. We just have much better tools
to do it now. And I would say that narrative warfare, the war between controlling what people
get emotionally riled up about so that they serve an agenda of whoever it is that's creating the
narrative warfare and they don't even realize it and think it's their own agenda because they're
being nudged. Narrative warfare and memetic warfare and info warfare is the brunt of
the unconventional warfare happening in the world. I would say that it's fair to say that today and
this is easier for people to hear today than it would have been three months ago because cities
are on fire in the places where we didn't expect cities to be on fire and because the upcoming
election in the U.S. currently stands that no matter who gets elected a solid third of the
population will think it was stolen. The Democrats are freaked out by that by the way stealing it
and the Trump supporters are set up to think the Dems are trying to steal it. So whether anyone
steals it or not a third of the population will think it was stolen. So what the fuck happens
from that? So either you get massive violence or if you don't get massive violence those who want
to steal elections now know fully that they can with no repercussions. And how do we actually
create the confidence both in the integrity of the elections and everyone knowing it when the
information landscape is as fractured and the narrative landscape is as fractured as it is?
Okay so what I would say is that we are in World War III currently. That's a bold statement. It's
not a kinetic war meaning bullets. It's an unconventional war. Go read the doctrines on
unrestricted warfare that Chinese Communist Party and PLA published or unconventional warfare that
the U.S. published. 99% of war isn't kinetic. It's economic warfare. It's narrative and infill warfare.
It's cyber warfare. It's political and diplomatic and supply chain and trade warfare. And kinetic
is kind of the last part that will back it up. Kinetic used to be a bigger percentage of the
story than it is now because we didn't have powerful cyber attacks and we couldn't do narrative
warfare as powerful as we can now because social media is just fucking amazing for being able to
control mines. Detour on that. Social media will control mines and move people into war even with
no one wanting it to. Okay so if you haven't had Tristan Harris on the show or discussed with him
the issues around Facebook algorithms and Twitter and TikTok is even worse you should but I'll do
the very brief version here. You go on Facebook the total amount of info published on Facebook no
one could ever possibly look at. So your news feed you can scroll for a long time and not see
it all and it represents almost no percentage of what's on Facebook. So when you see Facebook and
when I see Facebook we think we're seeing the world we're not seeing the world we're seeing a very
carefully curated AI algorithm curated world. Now Facebook wants to expose you up front to enough
of the things to see your likes and see your hover patterns of your mouse because once your
mouse is hovered enough and once you've liked a couple hundred things it can predict what you will
like better than your spouse can. Jesus Christ. And it's important to understand that the kind of
AIs that are optimizing the social algorithms are better than the AIs that beat Gary Kasparov at
chess. Yeah that's nuts. And he's so much better at chess than you are at anything at controlling
online right and he knew he was at war and you don't even know when you're going on Facebook
that it's not just a tool that you're using it's an agent that wants to control you that's using you.
And so what happens is its desire is to maximize the knowledge about you that it can sell to marketers
and to maximize your time on site that it can sell as attention to marketers. So you will
spend more time on site when your limbic system gets hijacked than when your prefrontal cortex
that remembers your goals and that you don't want to spend that much fucking time on Facebook stays
engaged. So the stuff that scares you and enrages you and elicits your greed and your
horniness will make you spend more time on site than the things that make you think
complexly about stuff. And so what ends up happening is people whatever it is that would
emotionally get them which appeal to their current biases is what they get more of and they get
driven in more extreme directions in all directions. So the right gets more right the left gets more
left and you get both Antifa's and Boogaloo's coming out of it as the without any political
goal at all. Really fast. I've heard people say Boogaloo I don't know what it means.
A particular alt-right group that identifies accelerationists that want civil war in the
U.S. that believe they're ready that they'll win that it's eminent and so they want to accelerate
the movement towards civil war to get on with rebuilding the country. Why are they called
Boogaloo's? Long story there's a bunch of names. Boogaloo's, Hawaiian shirts started as big a
glue boys but memes coming out of Fort Chan. Okay. But they go from Fort Chan to Facebook.
Now so it's important to understand that this algorithm that's happening on Facebook it's
also happening on Twitter and Instagram and TikTok and YouTube. Why did you say that TikTok is the
worst? As the social media platforms evolve they're evolving to be able to appeal to younger
audiences more effectively in competing against the other one so whatever is the most addictive
that gets them to engage the most is what it gets optimized for. On the supply side right if I have
an MBA and I'm running a company I know that I want to maximize the lifetime revenue of a customer.
I also want to maximize the total number of customers so multiple the number of customers
multiplied by lifetime revenue is my desire. So on the supply side there's nothing that would
be better for me than addiction of my customers to my product and then being able to make the
widest population addicted possible. And this doesn't just happen with social media this
happened with fast food. Fast food is extract the most addictive things from food from an
evolutionary perspective salt, fat, sugar mix them together in the right combinations and with
palatability remove all the nutrients so that it doesn't even fill you up so you keep eating it and
you have what's called a hypernormal stimuli. You get a bigger dopamine hit from that than you
ever would from a salad and then the salad doesn't you get no joy from where you would have before
because you're actually desensitizing to normal stimuli through normalizing hypernormal stimuli
which is why when you watch enough porn you can't eroticize with normal women right and so porn and
fast food and social media and are all basically optimizing towards hypernormal stimuli because
from a supply side it makes me more money. I maximize lifetime revenue when the people have
to keep coming and getting hit and what will appeal to everybody well social media knows
that we're social primates and that we're lonely and that what we want to spend all our time doing
is looking at other people's faces and like seeing other people and engaging and yet real
interactions are vulnerable and difficult so to be able to take the part of the interaction which
is where I get a like on the thing I posted and I get to see the photoshop versions of their faces
and then other limbic hijacks and be able to optimize for that remove all the nutrients of
actual authentic human interaction that's what you get and so each of the new platforms that
has to emerge in the presence of the existing platforms has to offer some new hypernormal stimuli.
Yeah the social media is is something that so it's weird because I've built my business around
social media if you'll grant me I guess that YouTube falls into the social media category
um which is my primary focus but that's rapidly become the only one that I really spend a lot
of time on as just an individual um there is something about the way that it the the endless
scrolling like if I do it enough when I fall asleep I have this sense of like motion almost but
like a very disquieting sense of motion almost like a fever dream if you've ever had a fever
dream that just fucking loops so I was like oh man I can't I can't keep doing this so yeah that the
what is happening to minds especially of kids with the change in social media like I'm I'm always
wary of being like you know the old funny daddy who like oh kids today but when I the thing that
freaks me out I want you to imagine a world with VR porn and a device that moves in conjunction
with what you're seeing in the VR porn that of course is affixed to the more sensitive bits that
you have and when I think about I I'm not kidding Daniel I wouldn't have graduated high school
certainly not with the GPA that I did I I if my parents left I would have had that out so fast
like the when you can construct uh different people different partners every time that you
go in like exaggerate um different features like uh peak shift which I'm sure is something that you
know about like you can just peak shift something until it is dysmorphic and your your brain is
actually wiring to that thing and when I think about like one of the recommendations that I have
for couples if you want like so my wife and I've been together almost 20 years and my recommendation
to couples is always yo you need to have more sex I can just tell you right now like if you want a
good long-lasting relationship the neurochemistry that cocktail that you get from intimacy is crazy
but if you've been living in a VR world that is like your brain has wired to it it is normalized to
it and then so that was the first one that I sort of put my finger on it was like ooh I'm glad I
don't have kids because that one really fucking scares me like hey parents I used to joke like all
the time with people that I knew that had kids like man when your kid's 14 this shit is going to get
weird like where technology is going it is going to get weird and if you don't think that there are
repercussions for that like man it is that one's worrisome but now as I back into just social media
in general and what what it must be like to be 12 or 13 I remember as a kid if you were going to get
sort of gossip bullied they might spray paint something on the bridge that we all drove under
to get to school and that was like the height of oh man like you just got burned but now that people
can create an anonymous account and gang up on somebody at the school that is so gnarly
you ever come across the term stochastic terrorism never so if you read Sun Tzu or you read the 36
stratagems or any kind of text on military theory and it doesn't have to be Chinese can be anywhere
get the enemy to weaken himself is always one of the high principles and so if you can see that
there's internal dissent within a people or a culture or corporation or whatever and you can
increase that internal dissent great right if the goal is to be able to win game a competitively
relative to them because you're competing for the same scarce resources whether it's global control
or actual physical resources or whatever else so stochastic terrorism you've got groups of people
who are very disaffected who find each other online in a four-chan group or an eight-chan group or
in a facebook group or in a chat room of various kinds and talk about hating blacks or hating
whites or hating police or hating whatever it is or hating the kids at school well if i am a
state actor or a non-state actor jihad terrorist or whatever i can make fake sock puppet accounts
go in there and egg them on right share more stuff that pisses them off and gets them upset
tell them what a hero they'll be if they do it and it's what we call stochastic terrorism because
i don't know exactly who will do what harm at what point but i'm increasing the statistical
likelihood that more people will do more harm and if the goal is to be able to delegitimize the
enemy or weaken them or whatever that's so easy right that's so easy that never used to be easy
like that as easy as that is it's also easy for any intelligence agency to just watch where the
groups of people that are talking about stuff are and be able to share more interesting stuff to see
what people are thinking as honeypots for information sharing so the thing about the arms race
is that the tools escalate right but we don't have even distribution of the use of those tools
and as a result the total asymmetries get more severe and the whole idea that this increased
tech that right now i have a computer that gives me access to more information than presidents had
10 years ago if i know how to use google searches and that my phone has supercomputing power if i use
amazon cloud or that's mostly just silly because yes it's true that that tech has decentralized
capacity in a way but nobody's using their phone to use amazon cloud for supercomputing
capacities to do what groups do with supercomputers or not that many people are using that they're
just fucking scrolling facebook and getting their mind hijacked and thinking they believe things
that they wouldn't believe otherwise right or thinking or having emotions or whatever
where they're being nudged for agendas other than what is good for them or and so when there's so
much information right oh these bricks showed up in the protest well they were put there by the cops to
incite people to riot so the cops could use violence now they were put there by the far right
and to blame on antifa no they were really put there by antifa no they were put there by soros
they were put there by chinese agents they were put there by organized crime they were
how does it fucking make sense of it right you look at your speed and depending upon
who you've curated you get one of those things if you try to do a good job you'll get all of them
you'll get overwhelmed in bail right so either you'll get limbically and cognitively hijacked
into nonsense and be certain that it's true and be willing to go take that enraged action on it
or you'll just be overwhelmed have no idea um so when there's so much info and so much dis info
and there's so much noise and so little signal but the signal there is is disaggregated I don't
have all the signal in a place well aggregated for actionable intel access to info isn't what
empowers you the ability to info process to parse the signal from the noise aggregate the
signal have actionable intel well people don't really have that equally if you think about
a top tier quantitative hedge fund and their ability to do AI empowered high speed trading
with information that comes from lots of private intelligence agencies and big data analysis and
the ability to front run other large ones with algorithmic warfare in dark pools on derivatives
compared to your ability to understand the market and try to invest we're talking about
so many orders of magnitude difference that you have no ability at all to play their game
when I hear Ray Dalio talk about that and he's like look you're trying to to play a game that
I'm spending hundreds of millions of dollars to play and you can't win and he I I've met him a
couple times and he seems like sincere like I really think he's trying to keep people from
putting their hand on the stove and getting burned but it's like he has that peak behind the curtain
of just the like you said that description he's living so my question becomes how are you making
sense of all this like you're a just a ridiculously intelligent person you can obviously process data
very very well so the average person maybe can't do exactly what you do but I think it would be
edifying to hear what you do I would love to say things the average person can do perfect
average is a term that doesn't actually make any sense to me I don't know average people but
something that anyone can start doing progressively more if they want to to understand the world better
and the preface for that is if my map is wrong and I'm trying to navigate I'm not going to get
good results right so I my ability to make good choices depends upon my values what I think is
a good choice which you were asking about earlier but also depends upon what I think the actual
reality is in the state of play and then what I think the effects of particular actions will be
does it do the thing I want does it invoke a counter response of the other side that is
that I'm trying to do something against it's more intense does it create second and third order
effects that are worse so like strategy 101 if you aren't factoring counter response right you
have a goal you whether it's black lives matter or it's climate change whatever if you recognize
that your goal is not shared by everyone and you aren't factoring counter response you aren't doing
strategy you're just being emotionally hijacked into playing a game for reasons you don't even
understand if you aren't factoring second and third order consequences you're probably making
the world worse and so that all means you need to slow the fuck down now this doesn't mean inaction
it means the possibility of effective action now feeling effective and being effective aren't the
same thing truth and so people have to get off the addiction of wanting to feel effective
and actually step back and say wait wait do I even know where what I'm going towards do I
understand the lay of the land do I understand the various forces and do I have a path that
makes any sense at all so our ability to do choice making well depends on our ability to sense
make well which is why controlling people sense making is the heart of the war that's happening
and the forces that are so this is an important thing in terms of narrative and info warfare
when you ask what is power power in a game a sense is power over other people
and there's a lot of ways of getting it some are more evil than others slavery is a particularly
bad example but the economic servitude of I can employ you and when I'm employing you you are an
extension of my will you are no longer doing your own will that's still an example of how do I get
power over people to enhance some goal that I have right and when we look at left right it's
power of that political party to control as many people as possible to get them to vote away
so there's the power over the left and right against each other and their power over their
bases to then be able to have power as a nation over other nations and of classes over other
classes and those types of things right because ultimately if I didn't have other people that
could do shit on my behalf I couldn't do that much stuff like if I have to make everything
with my own hands I can't do that much stuff so if I want to do more stuff I'm looking at how
do I get more people to be able to do that okay so when we start to realize that
rather than try to control people's behaviors directly influencing what they feel and what
they think and what groups they're engaging in that will ongoingly use group think to affect
what they think and feel is a much more powerful way than the brunt of the warfare of the power game
becomes control the hearts and minds of people now when you're talking about making more yodas
you aren't trying to control the hearts and minds of people to do your bidding
you're trying to say how do I nudge them in a direction where they will become more sovereign
and self-determining as opposed to become more part of my in group so what I would say is that
that is trying to use the tools of power to actually make the game of power less pathological
which is a legitimate thing to do and a good thing to do typically the tools of power if I have
asymmetric power over somebody else and I get a lot of benefit from that I have the capacity
because of that asymmetric power to continue to get more of it and I have the motive to so
any business is not just focused on providing the thing they provide but increasing their
capacity to do stuff and some places that will be omnipositive and in some places it will be
driving externalities I we celebrate because we just cornered the market which mean we drove a lot
of people out of business and they can't feed their kids and we manufactured demand for people
to want shit that they didn't want before that doesn't actually make them happier now I'm following
all of your logic but how do people employ this to actually make sense that makes sense yes okay
okay
understanding these things already will help
that's why I was starting to bring it up when you understand more about that
the as much more capacity as the top level economic players have than you the top level
narrative players and information players also do and they're engaging in that and you realize that
that people's minds are the battlefield and also the treasure that is trying to be achieved and also
the weapons right and so it's important to be like oh wait to what degree am I a sovereign
self-determining agent to what degree am I thinking I'm a sovereign self-determining agent
that is actually being influenced in ways I don't even recognize dude this is scary man this is like
some your mind has been hijacked and you are now acting in the interest of somebody else
I don't know why but that just really hit me as you were explaining that like are my ideas my own
there was a band back in the 80s called creams rike and they were the first people that really
got me to think critically so I definitely owe them a debt of gratitude and they had this whole
concept album around this guy that was controlling people's minds by basically getting them addicted
and then helping them clean up but then like hey I did this for you so you're gonna do this for me
it's really terrifying when you couple that with what you were saying about social media and how
you've been essentially groomed to push they've pushed you in a direction that you started right
depending on what you hovered over and what you clicked on like some you're very involved in this
process but the them optimizing right second and third order consequences them optimizing for time
on site the ability to leverage you to a marketer but to do that they're optimizing you in a very
specific direction and that that is allowing either bad actors state actors algorithms whatever to
hijack your emotions your limbic brain to get you to do whatever like that's just scary like when I
think about the the thing about what's kicked off with the riots like protesting I love I'm all for
it when it kicked off into like looking out my window and seeing things burning it was like
that's where I go okay like you that shit that gets really scary really fast and when you get into
the weeds of like the complicated who's actually breaking the windows who's actually setting the
fires and the the sort of swirl of very difficult to parse apart things presents itself to you
that's where like understanding how to begin to extract the information how to learn about something
that you don't know about there was a lot of pressure to speak out and I was like I'm not
saying shit until I understand what's actually going on and even just going into that and beginning
to realize okay this is a big world this is complicated there's there isn't a party line
like it's being presented there are a lot of different thinkers across sort of every
statement that's being made there's somebody that disagrees with it quite vehemently so
my strategy for that and I'd be super curious to to hear what you think on this so I've got what
we talked about earlier the physics of being human so any data point that I take in it has to jive with
what I know is true about humans and the way that humans act and think and process and when I see
people just repeating memetic statements over and over and over it's like odds are that's not
an original thought for you because you're just repeating the same thing and then also looking
at both sides of the argument so it's like I know how algorithms work because as a person with a
YouTube channel like you have to understand how it works to make sure that your stuff is
getting presented to people so you learn real fast what the algorithm likes what it doesn't you
learn what the algorithm is using as a barometer of whether this is something that should be pushed
out more so you pay attention to that stuff so I'm like I know if I watch this type of voice
I'm going to get more of that type of voice so then you've got to actively seek out the other side
and there's been so many times where I'm like whoa like that's brilliant coming from you know side
A and then whoa this is brilliant coming from side B and so it's like until I get a sense of like
the edges right okay this is edge case over here this is edge case over here now I actually understand
filtered through what I know to be true of the way that the human mind works now I think I'm
beginning to understand this thing and I can begin to sort of try out my own ideas and that's
what I do then the next thing so I've taken in all this data the next thing I do and I my poor
family one of the coolest things to come out of quarantine has been we now I do these weekly
calls with different people and I try out ideas on them and I'm like yo this is how I'm thinking
about this what do you think and I begin to realize where oh shit I thought I understood this but like
my own logic is breaking down and in having to articulate it I realize sort of where the edges
you know of my ignorance are and that helps me then okay this is where I need to go research I need
to figure this out more but I don't have a particularly useful way of going oh shit that was all false
propaganda to begin with do you have a way of like are there certain outlets that you trust
how do you build trust maybe that's the easiest way trust around information
I would say that the idea that there are any authorities that I just trust enough that I
can cognitively offload the process of coming to belief to them is not a real thing currently
and that if you think about legitimate authority whether whatever's seen as legitimate authority
for a while it was the christian church or government or then the academies and the you
know the great ivy league institutions and they're supposed to be the bastions of what is true
what's fucking powerful so everyone who wants power has maximum incentive to try to capture
and co-opt legitimate authority towards their purposes and so you start funding the research
institutes to research certain things and not others and even if so I can easily manipulate
statistics to say most anything I want I can cherry pick data out of very large data sets to
say everything's getting better everything's getting worse or whatever it is that I want to say
um we can of course do false methodology and lie but we can even have information that is totally
true that is misrepresentative and will guide people in the wrong direction because let's say
I have a phase space of information that's all this information but I'm intentionally only
doing research on this area over here and publishing a bunch of research so the preponderance of data
points to such and such because there was an uneven distribution of what got funded based on
those dollars came from somewhere and they're seeking return on investment and so certain things
are going to be more useful a patentable pharma drug is going to get more research dollars than
a plant-based nutrient that no one can patent to ever be able to pay the money back so the
preponderance of data will say nutrients don't work as well as pharma drugs do but the preponderance
of data is gibberish um in that particular case and then also what metrics was it looking at well
it didn't cause any negative side effects because we looked for these four side effects well the
body's pretty fucking complicated you can cause lots of side effects that are outside of those
who you measured for so as soon as you understand the process of legitimate authority having a
maximum incentive to get co-opted then you start understanding okay this idea that I can offload
the cognitive complexity of the world to an authority where I can continue to have a child
like consciousness and find the parent who will tell me how the world is and what to do
stops being a desirable goal and the desire to take the responsibility to make sense to
increasingly make sense of the world myself now that doesn't become so lapsistic where I think
I'm not going to pay attention to people who've spent a lot of time studying but let's say I'm
looking at COVID and I'm looking at the topic of viral origin did it come from a wet market
naturally zoonotically did it come from gain and function research accidentally or intentional
bio warfare or let's say I'm looking at conferred immunity will getting it confer immunity so we'll
reach herd immunity will getting it confer immunity for some people but not others or for a short
period of time where it will not actually create enduring herd immunity or will it create ADE
and antibody dependent enhancements where then one of the normal coronaviruses will kill you next
time you get it nobody knows I can tell you from looking at the research the answer to that is not
known and so all the stuff on Sweden's about to reach herd immunity or this or like is all just
people overextending what could actually be known so one of the key things is being able to identify
what things do we have high confidence on based on what process and what things do we not have
high confidence in just acknowledging that so that's a question I'm always asking what are the
knowns and what are the things that we know we don't know or at least we and the knowns are never
100 percent certain right there's some Bayesian confidence margin less than 100 percent but I
can say high confidence based on this process but I'm still open to new data and then here's the
area of unknown so I want no certainty at all here because any certainty at all even a hunch
can bias me in terms of what I pay attention to so I just want to say I don't know do you try to
eliminate even your hunches like do you run all the hunches you try to what I try to run all of it
I see so if I say there's a virologist who thinks or an immunologist who thinks one thing we will
get immunity and someone else thinks we won't based on different ways that they're waiting data
so do I pay it do I think that experts who spent 30 years studying a field and are smart no things
I don't that I should listen to that is different than like what a TV personality who doesn't know
anything about it things yes so I like to find experts who disagree but that seem earnest as
opposed to seem like they are doing some piece of propaganda and then I like to see the dialectic
where I think possibly you're gonna have to tell people what a dialectic is how does it different
how is it different from a debate so yeah this is an important topic I saw you and Eric Weinstein
discussing this a bit so dialectic is the idea that you can have a couple different perspectives
that each have some truth value in them but maybe neither of which are the whole truth
and that rather than a debate where the idea is one of them is true one isn't and there's
going to be some kind of rhetorical warfare and then someone will be the winner at the end
there's a co-exploration coming from different perspectives to see can we actually find a higher
order truth together I'm super obsessed with this so the the idea of trying to find a higher
order truth this is you want to know what really grinds my gears the fact that do people not give
a shit about what actually works like I swear to god people just want to be right and as somebody
who used to be stuck in that loop I get it I have empathy I fucking have empathy but man everything
in my life changed when I stopped trying to be right and I started saying because my thing was
I was and trust me when I get the example I'm about to give you is like game a to the max
but when I was younger my focus was entirely on getting rich but I wasn't acting I wasn't acting
like I wanted to get rich I was acting like I wanted to be right and so there was a day where
they collided and it was like I was arguing for an idea in the business because it was mine
and it was a voice in my head saying you know this is wrong this isn't going to work this is
going to move the business backwards but I needed to be right and so I kept fighting for it I ended
up getting my way my partners left and I was like the fuck am I doing like I know that what I just
convinced them to do will move us backwards so do I want to be right or do I want to be rich
and finally I realized Jesus man if I could build myself a seam around something else
then I could actually achieve my goals but if I was focused on just being right that I was never
going to get where I wanted to go and when I look at the screaming that's happening right now
I I don't think it ends in actually improving the situation I don't think that by the rhetoric
that I'm seeing about like defunding cops and all that that we're actually going to get to
the beautiful place that I think people want to get to so it's like you're not going to be able
to figure out how to actually solve the problem unless somebody can propose hey let's defund the
police okay rad let's look at that um hey no this is what we need to do over here cool let's look at
that like when you can actually stop and look at it you can get to the goal but like I said at the
beginning most people don't know what their actual goal is they can't state it and then on top of that
they're so worried about being right or sticking to the party line or whatever that they're they're
not in this dialectic where you're bringing like um Lincoln with his team of rivals I was like that's
so powerful in a business I I go way out of my way to make sure that my team challenges my thinking
that if you're an intern challenge me if you think I'm saying something stupid fucking tell me
because I might be actually being stupid and I have so much on the line all I care about is the
truth and that's like one of those things it will be better for you you will be happier if you focus
on actually getting what you want but it is it's one of those things man the physics of being human
by default people want to be right by default doesn't mean that they can't switch it up and
change but Jesus by default people want to be right there's this TED talk this woman gave
it's one of my favorite TED talks and I think it's called on being wrong it was a she was describing
a book she had written which was studying the psychology of humans experience of being wrong
and she asked the audience um what does it feel like to be wrong and people said embarrassing
shameful whatever and she goes no that's what it feels like to find out you were wrong
feels like to be wrong is to feel right right typically we're we're we actually think we are
right about stuff we're wrong about that's inside what it feels like is righteousness and so you
were fortunate in that you knew you were full of shit right that was actually fortunate most people
when they are righteous and adamant and filled with you know passion and certainty actually think
they're right that's much more dangerous because then it becomes harder to reflect on what the
fuck am I doing do you think they have unease or they are are are they're people who truly have no
sense okay so means live in complexes that create world views that are self perpetuating and
self reinforcing so let's say we take a particular fundamentalist religious memeplex and there's
a bunch of different ideas there's ideas about if I die in holy war then I go to heaven and
there's eternal life and there's hell and so I've got both I've got all of the evolutionary
biology on punishment motives plus reward motives plus authority motives plus the desire for certainty
plus in group stuff plus the desire to not be outgrouped right it's appealing to every level
of maslow's hierarchy every emotional aspect of evolutionary biology but then you've you've got
core memes you've got supportive memes you have protector memes like a whole football team and
the protector means are anything that would fuck up believing that there is a way to deal with it
right so doubt comes from the devil and will make you burn in hell forever and faith is the
highest virtue which basically says critical thinking is evil and creates maximum limbic fear
for you so the prefrontal cortex that would try and do the critical thinking will end up
stimulating the amygdala to shut off the prefrontal cortex and so that's actually a very neurologically
advanced protector meme complex to make sure that the thing that could get you to question if all
these beliefs are actually unfounded gibberish won't be effective against you and so most worldviews
have protector memes built in and so that even if I'm feeling uncomfortable I have a way of
rationalizing it do you so I've heard you talk about this before and I thought this was so brilliant
how do you go from Jesus saying all the lovely things bringing people together
to fighting the crusades in his name like how you do the mental gymnastics do you know
like what was the protector meme in that meme complex that allowed people to pull that off
when the SS troop were being tried in the Hague for war crimes after World War two
I don't remember the the exact way the questions were phrased but they were being asked questions to
determine to try to understand the phenomena of what happened how Germany that had been very
actual liberal before moved into that place and also the likelihood for those people to
commit similar actions again and so they were asked all the questions specific to the situation
they were in but then they were asked general questions of the type did you believe everything
you were doing was right and one of the things was so fascinating was something like 90 percent
of the Nazi said no I didn't believe everything I was doing was right I did at the beginning when
we were hearing about what an oppressed people we were and the bad people that were trying to oppress
us and the Jews seemed to be rich when we were poor as fuck in the Weimar Republic and had to be
selling our kids into slavery and like it seemed like they were doing it consciously and we were
just standing up for ourselves and so originally I did but then we started to get into places that
were really fucked up and so 90 percent of them said no I didn't think it was all right
then they're asked did you ever try and stop and 100 percent of them said no I never tried to stop
and then when they were asked why they would quote German phrases that had been drilled into
their heads they were basically officers orders and if I if I went against this I'd be put in
the gas chamber it would and I wouldn't have made any difference like the whale thing if I don't do
it somebody else will right and I have my kids to deal with and I didn't have the power to stop it
and the and yet 90 percent of the people actually felt that way right so the same was true with the
inquisitions or the or the crusades or the and it's even true today of if you grow up in a very
religious area what is what happens if you give up on the religion right so we know what the
punishment for apostasy and fundamentalist Islam is but if you grow up in Utah in a strict
Mormon era and you give up on Mormonism then you get excommunicated depending upon how they
relate to it you lose all of the benefits your in group completely destroys maybe the idea that
you're going to lose heaven and all those kinds of things so people believe things less because
they are true and more because they are useful than they realize useful and staying in the group
staying in the good graces meeting some need mostly people believe things because it seems
like it will meet some need for them or believing something else will damage that need and then
they rationally backfill epistemology but they didn't do epistemology to come to the belief
they emotionally came to the belief and then they backfill epistemology so rationalizing is the
opposite of being rational being rational is not starting well set being rational is starting
with I don't know let's go through the process let's try what are all the hypotheses what is
the evidence for all the hypotheses rationalizing is I jumped straight to belief and now I'm going
to try to create backfill rationale for it and pretend that that's how I got there
I'll give you actually a really interesting example
one of the things the political left in the US likes to do is make fun of the political
right for being stupid you can see this with Bill Maher or other kinds of comedians and
it's part of their narrative warfare strategy feeling superior through being more educated
and whatever right and and the political right has its methods of narrative warfare and so I'm
not commenting on the rightness or not of the underlying ideas but the the weaponry that's
and nobody wants to feel really stupid and so you actually stay in group by laughing at the
people who are on the out group as opposed to defending the people who are so obviously stupid
that you're obviously stupid if you would even sympathize with them at all right so that's actually
appealing to very not rational things in group out group desire not to seem stupid
in the name of higher intellect so it's very tricky and sophisticated so there's a
left comedian who went to some Trump rallies recently and interviewed Trump supporters and
made a compilation of how utterly stupid Trump supporters are now of course he didn't include
any of the places where there are Trump supporters that are well educated and have good philosophy
and there are other ones that will show right oriented people going to a bunch of left or
Antifa people making them look like other idiots so they'll both use that tactic right so of course
the first thing we have to see is as we're laughing at the dumb Trump supporters in this thing it was
cherry-picked for that purpose of all of the people to then give the sense that that was ubiquitous
that they're all that right okay so you watch the thing and it's actually impressive how much these
people have rejected there's actually pride around anti-intellectualism within this population
there's a particular part of the right that has a anti-intellectual pride and so they the guys you
know saying very basic things about government or how bill becomes a law or whatever intentionally
like showing how stupid the people are that they don't know the basics of politics and
they're certain of wrong things and whatever and then tries to take it further and says if if Trump
used the n-word would you vote for him yeah I'd still vote for him if he whatever and they ran
different things and at one point it said something like if Trump said that everyone
needed to start fucking pigs would you vote for him yeah I'd still vote for him and what it was
trying to say is that guy who says yeah I'd still vote for him is saying my mind is not open to new
ideas right like my mind has closed to new ideas I have already made my decision I'm going with it
you have to say what made him get there well one of the things that's actually insightful is he
intuited in some place that he couldn't make sense of what was going on and the pundits were talking
it was above his head and that they were trying to use intellectualism and data and statistics and
whatever to say things that felt like they were going to fuck his world up that weren't in his
interest right that seemed against his interest and so he basically said I know my mind he's not
this sophisticated but subconsciously I know my mind is a battleground of people more sophisticated
than me who are going to try to convince me what is true but I don't think they have my interest
in mind so this Trump guy it doesn't matter if it's true or not I actually feel safer being on
his side in a world that feels like it's in war he feels more like me and he feels like he might win
and I don't want the susceptibility of people trying to confuse me to be possible so it's very
interesting to see how the that anti-intellectual thing was actually a compensating weapon of
intellectual weapons being used to control people in ways that they could tell weren't fully in their
interest that that's really interesting and this is where cognitive distribution to make it sound
fancy the fact that sadly not all minds are created equal it's like man when you have like
when I look at people that are clearly smarter than me I'm just like dude this is um deeply
problematic to try to make sense of what they're saying and to engage with what they're saying
it is uh I get it man I feel for people when it you you can tell you're being moved around the
board like a chess piece and you're not sure like where the trap is coming from but you know that
there is a trap coming uh and hold on one second because I have an alarm going off
all right sorry about that I am uh normally uh I don't film this late so I didn't even think to check
my bad um so yeah when you've got somebody that is just you know out performing you and you can
feel that you're being moved around that chess board it is so disconcerting um that I can see
how people would end up shutting down and so this is why we like debates is we think okay that guy is
saying something that I seem to disagree with but he's smarter than me I want to put my smart
candidate up to battle with him right and the higher angel of our nature is wanting to actually
understand by them going back and forth and them being smart enough to come up with the
counters that we wouldn't have known the lower angels of our nature is just watching a dog fight
and that's why you'll see Sam Harris eviscerates Noam Chomsky or whatever those titles of titles
that go around it's really those people when they're watching aren't trying to learn
they're trying to and that's why you'll see in a debate the people who are very very strong fans
of one of the people are sure that person won at the end on both sides so all my mind really moved
because that's actually not appealing to the higher angels of their epistemic drive but the
lower angels of their desire because this is the thing there isn't some way at the end to
determine which one is actually right clearly so the guy who's making the arguments of the
people who resonate with the type of arguments he likes his arguments resonate with him is true
and the other one don't resonate is true and ultimately my sense of truthiness is kind of a
a felt sense dude let me tell you as somebody who does a lot of public speaking I will tell
you right now that I can move an audience by changing not what I say but how I say it and
I learned very early on that by putting time and energy into getting good at the performative layer
of a talk made a huge difference and so when I was young I wanted to be a stand-up comic and so I
spent a lot of time in front of audiences I spent a lot of time practicing like what I was doing
with my face modulating my voice and it is it is a little it's exciting when you feel like you're
doing things for the right reasons but it's a little unnerving when I think about like charisma
goes a long way man just by the way that you make somebody feel they always say you don't remember
what somebody did or what they said you remember how they made you feel and so if you can make
somebody feel good if you can hype them up and I tell audiences all the time and this is sort of
the core friction of my life is I have what I call a two-hour declining arc of influence
so if you if you get me in a room with somebody my whole thing is get me in the room if you get
me in the room I will fucking make somebody feel something I can be very persuasive when I really
believe in something and I'm really passionate because I can bring that out and I can energy
infects of the people and so you can infect them with your enthusiasm you can get them hyped up
but as soon as I walk away it's like it that sense of like because I try to give people the
sense that they can do it right whatever it is like you can do it you can make it come true and
let me tell you and I know that when I walk away that feeling begins to wane and so it's like how
do you get beyond just the the ability to whip people into an emotional frenzy and actually get
them to think critically to form an opinion to say okay I actually think I understand how these
pieces work together and then it's like you can begin to form your own opinion then you can you
know how to move through the world but otherwise how to do that for your listeners right now
how to please how because similar this conversation might have some impact on them for like a day
maybe right but the moment they have scrolled their facebook feed they've forgotten about it
and they're now fully inundated with other things and so how why would why do we bother
doing this at all so if someone is feeling a particular kind of resonance and inspiration
they have to take some actions it will keep feeding or nurturing that and so let's talk
about a few things people can do because when you're in the room with them whether it's just
that you're giving them better information or you're emotionally influencing them they're
influenced by what they're around and so if some but then when you leave they're influenced by
whatever they're around next what you're trying to do is make them have more of a internal locus of
control to be more self-influencing well the the kind of influence I would say illegitimate power
in a game b sense illegitimate power is where I'm trying to influence people towards my agenda
perpetually legitimate powers where I'm trying to influence them to be more self-directing
which is basically what a good parent or a teacher is trying to do is to increase someone's
capacity to make their own good sense making their own good decisions and whereas to the degree
that I'm trying to convince them what to think that aligns with an agenda I have that is a
you know game theoretic thing that will then produce counter responses of other people who
want to convince them of some other thing but as people are seeking to become more
self-determined the first thing is to recognize how much you are not self-determined to recognize
how much the information streams coming into your eyes and ears and who you're around influences
and start changing that one of the best acts of self-determination is to change the things other
than you that are influencing you and so we talked about the problem of social media if you
care about your own well-being enough you'll just quit social media your own well-being and your
ability to understand the world and you'll start finding sources of news that are better than social
media that aren't ai curated for limbic optimization for you but that you're curating based on what
seems to be good information and you'll find left sources and right sources and sources from other
countries and whatever to try to make sense of stuff if you are going to stay on social media
there are some things you can do to do a better job which is let's say that you are politically
aligned in a direction you're left aligned go find all of the right thinkers and follow them
and join a bunch of those groups if you're right aligned do that with the left whatever your
particular perspective is and find the ones that seem to be the most actually smart and earnest
and then unfollow all the stuff that seems to be salacious and not well researched so that your
feed becomes the smartest stuff from all of the perspectives and if this is working you'll become
less certain about everything you'll know that it is working because you will know more than you
knew before and you'll be less certain whereas right now you know less and you're more certain
yeah that i think that's really powerful and the thing i i'm really obsessed with this idea
i want people to understand that what i normally say is skills have utility but information has
utility and man i don't care from where on the political spectrum an idea comes from if it's
real if it has real world implications and it lets me move towards a goal that i have i'm gonna
take it and i i i actually cannot understand um anything else so it's they're they're powerful
i and this all came for me because of building businesses like when your house is on the line
you don't have time to worry about whether you thought of the idea or somebody else thought of
the idea or somebody you like thought of it or somebody you don't like thought of it it's just
like jesus dude i don't want to have to go home and tell my wife that we have to move out because
we lost the house like that was such a real thing for me and that kicked me into it just and i had
already been sort of marching down that path but that kicked me into a whole another level of like
i just need to know what works man i need to know what works i have a goal i need to know
what's going to move me towards that goal and it also it felt better like there there's a sense of
relaxing because i'm not trying to posture i'm not trying to campaign i used to say all the time
and unfortunately i was wrong about this but i used to say all the time to people just be good
because you can't campaign and convince people that you're good now the sad reality is you actually
can you can bamboozle a lot of fucking people with a lot of words but being good itself is
going to take you a lot farther and getting people interested in that like gamifying in themselves
like okay cool i want this curated feed that is bringing me a diverse array of opinions
um so that i can actually function and if people got into that idea of functioning the the goal
here is to function it's to actually be useful to be able to so i define power very differently
than you but the way that i define power and maybe it's just the wrong word at least for
this conversation is power is being able to close your eyes imagine a world better than this one
open your eyes and actually have the skills to move towards that to make that real and
and i have become so obsessed with that idea that it helps like that becomes almost the
filter by which i make sense of the world like if i really think about like what's what's one of my
highest level filters it's like i only do and believe that which moves me towards my goals
and if you're good at choosing your goal then you suddenly become open to any good idea from
wherever even if it contradicts like i came into it thinking one thing but like whoa that's
actually more that's real that's actually going to take me it's not something i ever thought like i
never thought that and i don't know enough about game b to know if like i'm behind it or not but
it's like hey if game b ends up being the most real thing and there is a way to deal with the just
freakish amount of complexity and that we actually can consciously build something that moves us
towards that and it becomes a my values would definitely be sustainability human well-being
like those are sort of inextricably connected wanting the human race to go on long after i'm here
wanting people to struggle but struggle well so that they can be tough and be resilient like those
are all things that to me seem inherently good more than say happiness or something like that
which is very transient but like seeking out the things that will actually get me there and the
process of iteration and at the risk of just completely derailing on tangents here that to
me that sort of mixture of like iterate get it out there try be sincere in the pursuit of what's
actually going to move you towards your goal like that is you know if i had magic fairy dust that
could sprinkle on people to get them to act in accordance with that i think they would be happier
and it certainly would lead to a better world in my estimation this is interesting and at the
at the risk of opening a very big can of worms
did i do i remember right that you said that it isn't necessarily true that improving the
individual will improve society or am i misremembering that
it is not necessarily true that improving some subset of individuals in a particular
way will improve society like okay someone getting better at violin is improving them
it's improving their skills someone getting better at warfare is improving their skills
so is society the result of the quality of the members yes but are the members also the
result of the quality of the civilization systems like the education and the economics and the
culture and the governance that helped condition and develop them also yes so it's not just bottom
up individuals to society or just top down the quality of society evokes different things from
the individuals there's a recursion there um so i but i don't think there's a tangent there i don't
want to go down i want to go back to something you said a moment ago when you were talking about
the desire to be right and how problematic that was and when you let that go ego in that way
makes you very easy to control because all i have to do is appeal to your desire to feel
right and i can control you i can give you information that i've taken more time than you
have to process to frame it up that will make you feel right and i can pick what you believe
i can also inflame you into emotion by attacking your sense of rightness or whatever so having a
fragile ego that wants to seem right and that is fragile identified with certain positions
makes you very very vulnerable to control so that's an important thing having a mindset where
anything can be brought up and your identity is not attached to specific belief structures
the belief could change and you don't crumble as a result of it makes you much more resilient
yeah resiliency is um is one of those things from an intrinsic standpoint that if people want
that in themselves and they're actually willing to put that to use um you can begin to get anti
fragile and anti fragility uh in terms of building a new society i know is a is going to be a pretty
important thing do you think that we have any ideas that could actually because so anti fragility
for anybody that's never heard the phrase before the more you attack at the stronger it becomes
so what on earth would that look like at the societal level i i it is a failure of imagination
for me i can't imagine it capitalism has been anti fragile um as a system of resource distribution
and um etc it it has continued to evolve its capacities so we went from say barter to
exchange mediated by currency to fiat currency to fraction reserve fiat currency what were the
attacks upon it that made it stronger well if one capitalist group say another nation or whatever
was trying to advance their overall share of the pie relative to another one they kept each
strengthening their underlying capitalist base becoming better at extraction exchange those types
of things um when communism was emerging as an alternate system it increased its capacity to
be productive and defend itself and whatever so that's an example of anti fragility you were
asking earlier how does someone go from the forgiveness of jesus to the to the crusades
there was a belief system christianity that continued to get stronger and by stronger it
meant as it was attacked by other religious ideologies well or political ideologies it was
increasing its and this is actually interesting because anti fragile is not always good because
sometimes it just means the thing is getting better at warfare um i actually want to bring up the
trump campaign uh has elements of anti fragility so whether it was stormy daniels or the russia
issue or the impeachment his base actually got stronger through each of those and so one of
the things that the left has not recognized they failed to recognize the anti fragility and that
they were lobbying attacks that would lose but would actually strengthen and so that's actually
an important thing to recognize because if something has become anti fragile and you think it's bad
and you're going against it you have to think in a different way um and actually i'll use trump as
an example here of the thing you were mentioning around um listening to diverse opinions
so we we know that uh he's a different kind of president and the politically trained ones
that have been there before uh whether people think that he is saving the nation from the
corrupt evil deep state or whether he is destroying it to create his own evil dynasty um is one of the
classically polarized things that people have a hard time grounding enough they ground it in the
thing that resonates is true to them without seeing the other things but i think everyone
knows he's been effective at a particular thing um i know a couple people who have been who worked
with him closely been on the security council or you know in his uh advisory board who've said the
same thing about their experience working with him in the presidential or said one same thing i
found very interesting is that where most of the presidents previously had positions that were fairly
consistent and predictable bush did kind of bush things and obama did kind of obama things
and they got people around them that had a similar ideology and that had for some period of time
right the obama democrats before they were obama democrats were clinton democrats they were of a
certain type and same as bush republicans um trump got people who were mostly not of that
of a particular lineage system and he got people who disagreed with each other vehemently
and so if he would bring patreus into a room and bannon into a room together to talk about china
because they both knew more about it than he did and he knew that but they disagreed vehemently
then what they what i was told would happen in the room is that he would invite a group of people
in without giving them any advance notice of what they were going to talk about so they couldn't
prepare how to manipulate whole thinking so he got their extemporaneous real sense he brought in
people who disagreed he would ask a question without giving an indication of what he thought
he'd keep a poker face on the whole time to not indicate that what he believed and he'd just
keep asking questions and have them fight it out and and he would actually sit there quietly and
listen for a couple hours and once he had heard enough then he still wouldn't tell them what he
thought he'd go straight to twitter because he didn't care if they agreed with him or not he cared
if his support base did and twitter gave him an instant way to communicate with the support base
and get real-time analytics based on the big data analysis of the twitter feed of whether what he
was saying was coalescing his support base or not wow and so that is an effective technology
where what he's doing is listening to different viewpoints now what he was listening for is not
necessarily what is true but what will be effective for coalescing my support base
but he also had much more direct communication with people and much faster feedback now also
when you don't have a position kind of like bruce lee said about martial arts right when
you don't have a fixed form when you don't have rigorous positions you can take the position
that is coalescing the support base empirical more which is both terrible and wonderful depending
upon what your goal is oh man so yeah this is i'm i'm i'm not surprised by this conversation
given that you are the person i came across when researching the end of the world and how
civilizations crumble dude the way that you are taking the entire ecosystem of things that have
to be taken into consideration uh into consideration it is it is very interesting i'm going to be
watching you very carefully uh with what you continue to put out in terms of game b and how
we move forward intelligently i think we're in a super weird time but dude thank you for coming
on the show thank you for and maybe you would warn me against this but thank you for being a part of
my sense making apparatus uh i will not take you literally i will definitely look things up uh and
form my own opinions but man you definitely fall into the category of people that i think are are
saying things in a rational way um a metered way that makes a lot of sense to me so word thank you
it's good to be here it's fun to have the conversation with you dude no joke uh hopefully
we will connect again soon and uh thanks again everybody if you haven't already be sure to subscribe
so i can fuck up your algorithm and until next time my friends be legendary take care
the decisions we make in the next 20 years 20 30 years are going to have
enduring consequences of the sort that previous decisions did not
we need to figure out how the problems that could that could threaten our extinction won't
extinct us we need to figure out how to avoid an anarchic society we need to figure out how
to avoid it just topic society we need to do all this in a span of it's say a couple decades
