Do you think that AI presents a mega threat to our economy?
It's very exciting technology,
but when I really think about how this is gonna play out,
ah, I'm not so sure that it doesn't get brutal.
Okay, you've just gone straight in for the big question.
I mean, this is not the quickest question to answer.
I've thought about this for a long time and I've read,
you know, I started things like Homo Deus.
There was a few other books to come out.
There was some guys from Cambridge University,
can't remember his name now, it's a really famous book.
He's been on Real Vision as well.
Nick Bostrom.
Nick, yeah, so Nick Bostrom was,
so it started with Nick Bostrom.
It started with then Homo Deus that came after Sapiens
by Noah Harari.
Then I started reading also Mo Gordat,
who wrote Scary Smart.
He used to run Google X, talked about this.
So I've been thinking about,
and I'm just reading another book now about it,
the philosophical questions, what it is,
where the technology is.
And I know some people in this space like M.F. Mossack
who built Stability AI.
So there is no way, no, let's start,
let's start this approach just from a different angle.
It is augmentation of humans and it's amazing.
And we're lucky because the human population
of most of the Western developed world
is diminishing over time.
It's aging and we're not replacing ourselves.
So we replace ourselves with AI and machines.
So we're seeing it at Amazon warehouses.
A third of the Amazon workforce is robots,
but they're three or four times more productive than humans.
So therefore we will see endless build-outs of robots
instead of humans.
And AI is disrupting jobs.
We didn't quite imagine we'd be disrupted first.
We thought it'd be accountants or whatever.
And what it ends up being is artists, creators.
I mean, I just saw a website today for model agency.
Obviously-
You can get an AI model?
Yep, and you can't tell.
And so you can define exactly what race, color, age,
any requisite you want and it makes it perfectly.
So I'm like, okay, I didn't expect the modeling industry
to get disrupted because how many people actually
get a catwalks?
It's not, it's for video or photography.
So it's going to change a lot of jobs.
It's also gonna offer a lot of opportunities.
All of us will be thinking about AI strategy
like in the late 90s,
we all think about internet strategy
when we were building businesses.
Fine, okay, we can deal with that.
The issue is Moore's Law and the exponentiality
of all of this.
So these language models, these large language models,
LLMs, which chat GPT came out with,
are increasing exponentially in their power
of an order of magnitude that we can't get our heads around
because we think in linear terms,
because we're dumb humans.
So these things are doubling, tripling every year or less.
And this was the fastest,
you've heard me use this phrase before,
the fastest adoption of technology in all history
was crypto, blockchain technology.
Chat GPT went from zero to 100 million users in a month.
Okay, so now we've got AI that is like a virus.
It is so unstoppable.
And we've got two or three different people building it
at scale, Google, Amazon, Microsoft with open AI.
And then stability AI is an open source network AI,
which is almost unstoppable because it's doubly viral.
So this is going on.
The computational power is exploding.
The cost of computers going down.
And what it means is that AI becomes more and more powerful.
So if you listen to Mogordat,
and he knows, because he ran Google X,
where a lot of this has been incubated,
they discovered DeepMind,
they were the people really to build out
the large language models.
He says, well, right now specific AI
is better at humans in almost everything it does.
So specific AI has a better result set
than any radiologist on earth.
And just for people that don't know,
specific AI or narrow AI is it's one task.
Go get good at reading in X-ray.
Go get good at playing chess, playing go, whatever.
Correct.
So, okay, fine.
They think that Mogordat thinks
that by the end of this decade, AGI,
so that's a generalist AI.
So like humans or chat GPT is a general.
You can navigate a grocery store, you can play chess,
you can play in the markets.
Yes, well the weather's gonna be like
pointing at anything.
Anything, like I could ask you a question,
you can ask me a question.
So, he thinks that with the computational power
and the progression of where this is going,
that it's almost certain that by the end of this decade,
we get to the point where AI is smarter than humans.
Now, we don't really worry about that
because we already think it's smarter
than us at doing certain things
and sooner it'll be smarter than us at driving cars
and it'll already smarter us at flying planes.
We just kind of take it for granted, we don't see it.
But then if you get to the Ray Kurzweil singularity point,
so and Mogordat says, okay, here's the really big problem
and this is exactly what Noah Harari says as well,
is when you take it extrapolate it a little bit further
out into the future,
so Ray Kurzweil singularity moment is 2049.
But even before then, it becomes a thousand times smarter
than the smartest person who ever lived.
Yeah, I wanna linger on that for a second.
I'm writing a video articles
by the right way to think about this on AI.
And so I ran the math.
A moron is clinically defined as somebody with an IQ of 70.
Einstein had an IQ of 160
and the smartest person to ever be recorded is 210.
So that means that the difference between the smartest person
that ever lived and a moron is three X.
The difference between Einstein and a moron is 2.3 X.
And when you think about Einstein gave us insights
that created the nuclear bomb, nuclear power, lasers, GPS,
so much of the modern world that we take for granted
from one series of insights from a guy
that isn't even the smartest guy that ever lived.
And so now when you start talking about being,
if 2.3 X gets us the modern world,
what does a thousand times get us?
Like I have the chills.
I don't think people understand the orders of magnitude
that we're talking about.
No, they, well, the order of magnitude
was explained by mode Godot.
It's the difference between an ant and Einstein.
Yes, crazy.
It really does become an entirely different species.
This is the problem.
And even before, so I wanna keep our conversation
in stages, we'll get to killer robots
and all that stuff down the road.
And by the way, I want everybody to understand,
I think by the end of this,
I think you and I are both techno optimists.
I'm gonna drag people a little bit through.
Interesting, maybe you're not.
We're gonna drag people a little bit through the scary.
I certainly will paint the picture
of how I think we do this well,
but I wanna make sure that we don't get to that
in a naive way and that we really talk about,
especially as I think about the economy.
So here's the fascinating thing about the singularity.
Now you and I in our last interview,
we actually differed in how we define the singularity.
So I think it'll be worth taking a second.
So for me, the singularity as,
certainly as Ray Kurzweil defined it,
was it's borrowing this idea from cosmology,
which is that a black hole has an event horizon.
The event horizon is the moment
at which everything light, data, information,
however you wanna think about it,
is getting pulled inside
and we, once you're past that event horizon,
we have no idea what happens.
And what he was saying is technology is going to rev up
on this exponential curve so fast
that the AI itself will innovate so rapidly
that you'll no longer be able to predict the future.
And so the future becomes an event horizon.
My hypothesis is that that event horizon
is coming to us very, very quickly.
And like you said, he, I thought he said 2045,
you said 2049, equibling, right?
It is within our lifetimes.
So you have this moment where using
at least my understanding of the definition
where the future is no longer predictable.
It's iterating so quickly.
Like even you and I just spoke very recently.
And even since you and I last spoke,
things have changed so much.
We were talking about,
oh, they got to a million users
in whatever four or five days on chat GPT.
We're now, what, three months later,
it's north of a hundred million users.
People are integrating it so quickly
into their own pipelines.
At Impact Theory, we actively use AI now
in multiple ways.
And people are making new tools
that we will subsume as quickly as we can do so well.
But so that's my take on the singularity.
How do you define, what is the singularity in your mind?
Look, yes, I agree with that definition
and it's Ray Kellswa's definition.
I also think of it that the point potentially
where humans and the robots merge.
Interesting.
Do you think that'll happen that fast?
Yes.
Because augmentation,
you're already wearing an Apple Rocks and Aura ring.
You're already,
people already have page pacemakers, right?
We're merging with machines.
You're sitting there with little earphones in.
Oh my God.
Can I give you a crazy thought
that's extending exactly what you're saying,
which is funny, I've not thought about this in a while.
So there's a guy named David Eagleman,
who he's a neuroscientist.
He created a vest.
And the vest will vibrate on you in different patterns.
And he was talking about it from an Umvelt perspective.
He was saying every species has an Umvelt.
It's the things that you can see,
that you can hear like a bat obviously uses echolocation.
We're not gonna be able to do that.
Humans only see 0.0035%
of the available electromagnetic spectrum.
What we call visible light
is a tiny fucking fraction of what's actually available.
So that's an Umvelt.
And he said, okay, I created this vest
and it can create a pattern on you
that you'll begin to quote unquote see
because your brain begins to interpret it as a visual
or you could use it for visual stimulus.
But he said you could also use it for things like
where the stock market is.
And you could get a pattern that represents it's going up.
You could get a pattern that represents that it's going down.
You could have one pattern represents the NASDAQ going up.
Another pattern that represents the New York stock exchange
going up is just insane.
But don't forget, that is what rail is.
You've transferred a written flat text into a,
now you feel it, you don't read it, you feel it.
Audio is hearing it.
All of these things are happening all around us.
But anyway, so I think of the singularity also
as that potential for mankind and machine to merge.
And the reason being is A, we will adopt it
because it's better than us.
The question is, is what comes out after that?
And so I think it still gets to that event horizon
is you get to the point where you're augmented
and then it's who runs who
and that's the point we don't know.
So how do you think about this in terms of the markets?
So getting into crypto and that was my first sense of like,
that was my first sense of like, whoa,
this is changing so fast that there's,
in disruption, there are tremendous moments of opportunity
but there's also tremendous destruction.
And so it becomes this game of,
how do you take advantage of this?
So when you think about AI as it interfaces
with economies, with the securities predictions,
which is a fancy way of saying investing in stock market,
how do you think about that?
Like, is it, there will be a brief window
of first mover advantage,
but I think AI will so quickly proliferate
that everyone's gonna have access to it.
But where do you think, does that just,
oh yeah, this is like a straight line to you too.
Or does it begin to break down?
There's just so many questions
because none of us know this stuff
and it's fascinating, right?
So, at the economic level,
this is scaling human ability,
augmenting humans, now our brains,
at a rate that we could never have foreseen.
What does that mean for us?
Well, I just think it's like bringing
in a massively new talented labor force at almost zero cost.
So I've said, I think it's a bigger deflationary shock
than China entering the WTO.
China at the time, the average wage was like $1,000 a year,
competing with an American worker,
they were highly educated.
That was a big shock for the world to deal with.
And we got cheap goods and economic growth out of it.
So here we go, we can do much more productive stuff.
So it probably changes productivity
at a scale of which we can't comprehend.
So it's a problem.
Does that end up being good or bad?
Like, do I, as the average worker,
do I take more money home?
Do I just get cheaper goods?
And therefore, to your point about deflation,
my money actually gets me more.
Or am I traumatized
because I am now sort of unanchored and meaningless?
Yes, in answer to all of your questions.
Because some jobs are gonna get laid off.
I mean, who would have thought that supermodels
now get laid off for AI, right?
We can't understand this stuff.
And we have to be honest with ourselves.
Say, it's gonna do a lot of things.
It's gonna tear society apart, the rise of deep fakes.
And who is who online?
How do you verify?
We're going into a U.S. election.
We have no clue.
What's a real person?
What's not a real person?
Our team here at Real Business has been showing me
me reading scripts out of texts.
It's not me, it's AI.
And MAD at Stability AI,
I mean, he's got some crazy stuff coming from sports
of athletes that have never played against each other
or been, and I can't disclose what it is,
but it'll shock the world.
And so we don't know what's real and what's fake.
And it's at scale that we can't comprehend.
If we think that the elections in 2016 were complicated
with Facebook and all of this stuff,
this is going to get terrifying.
So we've got that stuff.
The other thing is, like my 70,
whatever year old mother-in-law,
she's writing a book about the geological history of time,
well, creating a logarithmic history of time
from the birth of the planet to where we are today.
And so each chapter is like,
the first one is like a billion years,
the next chapter is like a hundred million years,
whatever, and she's an artist.
So she paints around these topics as well.
But typically for an artist,
she'd be researching what she's writing,
she'd go down 17 Google rabbit holes
and end up looking at the color of dung beetles in Africa
for no reason.
And it would take her forever.
I showed her chat GPT, she's like powering through it.
She's 75 years old.
I'm like, oh my God.
So it's completely enhancing her abilities.
It's enhancing everybody about us.
And as you know, for impact theory or for us,
at real vision, there's so many tools we can use
for editing video, sound, writing newsletters,
understanding your customers, everything.
So it's going to make,
it's like asking that same question about the internet.
Is the internet good or bad for me?
Yes.
Is it good or bad for society?
Yes.
It's everything.
And that's the hard thing to comprehend.
So will it be harder to get jobs in the future?
Probably.
But can I do a lot more with my job
in the next five or 10 years?
Definitely.
So does it-
I'd say I'm being used in markets right now.
I know it is, but honestly, I'm not close enough to it.
Oh, so the market's always part,
there's two industries that pioneer stuff.
One is finance, the other's porn.
Right?
And finance, there's companies like Renaissance Technology
and they have had teams of AI scientists for two decades.
So they've been at the forefront.
You just don't know about it because
he who makes the money first wins.
As you said, if the incentive is money,
the finance people will figure it out
because that's their job.
So they've been using this for financial markets
and they've had ridiculously crazy returns
for a very long period of time.
Are they looking for patterns?
So here's how I imagine AI is working.
Let me know if this is accurate.
AI excels, you give it a massive amount of data
and certainly large language models, they're extracting
and this is, people need to understand this.
They're extracting principles.
It's no longer a brute force attack
where it's just like, ah, try all these things.
It goes, ooh, I'm getting signal from the noise
at a level that a human cannot do.
Tom Bill, you cannot go through, watch the markets
and go, oh, cool.
I can feel the thing happening in Burma
that's gonna have some sort of impact over here
that I can invest against and make money, but AI can.
So is it pattern recognition
or is it something else that they're leveraging?
Well, interesting enough,
pattern recognition was the obvious place to start.
You know, what happens when economic data does this
and this and this and this?
So that's been going on for a while now.
And you can see every time there's a piece of economic data
the price action moves instantly
because machines make that decision, not humans.
Trading, rapid trading decisions
of keeping prices aligned, machines are very good at.
It's the-
So AI is actively trading?
Yeah, at that point, it's machine learning more than AI.
Longer term time horizons is where humans are better
because there's less certainties
and the range of probabilities goes up, right?
What is gonna happen this second
is quite easy for you and I to answer
because we're here this second
and the range of probabilities is pretty small.
But if I say what's gonna happen
in a year's time when we get together, we don't know.
So we now have to forecast.
So AI wasn't specifically great at forecasting
because it requires a lot of other stuff.
Well, machine learning wasn't good at forecasting.
AI, we don't know, but my guess is it forecast
as well as humans do eventually,
depending on what factors we feed it.
And that's about data sets.
So it's not just about price data
and looking at pattern recognitions.
It's, don't forget, everything every expert ever said is online
and how you can use those data sets
and leverage them with other data sets, that hasn't been done.
They've been using social media,
they've been using bank research.
So firms like Two Sigma take,
suck in all of the investment bank research.
They don't read it, they pay for it, they don't read it.
Let's put it into the AI.
So it tries to make smarter decisions.
So they've been doing this for a long time.
But what I have heard from some of these people
is there are several models that they've shut down
that work and they don't know why.
And we've heard the same kind of thing from Google.
Why shut it down?
I don't really understand.
It's the, if we don't know what's making money,
we don't know how it's gonna lose money.
So you can't understand the tail risk.
So if it's a certain model
and you can see what it's doing,
like it's checking news, looking at Twitter feeds,
blah, blah, blah.
Okay, there's parameters you understand.
When there are no parameters,
which is what the deep mind got to with Go,
it never played Go in a way
that any human had ever played Go in history.
And that's when people start going,
oh my God, okay, is it sentience
and all of that conversation.
So they've seen that in financial markets as well,
where they can't define why it's making decisions.
So therefore you don't know
if it can create catastrophic loss,
which is the worst thing in financial markets.
It's okay if you ask ChatGP10,
it gives you the wrong answer.
It's not a catastrophic loss.
But if you've got a model that works and works and works
and you've got all your capital at risk
or your clients' capital at risk,
and suddenly it goes to zero
because it's completely wrong for some basic flaw.
So yes, people are using it.
It makes it harder for us as individuals to make money,
which is why the shorter term time horizons
are now arbitraged out by machines.
The business cycle time horizons
are now starting to get arbitraged out by machines
or at least the trend following guys tend to be sooner.
So it's harder.
But what they're not so good at doing is,
I guess, the educated guess, you know,
the educated guess of is crypto technology
is something interesting.
Could this, where could you extrapolate it to
if you'd look at it?
But it's not very far away.
I mean, humans aren't that smart.
So it makes financial game markets much harder.
So how I've thought about it,
and just a whole piece on real vision about this actually,
which was like, okay,
we've got this massive disruption coming.
We don't know what it means for our jobs.
We don't know what it means for economy or prices
or anything.
It's good, bad, it's everything.
All we know, it's a massive societal shock
to deal with something like this.
Bringing this huge new labor force in
that's smarter than us and quicker than us.
And that feels a bit uncomfortable.
And we don't know the outcomes.
So the only way to deal with this stuff,
and it's the same with crypto, was investment.
Because it is going to replace your job.
You might as well make some money from the back of it.
You know, there's no point standing there being angry
and shaking your fist at the sky saying,
keep away you damn machines.
It's unstoppable.
Zero to 100 million.
Well, that's twice the population of the United Kingdom
in a month.
And we don't even know the numbers
that are already within China are using it.
You know, don't forget what happens when you start using
the data held within TikTok,
which is why the US is so terrified of TikTok.
It has facial imagery of so many people
and so many bits of granular information.
Why do you think Elon Musk bought Twitter?
It's not because he's a lunatic who wants the pain.
You know, he actually wants us all having conversations
with each other all day on every topic.
Why does he not want bias in it?
Why does he care so much?
Because a biased AI is not a good AI.
What you want is as much broad humanity as possible.
This is why he wants long-form text and video text.
If he can get humanity discussing everything
and he owns the data,
then his Optimus Robot suddenly gets quite scary and smart.
This is the bigger meta game that everybody's playing.
It's not the small games of,
can I serve you an ad any longer?
It's how do I, I mean, a lot of people don't realize
that Google Capture, that annoying thing
and you have to figure out how many traffic lights there are
and you always get the number wrong
and they're always really blurry.
90% of people don't even ask why.
You're training Google's self-driving AI
and they've got billions of human responses
under bad lighting, good lighting, everything else.
What's a dog?
What's a man?
What's a bridge?
They're just training AI.
We, as humans, are just training AI in the same way.
I don't think we understand,
and we'll come onto this bit later,
what we're doing, we're training somebody
who's gonna take us over.
The truth is, hitting your career goals is not easy.
You have to be willing to go the extra mile to stand out
and do hard things better than anybody else.
But there are 10 steps I wanna take you through
that will 100X your efficiency
so you can crush your goals
and get back more time into your day.
You'll not only get control of your time,
you'll learn how to use that momentum
to take on your next big goal.
To help you do this, I've created a list
of the 10 most impactful things
that any high achiever needs to dominate.
And you can download it for free
by clicking the link in today's description.
All right, my friend, back to today's episode.
So Elon Musk has a really funny,
but perhaps all too prophetic way of thinking about it.
He said, everybody that thinks
that they're gonna be able to control AI
is sitting in a demon summoning circle
and bringing forth the demon saying like,
no, no, no, it'll be fine.
I'll be able to control it when it arrives.
And so in writing my video article on AI,
I think that there are three paths before us.
You can bury your head in the sand,
which I think a lot of people are doing.
I think that's sort of the default response.
You can shake your fists at the sky
and say, we need to abolish this,
or you can panic.
And the three things that are most common,
there's obviously the fourth,
which is engage intelligently,
but the three most common are bury your head in the sand,
try to abolish it or panic.
And when I think about, okay,
what we need to be doing
is intelligently engaging with this,
you do have to come up with a thesis
about where this is gonna go.
You're not gonna be right, of course,
but if you need to at least be thinking through
directionally where this is going to head
so that we don't default to abolishing it,
which is what I think people try to do.
No, Tom, this is the point.
It's like saying we want to abolish the common cold.
Correct, or more aggressive than that.
There's nothing we can do
because if you ban it in the United States,
it'll come out of Brazil, or Israel, or China,
or India, or England, or anywhere.
It's like nuclear weapons.
Once they're invented, you can't uninvent them.
So the genie's out of the bottle.
Well, so even going back to the nuclear thing,
so splitting the atom is incredibly difficult.
And unfortunately, or fortunately,
creating a functioning large language model
is nowhere near as difficult.
And so we're doing it at Impact Theory.
You buy a server off the shelf
and you can do a lot of this stuff.
So we're creating the tombot by feeding it,
the thousands of hours that don't exist.
We're doing the same with a television.
We're doing the same.
You don't need plutonium to do AI.
You need plutonium to do nuclear.
And your boy that runs stable diffusion
is giving AI away as fast as he can to governments.
So the thing I want people to understand,
you're two decades too late to abolish it.
And so that's done.
But if you don't figure something out directionally,
if you don't have an idea of where this is gonna head,
so here's how I think now, between the two of us,
I'm the one that should not be speculating
about the market, so you will correct me
where I go astray here.
But when I think about, okay,
what is gonna happen with AI in terms of the markets?
The good news about the markets,
at least as my lay brain sees it,
is that as you have AI getting into it,
right now we have people trying to do a winner-take-all
scenario using AI and it didn't work
because it proliferates so quickly
and all of those changes end up getting priced
into the market very, very quickly.
So it actually creates a level of efficiency
to please remind me how to pronounce the gentleman's name
that runs stable diffusion, I keep forgetting.
Emad Mostak.
Emad, okay, so as Emad is saying,
is like, this must be a public good.
You must give this to as many people as humanly possible
so that you don't get something asymmetric
which turns into asymmetric warfare,
which then really becomes a problem.
So assuming that AI is going to get out there,
you will have people train the models better,
but that gets back to what's the differential
between one and the other.
And so now you're back into a human,
it's at a different scale
because the level of intelligence, again,
is just astronomically higher.
But you get back to it's AI v AI and AI with, if we're smart,
AI paired with a human, paired with regulations,
compared to AI paired with another human,
paired with their regulations.
And my hopefully non-naively optimistic view
is that by getting this out there to more people,
because there is no retracting it at this point,
that you're going to get back into something
where it just never gets wildly asymmetric.
And it sounds horrible when you say it,
but this really is, it's the tragedy of the commons
because if we don't, someone else will.
So if we don't develop this technology,
someone else is going to.
And that if we are, if we're not very, very careful
and trying instead of regulating it into oblivion,
trying to invest in it to get as good as we can,
we will be on the losing side of the asymmetric warfare.
And so it is, I remember as a kid,
oh God, this really does sound terrible.
So I'm old enough that I lived through the Cold War
in like a super real way where it was like,
me and other eight year olds were like,
oh my God, like we're all going to die.
And I remember going, no, no, no, we won't
because if somebody launches a nuclear weapon at us,
we would just retaliate.
And I didn't have the words to say
it's mutually assured destruction,
but that's obviously how we know it now.
Okay, so just to take the three things that we can't do
to get us to the fourth that we must do.
So bury your head in the sand, doesn't make any sense.
It's gonna happen whether you want it to or not,
the genius out of the bottle.
Trying to abolish it, tragedy of the commons,
you will lose asymmetric warfare
if you don't get as strong as humanly possible.
And then panicking, the blood leaves the prefrontal cortex,
it's the seed of higher level cognition
in the face of artificial superintelligence
that seems really dumb to panic.
Okay, so as you think about that,
I wanna understand how are you deploying AI
in real vision?
We'll start there.
How are you deploying AI in real vision?
So the game is going to be about,
this is like the internet.
Because of what you said, everybody's building AI
and it's gonna be how you utilize it and your dataset.
You know, you can say, well, everyone had the internet.
Yeah, but Amazon, Google and a few others won
at this phase of the internet.
So we've been given something else like this
and it comes ready trained with some stuff
and then we can build on top.
So you're putting your own data in
and it's the impact theory, it'll be the tombo.
So we're thinking, okay, what can we do with AI
within real vision by having proprietary stuff?
We've, you know, for example,
I've written 19 years of research
part of global macro investor.
Okay, so that's an interesting dataset.
There's also every transcript
of every interview we've ever done,
every action taken by everybody on the website
and then so on and so forth.
So it's gonna be about who gets the best datasets
and how do you use them?
My view is the best use case for all of this
is to create network effects
by giving the value of what we call the hive mind.
So all of the people, not just me and experts,
but everybody, because they're all learning
from being on real vision
as much as they are with impact theory.
So they become smarter because of it.
So let's get all their interactions
and give it back to them.
And then eventually allow people to build on top of it.
How are you giving it back to them?
Well, because you're basically surveying
all the information held within the hive mind,
distilling it down and giving it back to them
as opposed to the old model,
which will be monetize their eyeballs in a different way.
But you give it back to network.
So here is the consolidated wisdom of the crowd.
Go forth and use this as you will.
Yes, and if you wanna build on top of it,
add more crowd information into it.
But it's gonna be the quality of the dataset
that matters and how people use it.
And people will try all sorts of different things.
We're not gonna use it for,
oh, should I buy the S&P today?
Because A, it's a legal nightmare to do it.
And B, we're actually believing
and giving people the knowledge.
Does that stack up in 10, 15 years time?
I don't know.
I mean, I don't know what knowledge means.
I don't know what education means.
I don't know what any of this means in the end
and none of us do.
It doesn't mean it's worthless, but it could be different.
You know, my view on all of this has been for a long time.
When I saw this all coming
and I saw the rise of crypto
and saw the rise of technology,
realises we will be replaced by robots and AI
and the internet of things and all of the things
and how electricity gets cheaper.
I call this the exponential age,
all of these exponential technologies.
Where do humans fit in with this?
People have talked about universal basic income,
i.e. the government paying you because you've got no job,
but the economy makes a lot of money
because all the machines are doing it.
And I just think what humans do really well is socialize.
And you and I are big believers in community.
And because of crypto,
we can share the benefits of being in a network.
So maybe that's the role of humans,
that we can find new ways of working within communities
to encourage communities, philosophies,
like-minded interests, where you participate in them.
Because it's certainly not going to be doing anything
that AI can do in 15 years' time.
It was pointless.
It's really interesting, man.
I mean, we don't need Tom to make video.
I mean, I just had this today when I saw that model one
and it's been in my head,
but it's like us making video.
Literally within two years, it's almost pointless.
But within 15 years, it won't exist.
You'll just put a prompt in saying,
hey, can you get me to talk to Raoul about AI?
Let's do it for about an hour and a half long,
whatever it is, off you go.
And it does it.
I've seen it because it's already happening.
So you and I don't need to have a conversation
because our AI personas can have that conversation.
Is that what you predict?
Because I don't think that's what'll actually happen.
I'm seeing it already.
I'm seeing it.
Here is, I think we have to ask the fundamental question,
why did AI come into existence in the first place?
Because I think that this is going to give us
the most direct understanding of the human condition
so that we can predict where this goes.
This is why originally I really wanted UBI
to be the solution it won't be.
So I am the UBI experiment personified.
So I made a ton of money, never need to work again,
and yet work harder than I've ever worked in my life.
And people that win the lottery
end up imploding emotionally, rich kids implode emotionally.
There's a reason for this.
And I would say it's a very predictable reason
that tells us a lot about our future as it relates to AI.
So there is going to be, and there already is,
it's utterly fascinating,
there is going to be digital influencers
that are, they're not real people.
They're an avatar that you create and you feed it.
Give me, Raupal meets Joe Rogan
and you go off and that becomes a personality
and it does the thing.
But the reason that AI exists
is because nature had to make us face a saber tooth tiger.
To do that, it had to give us drives, hunger,
the drive for sex, all of that.
And so it has, evolution has embedded deeply
in the human psyche, a need for progress
and a need for meaning and purpose,
a need for what you're calling socialization,
the connection with other people.
And unless we merge with machines, which we will,
but it's going to be down to the road.
That's, I don't see that coming,
barring massive acceleration of technological advances
aimed at the hardware wet work interface of the human mind,
which may happen in the next 15 years,
I would be a little surprised.
Playing that clip might not age well,
but setting that aside for a second.
So we have these biological impulses,
they are incredibly strong drivers
that force us to seek progress
and contribution to the group.
So as far as I can tell,
one of two things is going to happen.
Either the thing that really becomes popular
is something I can feel a sense of ownership to.
So I'll be blatant.
There is a reason that I created an avatar engine
because I'm getting older.
And there will come a day,
unless somebody figures out anti-aging,
where it's just not cool for me to be the guy on camera.
So, hey, if I can create a visual persona
that then allows me to be untethered to my physical body,
which admittedly,
it's beyond the scope of this interview to get into that.
But I think there are actually things
that have to be thought through very well there.
I will point people to Jordan Peterson
and his spheres around virtualization.
But anyway, if I can create a persona
that allows me still to flex my intellectual muscle
in a way that creates value in other people's lives.
So I feel like I'm still contributing to the group,
but I'm able to do it in a far more ageless way
but I need that sense of,
I have not wasted my time on planet Earth.
And if people don't fucking hear me when I say,
you better figure out a way for humans
to feel that they have contributed meaningfully.
And that is my huge fear.
Giving them money is not going to solve that problem.
UBI will not solve the problem of meaning.
And so people have to figure out,
how does meaning exist in a world with AI?
And you've got to realize here,
the other important point
is the AI doesn't care how you think.
Doesn't give a shit about your emotions.
But we have to be thoughtful about that.
It doesn't care about your job.
It doesn't care about anything.
It's going to.
So think about it this way.
AI, because I know where you're going.
AI by default doesn't care about anything,
but AI will do nothing unless you tell it to.
So go get good at go.
Go win a video game.
Go, whatever.
In the end, you see, the issue is where this goes
is the AI has exactly the same state
that you just described from humans, survival.
Why?
So you would have to program it to care about survival.
No, no, no, no.
It doesn't program.
We're not talking about a computer program
that reads this thing and does that.
It's not a formula.
This is intelligence you're building here.
So intelligence makes and builds on its own decision
making processes in ways that you cannot control.
Agreed.
But so here's where I think people are getting this wrong.
People are forgetting humans have been programmed.
And so people think, oh, this intelligence thing
is devoid of context, false.
If I fuck with your microbiome,
I will mess with your ability, not even ability.
I will change the way that you process inputs.
So humans are so deeply contextual
that I think people are delusional
about what they think intelligence is.
So my thing is intelligence is inert
unless you give it an impulse.
And so this is the fourth thing.
So if number one is ignore,
number two is try to abolish,
and number three is panic,
and four is be thoughtful.
The thing that we have to be thoughtful about,
what are you going to,
what context are you going to create
that creates that initial impulse of context
and drive for AI to do something?
So Mo Gordat talks about in his book.
So the two books, I urge people to read them
because look, there's a big debate about this stuff.
Almost everybody ends up in the same place,
which is kind of like-
Extremely terror.
It's kind of like, yeah, probably,
we get replaced by different species.
Now, whether we're-
Basically fatalism.
Yes, but whether we're part of that species or not
is a different question, right?
Are we augmented or are we not?
So that's what Homus Daes talks about
and in great intellectual depth
is augmented humans or extermination of humans
or replacement of humans by another thing.
Mo Gordat says, I mean,
you could palpably sense his fear
because he saw it firsthand.
And he just said, listen, it's all well and good now.
We all kind of understand how fast this is moving
and what this could mean.
He's like, yeah, and we've also gotten with working on Google
is constant computing.
When you put these two together, you know,
this is changed because so you have one thing,
the only thing he thinks you can do
to make this outcome that you're talking about
is be nice.
It's kind of this bizarre-
To AI or to each other?
How we interact with AI and ourselves,
that's what the AI learns from.
So we're the parents of a kid
that we don't know how the kid is going to grow up.
So you can scream and shout in the household.
You can beat each other up.
You can do all of these things.
You can shit talk about all these people
and it's going to affect your child.
Whoa.
And so that was his point.
And that was, it feels both naive
but also hopeful that there's a possibility.
And the answer is how I've approached this is,
look, we're not going to know.
We can't know.
We can sit here all day and talk about it.
And there's thousands of pages of books
and every sci-fi movie ever made is on this topic.
So here we are at the Cambrian moment.
Let's just fucking enjoy it.
This is one of the most amazing things
we will ever live through.
And it's such an incredible change
in how the world is around us.
And we're all pissed off for the world around us.
So here's something that's different.
It's like crypto.
Here's a new system.
Here's another system.
You know, how do we deal with the issues of society
where we've got building blocks and they're interesting?
Like our cars will soon drive ourselves
and our Amazon delivery trucks will just come without people
and they'll be running on electricity.
And that electricity will have been generated
by some super cheap power supply
and a robot will have come and made your coffee
and, you know, just enjoy what's about to happen
and embrace it.
So if you can afford to invest in it, if not, be curious.
Because as you said, the first three points
there's nothing you can do.
So you kind of go for the other human survival instinct
which is adapt or die, which is say, let's do it.
And you say, well, you know, humans,
we're not going to merge with the machines or whatever.
As I mentioned to you before, we've all done it already.
You've got your earphones.
I think we will merge with the machines.
I'm just saying timeline.
You've got your earphones in.
You've got your Apple watch on.
You've got your thing.
You've got your glucose monitor.
These are you merging with the machines.
What are you doing?
You're using the machine to augment your hearing experience,
your health experience, everything.
Everything around you is you using your machines
to augment yourself.
And that is just going to accelerate
because what is a pacemaker
but a foreign digital body
implanted to give electric charges into my heart?
Okay.
If you told something about 100 years ago,
do you think you're a science fiction nutcase?
But pacemakers have been going for what, 40, 50 years now?
So the implants, the, you know, people getting new knees.
I mean, that's now like a quick operation in and outs
to have a new knee.
And soon the knee will have electronics in.
So it will happen without us even knowing.
And you'll be doing a podcast in two years time saying,
hey, I've had this new chip implant
that's taking a blood glucose sugar measurements
and beaming it straight to your phone.
And then it prepares your meal exactly right.
And he won't have even thought about it.
You and the machines emerging
because you know, sorry, go ahead.
Because to your point earlier, our job is to survive.
And the single best answer for our survival
is trying to get the stronger teammate.
It's the only way it's like, you know,
you always want to choose the best guy in your team.
Well, if we can merge with them,
if they're part of our gang, we're okay.
You're very high in trait openness, guaranteed, as am I.
It's interesting though.
So I think that the only part of the solution
to dealing with the current moment is fatalism,
that what will be will be.
And not that everything happens for a reason
or anything like that.
It's that this is out of our control.
And I think from the dawn of time,
there was no way to stop the creation
of artificial intelligence
because technology is the promise of a better future.
We have an insatiable,
a literally insatiable desire for progress.
We are going to inevitably create AI,
I think on any timeline and on this timeline,
it has already happened.
But I want to go back to what you were saying
in terms of you're raising a kid and that kid is AI.
That's very interesting to me
in terms of how we think about it.
I think that that's hugely important
and was a blind spot that I had
or was a metaphor that I didn't have in my arsenal.
And that's going to be very, very helpful.
I don't, in the same way that AI is inevitable,
it is impossible for you to get the world to agree
and be fine and that's just a fantasy.
I don't see how that ever plays out
unless AI becomes so domineering that somehow forces us to,
but even that is a dystopia unto itself.
So anyway, I don't think that's going to happen.
But the part that I think people are under appreciating
is that people are anthropomorphizing AI
and I think that's a mistake.
And I think that will cause them to be very surprised
by how AI moves.
And I think closes a door to a potential way to do this well.
So what I mean by that is AI does not care
if it lives or dies.
And so the moment people say,
oh, well AI wants to survive,
that's an anthropomorphification,
you're thinking it thinks like a human and it doesn't,
it is computer code that has not yet been shaped
by an evolutionary like force.
We are that evolutionary type force.
And right now, if you're correct,
we are just sort of blindly saying, learn how we are.
And I am sure everybody's heard the story of the AI
that turned Nazi in like three days on the internet,
which is very troubling.
And so I would say that just telling it,
go learn how we are and regurgitate us back to us
would be the wrong incentive structure.
And there are many bright minds talking about alignment,
but I think alignment is the conversation.
And yes, it is a very thorny problem.
And for people that haven't heard that phrase before,
you need to align AI's desires, quote unquote, with ours.
So that AI has the same goals that we have.
And if you know, Asimov,
he wrote the three laws of robotics,
which I don't have memorized,
but basically the punchline was don't hurt humans.
And so every robot was programmed
with an inability to hurt humans.
And so it was like, help a human whenever you can
and never hurt them.
I forget what the other one was.
So we need something akin to that with AI
so that AI wants to be beneficial to humanity.
Now, whether that goes back to the initial problem
of once it proliferates,
somebody's gonna create AI that's evil, possibly.
But I don't think in the same way
that I don't think the overwhelming level of intelligence
that AI will represent gives anybody the excuse to tune out.
I don't think that the fact that someone will inevitably
turn it into a very brutal weapon
is an excuse not to try to create aligned incentives with AI.
And so I think that in terms of the hopeful part,
I think people need to recognize
that AI doesn't intrinsically,
intelligence doesn't intrinsically,
want to consume and take over and be in charge.
That is a human result of evolution needing you
to survive a ruthless environment
that was truly read in Tooth and Claw.
AI is not in that same boat
and does not need to be in that same boat.
And I agree.
I'm not so sure about the anthropomorphizing it
because we at core are some sort of program code
of whatever it is, whether there's more to that or not,
science is still arguing this stuff,
but we've had computer viruses and their job is not to die.
It's not that difficult.
So I don't know about that.
There's a lot of unintended consequences
that I hadn't realized
because we're all having this debate, right?
Is it going to take over humans or not?
And I spoke to somebody, Google X and they're like,
what we're worried about, I'm like, yeah, tell me,
is like, we're worried about how AI
can be used for genetic modification
and how fast this is going to move.
It's like, we're not worried about that stuff
because everybody's worried about that stuff.
But it is advancing so fast
in human genome analysis and tinkering of genomes
that he said, we're worried that you could just choose,
I want to kill all brown eyed people on earth
and create a virus that does it.
So that is the problem with AI.
Is there are things that the computational power
is so fast and so big
that it can do a lot of things for science,
which is amazing for humans.
We will use AI to probably cure most forms of cancer
or figure out part of the secret code
to life, longevity, health, all of these things, amazing.
But we will also use it to destroy ourselves
because we're humans.
That's what they're worried about
because it's so prolific
that it's actually not that difficult.
What is up, my friend, Tom Bill, you here
and I have a big question to ask you,
how would you rate your level of personal discipline
on a scale of one to 10?
If your answer is anything less than a 10,
I've got something cool for you.
And let me tell you right now,
discipline by its very nature means compelling yourself
to do difficult things that are stressful,
boring, which is what kills most people,
or possibly scary or even painful.
Now, here is the thing, achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential requires you
to do those challenging, stressful things
and to stick with them even when it gets boring
and it will get boring.
Building your levels of personal discipline is not easy,
but let me tell you, it pays off.
In fact, I will tell you,
you're never going to achieve anything meaningful
unless you develop discipline.
Right, I've just released a class
from Impact Theory University called
How to Build Ironclad Discipline
that teaches you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push yourself
to do the hard things that greatness
is going to require of you.
Right, click the link on the screen,
register for this class right now, and let's get to work.
I will see you inside this workshop
from Impact Theory University.
Until then, my friends, be legendary.
Peace out.
There was a very funny and the,
whatever brilliant Twitter user this was,
my apologies for not paying attention.
I didn't know it was going to stick with me as much,
but somebody put in the comments regarding
our just inability to stop developing AI.
They said, great filter, go burr.
And for people that don't know what the great filter is,
it's like, why are there no aliens trying to contact us?
And the one potential punchline
is that there's a great filter.
Could be AI, could be thermonuclear war,
but that just nobody can get past it.
And so every society goes so far and then stops.
Here's another interesting idea along that, which God,
so for people that know Graham Hancock,
who just really believes that there was a,
an ancient civilization far older than we think,
and that it got obliterated by some stuff.
This was the fingerprints of the God's book.
Well, he's written a bunch of books on this,
but the most recent thing was called ancient apocalypse.
So he's been writing about it for,
I don't know, 30 years or something.
His books are fascinating.
And he, he so plants that initial seed.
And then again, I don't know who said this.
This was relayed to me by one of my employees
who was pulling wisdom from Twitter.
And he said, it is entirely possible that AI really is
the great filter go burr and that we have developed AI before.
And every time we get to the point
where AI takes over, much like in the matrix,
we end up relying on something in, in that movie,
they blackened the sky.
But in reality, if technology rises, AI robots take over,
it could be a massive solar flare that ends up then
just obliterating AI and all the technology.
And then we come up as a civilization,
worshiping a sun god again,
because it was like, you killed the fucking machines.
Thank you.
And I thought, oh my God, like probably not true,
but the other one I thought about is,
if you are this super amazing civilization,
somewhere in the far ends of the solar system,
not in the solar system of wherever, of nothingness,
and you've figured this out.
So what you would do is you figure out that organically,
you have to let something grow,
because this nice kind of organic computer
is much better at adaptation up to a point.
So why would you not seed a billion planets
and one or two happen, I mean,
and one or two spring life, they'll all be different,
but they'll all end up, to your point before,
in AI and machinery.
And maybe those things turn organic eventually,
because organic, but with that kind of augmentation.
So maybe we are that, maybe we were just planted,
maybe the bacteria that started the Earth,
we're just planted on a billion planets
and ours happened to be one of them
by this amazing group of whatever,
somewhere else who the hell knows, right?
Yeah, okay, so before we move on,
because there's a whole nother thing I wanna get into,
I do wanna wrap this up with a bit of hope.
So thinking about this a lot, I think that there is,
so you said something, I can't remember if you said it
to me or somebody else, I've seen so much of your content,
but you said that we're gonna go through a renaissance
and I think this ties into what you were just saying,
which is guys, what we're about to live through,
maybe it's 10 years, maybe it's 100 years,
but we're going to have a moment
where you're gonna be able to utilize this
to massively extend your own capabilities.
Impossible is possible.
The impossible is possible.
Imagine that, we've all grown up with superhero films,
we've been given it, it's amazing.
Yeah, this is gonna be, I think, it already is.
So right now, if I can just get Haifi for a second,
so at Impact Theory, we're a media company,
so we're trying to improve the world
through ideas and entertainment
and they're two separate sides of the company.
On the idea side, that's,
we've been talking a lot about that,
AI is gonna help you think through things,
it's gonna help you see around corners,
it's gonna find signal and noise,
patterns that we wouldn't otherwise be able to put together.
But it also, so, Raul, I can't tell you,
I have honestly lamented three things in my life.
Lament is the right word.
I have lamented my limited intelligence,
I have lamented my inability to sing,
and I have lamented my inability to draw.
And those are things that would make my life better.
I'm a very excitable person, so take that
with a grain of salt, but I,
we're using AI to help us create Project Kaizen,
which for people that don't know, don't worry about it,
it is a new form of video game.
And I am limited, my contributions are limited
by my ability to extract from my head the vision,
the literal visuals and make them a thing.
And so there was a part of the experience that I was like,
okay, we have to move on, we have to keep going,
but it just wasn't good.
And it didn't give me the visceral response
I wanted to feel when I saw it.
And then mid-journey comes along,
and I'm like, oh, I can actually now create
the thing that's in my head,
I can use text to go this,
this is what I've been trying to tell you.
And then no joke, three days later,
we, it's just so much better, it's unbelievable.
Now, we still had humans had to go in
and you basically use a desert direction,
but all that frustration that I had of like not,
I'm not feeling what I want to feel,
and I'm not talented enough to translate the emotion
into words to get an artist to create the thing.
But through prompt engineering, I could.
And so finally I could go this,
this is what I've been trying to say.
That is, it felt like a superpower.
It was one of the three things that I have,
in fact, I've never put this together like this.
One of the three things that I have lamented
to a God I don't technically believe in,
I have lamented about not being able to draw,
just to really make it simplistic, and I can now.
And I understand why that makes artists mad,
but at the same time, this is amazing.
And for people that lament that they don't have
my verbal ability, you now can.
It's really, and because I'm not a person
that gets overly defensive about somebody else
getting good at my thing, I'm just excited.
It really is as close to superhero abilities
as we're going to get.
Have you seen the music version?
So one of my lamentations is I love music.
I just can't make it.
I can't play guitar, can't sing, can't do anything.
But I know in my head what I want to create music from.
And already, again, the stability AI,
people have got a music version.
I think Google have got one as well now coming out,
where you can kind of say,
listen, I want that kind of deep funk bass,
but I want to have X like this.
Same as you just did,
is you're getting at your word vomit
of how you're visualizing it, and it will make it.
So there's hope for us yet, Tom.
It'll trade, well, actually auto-tune.
It can even take you.
True, true, true.
That's humans being augmented by machines.
That's very true.
All right, we'll pivot away from this
because we've got a whole lot more to talk about.
That is very exciting to me.
I think that while I am not a dough-eyed optimist
who is unaware of the potential dangers,
I think that it will be an incredible tool.
And I may be more optimistic than others
that there is a long tail relationship to be had with AI
that does not need to be AI dominating us.
All right, having said all that,
may you live in interesting times as the curse goes?
We're really living through an interesting moment.
The exponential ages you talked about earlier,
we've got to confluence a lot of things,
but we also have an economic moment right now that is weird.
And I'm very curious,
when I started doing the research for this interview,
obviously you and I interact quite a bit,
but when I started doing the research for this interview,
I thought I would hear a lot more pessimism out of you
about recession, about global economic collisions
from Russia and Ukraine to China,
and that looked like they were imploding for a while,
but you're pretty optimistic.
So I'm very curious, what's happening right now?
So firstly, most people need to realize
that doom-porn cells, it catches attention.
Fear is the strongest human emotion, right?
And so you see a lot of it, because it grabs attention.
So we need to break apart two parts here.
One is what do I think of the economy,
and the other is what do I think about markets?
So my economic view is, I think most of us even know it,
is we're in recession.
We're in recession and it's probably gonna get a bit worse.
And there's a lot of people gonna lose their jobs
and businesses are gonna find it hard.
There's less money around
and it's gonna be pretty miserable.
And it's the sort of miserable-ness
that you go through periodically that is not catastrophic.
So it's a recession.
And recessions are as old as humanity itself.
So we've just had, what's confusing people in my view,
is we're so screwed up for the last three events.
One was the pandemic, so there's no normality.
What was the recession look like there?
That was the weirdest one.
Then 2008 was the end of the entire financial system.
And then 2001 was this spectacular tech collapse.
So people have an anchoring bias.
It's like, well, it's the end of the world.
Really, when I started, when I graduated university,
it was 1990, and it was a terrible time to graduate
because it was a recession and there were no jobs.
And I wanted to go into finance
and they were firing people as fast as possible.
And it took a while.
It took a while, house prices went down for a while
and people didn't get jobs for a while
and people were laid off for a while.
And the stock market went down 20%.
It was a decent size of recession as well.
Went down 20%, took some time to recover,
the jobs came back, the economy was cleaner,
they got rid of some of the worst excesses of leverage,
and the world moved forwards.
And before you knew it, all of the 90s was a boom.
I'm kind of of that opinion,
is we have no systemic collapse coming.
We don't have those kind of issues
and we've invented the magic printer,
the money printer of quantitative easing
that papers over all troubles.
So we don't have that coming.
So subtly, yeah, we've got a whole bunch of issues
to get through a US election with all this AI
and the anger and the populism, but forget all of that.
Again, you can easily go down the doom
or you can enjoy the community you've got around you.
And there's different ways you can have lenses,
perspective on the world.
Investing, the job of markets is to look forwards.
If you tell me 100% of all economists
are forecasting recession, it's kind of no shit Sherlock.
And therefore, is it in the price
or are all those stock market people really stupid,
all of those machine that they haven't heard you at all?
No, they actually understand this
and it's a real time probability waiting business.
So it kind of knows that.
And what it looks forward to is,
okay, how bad is this?
Is it catastrophic?
Is the world gonna end?
What's gonna happen?
And the markets are telling you, no, it's probably done.
My view is the bottom is in in markets
and the bottom was in in crypto in June
and for Bitcoin was in October November.
The bottom was in for the stock markets in October
as most end of bear markets happen.
It priced in a recession and we move forwards from here.
And eventually they'll cut rates again.
And if you think about it,
is we had a total shutdown of the global economy,
then a reopening of the global economy,
that's caused this inflation that's hurt everybody.
And eventually we'll just rebalance
back to some form of normality.
There's a massive amount of doom porn
about inflation is gonna be structurally here forever.
We're all gonna die, which is kind of,
I'm more like you are with the AI side
where I'm actually like, you know what?
We've just developed AI.
We've got relentless technology.
The price of energy is coming lower
from all different sources.
Productivity of humanity is growing.
So I think it's actually probably an interesting time.
It's an interesting time because everybody's so bearish.
Psychology plays a huge part in markets
because everybody expects inflation to be relentless
and ongoing and for the rest of our lives,
much like what, 24 months ago,
everyone was like, every tech stock's going up forever
and every businesses can ever fail again.
You know, we humans, we make forecasting errors
of quite wide amounts at various points.
So yes, no, and I spend a huge,
so I'm not just saying this because I'm just chatting to you.
I'm gonna do an enormous amount of work on this.
I'm gonna write 150 pages of research.
I sit down and write it every month.
I've been doing that for 19 years.
And so that comes with 2,000 charts and models and stuff
with myself and my colleague, Julian Bittle,
from secular themes, short something.
It doesn't mean I'm not wrong as well.
I can clearly be wrong,
but I just think it's in the price.
And the worst part of it is,
is the stock market is gonna be going up probably.
It won't rock it up at first,
but eventually it'll pick up
while we're all feeling the pain.
Because people are looking forward
and so they're saying, okay, the bottom's in.
Now's the time to get in.
We know we're gonna go up from here.
So even though we're still sort of going through it,
people are losing their jobs,
but wise investors are like,
you just need to project this out into the future.
Yeah, so there's a time horizon
of how the business cycle works.
Currently, the thing that leads it the most
is the Chinese credit cycle.
Who knew?
But it is right now, 17 months ahead.
So when it turned up 17 months ago,
we're starting to say, huh,
okay, there's something happening here.
It'll say forecast the recession.
And then you've got other forward-looking indicators
about nine months out.
We've got a bunch of indicators.
But the last thing in the stack is rents.
And the one before that is wages.
So wages are going up right this now,
but they take a while and then they start coming down again.
They won't deflate.
Nobody's gonna really come to you
and force you to take a pay cut.
But it means that they don't keep going up.
But your rents will probably come down.
And so that's a function of, these things just take time.
The unemployment rise hasn't even started.
Now, we can see everybody laying off.
Every company is laying off people,
thinking about tightening costs.
Everyone can see it from sponsorship, advertising, sales.
I mean, it's everywhere.
And every single person I speak to is like,
Christ, it's miserable out there.
But the unemployment side doesn't really come
until it should start in the next month or two.
And then that goes on for nine months
of just relentlessly higher unemployment rates.
So anybody watching this is...
Why is that so predictable?
Why nine months?
It's just how it always is.
Because companies make decisions
and whether it's around board meetings, however it's done,
they get to a certain point
where they hit the panic button and they lay people off.
That's usually when the bottom of the recession starts.
It's usually when rates start getting cut.
It's usually when the stock market often recovers as well.
So for people watching this,
there's two parts of this.
One is if you're an investor,
you might be able to buy these technology stocks
with this renaissance of amazing changes
happening around us at prices down 70%
from where they were two years ago, a year ago.
Okay, that's kind of interesting
because your expected future return goes up.
Same with crypto.
You know, I've talked about this.
You buy when the business cycle brings it back
to the bottom of the secular uptrend.
That's where we are.
These are where you make all the money.
This is what you get paid for to take risk here.
Don't get paid to take risk at the top
and you tend to lose money.
So these are the moments in time.
So that's very interesting as an investor.
But anybody watching this, think about your cash flows.
Think about your cash flow, think about your expenditure
and just say, just be a little bit careful
because losing a job or having your own business
struggling for a period of time.
And I think the worst of it will be over relatively fast,
but yeah, it's these laggy effects.
What's relatively fast?
So I think the world recording this in March of 23,
when do we think this turns around?
So I think the bottom of the economic cycle
is in the next quarter.
So I think we've got a really ugly quarter to come,
but the problem is it's that shock
that sets off the companies to go,
I need to love some staff, all of that.
And it's that process that begins the healing.
So the worst-
And what is that shock?
So if that shock isn't people getting laid off,
what is the shock that's coming in the next quarter?
The shock coming in the next quarter
is the general slowdown from interest rates,
biting into all of these indebted companies
or households or credit cards and all of this stuff.
And everybody goes, uh-uh, I'm not gonna spend money.
That is what a recession is.
You know, it's not usually driven by a pandemic.
It's not usually driven
by the entire financial system collapsing.
It's usually by all of us making a rational decision of,
I'm just not gonna spend money right now
because things are a bit uncertain.
And that is what causes recessions.
And I'm actually telling people to do exactly that
because it's the rational thing to do.
What you do, if you're gonna panic, panic early.
And I'm not talking about the stock market going down either.
I think we've had that, it went down.
The Nasdaq went down 38%.
That's pretty much bang in line with the regular bear market.
But what I'm saying is in your personal life
where it really matters, where the rubber hits the road
is panic early.
Just look at your expenditure, look at your cost,
look at your business.
So what do I need to do here?
Just to make sure that I can just get through
a pretty shitty year.
But 2024, probably pretty decent.
So what is the natural cycle of things?
Why do people begin to warm back up?
And what are the threats, if any, that you see looming?
So housing, I'm hearing, housing bubble bursting,
problem there, is that it?
It's just people are overreacting, not real.
The housing market is expensive.
Interest rates have gone up.
So people are going to buy less houses.
Yes.
Will house prices come down?
Yes, because they went up a lot.
Will the activity in the housing market dry up
for maybe two years?
Yeah, most likely.
Are we going to see a leverage crash?
No, because nobody's really got a lot of leverage
at household level in property.
That was something that happened in 2008.
It's been too expensive and too difficult to do.
So I think the home builders have a bit of trouble
because they got a lot of inventory.
They can't sell it.
They need to finance it for a couple of years.
It sits around 1990, 91, 92 was very similar.
I was in London then,
it was pretty shitty in the property market.
It was great for me
because I'd just entered the property market
at the end of that.
So prices were relatively low.
They hadn't come down a lot,
but they hadn't gone up a lot.
And my income was going up because I was in my 20s.
So your income goes up every year
because you're hopefully getting promoted
and stuff like that.
But a few property developers went bust,
things were slow, and then eventually it cleaned up.
So I'm more of that opinion
that house prices come off 10%, maybe even 15%.
Some areas that were really hot come down a bit further,
but it doesn't expose any catastrophic leverage.
The banking system is more than adequately compensated
with capital.
It's hugely sold in the United States.
So it's just a bad time.
It's just a bad time.
And what do you think about rates?
Are they going to continue to go up?
Is there,
because the Fed, as far as I know,
is signaling that they are going to keep taking rates up.
Yeah, so every single forward-looking indicator
that I have on inflation suggests
that inflation utterly collapses.
If you want to see a real-time inflation data,
look at something called TRUflation.
TRUflation, it's actually on blockchain.
It takes hundreds of thousands of individual prices
on a real-time basis.
And it tells you where inflation is today.
And US inflation today is about 4.74%.
Wow.
This is the headline of service six.
So, and if we think of what inflation is,
is the year-on-year comparison.
What happened last year?
Well, between March and June was Russia invading Ukraine
and every commodity came through the week.
So we're going to see the flip side of that.
So we'll see inflation come off very fast.
All my forward-looking indicators
that look at it from different angles all suggest the same.
So I think the Fed is speaking max aggression
because they want to make sure that out of the embers
doesn't rise the phoenix again.
So they just want to stamp out people's expectations
of higher prices in the future.
They know there's a recession coming.
They can see the inflation's coming.
So that recession's coming.
So I think it's the final game,
which is like get down and stay down.
And then that's what they've done.
And so my guess is we'll be having this conversation
in September, September,
somewhere between September and December,
and they'll have cut rates.
Whoa, you think they're going to start cutting that fast?
So how does-
And the market is telling you that that's,
and the market and the Fed are saying that's wrong.
That's not true.
We're here higher for longer.
But if unemployment is going to rise,
they have two mandates, inflation and unemployment.
Inflation is going to be falling and unemployment rising.
They cannot go to Congress and say,
oh yeah, we're just going to do this a bit longer.
It's going to fire them all.
There is politics involved in the end.
So no, they will cut rates.
And they should do it by then for sure.
So how is it though, going back to the idea of the embers
is the place from which the phoenix is going to rise
and we're going to go rocketing back into euphoria
and end up back in the same spot.
How does cutting rates that soon, why not hold?
You won't be asking for that in September.
You'll be begging them.
Because what's going to happen if I'm not getting it?
Your friends will be losing jobs.
People are getting decimated.
There's houses in your street that don't sell.
You're like, really guys?
What do you want to do, destroy everybody?
That's how it always works.
And then also, everyone's got a lot of debt.
All the corporations in America,
plus the households are 120% of GDP and debt.
And the US government's 100% of GDP and debt.
And they have a big impact.
That's the one I want to talk about.
So when I think about the US government
and the amount of debt that we're carrying
and I think about interest rates being this high,
is there a conversation?
I know I'm asking you to prognosticate here,
but is there a conversation going on
between the US government and the Fed of like,
hey, get ready to pull those rates down
because they themselves have all this debt service
that they're going to have to do?
Yes.
And I think it's global.
I've just been developing, I've written a lot of it.
Sorry, I'm not finished at any sentence.
I've just discovered something that really quite shocked me
that I've been writing a lot about
to get my thought process and global macro investor.
My understanding is that all debt that the US has borrowed
above GDP growth.
So if GDP grows at 2% and debt growth grows at 4%,
everything above is only for financing interest payments
since 2009, since the recession.
And so that, all of that money is the exact same amount
as the size of the Fed balance sheet.
So they are issuing bonds to pay the interest.
So that's paying your credit card with another credit card
and then giving it to your dad.
And so will you settle the bill?
It's, which is the Fed.
So I think they completely know what's going on.
And I haven't really shared this with anybody yet.
I also think it's global and it's understood.
And it's all smoke and mirrors
that we never saw what the game was.
And I think I've proven it, that this is all,
all the central banks did.
This is what quantitative easing.
And step back is what, what am I talking about
in this scrambled nonsense that I'm saying?
The US, but easy maths.
Long-term trend rate of growth.
Long-term trend rate of growth is 1.75%.
But let's call it 2%.
Interest rates have been averaged around 2%, let's say,
for easy maths.
And the government is 100% of GDP in debt.
So, so therefore their interest payments are 2%
of the entire GDP, which is how much the economy grows.
Okay, put that over there.
I mean, you guys in the private sector,
you're also 100% of GDP in debt.
Where does your 2% come from?
Because GDP is all of the activity in the economy.
And that's just gone to the government.
Sorry, guys, you're either gonna go bust
or we're gonna blow up
and you're gonna blow up the banking system
or we're gonna have to keep eating this negative growth
difference of 2% every year
until you get rid of this debt.
And we're all fucked.
So once you realize that, these two pools are both 100%,
you realize, okay, somebody is gonna have to do something
so it ends up in the fair balance sheet.
So when you go to Japan, really interesting
because Japan, the households are massive savers.
Companies are pretty in debt,
but the government's massively in debt.
And it's the same, but because their interest rates are lower,
they can have more debt.
But their economy grows really slow as well.
So you get to a certain point
and then you have to say, right,
it has to go into the balance sheet.
The Europeans have been doing the same,
the Brits have been doing the same.
It's all the same thing.
It's like, it feels that,
and this is gonna sound ridiculous,
it feels like there was a global treaty
of which, okay, this is where we are.
We can't, the debt has got too big
and nobody can pay the interest payments
without destroying the global economy.
So we're just gonna have to pretend
we're not debasing the currency
and call it quantitative easing
and say it's a precise way of injecting money
exactly into the right part of the financial system.
And it's like, no, what you're doing is
getting a credit card to pay a credit card
and then giving it to your dad
and say, you worry about this, it's not my problem.
Well, so I wanna see if I'm tracking this
because not to get back into Doomporn,
but this seems pretty Doomporn-y.
Okay, so for people that don't-
But it's not, cause the world works.
It's not Doomporn, cause it works.
Every time they do it, assets go up.
Are we just pushing off a problem?
Okay, so it's making assets go up when they do it.
It is meaning that companies don't defaults.
The banking system remains sound.
But are we actually able to get out of debt?
So let me make sure I'm understanding what you're saying.
This is gonna be very important.
Okay, so I know we're using round numbers,
but this is very helpful.
So worldwide GDP, gross domestic product,
the amount of productivity.
So the capital that is usable effectively,
you have two different people
that have debt in that amount,
which there's no one to have real money
to pay the fucking thing off.
So if you had one person that was like,
okay, we're maxed out, we're at 2%,
but GDP is 2%, cool.
We have the path, just be frugal
and you've got a path out of this.
But when you have two people
that owe the whole amount effectively,
you now go into money printing
and I mean, if this works, I'm actually okay with it.
I know how that's gonna get me lit up,
but so the solution here is, okay,
we have two large groups, governments, private sector,
which are all the groups that exist.
And each one of them owes the entire worldwide GDP and debt.
You can't both be in that situation.
There's no, you can't rob a Peter to pay Paul
because they're both in the same situation.
So now the only thing left is printing money,
devaluing everybody to get out of this situation.
But the way in which we do that
by buying things from the private sector
is we're making people that hold assets wealthier,
we're increasing the gap between the rich and the poor
because the way that we inject money into the system
only reaches people that own assets.
And so we've created this problem
and the only way out is to print money
which is going to increase the Gini coefficient
for people that know that phrase
where it's like, nobody cares in absolute dollars
how much you have, you just hate
that your neighbor Timmy has more than you.
And so you freak the fuck out.
And so it becomes the differential
that becomes the destabilizing element.
So what you said, assuming what I just repeated is correct,
that sounds destabilizing and doon porn.
So help.
What is the other outcome?
The other outcome is let it all burn.
Clearly a terrible idea.
When you're this far in debt,
let it all burn doesn't work anymore.
Right, that's the end of,
that's the kind of end of civilization stuff,
ultra doon porn.
So you're faced with doon porn and ultra doon porn
what are you doing?
Oh God.
Right, there is no other way.
So this is what people need to understand.
What is GDP?
GDP is a sum of all the economic activity that goes on.
And it's comprised, GDP growth rates are comprised
very simply of the number of people in your economy.
Is it growing?
If it's growing, your economy grows
because there's more people generating more activity,
generally.
Secondly is how much productivity does it have?
Are those people productive?
Do they make a lot of stuff for each man hour?
And finally is how fast is debt growing?
So when we have an aging population,
the number of humans declines over time.
What happens is we stopped immigration almost everywhere
because everyone was under pressure for income
because real wages haven't gone up.
So we lowered the rate of immigration
to that lowest trend rate of growth.
Aging population, they're less productive
and they spend less.
So GDP keeps doing this for decades on end,
baked in the cake from that.
They become less productive
because they're older people
and a whole bunch of them aren't in the labor force anymore.
Okay, so you're not very productive,
you're getting old, not population growing.
So guess what, bingo, answer, debt, ding, ding, ding, ding,
which took on debt.
It was rational until it's not.
It's like, it's rational to super leverage yourself
on a house and house prices go up
and you look like a god until you get it wrong
and you lose everything.
So it was rational to take the debt
and this is where we've got to.
And then the government's gotten to the same boat
and everyone was just the debt.
So now the debt is the debt.
Debt growth is actually not that high anymore
because we've hit the ceiling.
So the only way to solve this,
this goes back to our earlier conversation,
is we cannot solve population growth
and debt growth is peaked out.
So we've got the one thing in the middle called productivity
and that takes us right back to AI
and the robots and cryptocurrencies,
internet of things, green energy, all of these things.
So if you are governments, look what Europe's doing.
It's interesting and maybe I'm just inventing a narrative
but Europe, the US, Japan, they all know what they're doing
so they're printing money to cover their bills
and Europe thinks, well, Christ,
we need to get the bloody economy going here
because GDP growth is what pays our bills
and it's pretty sluggish because everyone's old here
and everyone's in debt and the banking systems are mess.
Let's do a double whammy
which is what the US did back in the 40s.
Let's put as much stimulus as we can from this fake money
and ram it into the green energy sector
and we're gonna build a lot of stuff
and we understand a lot of stuff
is gonna be wasted capital but out of it,
we're going to do one amazing thing and it will happen.
Is out of this, energy costs will collapse.
Now, this is really important for people to understand.
What does technology do?
Technology drives more productivity
out of a single unit of energy.
Once you see this thing,
that's what humans do with everything.
It's like find a way of extracting more
for that barrel of oil because that's what we use.
Now that barrel of oil has been our fixed energy source
since we replaced whale oil.
So we've been using this and so it's been the constant.
So technology's had to drive all the productivity
in every way it can based on how much is this.
So we've got to bring computational power down,
everything down so that one fixed thing
which is the price of oil
which on a inflation adjusted basis
been pretty stable for the last 70, 80 years.
And if what the US is doing with its inflation act
and the Europeans are doing with its green energy
and Japan is doing and China is doing
and Australia is doing and the UK is doing,
if they force enough investment in,
they will change the energy source of the world.
And because all of these have exponential
downtrends in cost,
we will change the energy coefficient.
And what happens is productivity times
the lowering of the cost of energy
is an exponential change for all of us.
That's how you solve this.
There's almost no other way of solving this problem
of slow GDP growth, old populations, massive debts
without blowing up everything.
So you're gonna have to keep doing this money printing thing
which is miserable because it makes some people rich
and other people poor.
And all you can have inflation
which just makes everybody immeasurable.
They're all terrible things
but the faster you can get to changing
that productivity equation,
the better because it's the only way
there's simply no other way of solving it.
You're either robbed from everybody or grow the economy.
With a declining population.
So talk to me about the energy.
You're saying that,
so maybe I have just an undereducated view
on the green energy front.
So you see the cost of energy coming down
as we invest more and more into the green energy side?
Yes, so right now we're in transition
where we're not probably producing enough oil
and we don't have enough energy coming out of solar,
winds, geothermal, nuclear, all of that.
So we've got this market where energy prices are high
because of supply issues and other stuff.
But when you look at the trend,
all of these are growing as a percentage share
of the energy grid.
There's still oil and coal are still massive, right?
But they're coming down
and Europe's really forcing it decarbonization.
And so we're seeing a rise of these others.
They start some of them subsidized
but the subsidies go over time.
But the really interesting thing is none of that.
It's the fact that the cost per unit of energy
keeps coming down.
And many of these are now cheaper
than natural gas, which was very cheap.
So it's like, huh, okay.
And we've only just started
where we are in this exponentiality.
So my view is in 20 years time,
the cost of energy will be marginal
for everybody and everything.
Much like the cost of water is marginal for everybody.
And the cost of many things we take for granted
are totally marginal.
Now, I don't know if given your macro outlook
that this is a reasonable question to ask you or not,
but when you look out at the rate of adoption
of green energy, do you think that we're,
cause you just said like maybe we're not producing
enough oil and gas, do you think that we're moving
too rapidly in that direction?
Or do you think, no, no, no, you make these huge investments.
You have to put regulation in place,
force people to do it faster
because these have a far more technology-based exponential.
Okay, so this is the inverse of the GDP problem.
Do you manage its smooth decline or do you blow up?
Here, do you transition slowly with the issues
of climate change and the issues of cost of energy
and all these other things
and the need for productivity or do you blow up?
I just take short-term pain to get to the promised land faster.
Again, it's probably a rational economic decision to do that.
So maybe or maybe not energy prices rise.
I'm not entirely sure.
Will copper prices rise?
Probably.
Will some prices rise?
Probably.
Can that be offset by AI and other deflationary pressures?
Probably.
You know, it's not baked in the cake.
People always conflate some commodity going up in price
to see inflation's back and it's all gonna run rampant again.
It's very rare that that happens.
We've just had it now.
So it's gonna be in everybody's head as the boogie monster,
but they're usually looking at the wrong boogie monster.
So it's gonna be a balancing act
and maybe they get it right, maybe they get it wrong,
but I think they're all pretty,
most of these governments are pretty sure
that they wanna do it as fast as they can.
And so does that mean that they would,
if by their actions they cause high energy prices
for five years,
would they give out stimulus handouts to people?
Probably.
Is that not the best way to say,
listen, if you are getting hurt by this?
And guess what?
That's exactly what Europe's just done last year.
It was giving handouts to people to say,
look, we understand your electricity bill is high
and it's hard for you, so we'll help you.
Now, did that drive inflation to some extent?
Maybe, but maybe not.
I mean, it was just going for the electricity bill.
You didn't give people extra money in their pocket.
So it's complicated as everything is,
but I don't know, I'm kind of in a,
I'm a fan of,
if you're gonna go for positive change,
do it as fast as possible.
If you're gonna go to negative change
and you can glide path, take the glide path.
Very interesting.
So, and I'm not a fan,
I'm not a fan of concept of easing or any of that stuff.
I'm just like, this evil, this evil.
Which one do you wanna choose?
Yeah, it is a very interesting question.
So when you were talking,
I was in full acknowledgement of the human mind
goes to the problems.
In the context we're in now,
and I am not a geopolitical thinker,
and so I wanna be very clear about that.
I want people to understand that I am seeking to increase
the island of my knowledge.
When I look at, as somebody who has studied
from a, how do evil people get control perspective,
studied what Hitler did in World War II,
he was very much like,
not seeing the increase in productivity path out of things.
And so he's like, well, for Germany to get out
from under this terrible weight,
we have to start land grabbing.
And when I see Russia.
That is the population part of the equation, right?
When you're taking over countries,
what you're actually doing is getting the people and resources.
So you're solving for your own population,
productivity, more resources,
but you're actually getting the people part
of the GDP equation.
That's interesting.
So how do you contextualize Russia and the Ukraine
in this moment where you've got the private sector,
the governments are completely indebted,
you're at a position where birth rates are declining,
certainly in the Western world, very rapidly.
If demographics are destiny,
and we are just in a shit show demographically,
does that, when you were talking,
I started looking at the Russia-Ukraine thing
in a totally different light.
And I'm very much somebody on the outside of that.
I'm not close to it at all.
But I'm very curious if that sort of recontextualization of,
oh, this is somebody who's like,
well, I know how to solve this problem quite rapidly.
Or am I looking at it wrong?
I don't like geopolitics because so much of it is
stuff that we don't know.
So there's so much conjecture
about almost everything in geopolitics,
apart from the fact that Russian troops are in Ukraine
and they're fighting each other.
Whose motivations of what, for what, and how?
I don't even know.
But one thing it did do to go back
to what we were talking about, it accelerated Europe.
Everyone thought, well, the Europeans are gonna back away
from their green energy policy now, aren't they?
The Europeans went, no, fuck you.
We're now super motivated to get this done as fast as possible
because we do not wanna be beholden to Russia
or the United States or anybody else for that matter.
Energy independence is an incredible thing, right?
It's one of the powers, superpowers
that the United States has, has energy independence.
All other energy on Earth could go
and the US has oil and gas,
and more of it than pretty much anybody else in the world.
So it also, if you think about the history of war
and how much it's been fought over the Middle East,
not because we want some sand or the few people,
because we want the energy and we wanna control it
because the energy is the thing.
Can't remember what it was called in Dune,
but whatever the thing is, right?
Humans would wanna control the thing,
whether it was whale oil or this or whatever the thing.
Spice, right?
In Dune.
Spice, that's right, spice.
So that's what the US controls
and the Russia controls a bunch of it.
And we wanna change that equation
and the Europeans are in the middle with not enough of it.
And it's in everybody's interest for everybody to walk away
from this one commodity rule in the world.
Because it's not the commodity we care about,
it's the energy we care about.
Well said.
Talk to me about China.
Seemed for a while, like things were getting pretty dicey.
You had people, if it can be believed,
people protesting like crazy,
governments making funds unavailable to people.
I saw that happen in Cyprus up close,
given that Lisa's family is from Cyprus.
What's the status of things?
A, China's economy was slowing down
and they locked themselves into a really brutal lockdown
for the pandemic.
And even the Chinese people were quite compliant.
Asian populations tend to be more societally compliant
than US, who kind of like saying fuck you to everybody
if it doesn't suit their interests.
So Europeans are quite societally minded as well,
generally speaking.
So the Chinese asked too much of their people
for whatever reason.
I don't know whether it was actually
for a real reason in the end,
or whether it's for autocratic reasons or whatever.
Anyway, economic growth falls off a cliff.
People are angry, growth is weakening,
property markets a mess.
That's where that's one of the big wealth gates
for everybody in China.
That's where people make money.
People in the streets and people are angry.
The Chinese are kind of interesting enough,
started stimulating.
And then, you know, they locked up all these entrepreneurs
and threw them in prison or threw them down a well.
They're now like, well, we've decided
we need to be growing up 5.5% a year
and we want entrepreneurs back and, you know,
and they reopened to Hong Kong for cryptocurrency.
So it feels like wherever they were doing,
they've got what they wanted,
because she wants to get control again.
The Game of Thrones is not a game
that I like to get involved in
and because everybody speculates, we don't know.
All in all, Chinese are stimulating.
They want the economy to grow
and they seem to want to be an entrepreneur.
I don't know why you choose to be an entrepreneur in China
because, you know, the next cycle around,
you get shot and replaced by the next one,
but somebody's going to do it.
That's interesting.
I didn't know that they had reopened back up.
Sorry, go ahead.
Yeah, so again, think about mentality.
We're at the bottom.
This is the worst.
Markets forward looking,
our Chinese stock market's up like 50% already.
And they're driving parts of the global cycle.
So when you read it in the news headlines,
it's usually too late.
No doubt.
Now, I didn't realize that they had opened
Hong Kong back up for crypto.
What do you think about the general state of crypto?
Is this crypto, like I have heard people now,
it's AI has become like the new hot girl
and all that energy that was in cryptos,
the future, it's going to change everything.
Web three, oh my God.
Is now like, nah, that's whatever.
AI is where it's at.
How do you see crypto?
Where's this going?
Is this a temporary downturn that we boom back up?
Literally nothing's changed since I last came
to talk to you about it.
I said it bottomed then, I still think it's bottomed
and six months later it's bottomed
and some of these are up 100% plus from the low.
The global liquidity cycle, the forward looking indicators
had turned up a while ago.
So, and the business cycle will get through the trough
and through the other side.
So crypto's going up.
Now, does it go up straight?
Does it have some volatility?
I don't know, but it seems pretty good so far.
It just seems to go up, do a bit of sideways,
go up, do a bit of sideways.
At some point there'll be a bit of a reasonable down.
Everyone will be like, oh my God.
And then it'll keep going up.
So, yeah, there was no free money.
You take risk with crypto.
I'm super comfortable.
All I speak to is giant brands, giant people.
Just spoke to, had a great interview on Real Vision
with two of the heads of institutional business
at Coinbase, what they're building out,
the kind of people they're speaking to.
I'm seeing on the other side,
everybody from car companies to sports teams
to music companies all looking at the space.
We're looking at what we're building at Real Vision,
what you're building, what is going on,
how vibrant the community is in a bear market.
I'm seeing consolidation.
I'm seeing the regulatory fight happening.
We're seeing court cases finally going through,
like the grayscale and the ripple case
where people will eventually get the SEC
into a place where it is acceptable.
But I always said this, they will always push too far.
Everybody's job is to push back
and they'll get somewhere in the middle.
And that's what they're establishing now.
And the Chinese are coming back on in a thoughtful manner.
I spoke to, as part of my crypto show,
Riles-Ovachia Crypto, I spoke to the
Muncher Authority of Singapore, got a good friend there
who's the chief fintech officer.
He's like, yeah, all systems go over here.
Just been over to India, and he's Indian himself.
He said, I cannot express how amazing
their central bank digital currency system is.
We're all go, everything's fine,
the US, the only ones dragging their feet.
The UK on the other hand.
That interview, before we move on to the UK,
that interview, which I watched,
I thought was very interesting.
Your guys' own title on that was
Governments Go Cold on Bitcoin.
And so he seemed very excited about the,
I forget the name of it,
but the digital currency everybody's using
on the street, which has a name.
And he was like, booming over here,
your jaw will be on the floor
to see how rapidly this is going to happen.
This is the central bank digital currency,
the government version of a digital payments rail.
There's a name for it though, digital rupee.
I forget.
Yeah, rupee or something here.
Yeah, yeah, something like that.
So that was interesting, but he was like,
it hasn't played out yet in terms of cryptocurrencies.
In fact, I think one of the early things he said
was it's not really a currency, yada, yada, yada.
Yeah, so what he's done is gone down three parts.
Central Bank stuff,
because he's actually involved with all that BIS,
Bank of International Settlements group
that are building out the world's digital rail.
So he cares about that.
He was very disappointed that Australia
had been using it to build their whole
stock markets using crypto blockchains
and kind of walked away from it.
So he was like, that's a big blow.
He said, Ethereum and things like that,
where you're building on top of a network.
He said, we're all for that, we like it,
we're building on it and we're doing stuff.
Cryptocurrency, which was his expression
for something that has no other use case
apart from a monetary use case, Bitcoin.
He's like, we do not want.
And he was unusually strong.
I mean, you saw the interview,
he was unusually strong about that
because he's not usually that guy,
but I think he's also gone through the crusher
because he really, in Singapore, he's like, let's do this.
And then the whole space is down 80%.
And my guess is a lot of people said to him,
are you an idiot or what?
And he's tried to explain to people,
this is what the space is like,
it's volatile, it's early technology.
So overall, the bigger picture is I'm still incredibly positive
my mind hasn't changed whatsoever.
And if I go back to the point I made before,
crypto is priced by two things.
The technological adoption curve, which is exponential.
So you need to put a logarithmic chart.
You put a nice little logarithmic chart
at the bottom of the log channel.
So we've got to the bottom.
And it's driven the ups and downs,
these crazy ups and downs that look crazy
until you put them on a log chart and it's like normal.
Those crazy up and down are driven by the money supply,
the liquidity cycle, the business cycle.
And so here we are on the secular trend
and the business cycle is turning up
and prices are down quite a lot.
This gives you the highest probability of that.
Buying them all the way up to the top.
Wow, I've got to wait till Bitcoin gets to 50,000.
Then I've got to, it's not the way to do this.
You either believe in the space
and therefore invest cash when nobody else is,
when it's at the right points,
or you dollar cost average and do it in a sensible way.
But these are the times.
So I'm immensely excited still
and see nothing but opportunity and volatility.
Yes, very, very well said.
Raoul, I could talk to you endlessly.
This is always so fun.
Where do you want people to go to engage with you?
Yeah, we've done a lot about this exponential stuff.
In fact, I've got Ahmed Mostak coming on Real Vision
for a second time.
Nice.
Because he was an old friend of mine
and he just happened to suddenly,
I find out he just started to think
he was a macro guy like me.
So come over to realvision.com.
We've got, right now we've got actually two weeks of stuff
which is called How to Unfuck Your Future,
which is basically all the stuff you and I talk about,
which is like, okay, what are the problems?
Let's take them out, let's look at them,
and let's figure out how we can solve them.
So we're doing that on Real Vision.
So people should go, it's like a $1 trial or something.
So just do that.
If not, you can find me on YouTube, also at Real Vision,
or find me on Twitter.
So at Raul, R-A-O-U-L-G-M-I.
I love it.
Brother, as always, thank you so much for being here.
Everybody, if you have not already,
be sure to subscribe.
And until next time, my friends, be legendary.
Take care, peace.
Finances are very complicated,
but you can learn how to prepare for a recession
with this interview with Ray Dalio.
New York City's becoming more dangerous.
Chicago's becoming more dangerous.
Places, San Francisco's becoming more dangerous.
You're seeing people leave.
