Culture is software. We know it's continually failing us. We should not have a significant
number of Americans alleging the election was stolen.
There was a pretty gnarly one-two punch between COVID and Trump that I really think
caused a sense-making apparatus to fall apart in some way. Yeah.
My question is, can we stop the rise of evil, or is that already a fallacy? And if we can,
then how? Well, I think your first point is that we didn't have anything like a consensus
around what was going on. I mean, people were siloed into various echo chambers and just not
converging on an assessment of just what the facts are about anything. I don't consider myself the
best judge of how this happened because there were people who were sufficiently far from me on the
information landscape so that I just cease to understand how they could be thinking and doing
what they were thinking and doing. I'm not seeing their social media feed. I'm seeing some fragments
of what they're finding persuasive, but it's just amazing to me that there are, I don't know what
it is, 30%, 40% of American society still thinks that Trump was not only fine, he's better than
fine and just impeccable on some level ethically. And that January 6th was a non-event and that
there was really nothing at stake there. It's all just been insanely, it was a combination of
nothing happened, but everything that did happen was antifa or trumped up by the CIA. It was not
violent, but the violence was from some other source. This is not a coherent view, but you
literally have something like 100 million people who think that it was just no factor.
The only thing bad that happened is that the election got stolen from the rightful president,
which was Trump. I don't know how you are paying attention to anything like a valid source of
information and you still believe that, right? And there are people who believe that or pretend
to believe it enough that they're, I do think they're people who are just being fundamentally
dishonest with their audiences. So you have, it's amazing how it can come down to a couple of
dozen personalities that really are close to the lever that moves public opinion here. So you have
someone like Tucker Carlson, who we know on the basis of the Dominion lawsuit behind closed doors
was talking about Trump as a demonic force. He couldn't wait for him to disappear from the
public conversation. He hated him with passion. Those are basically verbatim quotes of his text
messages behind the scenes at Fox that got entered into evidence in the Dominion case.
And yet his public facing message is all Trump supporting conspiracy theorizing all the time
for years. He was the most watched person on Fox and pretty soon he'll be the most watched person
wherever he finally hangs his hat, but his Twitter videos get apparently tens of millions of views.
And so he's got this enormous audience that seemingly doesn't care about his hypocrisy,
right? Which is amazing to me. I don't know how you maintain an audience with this kind of loss
of face. The mainstream media was not shy in advertising the discrepancy between what he
was saying behind closed doors and what he was saying on his show, right? So either you have
100 million people who just simply never watch any mainstream media product or read it. And that's
quite possible. But the basic problem before anything, before we think about antithetical,
ethical commitments or political commitments or people who disagree about evil really at bottom,
we just can't even converge on a discussion of facts. People just can't agree about what
is happening or much less why or what should happen. The thing that we have to start with,
one, to set the table is, is that what people are doing? That they really do all have their own
good intentions. They all think that they have spotted the evil, but they're just spotting it
from different sides. If that's true, then people's behavior at least makes sense. I understand how
it's self-motivated. Now, it's never going to be that pure. I'm sure there are also some people
that are just grabbing for power. But if the public response is, okay, I see from where I'm
sitting from my side that the other side is evil and I need to really react accordingly,
then it starts to make sense. Now, if that's what's going on, then it becomes, okay, well,
now we need the sense-making apparatus by which we figure out what is evil, what is the right
response. And the first step in that is going to be, I think, to identify what's true, that we
need some anchor in the storm that we're going to say, okay, this is the foundation and we're going
to build up from here. There has to be a mechanism by which we start to figure all this out. And so
I'll lay out my rough thesis as a way just to sort of guide the conversation. So I think that
there's something about the modern world largely as it's married to technology that creates this
inability to get people to share a narrative, which allows us then to approach any issue from
the same perspective of what we're trying to achieve. So you've got velocity of information.
So information is just coming out of so fast and furious. I've heard you talk about Alex Jones
in that context of like, hey, this guy just talks as fast as he can, throwing out so many points at
you. Each one just makes you look uneducated if you're like, I didn't know what that was. And
you're like, you find out it doesn't even exist. And so that is social media, just the rate at
which information can come at you is so fast. The business model of social media is that whatever
grabs attention is going to be monetized. And then people very quickly realize the more salacious,
the more sort of grand and aggressive, the more likely it is to get attention. So now it's coming
at you hyper negative and hyper fast. When you combine that with this sense of everything has
to roll up into a headline. So all of these ideas are incredibly nuanced. The problem is to get them
to propagate on social media, they have to be a headline, it has to be something that's memorable,
it has to be something that's easily digestible, and it has to be something that's repeatable.
And when you repeat it, that the other person's like, Oh, that's sick, you got it just right. And
now they want to go tell somebody else. And so for anybody that's being bombarded with all this
information as a way to wrap their heads around it, they just pick a team. And then the team just
tells them, Yeah, these are all your positions. So now all you have to memorize are the headlines
for your group. And I actually am deeply empathetic to that because holding on to the nuance of a
complicated situation is already very difficult. When you are able to roll that up into a headline,
it becomes something that you can hold on to far more easily. But then the truth of the on the
ground interaction points all get lost. And so I, as I was watching all of this unfold,
then it became the those 12 people that you're talking about, and certainly I will put you as
one of them, it began to be unclear, like, Okay, wait, what, what, what is the foundation that
you're building on that you level up from this? And so what I want to get through in the beginning
here is what is that foundation? So in a world where the sense making apparatus is dealing with
velocity of information, misinformation, power grabs corruption, but you can actually hide a lot
of that through velocity of headline, rolling up a complex topic into an oversimplification.
Where do we get the bedrock? Now I'm, I am aware of the not debate, maybe it was a debate that you
and Jordan did about what is truth. And I know that you can devolve into madness. But like,
if you were to give a simple explanation of how you ground yourself when you think through these
things, what does that look like? First of all, not being tribal, right? So not being not caring
really about, I mean, I care about source, I care about sources of information as a proxy for just
not having to figure out everything from, from, you know, the bedrock every time, right? So
meaning expert? Yeah, I think you can default to expertise most of the time,
all the while knowing that expertise can fail. It's just a sanity sparing and certainly time
sparing practice to say, Okay, most of what is printed in the New York Times has to be
to a first approximation, mostly true. Otherwise, the New York Times is no longer the New York
Times. Now, I think there, there have been moments where, and certainly on specific topics where it's
been valid to worry that the New York Times is no longer the New York Times, right? They can sort
of systematically getting certain topics wrong or shading the truth for, you know, as an expression
of obvious political bias. So there's, there, there are moments where all of our institutions have,
if not, you know, frankly failed us, showed a capacity to fail us, you know, at times. And,
and what that did to much of the country is just torpedo any trust in institutions, right? So the,
the trust in the mainstream media is at its all time low, I would imagine. Certainly the last
time I looked at a poll on that topic, that seemed to be the case. But so it is with government
messaging on virtually any topic, in particular public health, our scientific institutions,
our universities. And all of this is understandable in that in the last, you know, six years post
Trump and post COVID, we had this almost perfect storm politically where there really did seem to
be a capture of the mainstream institutions by a very intolerant and really at bottom illiberal
political ideology. I mean, it's supposedly liberal, it's far left, but it's, you know, in terms of
its style of thought, it was, you know, we were edging toward, you know, Chinese show trials.
I mean, it was really, it was just, you know, the kinds of, and the truth is you didn't need that
many specific cases to feel like, okay, you've seen enough, there's no reason to listen to these
people ever again, right? I mean, if you're somebody who's just poised to throw the baby out
with a bathwater, you just need to hear, you know, one case of someone being, you know,
defenestrated at the New York Times for not surviving one specific blasphemy test. And
that's, you know, then there's just no, then the New York Times is no better than the Epoch Times
or Breitbart or anything else that is in the business of, you know, putting things in font and
shipping them. And it's all journalism, right? You know, so for me, it was, it was, you had to
recognize that, you know, though our institutions are challenged, there is still such a thing as
expertise. There is still such a thing as institutional knowledge. There's a need for
institutions that we can trust. Certainly, when you're in the middle of a pandemic,
we need a CDC and an FDA that we can actually trust, right? So the fact that we felt that we
couldn't quite trust them is an enormous problem. And it's the thing we need to shore up is the
trustworthiness of indispensable institutions. It's not that we need to tear everything down to
the studs such that there are no institutions, no one thinks in terms of institutions, it's all
just podcasts and sub-stack newsletters. As far as the eye can see, and we're just going to all do
our own research, right? It's not to say that doing your own research is never valid and it's
never even important. I mean, there's certainly cases where one person can pull it a thread long
enough that something really important unravels and we're all, you know, wiser for it. Or that,
you know, one individual, given a specific problem in their lives, you know, let's say a medical problem,
they do their own research and they discover the remedy for the thing that was ailing their
family member or whatever. You know, the doctors didn't do it and the CDC didn't do it and the FDA
was wrong and they found the thing that helped. Okay, great. Generally speaking,
doing, when times are good, doing your own research is just, frankly, a waste of time.
And when things really matter, it's very likely a dangerous waste of time, right? It's like,
you don't get on an airplane and decide, you know, well, I'm not so sure I trust the pilot or the
guys who repair the engines. I'm going to do some of my own research here. Let me in the cockpit.
I want to interrogate some of those dials and switches. It's like, that's not a situation
where anyone would tolerate this sort of contrarian anti-establishment. I'm going to innovate,
you know, just break stuff and see what happens. And the problem is, in many respects, we are at
30,000 feet together, all of us, all the time. And we're having to figure out what is real and
what to do. And we do need experts that actually warrant our trust because they are, in fact,
experts, right? So when, you know, there's just specific cases like what's really happening in
Ukraine and why and what should we do about it, right? Should we be sending them arms? Is Putin
lying about, you know, the last thing he said was true on the ground? When our State Department has a
press conference and tells us what's going on, we need a State Department that we trust to inform
us, right? And when the New York Times has some point of view on what's happening there, we need
a New York Times that is sourcing information in a way that is valid. We just can't have everyone
trying to get to ground truth based on their own private efforts to come up with what we
should all think about Ukraine or what we should all think about mRNA vaccines or whatever it is.
People do feel that. And I certainly felt that at the beginning of this. So as I hear you say,
so remember my initial question is what's your foundation? And the foundation felt like you
wanted to be experts, but you understand how much they've eroded their credibility.
So my question, because I don't disagree with you, if I was at 30,000 feet, I don't want people
going in and trying to mess with the pilot. But I think that the analogy might not quite be
right for what we went through. We what it felt like, I'll just speak for myself, but I think
I represent a lot of people, what it felt like was, Oh, I'm realizing that the pilot is lying to me.
Now, I'm willing to be generous and say the pilot is lying to me because they're trying to stamp
out evil. And they really believe that that to trick the American public into taking a vaccine,
whatever is the right answer. And that they are doing it with a big heart and that they really
just want to help people get where they're going. But like when they said, you know, masks don't
work, it was just like, come on, like that doesn't make any sense. And then they flip and they're
like, no, of course, actually masks do work. And we were just lying to you because we needed to
get them into the medical professionals hands. So it's like, just slowly, slowly, they start
eroding. And you suddenly realize, everybody has an agenda. Now, that I get it. But where it
starts to be a problem for me is when, if we understand that experts have an agenda, and I'll
even, I had Peter Atial on my show, who's a medical expert, amazing. And if he tells me to do something,
I basically just do it. Like he's unbelievable. And he in his new book, he talks about how you
actually can be fat and healthy. And when he said that my first impulse was, Peter, you can't tell
people that. Because even if it's true, it's in such a like edge case, narrow percentage, and
the vast majority of the bell curve are all people who are fat and unhealthy. And if you give them
that out, they're going to take it, they're never going to make any changes, and they're going to
die. And they're going to raise their kids worse, and their kids are going to have shorter life
expectancy. And I really had an emotional response of like, you can't tell people that even if it's
true. But in that moment, I realized, Oh, this is the very thing that drives you crazy. Yeah. So
I'm like, you, you can't. So I was like, Well, if it's true, it's true. And the consequences are
going to be with the consequences are going to be. So then I start going, Okay, then if I can't just
more myself around experts are going to know, and they're going to be able to say because I don't
think three years ago, Peter would have written this book, I don't think he had the insights
into it. So even somebody as bright as him over time is changing. So experts don't really know
what's right and what's wrong, especially not in a hot and heavy situation like that.
On top of that, there are inevitably going to be things that I think should be said somebody
else think shouldn't be said, or vice versa. And so now you get to, Okay, well, if we can all agree,
we're only going to say what's true. Like even that, I think is a task. But let's say that we all
agree that we're only going to say what's true. Now this gets really complicated. And I will put
forth that what I think is quote unquote true is based on perspective, interpretation, and
reinforcement. So there's physics, which we don't even understand fully. And then there's everything
else. And because a gigantic part of everyday truth, and I don't know if that will help us get
to a sort of in the weeds working definition. But everyday truth seems to be predicated on that.
You have to take into the into account the person's perspective. So how do they see the world blue,
red, right? You have to take into account their interpretation. So looking at data,
some people are going to say, No, it doesn't show that it shows this. And you can get people that
look at the data and just violently disagree on what it shows. And then you've got the reinforcement.
So if they put out a tweet saying their version of the truth, and they get a wall of reinforcement,
then they're just one that feels good, they're going to see it more and more and more and more,
and so just the sheer repetition of it all. Any of those pieces feel wrong?
Well, I think the thing you pointed to there in your conversation with Peter is important to
focus on because people have a very hard time just keeping track of everything that's said,
right? And keeping things in proportion, right? And so I think your intuition that is dangerous
to be precisely true on that point, because most people most of the time will draw the wrong
message. That is the style of thinking as you observe that our public health officials were
too encumbered by, right? Like they were aware that they were messaging into a very dirty
information landscape, right? It's just polluted with conspiracy thinking and frank lies. And we
had a president who was, you know, by turns minimizing everything and lying about it. I mean,
just telling pointless lies, like, you know, we have 15 cases and it's going to go away,
you know, immediately, right? And so there was this basic fact, it's quite inconvenient in
the case of a pandemic, that it's this moving target where we're finding that we actually
don't understand what we thought we understood yesterday, right? So the message is changing.
It's not that we have a completely clear message that is still difficult to parse and we have to
be careful. We have to talk to people like children, or at least in a kind of paternalistic way and say,
okay, listen, most fat people are not healthy. It's generally not healthy to be fat. Virtually
every fat person would be healthier if they were less fat, but it's still possible to be healthy
if you're fat. And there are people who are skinny who are not healthy and it gets confusing. So,
but you can't really go wrong with this basic message that you want to be thin and fit and
you want to do the things you want to be on your way to being thin and fit at minimum. You want to
be active, you want to be eating well, etc. I am a freak for efficiency. So let me tell you,
I am always on the hunt for clothes that can work in any setting. The bad news is most traditional
pants do not have that kind of versatility, but bird dogs were designed to meet that exact need.
They were created to be your go-to pants for any and every activity. Bird dogs are made with a
cloud knit fabric that looks just like khaki, but stretches with your every move. And their built-in
liners use anti-stink sweat wicking fabric that I know a lot of you boys are going to need to keep
cool and dry all day long. With bird dogs, you can go out, work out, meet with clients,
kung fu fight, go to an event, whatever. They've got you covered and you can do it all without
having to stop and change. Go to birddogs.com slash impact or just enter promo code impact
for a free Yeti style tumbler with your order. You won't want to take your bird dogs off. We
promise you that. In the case of COVID, the truth was getting overturned by further revelations.
I mean, the truth with respect to the disease, the epidemiology of it, how contagious it was,
how dangerous it was. We were getting new variants. It was literally the disease itself was changing.
What we understood about vaccines was changing. Initially, in the beginning,
there was every reason to believe, at least there was every reason to hope that the vaccines
would block transmission and therefore not getting vaccinated was a decision not just
with respect to your own health, but the health of the people around you. Later on,
that began to unravel and it was clear, okay, that doesn't really block transmission all that much,
maybe a little bit, but not really. Therefore, it's a personal decision and it's not a decision
that you're making for others. You're not a bad citizen, therefore, if you don't get vaccinated.
We were messaging into an environment where there's so much misinformation around specifically
things like vaccines. There's literally an anti-vaccine cult that has been working in
the background of our culture for decades and this was their moment to really seize the reins of
the social media conversation, at least.
It was understandable that our public health officials and doctors generally felt like, okay,
we've got to keep this really simple. This has got to be idiot-proof. Get faxed. COVID is dangerous.
Wear a mask. Don't wear a mask when you're stealing the masks from people who don't get
our first line responders who need the PPE, but once we had enough, wear a mask.
The problem was when that began to unravel, there were so many clear moments of dishonesty
that where anyone who was going to have their trust broken with mainstream institutions,
they broke up right there and they seemingly broke up permanently. It was just, okay,
you're going to tell me that I have to get vaccinated because it stops transmission
and now I'm hearing that it no longer stops transmission. Okay, I'm done. The other problem
is that now we have an information landscape where basically everything survives. There is not the
normal Darwinian contest between sources of information where if something gets sufficiently
discredited, you never hear from it again. The internet is big enough and friction-free enough
such that you can be a complete lunatic who everyone knows is a complete lunatic and yet
you create an ecosystem that enough people love and you can figure out how to monetize it.
You can have an audience of a million people forever, it seems. You're literally, you could be
saying that the craziest case is something like QAnon where it's like the actual claim
that people are bonding over is that the world is being run by child-raping cannibals and among
those cannibals are people like Michelle Obama and Tom Hanks and I mean it's just, I always know it.
So it's like, okay, we're really saying that these people are cannibals and pedophiles
and we're going to spend a lot of time having this conversation amongst ourselves. We don't care
if the rest of the world thinks we're crazy because in this space, this is just our playground.
This is our information playground. There's nothing, we're not bumping into any hard objects here
because we have as much real as, we have as much information real estate as we can,
as we want to carve out for ourselves. I mean, that didn't used to be, it used to be that
if you wanted to publish books or publish print newspapers or magazines, you needed enough contact
with the normal kind of reinforcement of, you know, just mainstream consensus that
you would survive, you know, financially. It's like, there's something about the
internet that has just made the cost of spreading information go to zero and
when you're, I mean, when you're dealing in bits and no longer dealing in atoms,
it's, everything survives and persists in some basic sense.
So yeah, I think it's important to really understand what that mechanism is. So it's what
I'll call velocity of information if you have a better name for it, I'm all for it, but there's
something about packaging an idea up in an environment where there's so much information,
all you can digest is the headline when something is hyper transmittable that it just has, you know,
whether it's clever, it rhymes it, whatever, that has just that little bit of extra juice on it.
It's something that's funny, um, memified that it's, it's really going to burn through culture.
Now, for me, where this all begins to become deeply problematic is that it, it isn't so much
that just the internet is forever. It's that Socrates hated democracy because he didn't think
people were smart enough to parse through the information and he thought, man, you shouldn't
be able to vote in this thing if you're not educated on this thing and the reality is most
people aren't going to be educated and therefore democracy is really not going to survive. So
I take a totally different approach to this, which is I think that, that if you create an
environment where everybody gets to vote in a world that has the velocity of information that we
have, information is free to send. Um, it's easy to package it up, roll up into headlines. There's
no doubt that a lot of misinformation is going to get out there and people just don't even know
where to check, where to turn to know like who's who, what's what, that will have very negative
consequences. But the only flip side of that that I see is top down authoritarian control where it's
like I decide whoever I is, the government, Twitter, YouTube, whoever, they decide what's real
information and what's not because what people are trying to get back to you is what you were
talking about before where information velocity was slow, that you had to go to a print people
piece of newspaper. They even put extra checks where it was like it had to be vetted by three
sources or whatever. And I'm not saying yellow journalism didn't exist. Of course it did,
but there were self-imposed constraints. There was a business model that let even those self-imposed
constraints really be financially viable. It was just harder to do, harder to get out there.
And so by reducing it, there were only so many narratives that you were going to be able to
get out. So even if New York, you know, back in the 20s or whatever had 50 newspapers just in New
York City, that's still only New York City. You're not dealing with a global readership.
So you have just this natural constraint. Now once nature isn't giving you the constraint anymore,
the second you want that constraint from the top down, you now step into what I call the
trifecta of evil. And the trifecta of evil is three books that I read. They technically have
nothing to do with each other, but just completely explain how all of this goes awry and has made
me absolutely terrified of top down authoritarian control far more than I am afraid of the absolute
chaos of a thousand Alex Jones. So the three books are The Gulag Archipelago by Alexander
Solzhenitsyn, Mal, The Unknown Story, and then The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich.
And those three books tell you just how wrong things go when people are told,
shut up, your opinion doesn't matter. And this person knows better, and you're just going to
get in line. And the great thing about the Mal book is that I hadn't realized how evil Mal was.
I thought he was like a junior level of evil compared to Stalin and Hitler. But you read
that book and it's just, I mean, the details are just so sadistic and ghastly. I literally had no
idea when I started reading that book. The fourth, if I were going to do an honorable mention to give
Stalin some more love would be Red Famine. That book is shocking, shocking. Have you read it?
No, but I've read a lot of best Stalin. Yeah, I don't know if I can recommend it. There's this
one part where a woman telling a tale, a woman comes up and looks through another woman's,
this is in the Ukraine starving 1921 or whatever. And she looks to the window and catches her
neighbor eating her seven-year-old daughter. And she's just like, I just, I can't imagine.
So that scares me a lot more than we're all having a hard time figuring out what is true. Now, I have
a pitch for how I think we figure out what is true that is certainly going to be flawed. But
the first thing I want to either agree, debate, whatever is, do you agree that this is sort of
the sequencing of events, that we have this wall of information that's coming in too fast,
it's all rolled up into headlines. There's no nuance. Most people probably aren't smart enough
to deal with the nuance anyway. And now temptation one is to just go, oh, dear elites, pre-masticate
all of this for us and tell us what to do. We tried that. They have agendas, even if they're
really being sincere and trying to be good, they have agendas. And that just feels absolutely
shitty. It feels like you're being manipulated. It breaks all your trust. Can't do that. The other
one is just absolute top down, do what the fuck you're told, shut up. And this is it. Both of those
strike me as horrendous. And that leaves the third option, which is free speech, which has become
contentious somehow. So as a child of the 80s, to me, that's like the greatest thing ever. I'm
all for free speech. I love what Elon is doing on Twitter. I think it's amazing. But at the same
time, I know that's not widely shared. I'm not even sure where you fall down.
I can push back on some of that. Well, so a couple of distinctions. One is that
it's not just that everything gets boiled down to headlines. I mean, that is a problem. Sometimes
the headline doesn't even faithfully represent what's actually in the article. And so many people
only read the headlines. They never even read the article, right? So there's that problem. That
problem's been with us for a while. There's the algorithmic boosting of outrage and misinformation
preferentially, which is the problem on social media. And I would make one distinction, which is,
and this is, many people have made this, freedom of speech and freedom of reach are different
things, right? So you should be free to post whatever you want to post, but it is a choice
on the side of the social media company to preferentially boost or dampen whatever they
want to boost or dampen, right? So it's to change the character of the conversation.
And they have to make decisions there. To make no decision is itself a decision, right? So if
you're going to make it completely flat, people will have one experience. If you're going to tweak
it algorithmically, people have a different experience. And that is a business choice that
they are incentivized to make largely because they have a terrible business model. I mean,
the gaming of attention is a bad business model, I would argue. So the fact that it's an ad-based
attention economy has a lot to do with the kind of the original sin of social media,
I think, is the business model. And if these were all subscription businesses, I think we could
have a different landscape there with respect to social media. But still, there would be a
moderation burden. And it's something that it seems like they're never going to get right.
Except for in the presence of something like omniscient AI that we could trust, I don't see how
your effort to moderate what hundreds of millions of people say to one another,
or even in some cases billions of people. That's always going to produce casualties.
It's always going to produce somebody who was just a completely valid academic who just took
an edge case position and got flagged as a Nazi or whatever. There has to be some
process of appeal, etc. The other distinction I would make is that there's a big difference between
governments silencing speech and actually punishing people for errant speech. And companies, private
companies, or even publicly held companies, deciding that they want to be associated with
or not associated with certain kinds of speech. And so when I look at this through a free speech
lens, from a U.S. centric First Amendment lens, we should acknowledge that most of the world doesn't
have the protection of the First Amendment and they're worse off for it. And so if you're living
in the U.K. and you're perceiving this debate, you're looking at it as someone who feels stifled
by the reality that you don't have a First Amendment to default back to. And I've been
slow to appreciate just how different that is politically and ethically for people.
So speaking from the U.S. context, I think we have it right that the government should not
make any kind of speech illegal with a few exceptions like inciting violence.
So I think you should be free to be a Nazi and say you're Nazi things and you should be free to
reap the reputational costs of that, right? People now know you're a Nazi, they don't want to do
business with you, they vilify you on their forums. But the question is, should a platform
like Twitter or any other platform be legally required to associate with Nazis, right? Can
they have in their terms of service a no Nazis policy? And I think my free speech concern
now is aimed at the owners and employees of those platforms, right? So I'm thinking about
the person who starts a social media company. The truth is what we're going to do this,
we're going to, you know, this is an experiment because my, you know, as you might imagine,
my faith that you can actually produce a social media platform that works is pretty low. But
for waking up my meditation app, we are going to launch a basically a forum of some kind.
And that will very quickly have tens of thousands and even some hundreds of thousands of people in
it, presumably. Should I be able to have a no Nazis policy? Right now, I'm not expecting any
Nazis. I mean, first of all, this is a subscription business. So there's already a gatekeeping
function that is helpful there, I think, ensuring a kind of good faith and quality.
But there, you know, anyone who needs free access to waking up also gets it. So there's a lot of
free users of it. So it's not not a perfect paywall. I think when I start a platform like that,
first of all, I should be able to just zero it out overnight. Like if it's not working,
if I don't like the way this is working, I should be able to just send everyone emails saying,
sorry, you know, you guys broke this place, I don't like the conversation is over, right?
That's actually something I told Jack Dorsey when he was still running Twitter that he should
just delete it and he'd win the Nobel Peace Prize and he would deserve it.
So I think you should be able to, you should be free to delete your, your social media account
if you in fact own it. And you should be free to decide, okay, these are the standards of conduct
in this space. Like it's, you know, this is true if you open a restaurant or if you open a movie
theater, if you open any public space, it doesn't change if it's merely digital, you should be able
to set the terms of service. And if it's a no Nazi space, well, then Nazis are not welcome here,
right? So you, if you demonstrate that you're a Nazi, we kick you out of our platform.
Now I, so I'll grant you that any company should be able to do what they want to do.
If Hooters wants to hire only attractive women, by all means, let them hire only attractive
women. If someone wants to do a female only company, I don't have a beef with it. I don't even
have a beef if Harvard only wants to, you know, if Harvard wants to make it near impossible for
an Asian student to get in, as long as they are clear and transparent and don't take government
money, I'm all for it. I don't care. But the transparency matters to me. But my real question
is like, as we think about actually solving the problem. And so I'm asking this largely in the
connotation of 2024 is coming, we're going to be running into this again. I really think the
right way to set the table is you've got people on the left and people on the right who both
think that the other side is evil. They both think that they have recognized the problem
reincarnate. And if we don't establish a new sense making mechanism for a world in which
the velocity of information is this fast, AI is coming. So deep fakes are going to be a real thing.
Like we need a method that we can all rely upon in order to think through these problems well.
And so like where I come down on free speech isn't whether a private company
should be able to limit the reach of somebody that's a Nazi or say, I don't want Nazis on my
platform. That's fine. There is a real consequence to that though, which is then it just bifurcates
and you get the right and the left because that's really what's being argued about as far as I can
there's I have not seen any of what I would call real Nazi like stuff. It's normally just
behavior people don't like it. It's coming from the opposite side of the aisle. So when I say,
okay, what is the right way to deal with this? My answer is I think everybody needs to distrust
themselves a little so they should not assume that they are right. Everybody should be willing
to put their ideas forward on how they think through the problem. So rather than only listening
to experts, it's like, Hey, I'm an expert or I'm not, but this is how I think about the problem.
This is how I've ended up with this conclusion. I've looked at this or I've studied that whatever,
but this is how I come to this conclusion. And then to want the collision of ideas and the second
people are more worried about bad ideas being out there. They're either saying I completely give up
to this velocity of information problem. So we have to just choke it and we have to make sure
there's only the authorized information or you accept the consequences of letting the ideas
battle it out in the public consciousness. And as far as I can tell, the second you say,
the people aren't smart enough to battle these ideas out, the system of information distribution
is so broken that it's unsafe, maybe isn't the perfect word, but you'll never get a good outcome
by doing that. You can't have democracy. Like it is literally only in the face of the ability
for people to say what they believe is true and to battle out those ideas that we have any hope
of people really understanding as close to the sort of unsculptured way of presenting an idea
that we're going to get. And look, there are going to be people that won't be able to navigate
that mess. And so I'm certainly not saying that this is perfect, but when I step back and look at
the reality of the landscape that we're in, algorithmically controlled, all of that, everybody
has a voice in social media, et cetera, et cetera. I don't see a way around it.
Well, so we don't have a pure democracy, right? It's not like you just get online and vote and
it's one person, one vote, and then we decide whether we go to war with Russia based on the
tally. We pick representatives and there I think it's important that we have representatives who
are not blown around like weather veins by just whatever's happening on Twitter that day, right?
So yes, they need to care about what their constituents want, but I think it's good that
there's a looseness of fit between what 500 people in the government do and the cacophony
on social media, right? That may be to some degree informing their impression of what their
constituents want, right? So we need serious people in serious roles of responsibility and
insofar as we're losing that, and there's definitely signs that we are losing that,
and we've got at least one person in Congress who when our state is on fire, she speculates that
maybe it's Jewish space lasers starting those fires, right? This is Marjorie Taylor Green.
Yeah, yeah. Marjorie Taylor Green has heard that there were some space lasers put up there by
Jews. I think it was Rothschild funding that could start fires, and we might want to look
into that, right? So insofar as that is happening, that we're getting people so anti-establishment
that they are effectively lunatics in positions of real power, I think that's a,
maybe that problem has always been with us to some degree, but at least I am perceiving it
certainly post-Trump as uniquely worth worrying about at this moment, that like populism is
tending to promote candidates that are almost by definition have fewer institutional commitments
with all the good and all the bad that that entails, right? So, but there's a lot that's good,
that if you care about, you know, the last hundred years of scientific knowledge, right,
and your statements about, let's say something like climate change is going to be constrained by
a basic awareness of, you know, what most climate scientists most of the time think about climate
change, that's your one kind of representative. If you're somebody who's just going to
freewheel based on what they heard Alex Jones say, or, I mean, literally
Trump gave his first interview, I think, to Alex Jones, right? Like, there's a difference of
kind of a center of narrative gravity there in populism that I think we need to worry about,
but, and there's obviously right wing and left wing variants of populism, both are problematic,
but there's just, we have to recognize that there are asymmetries, like, so what you seem to be
recommending is that we basically talk to everyone, give everyone a fair hearing. It's only
when you just bring sunlight to everything that people are going to be able to make up their minds
and they're not going to, they're still left and right are still going to demonize one another,
but we're going to approach something like maximum understanding if we just talk about everything.
So, why not have RFK Junior on your podcast, right? You know, Rogan brings them on the podcast and
just, you know, RFK, tell me, tell me, give me the world as you see it, you know, tell me, you
know, who killed your father, who killed your uncle, what do you think about these vaccines,
do vaccines cause autism, and just let them go for four hours. The downside with that is that
even in the presence of somebody who is a subject matter expert who's there to
provide some kind of guardrails to that conversation, there is an asymmetry between
the time and effort it takes to make a mess and the time and effort it takes to clean it up,
right? And whether it's even possible to clean it up given the resources available, right? So,
if somebody is, if someone's just going to make up lies in front of you, even if you're an expert
in that area, there's only so much you can do because like you're not, they're playing with
it completely different, you know, kind of information physics, right? They're just going
to make something up. So, if you might be a climate change expert or a vaccine expert,
and if you have somebody who's a pure conspiracy theorist on those topics,
you know, in my experience, you're sitting with someone who is very often unscrupulous enough
to just make stuff up, right? Or to be so delusional in the way they have interacted
with even valid information in the past that the word salad they're going to produce is,
you know, effectively just a tissue of lies. And yet, there may be no way to actually
interact with it in an honest way in real time on Rogan's podcast or anywhere else such as,
so as to properly debunk it. So, you can't take, let's take RFK Jr. as an example.
Do we think that he is wrong and well-intentioned or do we think he is sinister?
Well, wrong and well-intentioned can cover for a lot of dangerous error,
right? I mean, you can really make a mess being wrong and well-intentioned.
I think with him, he's got so much sunk cost. First of all, there's so many people,
there is just a characterological, psychological phenotype that just is addicted to
the contrarian take on more or less everything, right? And it's not an accident. The people who
are all in on the JFK conspiracy, right? Like, you know, no way it was a single shooter,
no way Oswald was a Patsy, whatever it is, right? Those people, by and large, tend to just
jump on all the other conspiracies, whether it's, you know, the moon landing or
9-11 truth or it's like, and you have someone like RFK Jr. where it seems, I don't know the man,
but I've been paying attention of late, it seems like there's almost no conspiracy that he doesn't
have an appetite for, right? So, like when someone says, well, what about Bill Gates
injecting, you know, transponders into us with the vaccine? He's got time for that, right? He
doesn't say, oh, no, that's, I mean, you really think Bill Gates is doing that? That's just,
isn't that obviously bullshit? No, no, he's like, well, you know, that's just something we really
have to look into. It's like, you know, I don't have verbatim what he said on that, but it was,
he's way too open-minded on points like that, right? And so it is with everything. And now
it's deeply inconvenient for someone like me at a moment like this to have to recognize
some of these conspiracies turn out to be true, right? And some always looked plausible from the
very beginning. So like the origins of COVID coming from the Wuhan Institute of Virology,
right? Like is it a lab leak or is it the wet market? Well, it always looked plausible that
it could be a lab leak, right? That was always a valid thesis worth worrying about and investigating.
And it was never racist to speculate that that might have been the case, right? So the fact that
our medical establishment tried to tamp that down in a completely bad faith way, and maybe for reasons
that are, if you dig deeper into Fauci and into, you know, the other players, maybe they really
are, there's some deeply invidious things to discover about people's conflict of interest,
and, you know, research we funded, and now we don't want to admit we funded or whatever it was.
I mean, it was that moment in Congress where Fauci and Rand Paul were kind of debating the
meaning of gain-of-function research, and Fauci looked like, you know, to many people's perception,
and actually shared it at the time, he looked like he was just doing this sort of Talmudic
hair splitting on what the phrase gain-of-function meant, whereas Rand Paul was saying, kind of
just be honest with the American people, like you know that if you are changing the function of
the dynamics of a virus such that it spreads more among humans, that's gain-of-function,
you know, by any other name. So maybe there's something sinister beneath all of that, right?
So here's one conspiracy, among all these other conspiracies, that people were branded as conspiracy
theorists for entertaining, and yet it was always plausible to be worried about that.
This, by the way, is exactly the thing that I'm worried about. So it becomes very easy to
shut people down, to say, oh, that's just conspiracy, and to start having the
apps get involved. So YouTube marking it as like, oh, you talked about ivermectin,
this shutting this episode down, like just so many things coming at you at once, trying to say,
this is outside the Overton window. And so my whole thesis is very simple, that in a world
where there's too much information coming in, the answer cannot be to choke it off,
to try to limit the amount of information, because you will get that wrong. It is manipulative by
its very nature. The closest thing you're going to get is to let ideas battle out. There are going
to be consequences. I want to be very clear. We probably, when it comes to things like this,
you were better off when you had trusted but hyper-limited media sources that could at least
get everyone to walk towards the exits in a calm and orderly fashion. So I'm not denying that,
but that world is over. And so now you really only have two options that I can see. You either
top down, clamp down, or, and I'll lead people back to my trifecta of evil, or you go, there are
going to be consequences to letting people battle the ideas out in public, and there are going to
be a lot of people that get confused by things that should never be taken seriously, and they're
going to be taken seriously, and we're going to have lives lost because of that, but it will
balance out and we won't have lost all of our faith. And you're not going to get the small guy,
trample the death, sent off to the gulag, killed because he's an inconvenient voice,
whatever the case, which also opens the door to the power grabs. And now you get will to power,
which we saw a lot in COVID was like, oh, I can get a little bit of power. And so it draws people
into that. So you get power grab, power grab. So when I think back, and in fact, maybe the
right way to ask the question is, and I want to keep this tied to RFK, I don't want to depart
from that yet. So you've got RFK, your view is that he's making things up, that it's conspiracy,
maybe just personality wise, he's drawn to it. I don't hear you saying that you think he's sinister,
just dash, just how his mind works. Other people, though, think that he's bang on, that he's right.
You've already admitted that he'll probably end up being right about some of these things.
I know you well enough to know you're going to say, well, there's nuance. And if you're right for
the wrong reason, you really do have to think that through. It's not enough just to be right.
We'll set that aside for now. So you've got this guy conspiracy minded, not being sinister,
probably will be right about some of these things. But probably you still don't want him to be
platformed. And then it becomes. But the crucial distinction, again, is between
it being illegal to platform him, or just the choice for a private platform.
I only care about the choice. I want to know why, because you are such a potent sense maker.
There's so many of us that are like children of Sam Harris, where you really helped us
think about putting these ideas together. And then there's something in this one to punch
of COVID, Trump, where all of a sudden I felt like, wait, I've been using the tools you gave me.
And now the way that now I feel like you're using a different set of tools. And so I'm trying to
remap. Because here's how I approach you right now. Obviously, I've watched some portion of the
internet go, Sam's brain broke. He used to be Sam Harris, not Sam Harris. You did your own podcast
about it, which is brilliant, by the way, where you're like some portion of my audience thinks,
like, what have you done? I forget the exact phrase you used. But you're so aware of how
people have responded. But you've stayed really steady. So I'm like, okay, then maybe there's
something here I'm just not getting, which is why I keep laying my thing out, because you don't
feel erratic to me. But I want to understand you, your layering ideas that allow you to make sense
of this in a way where you're calm, like, if people are going to freak out on Twitter, I'm just
going to step back, I'm going to keep doing my thing. Like being with you does not feel like
I'm in the presence of someone who's on a manic episode or anything. Like you feel as ever sort
of calm and centered. And so because I am skeptical of my own approach, I want to understand yours.
Now I'm not going to pull back on the parts where I think that it doesn't make sense. I'll
say it doesn't make sense. But I actually do want to understand. So where I was going with that is,
I don't worry about illegal, not illegal, I just want to know why you think it makes sense to
deplatform or to not platform maybe a more accurate way to say it to not platform someone
like RFK Jr. When the founding fathers said, hey, the one thing you don't want to fuck with,
make sure people can say whatever the hell they want.
Okay, well, it matters what the platform is. So, you know, with a podcast, it's very simple.
I'm only going to do 40, 50 podcasts this year. I just have to make a choice. It's an editorial
choice. It's a publishing choice. What do I want to pay attention to? Whose book do I want to read?
Who do I want to talk to? You know, most people...
But you have said there are certain people you don't think should be put on a platform.
Trump was one of them.
Well, there's certain people I wouldn't talk to for a specific reason.
You're not talking fair enough, but are there people that you think should never be platformed?
Well, I think if you're going to platform... So what I said about RFK on my podcast is that if
you're going to platform him, you have a journalistic responsibility to do your homework, not only
in anticipation of the things he's going to say on your podcast, but you need to catalog
the things he's already said, which are obviously bullshit that you should challenge him on.
Right? So, you know, there is just a widespread scientific consensus at this point that there
is no link between childhood vaccines and autism. Right now, autism is a problem. Autism rates have
gone up. We don't understand autism, but people have gone deep studying the MMR vaccine, but
all just vaccines in general, and autism, and found no linkage. Right? So, and he is out there
telling people, anyone who will listen, that there's every reason to believe that vaccines
cause autism, or we should be worried about it, or, you know, or, you know, I'm hearing from
mothers who have seen the clear correlation. They had a normal kid on Tuesday and on Wednesday,
they got vaccinated, and, you know, the autism started. Right? So, he is spreading that fear,
and as far as I can tell, it's on the basis of no valid scientific information now. Now,
it's also, this is now linked up with everyone else's concerns about COVID vaccines, and just,
you know, the reliability of medicine in general, and bad incentives, and pharmaceutical companies, and
there's a lot of there-there in stuff that it's worth worrying about. I mean, I think a
profit-driven motive in medicine is something that we're always going to be in tension with,
because what we want, we want the medical establishment to be recommending drugs
because they're safe and truly safe and effective to people who truly need them. Right? We don't want
people in the privacy of their own minds or in the privacy of their board meetings
celebrating how they're going to make billions of dollars at this new opportunity, because they
can-they can, you know, market this drug successfully to people who may not need it,
may not benefit from it, and may be, in fact, be harmed by it. Right? So, it's that
disalignment of incentives that is-is specifically in the case of medicine that is,
I think people are understandably uncomfortable with. But-so, in the-in the narrow case, when
you're talking about having a podcast, you-you-first of all, you could just-the-the burden is not-is
not on you to platform everybody, you can just decide who you want to talk to. If you're going
to talk to someone like RFK Jr., I think, given his track record, and given how much,
I think, genuine misinformation he has spread, and, you know, consequential misinformation,
I think you have a responsibility not to just put a mic in front of him and let him rip.
You-you actually need to-to debunk him, and maybe bring on someone who can also debunk him.
Now, again, as I said-and you have no problem with that. So, if it was done in a-a debate format
with another exporter or superior expert, then it's-we're good.
Yes, except you-the-the asymmetry I pointed out before still applies. I mean, if he's going to
just make stuff up, right? So, like, you know, he will-I mean, the example I mentioned on my podcast,
like, he's been telling a story, I think, in-in several venues that, you know, he-he-he had
collaborated with-with a journalist, Jake Tapper, you know, like 15 years ago on a documentary.
They had just put in a ton of effort. They was-they did a really deep dive on the link
between vaccines and autism, and at the last minute, Jake Tapper called him and said,
listen, we're-we're going to pull this. We just-I've never-in all my years as a journalist,
I've never had this experience, but this just came down from corporate.
They're just pulling the plug on this. I'm so sorry. And, you know, so the punchline for him,
and I-I'm not sure if he said this on Rogue, and he definitely said this on some podcast I listened to,
punchline for him is, okay, the pharmaceutical companies have such
pull with-I mean, they-they spend so much money with CNN and these other outlets that,
you know, if they don't want something to air, it's not going to air, right? That's how corrupt
journalism is now. Now, if I was on a podcast debating RFK Jr., and he
trotted out that story, I would just have to eat it. I would say, all right, well, that's-that's
bad, but I agree, that looks bad, right? Now, Jake Tapper has published an article saying,
this is just a lie, right? This is just-this has like two per-a-two percent relationship
to what actually happened. There was nothing about it being-it's just-it's all upside down,
and I keep debunking this, and he keeps telling this story, right? So, unless you know that,
it doesn't matter that you're a vaccine expert or you could be an expert in-in a dozen, you know,
relevant disciplines, if someone's just going to make up a story that is perfectly shaped
to tickle the contrarian-you know, they're-they're all a bunch of fucking liars, part of the brain,
he still lands that blow in real time on a podcast. There's no way to debunk it in real
time. You literally need Jake Tapper to-you need to pull him out of the woodwork to-for
that particular point. But isn't-and there are many-there are many things like that. That's the
thing. I mean, there is not like-so someone who has this style of-of reasoning, again, some of
its conscious lines, some of its misremembering, some of its-they're reading studies, and they're-they're
not understanding them, and they're just-they're pulling, you know, half-truths out of studies
that-that are-can be made to seem real. And so, they're making such a mess that it is-is genuinely
hard to be an expert in-in that, you know, in writing shotgun on all of that and debunking in
real time. But the only responsible way to do it would be to have an expert there to
try to do that. I think it-it's worth stepping back and-and asking the question,
well, why is anyone listening to RFK Jr. about vaccines at all? Right? He's not an expert in
the relevant domain, right? He's not-I mean, he's not an expert in epidemiology. He's not an expert
in immunology. He's not a vaccine guy. He's not-he's like-he's not-he's a lawyer and an activist
who got this particular B in his bonnet 20 years ago, and he's just made a lot of noise
about this. And-and interestingly, he's also a climate science activist, right? And there you
can-you-you-you can see a-a very bizarre mismatch between how he deals with mainstream scientific
consensus in climate and how he-he disavows mainstream scientific consensus on the topic
of vaccines. And I mean, everything is flipped. I mean, he's just like-he's got all the-the
This is the perfect example for me of the very thing that I'm worried about. So here you have a
guy, he's either sinister and wants to help the climate, in which case I think most people have
cognitive dissonance, or he's sinister and wants people to not take vaccines that are going to
save their life, or he's maybe right about something that other people disagree with,
or maybe he's wrong but well-intentioned. So-I think-I think wrong but well-intention covers
for a lot. I mean, just think about it. The vaccine thing is-is really a unique case because
what you have is a-an intervention on a healthy person, very often a child,
that is nevertheless-never-less risky to some degree. Some number of people are going to have
a bad reaction. Some number of people are going to die from-from the-the-the like-you-I let you-I
mean, this is just everyone's worst-certainly every parent's worst nightmare. You know, I let-I
let them stick a needle in my child and he was never the same, or he died, right? Like, that's
just-so you-you just have to hear one story like that, right? It doesn't even have to happen to you.
It's just you-it could be a friend of a friend of a friend. You hear this story and you think,
man, it's just-it's not worth it. Like, I just-I don't, you know-in-in the case of-of-of
childhood illness, you know, infectious disease, you can, as you know-basically everyone who doesn't
get their kid's vaccine does, you can just be a free rider on this larger system of herd immunity.
You can say, listen, I-I-I-I-most people are going to be vaccinated for measles. I don't even have
to get my kid vaccinated. Like, I just-I'm not going to run this risk. I'm just going to opt out.
And so he's intersecting with totally understandable fears that get-wherein specific
anecdotes, specific stories get amplified. They're above data. They're more important
than data. You can show me all the data in the world. I know what happened to my kid, right?
That's, again, scientifically, that's all upside down, but it is so compelling that...
What should we do, though, with people that are in that situation? Because, for me,
if a parent doesn't want to vaccinate their child, I do not think you should be able to force them.
Even at the height of COVID, where I was like, when I really believed everybody just needs to
go get vaccinated, and some people were like, I don't want to do it. I was like, word, then fine.
That just feels... So it felt wrong to me, and this is where it feels like everybody needs to
have a moral compass. Part of where I think the breakdown is happening, I've heard you refer
to something as a great unraveling. Now, I don't know what you mean by that, but I started mapping
out what I thought you meant by that. One of the things that certainly I would mean is a great
unraveling, is we don't have these shared morals anymore. We don't have one religion to carry us
through. What I think ends up happening, and the thing that you and I have been talking about
without really talking about, is this is a battle for the truth. If things were clear, they'd be
clear. If we really knew, vaccines don't cause autism, if vaccines caused autism, it'd be very
clear. You just see it, boom, done. So it's in some weird... Maybe it does. There's enough credibility
there that people can still buy into it. There isn't enough just unequivocable evidence in the
other direction. People go, I've looked at this, because if it were true, I could just show you
this, and I could show you this, and then people would go down the line. Nobody's arguing about
whether what you eat impacts what you shit. Everybody just gets it. I don't have to tell anybody.
I don't have to go convince people. It's just like your life is such proof that there is a
one-to-one relationship between what you put in your mouth and what comes out the other end.
So there is some weird gray area. So the question becomes... And it's mostly gray area for most
things. Right. So now, if we know we're living in this area where everything is gray, nobody knows
who's going to be the expert, you started the conversation by saying, okay, we really do need
experts, but no joke, like nine words into your sentence, you were caveatting experts have sort
of thrown away their credibility. And so it's like, that is the world that we live in. This
stuff is so complex. So the thing that we have to take on in head-on collision is, how do we
discover what is true? Well, if you do it the way RFK Jr. is doing it for climate, right? You
notice that you can find any... Believe the preponderance of experts. Yeah. It's like,
it's not an accident that almost all climate scientists, there's a general principle you
have to understand here is that it's always possible to find a handful of PhDs or MDs
who are crazy or conflicted or just for whatever reason, disposed to stake out a genuinely
disreputable and indefensible thesis. So the cigarette companies could always find
somebody with a seemingly relevant degree to say, I don't think smoking causes cancer,
I don't think it's addictive, you could find that guy. And then that guy would sell his
wares to the chemical companies that are putting fire retardant in mattresses,
and he could say, well, I don't think this is... If it gets into the bloodstream, it's not a problem.
You can always find those people. So I'm not saying we are always ruled by scientific
consensus because there are genuine breakthroughs in science that overturn even a 99.9% consensus,
but scientific consensus is still salient and still matters most of the time,
and it's not arrived at by accident. And there's so much tension in science to disprove other
scientists. It is such a competitive atmosphere that, again, there are studies that don't get
replicated, there's false ideas that survive far longer than you think they would, but
generally speaking, you are not going to go wrong most of the time by lining up with what 99% of
specialist X thinks on this very specialized topic. So RFK Junior plays that very center
of the fairway game on the topic of climate, and he does something completely different when
he's talking about medicine. Now, I don't know, maybe he has a story that reconciles that difference,
but we need, yes, we need a healthy institutional and scientific conversation such that good ideas
generally survive and bad ideas are generally debunked, and that we know that most of the time
are experts, are real experts, they got that, they acquired their expertise by a process that was
going to weed out the imbeciles and the delusional and deliver somebody who really
is arriving at their opinions on the basis of a methodology that we generally can trust. They're
not obviously conflicted by... Can we lay out that methodology? Well, you're on guard for
obvious cognitive bias and wishful thinking and certainly bad incentives. So it's understood,
it's like, yes, if RJ Reynolds is funding research into the toxicology of cigarettes,
it's not to say that obviously conflicted money is always going to fund a study that is false,
you could run it. It's not, it wouldn't be hard to run a totally valid study where the money came
from what would be classically be considered the wrong source, but it's easy to see that there's
at least the optics are bad enough that that's not how you want to fund that particular science.
And at minimum, scientists have to declare any economic interest they had in any part of this
picture. But the truth is, scientists deeply flawed, and yet it's better than any other
part of culture with respect to how we play this game of just letting ideas collide against one
another and seeing what survives. That I agree with. So the problem is I don't feel like that's
what's happening or what's being championed. So broadly, and then we can get specific to you
and I and exactly what we're saying. But the way that I think about this is you've got even
something like science. If you talk to Eric Weinstein, talks about the disk, I think it's
the distributed information suppression complex. So he talks about how there is, for whatever
reason, just inherent into the world of science, there's a certain bias, there's certain ideas
they don't want getting out because people have built their entire careers on something. And if
you're putting something for it that challenges it, necessarily that they're being evil, but it's
the same kind of idea of the cigarette guy is going to see what he wants to see. And the guy
whose entire career collapses, if your new idea is right, well, magically, the peer review that
you get is terrible. And he's got a laundry list of things like that. And so I'll back up. So in a
business context, I created something called the physics of progress. And it was me trying to teach
to my students exactly how you solve novel problems. So I was like, Hey, if you want to grow
a business, I have no idea what the product is, how the audience is going to respond, what the
market situation is going to be like. So you really have to understand how to think through
new business, new product, new era, new market dynamics, whatever. And the way that you do that
is physics of progress. And I lay this whole thing out and I'm super proud of it. And I'm
pitching it to my team. And I'm like, Okay, you're going to start with where, where are you trying
to get to? What's your goal? You're going to identify the obstacle between where you're at
and your goal. And like, why won't I just automatically achieve my goal? Then you're going
to come up with a experiment that you can run a thing that you can do to try to overcome that
obstacle, you're going to do that thing, you're going to look at the data, figure out whether you
made meaningful progress, you're going to then re-inform your hypothesis about how to overcome
that obstacle, and you're going to start over. And one of the guys in my team goes, that's the
scientific method. And I was like, is it, I actually don't know the scientific method. And he's
like, Yeah, that's the scientific method. And I was like, Okay, that makes sense. To me, that's
it. The reason that I called it the physics of progress. And again, just completely acknowledging
it's the scientific method. But the reason that it occurred to me as a physics of progress is
because it is the only way to make progress that you're not going to know, you're just taking
your best guess, you know, you know, where you're trying to get to, you have a guess about what
the thing is that's stopping you, you're going to try something. The problem is, and when I teach
this, the big issue is, when going back to what I was saying is truth, truth is perception,
interpretation, and reinforcement. And at the moment you look at the data,
so I ran my test to see if I could overcome that obstacle, I get a result. When I look at that data,
I'm bringing my perception, my interpretation, and my reinforcement to that. And it's not that
I'm evil, but I'm not necessarily going to see what's true. And this is where science then begins
to break down. It is the right answer. Like it is what we need to do. As far as I can tell, it's
the only way to make progress in anything. But what we're living through right now is that moment
of the interpretation, the perception and the reinforcement causes you to see something that's
not actually there. You're, you're looking at the world to a fun house mirror. And so
what, sorry, one second, let me bring this all together. The one thing that I live in perpetual
fear of is that you have the guy, the doctor, you'll probably remember his name, I don't,
who was like, you know what, I think after you do an autopsy, you need to wash your hands before
you give birth to somebody. Yeah, Semmelweis, yeah. What, Semmelweis? Semmelweis, yeah. So Semmelweis
goes and tells people this, hey, I think this is causing the death of mothers. We really have to
start washing hands. People make fun of him, lambast him, drive him into an insane asylum
where he dies before it's discovered, oh yeah, germ theory, he was right. And so that's how
wrong this goes. I don't think that humans have changed. I think that we still have that reaction
where it's like, it, it, they're not necessarily even trying to be mean. It just doesn't make sense.
And it, to them, and it would cause like all these changes and, and we don't really know that this
is a thing. And so to me, the people that want to make the decisions, they lack the, the humility
to recognize the odds of me being wrong, border on 100%. Not, not on everything, but when you take
everything in totality, you're going to be wrong and you just don't know about which things. And so
if I'm thinking, okay, you've put forth your idea, we need these, we need experts, we need an
institutional response that we can trust. My thing would be the closest thing I could imagine to that,
you have to red team, blue team, you've got to get somebody like RFK Junior who really believes
this is a problem. This is really causing autism. And then you debate it with data that you predict
ahead of time. So it comes down to, okay, what was your prediction? What did you think was going
to happen? Then you run the experiment. Did it actually happen? Yes or no? And then both sides,
because when you look at the data is the point at which you're most likely to make your errors,
bring your biases, all that. You look at the data, and then you try to go with the consensus. Now,
I don't see any way and climate is a great one to talk about. I don't see any way to stop all kinds
of pro long debate. But then you hope that when there really is evidence that it starts to be
just one by one, all the detractors start falling away, it just becomes too self-evident.
And then you really can get something approaching consensus in action.
Yeah. Well, so let me see if I can just isolate what we're disagreeing about here because
you seem to be imagining that we can have an information landscape, whether let's say it's
on a platform like Twitter or YouTube, where it's as flat as, but there's as much,
no one's doing anything deliberate to tune the signal to noise ratio, right? Because to do that
would be to be biasing it based on there. But honest answer is, I think people are hyperbiased.
So that is factored into, while I didn't talk about that, that is factored into how I think
you have to let the ideas battle so that the wiser, more eloquent fighters, and I think this is
probably a lot of some people's pushback on you stepping back somewhat exiting Twitter,
is they were like, you were the guy I counted on to be able to throw and dodge punches and bring
humor and all of that. And so we've lost one of the great fighters of this. And that gets hard
because I don't see myself as talented enough in the idea of public opinion to do that. So you
have to have people that can dismantle these ideas. Like I've seen you on stage do this,
particularly with religion, which is outside of where we're at right now in the conversation,
but where you have been, you've been funny and it's shareable. The clips themselves are amazing
because they hit and they shake you up, but they're easy to transmit and remember. And so
when you find a great orator, Douglas Murray is another guy that can really do this.
That feels to me, and I know you've sort of, you keep saying I'm not the guy to think through
COVID or whatever. And I'm like, ah, actually, so as long as it's people who are disagreeing
respectfully, who care about truth, you, you have to, as the individual care about truth,
and you have to not pride yourself on being right. You have to pride yourself on identifying
the right answer. But I, I have a feeling that experts almost need that external panel of people
who are like, I'm not invested in this, but I know how to think through novel problems.
Here's how I'm parsing this data. Let me ask you really pointed questions, give me your feedback,
and then I'll triangulate on an answer. That feels like in the reality of how ideas win at scale,
that feels the closest to true, but it requires a people be able to say whatever the hell they want,
that they don't get booted, kicked off, silenced, whatever. Well, but so let's just take that last
claim first. All of these platforms have to kick people off for specific violations of their
terms of service, right? You need some terms of service. As far as I know, even 4chan has a
terms of service, right? I think maybe 8chan doesn't, but like, if you want to be more extreme than
4chan, you have to go somewhere else. So I will, I will give you barriers must be put up now,
where we put the barriers we are going to. But the moment you concede that, right,
then you recognize that there's absolutely nothing novel about what Elon is doing on Twitter. He's
he's just biasing it in a way that he likes better than the previous bias, right? So he
brought Kanye on knowing he was an anti-Semite, and then Kanye did something, and he kicked
him off because he realized, okay, I can't really have this happening on my platform.
And so it is what I mean, he's, he's cozying up to sort of queuing on lunatics, and he may not
even know who he's signal boosting. He's just like, you know, glad handing somebody who said
something he thought was clever, send him a meme he thought was clever. And he's actually signal
boosting somebody who's just odious in their ideological commitments and in their line about
everything under the sun, right? And I'm not saying Elon's actually paying attention to all that, but
he's, he's doing something incredibly ad hoc and sloppy. And it's still not free speech absolutism,
right? Free speech absolutism just doesn't exist. It doesn't even exist on 4chan. I mean,
as far as I know, I have this on just good faith because I'm never on, I don't think I've been
on 4chan ever, but I think it has a terms of service, and that's why 8chan was spawned. It's
like in protest over, you know, the puritanical control on 4chan. So what you seem to be recommending
is the 4chanification or the 8chanification of everything. And what that would be in my view,
if that were happening on YouTube and TikTok and Twitter and, and, you know, threads and everywhere
else, it would be a maximally, maximally noisy, uncivil space, right? So it's just, it would get
hard in so far as you achieve that ideal of no libtard institutional bias, right? You just
were just going to let it rip, right? Anyone with anything to say gets equal chance to say it.
What you, what you're going to have there is just the, just pure cacophony, and it's going to be
harder and harder to find the signal and the noise, right? So the moment you admit that,
you admit you're in the business of favoring certain voices over others, platforming and even
de-platforming people when they're, when they, when they prove on the 10th infraction that they're
truly beyond the pale and just committed to, to making a mess, right? And what I experienced,
so, and, and so my leaving Twitter was just, you know, it was much more of a personal decision.
It wasn't a decision that, it was just, it was just a decision about how I was going to spend my
time and attention ultimately. But I mean, the reason why I didn't see a benefit to my staying
there is that it's just the wrong space in which to try to have a conversation and a conversation
that converges on anything useful on these kinds of topics, right? Really any polarizing topic.
Because I tried, I mean, it was the only, it was the only social media platform that I ever used
personally. I mean, I'm on others, but those are just marketing channels and I never see them.
But it was really me on Twitter. I was really trying to make sense to people.
What I was getting back was just this, you know, tsunami of bad faith attacks and craziness.
And what was actually exploding was not just, you know, headlines that were false, but like,
you know, in the, in the final case, it was a clip of me on another podcast, which was genuinely
misleading as to what I said in context on that podcast. But it simply didn't matter because
the clip itself seemed to be, it seemed intelligible enough, it seemed clear enough,
what I was saying within the clip, that people just, they didn't even want to hear that there
was a context. Is the Hunter Biden thing? Yeah. Yeah. By myself. So they, so they didn't like
literally, they didn't want to hear and even like no one has the bandwidth to go back and find the
context for the thing that they just reacted to that just, you know, primed all their, you know,
satisfied all their salt and sugar and fat receptors. And so when you ask like what my
principles are, my, my, my general principle is to be very on guard for doing that sort of thing
myself. So like even when there's somebody who, who I know I understand and revile appropriately,
somebody like Trump, I'm still on guard for the clip of him that is actually misleading, right?
And, and I will actually defend him as much as I, you know, find him indefensible. I have,
I've burned a fair amount of, you know, reputational capital now over here on the left
by defending him on specific points when I felt that the attack on him was just based on lies,
right? So like when he, when he gave a press conference after Charlottesville and said that,
you know, there were good people on both sides. And he seemed to be saying in that clip that
the neo-Nazis are good people, right? And that was spun from, that was spun politically from,
you know, everyone from Biden on down, it was spun by the New York Times. I mean, literally,
I would have, if I had to bet 95% of the commentary left of center still thinks he was praising
neo-Nazis in that, in that press conference. And yet within the, within the context of the press
conference, it's absolutely clear that he's not doing that, right? He says, you know, within
20 seconds of the clipped piece, he says, you know, I'm not talking about the white supremacist
and the neo-Nazis. I'm talking about other people who were there for, you know, who were just worried
about, you know, monuments getting torn down. And so I think we have to acknowledge that there's,
we're in a, a media landscape now where people are being reliably misled by clips that, I mean,
so the underlying ethic here is that when people are arguing in a partisan way,
they don't really care what their enemy has said or meant to say. What they want to do is
they want to hold them to the, the worst possible interpretation of what they said and make that
stick, right? And the game is just, see if you can make it stick. See if you can, you, and so,
so I've long, I've made this claim, you know, for years now, and this is, you know, this is more
based on what happens to me from the left as opposed to the right. I mean, the example we're
talking about now was sort of defamation coming from the right. But, you know, I've made this
point before, and this is, you know, it's an inconvenient point to make because like even
this can get clipped out to my disadvantage. But it's just, it's worth saying because
this, this shines as bright as possible a light on what everyone is doing. And many, many good
people are doing it kind of unthinkingly. But so I'm living, I've long known for at least eight
years or so, I've known that I'm in an environment where if I say on my podcast, black people are
apes, white people are apes, we're all apes, racism doesn't make any sense, right? There are some
considerable number of people who will clip out me saying black people are apes or make a meme,
black people are apes, Sam Harris, right? And they will export that to their channels
with apparently with a clear conscience saying this is fair game, right?
And that's the kind of people I was dealing with on Twitter. And that's the kind of the person who
clipped that clip from that podcast is exactly that sort of person. And that, and he was being
signal boosted by lots of other people we could name. And so I just recognize that this is a,
it's just the wrong occasion to try to have a conversation with people. It's built into the
dynamics of the system where people are incentivized just to dunk on everybody, however dishonestly,
and then move on. And you know, the, and part of the pathology I saw with Elon taking over the place
was not so much what he was doing to the place as its owner, but just how he was behaving personally
on the platform himself. I mean, he was doing the same thing. He, one of the first things he did
after he took over Twitter was he spread this meme about Nancy Pelosi's husband, you know,
after the hammer attack on him. It's like, it's not what it seems. It could have been a, you know,
gay trist gone awry. And he linked to a website that had an article to that effect.
This was a website which during the 2016 election claimed that Hillary Clinton was dead and that
a body double was, was campaigning in her place, right? So Elon links to that as a source, right?
In front of, at that point, probably 110 million people amplifying a completely crazy conspiracy
theory that is getting spun up in QAnon circles. And then when that gets pointed out to him,
just how, just how wrong all of that was and how irresponsible it was, he never corrects the record,
he never apologizes, he never changes his, his appetite for doing that again. In that case,
I think he just deleted the tweet, right? And moved on. And so it's, it's like even people who
reputationally have a tremendous amount to lose by behaving that way, you would think,
are goaded into behaving that way because of the mechanics of the platform. And so,
you know, for me personally, I simply don't understand how people
have audiences that will still follow them after they prove that they don't care to make any of
these distinctions. I mean, I mentioned Tucker Carlson, the fact that behind closed doors,
he's saying that Trump is a demonic force. And then in front of the camera,
he's basically messaging to Trump a stand 85% of the time, you know, in a very supportive way.
I don't understand how, like in front of my audience, if that, if a similar thing were revealed
about me, my, my audience would, would just completely disavow me. I mean, I was like,
there'd just be no, it would be, it would be a complete breach of trust with my audience. And
that's, that's the way I think it should be. But Alex Jones, I mean, like Alex Jones has
an audience of some tens of millions of people in the aftermath of Sandy Hook, right? You know,
when he's like, he has lied and lied and lied about Sandy Hook being a false flag, fake,
you know, confection of the, of the Obama administration. You know, they're all crisis
actors, the kids never died or like, I mean, it's like, I don't, I don't know how he, he,
how deep those claims went, but some version of that, right? Like this is none of this is as it
seems. He created immense harm, demonstrable harm with all the Sandy Hook families. I mean,
these are families, in many cases, they've had to move home. Some have moved homes 10 times
since he started spreading those lies about them.
All of this gets kind of, you know, forensically documented at trial, he gets a billion dollar
judgment against him. How does he still have an audience? Like, like, who are these people who
are still listening to him? Is that legitimately confusing? Because that one to me is very clear.
He's entertaining. All these people are mentally ill or like, what is this?
Because I don't look, I don't know Rogan well at all. But Rogan keeps having him on. I don't
know if he has recently, but he thinks he's funny since then. But yeah, that I don't know. But
certainly my take is that people find him amusing. He's funny. And he's gotten enough weird stuff
right that people are like, all right, look, he missed. I don't, I know literally nothing
about the Sandy Hook stuff. So I'm certainly not defending that. I'm just saying I understand
the phenomenon. The phenomenon is that, that this is, this is an age where the algorithm is
a big part of the piece of information. And so the reason that certain people become the voice
is that they also are able to speak in a way that people find really compelling, entertaining,
engaging. And so that person is going to keep going. Alex has a way of delivering information
that's zany. It's crazy. It's over the top. You can't believe it's real. He's funny.
He's fun to make fun of. And there are enough things that people like, I mean, he gets memed,
right? It's like, another crazy thing that he said five years ago just, you know, came true.
And so he's, he's a bit like the, the Simpsons in that people would be like, yo,
Simpsons 12 years ago predicted the same. You're like, that's insane. So same thing with Alex.
But now that doesn't mean that he isn't a destructive force. It just means that it's
very easy for me to see why he's entertaining enough that people are going to keep going back to him.
You can reboot your life, your health, even your career, anything you want. All you need is
discipline. I can teach you the tactics that I learned while growing a billion dollar business
that will allow you to see your goals through. Whether you want better health, stronger relationships,
a more successful career, any of that is possible with the mindset and business programs in Impact
Theory University. Join the thousands of students who have already accomplished amazing things.
Tap now for a free trial and get started today. I'll grant you the entertainment component,
especially in his case, but in, in, in his case, perhaps to, to a lesser degree,
but certainly in Tucker's case, there's this pretense of, I'm just giving you honest information,
or I'm just calling it as I see it. Like this is just, you will like, what you see is what you get.
There's not like, this is just, this is, there's a fundamental integrity to, to the message. That's
what his audience seems to think they're getting. And then we know that he is a completely different
person behind closed doors. I can explain that one as well. So you've got, all right,
we, we all know they, I'm just giving you what a dyed in the wool red Republican is going to say.
They shouldn't be looking at his private communications. And that's a way of not
taking the, the knowledge on board. Correct. I'm not saying it's the right way. I'm just
saying this is how he keeps his audience. They shouldn't be looking at his private communications.
This is exactly what Trump has been warning us about, people getting into your private life,
governmental overreach, all of that. And then of course, like he's going to fight for Republican
values. Even if he thinks that the leadership isn't great and that he'd rather have somebody else,
he knows that lying on behalf of a guy that he thinks is demonic, but at least he's Republican,
is better than, than the, the outright dangerous, I don't know what words they use for othering
the Joe Biden camp, but like that's how it's going to be that you would much rather, I mean,
it was like when Trump said that, yes, I'm a bully, but I'm a bully for you. It was like, okay,
sure, Tucker's not perfect. Sure, he lied to present things well, but I'm kind of glad he did
because I need him to represent our side. We have to win against the other people.
Like there's this real escalating sense of like, we have to win the stakes really matter.
And in fact, going back to that idea of if, if I look at, so I watched the whole interview that
you did where you were talking about the Hunter Biden laptop. And so I'm watching with an open
mind and just like, just a ton of respect for you, Sam. I cannot stress it enough before,
after this minute a year from now, I just can't fathom not really being blown away by how you
think and the, all the meditation stuff, you seem sincerely to want to help people. So it was very
easy for me to go, okay, I think I get where you're going with this, but for me to interpret that
moment the way that you did, and this is why I said, this is about stopping evil. To me,
your interpretation of Trump is that either because he's just a clown on the loose, a dangerous troll,
or because he's actually nefarious, either one has the same outcome. So I doubt you split real
hairs with that, but he cannot be in control of this company. It is, I don't know if you go all
the way to existential, thank you, this country. I don't know if you go all the way to existential
or not, but it's like, it's so high risk finger on the nukes asking questions like,
why do I have less nukes in JFK back in the 60s? Like this is, this is as close to unhinged
narcissism as you're going to get. It's too dangerous. We are now at a point where, hey,
everybody, yeah, fine, I will step forward and say that there should be a small group of people
that just keep us from this lunacy. And if that means that we have to not necessarily
bury the laptop, but you cannot let it come out right in a moment where it could possibly sway
the election and put that psychopath back in. Now, that's where I say that is way more dangerous.
And now we can at least talk about what we disagree on. To me, the authoritarian nature of
like, I and some small group of people have decided that Trump is that dangerous and have
decided that this laptop revealing at this moment would be dangerous to the Democratic candidacy.
So whatever it is that we have to suppress, we have to suppress it. Now, that,
I'd be clear about what my position actually was at the time and what I was actually
saying on that podcast, not especially well, my position was it was always a hard judgment call
at that point. And we're talking about 10 days before the election, this thing comes,
it's clearly an October surprise, foisted on us, timed intentionally to be hard to parse
right before the election. It's just like, we're on Rudy Giuliani's timetable. It's like,
he, this is like here, this is when I'm going to show you the laptop, right? You got 10 days to
figure this out. It was meant to detonate politically at that point. And we already
knew what happens in the 2016 election when 10 days before an election, you say, hey, we got
Anthony Wiener's laptop and now we're reopening the email investigation to Hillary Clinton.
We saw that that was her poll numbers by the hour went down. And whether that was decisive or not,
who knows, she was unelectable for other reasons. So we had a, so my claim at the time was
it was totally understandable for journalists to say, we're not going to be hostage to Rudy
Giuliani's timetable here. We have an election in 10 days, first do no harm. Let's just give this,
let's wait for three weeks to figure out what's true about this laptop, right?
We can't figure out whether this is a Russian forgery. There's reasons to be concerned that it
could be Russian disinformation. Who knows what's going on here. We should not be in a rush to create
a disaster here politically. And so I viewed each of these platforms having different choices to
make. So journalists could decide, do we want to focus on this now or do we want to give this a
little more breathing room? That was an editorial choice that I completely understood and still
a genuine hard call. Then you have Twitter deciding not only to, whether or not to amplify certain
things, they decide to de-platform the New York Post that had a journalist who decided to write
about the story, right? That was a very different decision and I think almost certainly the wrong
decision, right? I mean, again, understandable given the political bias of the people on Twitter
and given the genuine uncertainty as to the ground truth of the validity of the information and
where that laptop came from. And I think even in that case on the New York Post story, one of the
reporters who reported it out didn't want to sign his name to the article. It was the Wild West
over there in terms of actually doing the journalism. So in my view, it was a coin toss
as to what to do there. Now, if you raise the stakes more, right, you make Trump even more
sinister. You make the election even more tenuous. You make the information even more
dubious than the dials change. And so many of these decisions are not decisions you can make
categorically in principle. It really is this pragmatic balancing of just what is true and
what are the stakes, right? So I'll compare this to another case you spelled out earlier.
So you felt that it was obviously wrong to force people to get the mRNA vaccine for COVID, right?
Now, I would grant you, certainly in retrospect, that seems true, but if we change a few of the
variables, I think your ethical intuitions and certainly political intuitions would totally
change. So you make it a much more obviously effective vaccine that really does block transmissions,
like a sterilizing vaccine. You make it a much more dangerous virus. You make it a virus that's
actually preferentially killing kids rather than old people, right? So now we're in an environment
where you're deciding not to get vaccinated is putting my kids at risk, right? Do you get to
make that choice, right? And you might say, oh, yes, yeah, I should be able to make that choice
as my body, but dial up the deadliness of the pathogen, give us something like airborne Ebola
that incubates for a month. You don't know you have it and you walk around spreading it and it's
got a 75% fatality rate and it's mostly killing kids. No one gets to make that choice anymore.
I mean, then literally the cops come in and vaccinate you. And I would say that all of us
would agree to that. Again, that you turn up the lethality on the pathogen, you turn up the
effectiveness of the vaccine, you turn down the risk of the vaccine, give me a truly safe vaccine
where there's not even one documented case of vaccine injury, right? So then you just have to
be completely crazy to be worried about being vaccinated in that kind of environment. Then
it's just a no-brainer. Then we just don't tolerate a diversity of opinion because the stakes are too
high. It's a full-on emergency. Bodies of kids are being stacked up in parks, right? There's so
many of them, we don't know what to do with them. We've got these mobile morgues and we have a vaccine
that actually works and then we've got RFK Jr. saying, maybe you don't want to get the jab on
Rogan's podcast, right? That's the world I've been worried about ever since COVID. Like a
world where the truth is really clear and yet our media environment is so crazy that we can't
even talk about it. Again, the fact that something like QAnon is possible, right? The fact that we
could have a president who messages to QAnon favorably without disavowing any association,
right? When asked about QAnon, he says, well, they sure seem to like me. They seem like nice people,
right? This is a, I mean, some tens of millions of people, it seems. Let's say it's a hardcore of
maybe 3 million people, who knows? Millions of people who believe that the world is being run
by child-raping cannibals, right? If that is possible in the current system, you just have to
imagine what that would do when the stakes are truly high, right? When it's part of the machinery
of some decision-making. So I have a slightly different intuition on this. So I like to take
the hardest possible look at this thing and then see what I would do. So one, even if you dial it
up, it's airborne Ebola, it takes a month, you're walking around, dead kids are being stacked up,
I would still let RFK go say, I don't think people should get the jab. But having said that-
What do you mean let? Like, you would decide to have that conversation or you just think-
Oh, on my podcast, there should be no law against it.
But so I agree with you there. So where I hold the line with the First Amendment is,
yes, you should be able to be as wrong as you want to be, but we don't have to algorithmically boost
those errors, right? And if I have a platform, again, I'm creating a social media platform.
I don't want the Nazis and I don't want the people who are spreading lies about the current
pandemic that is going to get people killed. Where you and I break down is I am so paranoid that
people don't know what a lie is. And so the very thing, and this is why I brought up the founding
fathers before, the reason that I'm saying I want these people to be able to speak is because I don't
know who knows the answer and who doesn't. And so I need the information. Now, over time,
certainly for myself, I'll begin to discern who I think is a good faith actor and is really
thinking through this problem. And I get that there's going to be people that get caught up and
just the speed of it, it's hard to parse who's right and who's just entertaining. And that will
be very frustrating, especially if it's my kids that are being stacked up in the park. And I get
all of that. But I would also say that if you need those sort of wartime powers, this is Ebola,
it's spreading, the deaths are just absolutely outrageous. We have reason to believe that the
vaccine is working. While I wouldn't say that people can't speak up, I would be like, you are
getting vaccinated or you're getting quarantined in some way. And that would be horrible. And that's
really got awful. And it will have absolutely terrible consequences. But I don't want to say
that I can't see a world in which I look at it and go, that's the right answer. What I want to
talk about is what am I using to determine that that's the right answer? That's really the thing
that I want to talk about is how we think through these very difficult, very novel problems. And so
one of the things that I find interesting is you've got founding fathers and you've got religion.
So the founding fathers, to me, represent a shared narrative about what people ought to be,
what the US for sure ought to be in a moralistic sense. Like, how do you structure a government to
protect itself from tyranny? How do you recognize the individual people? What ought they be able to
pursue without the government being able to interfere with them? Like, what are those bright
lines that makes us Americans riding on the back of freedom and freedom of speech and all of that?
Now, of course, crazy, they're doing all this while holding slaves, but they put an idea together
that as you adhere to the idea, all that other bullshit starts to fall away. So that to me is
a structure of a system that grows better over time. So that's one element that it's an orienting
mechanism where live free or die, right? It's something people were literally willing to give
their lives for an idea that has fallen apart in a way that I don't clearly understand that
I would love you to talk to. The other part of this is religion. Same thing. It's how do you
know what is true? In fact, my I was thinking about this today. Tell me what you think. I think that
religion is the thing that allows you to establish your behavior patterns when truth cannot be
scientifically established. So you have religion for the millennia when you couldn't look under
a microscope to know about germ theory. So you just said, don't put these fabrics together,
don't eat pork, whatever. And ultimately, it was like, you knew you were doing the right thing
because it was written down in a book or told an oral story, and you either hewed close to what it
said to do, and you were doing the right thing, or you didn't, and you weren't. And so what I think
we're living through now is people realize, mm, religion doesn't hold that sort of gravitational
center that it used to, because we now do a microscope, and we can really see what the
religions were trying to get at. But it did give us a shared narrative that works well for people
that are headline readers that can't hold the nuance of the argument. And so they just need
10 commandments, tell me what to do. And so I know that I'm either in line or not. So now,
when you're looking at a global pandemic, we don't really know what's going, we don't know the
lethality, we don't know if you should get the shot or not. If I can point to religion and say,
to be a good Christian, you would get the jab. For this reason, I would draw a parallel with one
of the stories, then people do it. And now I get people to, of their own accord, out of a desire
to adhere to this shared narrative, they do it. And so you see how religion can be this incredible
boon, but in a modern era, with idea velocity, with hyperfragmentation driven by algorithms and
social media, and all of that. Religion is, I need you to speak to this because I don't know
the data well enough, losing its power, losing its efficacy, I don't know, it's lost something,
it does not have the effect that it used to have. And
well, I would also say it just doesn't address many of these use cases. So the religion doesn't
have a position on vaccines. I mean, there are some religions that might, I mean, you know,
Christian scientists would probably not get vaccine.
Don't you agree that if I'm a preacher, I find the story that I want to draw the parallel.
Yeah, but I think you could probably do it either way. You could be against vaccines or pro-vaccines
to depend on how you choose. Correct. But I get you to adhere by, I don't have to use the
authoritarian rule. That's my point. I don't have to do something top down. What religion
allowed you to do was keep the sovereignty of the individual, especially if you're talking about a
Christian religion, keep the sovereignty of the individual and yet get them to fall in line. It's
really pretty genius where whether you do it because you believe in America and so you keep
your freedoms, but you adhere to the mores that allow this amazing thing to exist that you're
proud to be a part of, religion serves the same function. But now as we get into weird, like,
cultish, new religion, wokeness, whatever you want to call it, something deranges.
I think, I mean, what you want are principles here. I mean, one principle is I think we should
be very wary of being driven by tribalism. Right now, it's not that tribalism is always in every
case pathological. I mean, I think there's tribalism we can play at for fun. I mean, it's
entertaining and it's not very deep and yet it can take up a fair amount of bandwidth and it's
fine. So you can be a fan of a sports team and we know what that looks like when you take it too
seriously. I mean, when you're like a South American soccer player and you lose the World Cup
or you commit an own goal or something and you literally have to worry about getting murdered
by your former fans, right? We know that it's gone too far. It's too much like religion in that case.
But in the general case, you can play at tribalism or you can be loosely identified with some
subculture and it can be fun and you can enjoy the diversity and the diversity can be somewhat
antagonistic even as it is, let's say, in sports, right? But it doesn't reach deep into
a person's psychology and social network and political commitment such that
they're making life and death decisions on the basis of how much more they like the Yankees than
the Red Sox. So, tribalism, deeper tribalism is, I think, something we just need to outgrow,
right? I mean, because the truth is not tribal. The truth is universal. Even specific truths
have some, there's some view from above where diversity of opinion is just a matter of our
ignorance and if we could really see those truths clearly, we would all converge on the same
account of reality regardless of our background, regardless of our language, regardless of,
I mean, we just don't, we don't have the right to be, to our provincialism anymore with respect to
our basic epistemological commitments, whether those are scientific or ultimately ethical,
right? So, I would say that it used to be the case that we could agree to disagree about how to
treat women in a society, right? Like, so, yes, if you're in Afghanistan, you don't let them get,
you don't let them get educated, you force them to live in cloth bags, you beat them if
they try to get out, you know, they can't be out in public without being accompanied by a male,
relative, you know, just, there's a list of taboos and most of them are killing offenses.
And do we just agree to disagree there? Well, practically now, yes, because we lost that war,
we're no longer there, we just don't have, we just, it's not worth sending our sons and daughters
to die to defend those girls. But the ground truth is, if you're born a girl in Afghanistan,
you are profoundly unlucky, right? That is just, that, and that disparity in luck should be calling
to all of us, right? Like, it's just not, it's just not a good status quo. Ultimately, if we
got our shit together as a species, some subset of the women and girls would not be forced to live
in cloth bags, as they are in Afghanistan at this very moment, right? So, ultimately, we will converge
and tribalism is precisely the wrong algorithm to use if you want to converge on the deeper truths,
whether they're scientific or ethical or, you know, I would argue even spiritual,
that we should organize our beliefs about reality and how to live within it, right?
And that's what we're trying, we should recognize that that's what we're trying to do. We're trying
to navigate in the space of all possible experience, individually and collectively.
And we're just, we're trying to figure out what to do next, right? This is politics, what should
we do next? We've got a hundred billion dollars to spend this year in the state of California,
or whatever it is, you know, I actually don't know what our budget is in California, but
we've got this money to spend, what should we do with it, right? And then we have diversity of
opinion and in some cases, you know, radical diversity of opinion about what is important and
what is even decent to focus on. And I agree with you that a basically free space of conversation
is the way we will orient and resolve those disagreements, right? So we need, I do agree that
in most cases, we need the conversation just to run long enough and to be
uncoerced enough so that most people most of the time can notice that the better ideas are
surfacing and the bullshit is being moved to the sidelines. But there are still, you know,
obvious cases where the topic is specialized enough or the knowledge you need to just get us to
have a valid seat at the table is deep enough that not everyone gets to air their opinion with, you
know, not everyone gets to air their opinion at that particular, in that particular conversation,
or if they do, we're all wise to just have very little patience for that particular opinion,
because it's just, it's obviously incredible, right? It's obviously, it doesn't have the person,
doesn't have the right background, they're not playing the language game appropriately,
they sound crazy, they have these, they're telegraphing their other ideological commitments
that are distracting and not convergent with the actual truth at hand. So it's like sort of,
you know, you bring Alex Jones to the physics conference, it's not going to take him too many
minutes to sort of disqualify himself as a expert, a relevant subject matter expert on physics,
right, or anything else. And so we live with that tension that, yes, it's in fact true that a Nobel
laureate on any given topic can discredit himself with his very next sentence, if the sentence is
obviously wrong, right? And somebody who knows basically nothing can be right in a debate with
this guy by just pointing that out, like you just, that doesn't make any sense, right? And it is true
from a scientific point of view that we don't, we take authority, scientific authority very lightly,
right? Like it's not, it's not good enough that you're a Nobel laureate, that's not the thing
that's going to make you right, right? And on some level, you're only as good as your last sentence,
right? Like even if you have a Nobel Prize. And that's how we, you know, so, you know, a Nobel
laureate is giving a lecture in, you know, again, it could be on his narrow area of expertise.
And at the end of the lecture, hands go up and it could just be a lowly undergraduate
who embarrasses him or her on the, again, not even on an adjacent topic, on the very topic
on which that person became an expert. And that is, that's, that's just because
truth is in fact orthogonal to any given person's reputation or educational and career achievements
or, you know, like, it's just, it doesn't matter who you've been, like we, it matters what you're
saying right now and why you're saying it and what, and whether it is connected enough to a
chain of reasoning and a chain of evidence that anyone should take it seriously, right? So that's
all true. And yet as a time saving device, if we have to figure out whether, you know, a certain
chemical is, is toxic, we don't want to hear from Alex Jones, we want to hear from the real
chemists, right? Yes, we don't want to hear from the chemists who are working for Monsanto if that,
if this is a compound that Monsanto is marketing that they stand to make a billion dollars on.
And we know we don't have good regulations that would force them to do the relevant toxicology
and really safeguard human health, right? We know that a lot, a lot of the incentives are
misaligned such that some of the time, even someone with the right educational background
is either lying or, you know, impressively self-deceived and we're getting bad information.
And this is, again, this is what I come back to. What we need in every case here when things matter
are institutions and regulations and procedures and, and, and alignments of incentives that we
can actually trust because they're trustworthy, right? Because they are actually reliably keeping
bad information out and, and surfacing good information. And I would admit that we have a
highly imperfect system, but the system we have is way better than no system, right? And I just
take a, it is very easy for people to see when you move it out of science and certainly out of
medicine and put it into areas of like, just like straightforward engineering, like, like on an
airplane, right? So like, there's not, people don't tend to be iconoclasts with respect to
engineering. Like when you get on a plane, you don't want to be doing your own research. You
don't want to, you didn't want to, you don't want your, you don't want to be doing Google searches
about plane replacement parts, right? You just want to know that the FAA has it, right? You want
to know that the regulations work. You want to know that the pilots for United don't want to die,
right? That they're not going to get on the plane if they think it's unsafe. You don't,
you want to know that the mechanics are not getting bogus parts because they can shave a
profit. They're incentivized. Like, you don't, you don't want a system of incentives where
we tell the mechanics at Boeing that if you can figure out how to get parts from Malaysia cheaper,
right? We're going to let you keep that pocket half of the difference. You know, if you save us
a million dollars, you get to keep 500,000, right? So get us a landing gear that, you know,
just came, that somebody 3D printed, you know, in another country, right? If we found out that
that was how we were incentivizing mechanics, we would go nuts, understandably, right? But
presumably, we're not doing that. We have to discover as a species all the ways in which
we're doing dumb things at a systems level, right? In institutions and in the, you know,
the systems of incentives that connect institutions, we have to defrag all of that such that
mirror apes like ourselves can be making, reliably making better decisions than individuals
can tend to make on their own because the systems are so good. And so again, this is not,
we're not going to solve this in podcast to stand, right? Or substack a stand, right? Like,
I'm not saying we don't want podcasts and substack newsletters, but I think what you
can do is, is delineate how to think about the problem because here's the, the last thing on
this. And then I've got so many more things I want to talk to you about. But I think part of,
because I agree with you, as you break down what it should look like, I agree with you.
The problem is that the example that you gave that I think really freaked people out was like,
the saying isn't going well with the timing of the Trump thing, the Biden laptop,
the Trump thing is so serious. I'm going to just real fast break the system to make sure
that this doesn't go forward. And that sets everybody's alarm bells off.
But I wasn't, again, just to be clear, I was not advocating to break anything. I said that
Twitter, Twitter was wrong to de-platform the New York Post.
Right.
The New York Times, I think, was probably, again, and I put it explicitly in these terms,
it was a total coin toss for me, journalistically, whether you decide to do a front page story on
the Hunter Biden laptop with 10 days left when there was, there were valid concerns that this
could be Russian disinformation. And you had the previous example of an election seeming to get
derailed by something similar.
But the second you say that there might be reasons, but somebody is making,
a human is making a judgment call, and certainly the way you presented is your take is,
if it were my call to make, that's probably what I would do.
I think that's the thing, that's certainly the thing that made me uncomfortable of like, whoa,
I, that feels like you're running a much higher risk scenario.
Let's make it even more realistic because now, what am I doing now with respect to the laptop?
Right. Like, I have not done a podcast on the Hunter Biden laptop yet, even yet.
Right. It's been, it's been now with us for years.
It's conceivable that I could. I mean, I still, I still, I still don't find the topic interesting
enough given the political environment that I care all that much. I mean, because for me,
it was a very straightforward calculation. Here we have a sitting president who I knew to be
unqualified in all kinds of ways, but the specific problem for me at that point was,
we have a sitting president who is not committing to a peaceful transfer of power.
Right. That was a five alarm fire politically. I mean, that was just, that was as, as bright
a line as I needed to say, this is an emergency. Right. This guy can, this, this is, now it's
not an emergency such that we could do anything to stop him. Right. I'm not saying that the New
York Times should have printed lies about him. Right. I'm not saying that it actually did not
require lying or even a shading of the truth. It's just, here's a guy who on multiple occasions
has been asked point blank on television, will you commit to a peaceful transfer of power?
And he, in so many words, he said, no. It's like, if I win, it will be, it will be a valid election.
Right. That's basically what he said. So let me ask, what do you think about
people want him elected still? Like he still, theoretically, as we're recording this, is the
prime contender for the Republican nomination. And that's, so that just to close the loop on
what I just said, that's why I'm not, among other reasons, that's perhaps, I haven't
thought much about it, but that is why I'm not so motivated to spend a lot of bandwidth or any
bandwidth trying to figure out what's so wrong with Biden and the Biden family. Right. Now,
I have no doubt there are politically inconvenient, embarrassing, even shocking things to discover.
I mean, certainly in Hunter Biden's life and in his behavior, I mean, that's,
I'm sure there's no end to embarrassment there. But even some degree of implication with
President Biden, is that possible? Is it conceivable? Is there something there that I just
haven't freed up the bandwidth to pay attention to coming out of that laptop?
I'm sure there are many people in Trumpistan who could speak for an hour about all the things
they think we know based on that laptop. But I certainly doubt some of that. But why am I not
motivated to pay more attention to that? Because just as you said, Trump could very well come back
in 2024. I don't think that I really, maybe I'm just not explaining it well. I don't think that's
where people get the friction. Where they get the friction is the sense of it's one of the earlier
questions that I asked. I think you either believe that the people can sort through this themselves
and figure things out and you put the trust in the hands of people. Or, and I think your position
is clear. And so tell me if I'm getting this wrong. So either the people en masse, just give me
the information they'll sort it out. Or we need experts, which people are going to read elites,
which is not a charitable interpretation, but that's how they hear it. Or we need a group of
elites that are better than us plebs and go figure it out. I think that's what they hear when you
say that. Now, I get what you mean about experts, but I know that even the most well-intentioned
expert has a propensity to be wrong, that I just feel like the mistake I would rather make going
back to my trifecta of evil, the thing I'm most afraid of is authoritarian rule. So in that moment,
I go, oh, God, these are both terrible situations, but I really feel like you have to put the hands
in the people. You have to leave it with them. If they let them see all the information, and yes,
I know it's calculated. But there is no seeing all the information, right? There is no
unmoderated, pure, just fire hose of information. I mean, the information doesn't exist
as a unitary object that can be contemplated in its totality, always in proportion to what
it is in fact, in reality. It makes me a little nervous. You do have, it is so specific, a laptop.
Maybe it's Russian disinformation. Turns out it wasn't. But maybe, but you have this thing. It
becomes so concrete and so tangible. I think that's why there's so much attention on that thing.
But so I just want to get to your principle versus my principle, because I don't,
again, I don't know that either of us are right. So my principle here is that, again, I mean,
I stand by everything I said on that original podcast. I just didn't say it especially well
there. But, and so people are genuinely confused about what I was recommending.
Can I say it so I know if I understand? Yeah.
That the, what was going on is it was a real emergency. You had a real emergency. You have a
president who was not committing to the peaceful transfer of power. Our democracy was truly at
risk. Our democracy is, is the most important thing in this scenario. A laptop comes out.
First of all, it could be Russian disinformation. We don't know yet. And so it would be,
it would be foolish in the, in the same way that if the Russian guy that sees the five nuclear
weapons getting shot at him, for him not to pause and go, this just doesn't make sense. I'm not
going to do it. In that moment, it was far wiser to not put this in front of the public,
but instead to go, the risk-reward ratio is off. Hold off.
Also because there was no rush. There's still no rush. Like again, I still haven't done it.
But I want to make sure, did I accurately convey how do you think through that problem?
But, but, but the crucial thing is people took up from that podcast clip, people took away the,
the impression that I was advocating that we lie about Trump, right? That we say that we felt
that way. So as somebody watching the whole thing, not the clip, the whole thing, I walked away
going, okay, I get where Sam is coming from. If you really believe that this is an emergency,
that this will disrupt, honestly, if, if all of that were true, emergency, he's going to steal
an election. It is going to jeopardize our democracy. And all I have to do is hide the laptop
or buy time, create a smokescreen. If I really believe that all of that was true,
man, I'd be very tempted. Now, it's just my obsession with this trifecta book.
If it's a sufficient emergency, you should want the guy assassinated, right? I mean, like,
it goes all the way. Like, if this guy's Hitler, well, then we all wish Hitler got assassinated,
right? Now, I don't think Trump is Hitler or anything like Hitler. So there's that there is
can you precog him? That's, that's where I get nervous. Like everybody's so quick to say that
he really is Hitler. And it's like, I know, well, I don't know how much harm he could ultimately do,
but he shows no sign of being ideological in any way. And he shows it shows no sign of
wanting to take on a kind of world building or dismantling some project.
And that makes my radar. People want what? People want him. So this may illuminate the
difference. So because some people want to elect him, I'm like, damn, is there something I'm missing?
And so because I know I could be flawed, I'm just like, then you have to let the people decide.
Well, no, you have to let the people decide. I would argue we still don't entirely know
what's up with that laptop, right? It's like, I know there are people who think they know, but like,
I don't actually know what sort of forensic analysis has been done of that laptop and how
reliable that is and what the scope of fraud is there really. And I'm still unaware of anything
that has surfaced from that laptop that is clearly a smoking gun that implicates Biden in corruption
in a way like there's new information coming out in recent weeks. I don't know what the relationship
that is to the laptop, but if there's a 20 megaton scandal in that laptop, it still hasn't reached
me and it's been over a year, right? But again, I default back to my original position, which is
the fact that Trump wouldn't commit to a peaceful transfer of power and we in fact didn't have a
peaceful transfer of power and he's now running again, that to me is so disqualifying that I'm
not inclined to do anything that could possibly increase his chances of getting elected, right?
So again, he's not Hitler, but I think he's someone who is totally committed to subverting
all the norms of our democracy for purely personal avarice and just his malignant narcissism.
I mean, he really is a pure case study in that. But again, not ideological, not especially ambitious
in any of the ways that somebody like Hitler or Stalin was, but it's so corrupting of our politics
and so destabilizing of the institutions we should care about in our democracy
that I think having him for a second term could well be a total disaster and it's just such an
awful precedent to have someone who didn't commit to a peaceful transfer of power,
basically saw to it that we didn't have one, worse still, really did try to steal the election
all the while claiming it was being stolen from him, right? I mean, the stuff he was trying to do
behind the scenes, the pressure he was putting on Mike Pence, all of that was a genuine effort to
steal an election he knew he had lost. I mean, his attorney general, people behind the scenes
got it through to him that he had actually lost and he was still willing to just bluff his way
back into the presidency. That's so disqualifying and should be so disqualifying from my point of
view is that, yeah, do I want to do three hours on just how awful Joe Biden is? No, right? Now,
I don't think Joe Biden should be running for president. He's way too old, right? He's obviously
passed as, not just his prime, it's just like, it's a disaster, right? And I think Kamala is,
I mean, I can't see a scenario in which she's electable. So if he dies or if anything happens to
his health, it's so catastrophic that he's no longer the candidate and she is, I think that's
just a red carpet rolled out for Trump or really anyone to become the Republican president.
So I think it's totally irresponsible and dangerous that the Democrats have put us in this
position that we're running Biden with Kamala Harris being his VP with no alternative,
really. I mean, maybe if he died today, then maybe Gavin Newsom or somebody would step up
and we would have a different race. But the fact that we seem to be running Biden by default with
Kamala Harris really set to some significant degree, half the country will be seeing her
as the person who's running because they plausibly wouldn't expect him to survive his term.
All of that's a disaster. All of that is well worth criticizing. I don't want to touch it
because what's the alternative? Like, I mean, if I could, if I saw an alternative
that I could advocate for, right, that would, could it all be effective? If I saw an upside in
criticizing Biden validly, then I would do it. But this is a pure pragmatic
case where I'm deciding, first, do no harm, right? And it comes exactly back to the, you know,
some fat people are healthy principle, right? If you're at a moment where
something really is going to turn on people getting their head straight around
diet and health and exercise and, you know, body image and the clock is ticking, right?
We have got 10 days to get this right. You know, it's like, and a lot hangs in the balance.
Do you really want to do a podcast on here are all these fat people who we've just tested them
and they're actually just, they're as healthy as any Olympic athlete, right? They got the right,
their lipids are perfect, their VO2 max is great, they look fat, but, you know, this is not what it
seems, right? No. And what about, let's do 100 podcasts on that topic, right? Which is what
people have done around COVID and ivermectin and mRNA vaccines, right? Like, you know,
Brett Weinstein literally did 100 podcasts in a row on ivermectin and mRNA vaccines,
right? As though there was no other topic in the world worth paying attention to.
That seemed, it made me feel like I was getting all the information. I didn't just
assume he was right, but it really helped me feel, and I watched a lot of those podcasts,
it really made me feel like, okay, at least somebody's talking about this. It felt like
pirate radio. And as we're talking, I think I now understand one, I think it's very important that
I love about you, that you say what you believe, and it doesn't matter whether I or somebody else
would love to nudge you in another direction. But truly, as somebody who thinks you're amazing,
I will just say that I think now, through this conversation, I realize what I want your particular
mind to do, because you are so good at this. What I would rather have seen is the, okay,
I'm going to look at this laptop and whatever it says it says, and I'm going to break it down,
and I'm going to explain all the stuff you just went through about Kamala, this crazy,
in no uncertain terms, I want them to win, but you can't hide from information. Let's just pull
this out into light. Let's pull Trump out into light. Look guys, in the final analysis,
the laptop is fucking crazy. It does seem to indicate that there's some connection to whatever
you find, right? I'm just, I'm riffing here, not saying this is actually what it says. And then,
but look, the Trump thing is a thousand times worse. This one feels like a real emergency.
And then I'm like, oh, that's the Sam that I know who's just like,
coldly dispassionate about this is this, this is this. But I am being coldly dispassionate.
I'm just, and I'm being completely transparent. You're being also strategic,
and that's the part where I think it gives people that sense of, but it's not, it's not a hidden
strategy, right? Like it's just very, I'm just telling you why I don't, I don't see an upside
in talking about certain things. Because again, there's, there are asymmetries here that are
really strange, but they're incredibly powerful. Like, so there's, can I tell you what the upside
about talking about it? But let me just add this one piece. There's,
there's almost nothing you can say about Trump that is true and awful that his supporters care
about. That's crazy. Right. So, and yet, so he functions by a completely different, different
reputational physics. And I think many people in that ecosystem do too. Like, again, I, you know,
I mentioned Tucker, it's like, he's not paying a penalty with his audience, the way I would pay
a penalty with my audience if similar revelations came out about me. And over here, you have somebody
like, you know, Barack Obama, literally it was a 48 hour scandal when he wore a tan suit, right?
I mean, like that was the level where he was getting dinged. You know, Trump is a completely
different situation. So it's someone, again, coming back to the FAT analogy, we know that
there's an appetite to eat junk food. We know most people, certainly most people who have not
already made it a habit to exercise, they're hard to motivate, they're hard to get into the gym,
you know, most people join gyms and then they lapse. Not everyone gets addicted to working out.
We know that there's a center of gravity to where people are stuck. We've got a problem with
something like 40% of Americans are actually officially obese and like 60% are overweight,
something like that, right? So it's like, we know that it is, it's hard to get through to people,
and even if you get through to them, it's really hard for them to change their behavior, even if
they decide they want to change, to make these changes. So then you have to ask yourself, okay,
just how sexy do we want to make the message that
some fat people are as healthy as anyone alive?
I get it, man, but there's second and third order consequences. So my thing is-
I'm not saying you lie about it. No, no, I didn't hear you say that.
I'm just saying like, do you want it to make your next, your next project is to get the message out
on that topic. Of all the messages, you could, you could be dealing with child trafficking,
you could be dealing with climate change, you could be dealing with, you could be helping people.
I'm arguing whether you should do a podcast about it. So if that's what people have been
pushing on you, not at all what I'm pushing on. They think I should talk to RFK Jr. They think I
should have platformed all these COVID skeptics. In fairness, I wish you would talk to RFK Jr.
And I'll maybe give you insight into that. You probably already get it, but I want to outsource
some of my thinking to you because I think you think through the world in a really interesting
way. So rather than me have to go do the research in RFK Jr., I'd rather you do it.
So it's a factor of trust and just I, I look at other humans, people may fucking hate this,
but I look at other humans as like a really specific AI. And I'm like, okay, I'm a specific
AI to other people, right? But you're a specific AI that I use to think through certain problems.
And so RFK just happens to be one of the problems I would love to see your AI go,
think of now you have to go do all the research and all that shit and combat him and bring the
expert and all the things that you don't want to do. But that's why people would love to see you
do that. And so that's where I'm like, uh, the Sam Harris AI that I want to use just gives me all
the facts about that laptop gives me all the facts about Trump. And then just as more persuasive,
that Trump is going to be the bigger problem. Again, because I, but I know that certain bells
can't be un-rung, right? And that's the part where speaking for myself, I'm like, uh,
and I know, but I, but I know that there's, there's super stimulus stimuli, right? Like,
I know that if I got on my podcast and said, my daughter has a vaccine injury, right? And
I don't care what you think about me. I'm not, she's never getting vaccinated again.
And I'm done with all this, you know, vaccine. Like, that's not science. That's not like, like,
it doesn't matter if you get 10 people, 10 prominent podcasters to tell 10 different stories
just like that. That's not, and that's not a sampling of the data space, right? And yet it is
so powerful, right? It's so, and so you just have to, you have to, you have to be aware of
the rhetorical effect of kind of shining the light of your attention on certain things. And
you have to, you have to be aware that though you are making a, you are going to make a best
effort to keep this information in proportion, right? Or honestly convey the proportion that
you think in fact exists in reality. If you frame it a certain way, or even if you, if you
speak about two things in the same context, that project becomes impossible. Like, you just, you
just know that people are going to come away thinking, you know, I forgot the details of
that podcast, but I do remember that, you know, that vaccine is just dangerous. Like Sam Harris
said, it's just dangerous. I get it. You know, I get it. So my takeaway is just, I don't know what
comes of it. I think it's always, it's always better to say what is true. And there's true,
so I would filter, I totally agree with you, true and useful is the filter for me. I mean,
that's, it's like the vendor is not, truth is just too big. I mean, the Venn diagram, the circle
for truth is so vast that we can't possibly. But useful to what? Useful to making sure Trump
doesn't get elected is where you spin people out of control, which fine. You're in, in this,
you have been, I think, hyper consistent. I understand your position now completely.
Right. And now my only thing is, I think you already understand this, so I can just wrap.
I think you know why it bothers some people. Well, let's talk about those people. It certainly
bothers the people who don't understand how shocking and untenable it was to have a sitting
president not commit to a peaceful transfer of power. Like they, like there are people who just
don't even know he did that or don't even don't think it mattered. There are people who think
that January 6th was a non-event, that people who think that the election was actually stolen
from Trump. So there's like lots of confusion around all this. So those people, so some numbers,
some percentage of those people are just frankly confused. And if they had the right information,
they would see it the way I do. Most of those people are essentially in a personality cult,
right? There is a pure expression of tribalism. It's not Republican, it's not establishment
Republican tribalism, but it's a populist awakening on the right, which is not the right we are used
to, and it's not even conservative in many respects. So that's why I refer to it as like
Trumpistan, but it's a kind of personality cult, which yeah, I can't reason with those people.
I've said enough, like if they want to understand what I think is true, there's 20 hours on my
podcast where I explain what I think is true about all that, and they're very likely not going to
agree for reasons that impressively resemble sort of the birth of a new religion. It's like
me talking to Muslims about how the Koran is probably not the direct word of the creator of
the universe. Like we're not going to agree, right? Like I lost them in my first sentence,
and so does the Christians and Jews and everybody else.
So you mentioned AI. One thing that AI could in completely destabilizing everything else,
it could somehow resolve this very much in my favor, in that what it might do, let's forget
about existential risk and the other deeper concerns, but just it could in the near term,
could so fully pollute our information landscape with just fake information, right? So deep fakes
and fake journal articles and fake sources to things that people will write seemingly totally
compelling articles about and everything, mRNA vaccines and everything else, and they'll be
sourced with stuff. None of it exists, right? It's just a pure confection of AI gibberish
that we might all have to default to just very straightforward old school gatekeepers of information,
otherwise we're going to recognize that the internet is completely broken and we just don't
know what's real. So like in a world of endless deep fakes, I'm really going to have to rely on
the New York Times or Getty Images or Apple or somebody with just way more resources than
I'm ever going to have on my own to tell me what's real. If I see video of Putin saying
that he's just launched his tactical nukes, right, or he's going to do it tomorrow at four o'clock,
and I have to worry about a world, and I think we do now, and if we don't now,
it's four months from now, we're going to have to worry about this, a world where basically
anyone who wants to can produce a perfectly compelling video of Putin that will be undetectable
by me as a fake, what are we going to do with that? I think we're all basically going to declare
something like epistemological bankruptcy and just say, I don't know what's true anymore.
I'm not going to react to this video. The fact that Elon tweeted it, and it's just raw video on
Twitter, or it's got, it came from, it aired on a Dallas news station, a local news station,
and it's like, I just have to wait to see what the real gatekeepers say about this. I'm going to
give this 24 hours before I even think I know anything, and how am I going to know anything?
Is it going to be me with my blockchain algorithm that got democratized by either that I read about
on some blog where I am now figuring out whether this video has the right watermark,
so it's got digital provenance, or I'm just going to, very likely, there's going to be a
few institutions that prove that they can figure out whether a video is real. Now, maybe this
particular use case is going to be fully democratized, and we're all going to just have a plug into
our browser. So one, I think that the way that it will really play out is the platforms that show
video and images will build into their infrastructure, the ability to read the blockchain signature,
and so you'll very quickly know, like, is this authentic from the source, and then the other
part will be a community notes like function where people can say, yes, it's real, but here's the
context that you need so that you're not manipulated. Now, both of those speak to the wisdom of the
crowd and the right place for something to be truly democratized. But the crowd, the LLMification of
the crowd, the crowd's going to get so much larger. Because you think there'll be a lot of bots?
Yeah. The crowd could be literally 99% AI at a certain point.
It will be tough if you're spinning up what Elon has done, and you charge whatever,
$8 or $9, it's suddenly a bot farm. You almost know what he's doing then, right?
Like what, it's like 500,000 people are paying for Twitter and out of 300 million?
Yeah, but when you think about what defenses we have when things really start to break,
right now they think he's just being dumbass and he shouldn't have bought it, and so they're not
going to pay it just because they're stubborn. But if they realize, oh, he actually wasn't
fucking around, the bots really are a problem, and by spending $7, I can verify that I'm a real
human and now we're back in business, then I think people are far more likely to do it.
But I think the avalanche of fake things that are coming are going to come in so hot and so fast,
and it's not just going to be people like me and you of thousands of hours of us out there.
People have already cloned my voice. You can hear me speaking in Portuguese and I think Italian.
I didn't do it. Somebody else did it, and it literally sounds like me. So that's going to happen,
but it's also going to happen revenge porn, where a disgruntled boyfriend makes porn from his ex
girlfriend and it is indistinguishable. And so everybody very fast is going to have a reason
to care. Now the moment I worry about the whatever six to 12 months it will take to embed the
infrastructure and each of the things to read the watermark and to say this is real, not real,
and to filter out things that aren't real, but that will, barring that sort of naked year,
you will very rapidly, because it will be so detrimental to just each individual,
people will adopt that technology, I think pretty fast. I just worry that this all happens
right in time for the 2024 election. Yeah. Yeah. I'm worried about that too.
Seems like the right time frame for it. It's crazy. A year of a year of
chat GPT or GPT-4, maybe five, and yeah, no, it's 2024. It could be all too interesting.
How do you think about preparing for that? How do we get ready?
Who's we and what is ready? Americans, so that we're thinking well through the problem.
Well, I hope that, I mean, I can imagine this is a major priority of people currently in government
that we're doing everything we can to ensure that the election is run in such a way that
there's the least opportunity to worry about election fraud. Now, I don't think election fraud
is, I think most concerns about election fraud are generally imaginary, but I think we need a system
where there's just no scope to worry that the election was not run properly.
The fact that we can't figure, the fact that we're finding that that's so hard to figure out
to the degree that we are, I'm actually not close to current efforts to
shore all that up, but I got to imagine, I mean, that has to be the number one priority.
Whatever happens on election day, we should not have a significant number of Americans
credibly alleging that the election was stolen. That's just so sanity-straining and shattering of
democratic norms that it's just, we have to get over that hurdle and we have to stay over it.
There can't be some new concern that surfaces that you can hack or voting machines. That has to
be, the integrity of elections has to be the paramount concern. If we solve that, then at least
we have, okay, then we're at the mercy of whoever we ran and whoever won. There, I just think you
if Trump is in fact the candidate, I think we have to, I think it would be a terrible precedent
to reward someone who's behaved as recklessly as he's behaved and as dishonestly as he's behaved
with a second term in the White House. I mean, it just would be insane that we have,
if in fact we have a majority of Americans who would want to see that happen.
Do you think long form podcasting could change the landscape of who gets nominated?
Yeah, because podcast, I mean, many podcasts have audiences that are larger than any other
form of media. I mean, certainly Rogan's does.
By the country mile. Yeah, but again, but I think Joe and everyone else in a similar position,
even at whatever fraction thereof, anyone with a significant platform like that
needs to be more responsible than most people are tending to be. Again, it's like,
I mean, Joe may think he's just shooting the shit with friends, but he's actually not. He's
educating or miseducating tens of millions of people with on every topic he touches,
right? So there's a responsibility that comes with that and it's not, so I don't think Joe has been,
I mean, I think he's been
less careful than he should have been on specific topics. I mean, I think that's definitely,
it was true during COVID and it's true, it's been true on certain political points, but
I mean, genuinely, generally speaking, I think his heart is in the right place and he's not,
his format is such that the people who are going to be, I mean, people have a,
are given ample opportunity to discredit themselves in that context, right? So there's just,
but I do think he's, if he were going to take seriously the impact he's having and can have,
I think he'd be more careful on specific topics than he has been, right? And I think it would be
a good thing for him to be more careful. And then there are people who have similar platforms
who, like Elon, who I think are being totally reckless, right? And I just think his behavior
on Twitter has been unconscionable in how he has amplified bad information, pseudo information,
lives, and denigrated real information. And it's just, and it's not, again, I don't put this on
him, it's not in a systematic way, it's just in a reckless way. He's not even paying attention
to what he's breaking or what he's signal boosting. It's like he's not,
it's just, there's, it's like an adolescent attitude toward the safeguarding of real things.
It's like, you're like, like we have, we have a world where the difference between
are succeeding in this common project of, you know, building a civilization that works
and are failing is, I mean, like that gulf is so enormous. And given, and given that basically
all of our problems are the result of failures of human cooperation. I mean, like everything
that's just not an asteroid that's, you know, that's, you know, gonna cross our, the path of Earth.
And even there, even with an asteroid, an Earth crossing asteroid, human cooperation is the answer
to that problem. It's like, like there's almost no problem we could have that in the limit we
can't, I mean, if it's compatible with the laws of nature for that problem to be solved,
I think our understanding the problem and collaborating in its solution is going to solve
it. Now it may not, you know, conveniently may not, we may not have the time we need to solve it,
right? Like if we find out about an asteroid and it's, you know, 15 days away, we don't have enough
time to get up there and divert it, right? But if we had 15 years or, you know, 30 years, we,
presumably we would have the time we needed to solve this problem.
Have you read Ian Bremmer's book, The Power of Crisis?
No, but I, I mean, I've spoken with Ian, I mean, I think I probably spoke with him before that
book came out, but he's been on my podcast several times. So I have the gist of his thoughts on this
topic. Yeah, so he unnerves me a little bit. Adam on the show and he was great and I was very honored
to do it, but it unnerves me a little the idea that we need some sort of crisis, what he calls a
Goldilocks crisis that's big enough to be really devastating, but not so big that we can't overcome
it. I hope that's wrong. Yeah, I mean, I don't, I don't think we need that. What I'm saying though
is what we need are, we need adults in the room and we need the most powerful, we need the luckiest,
most powerful, most influential, the people who command the most resources and the people who
command the most of, of our bandwidth, right? The people who command most human attention at the
moment to behave responsibly, right? Elon is not doing that. And again, I'm not talking about
the decisions he's made as CEO of Twitter. I'm talking about his behavior on Twitter, right?
It's just, it is, it's very Trumpian, right? It's just, it's just, it's like all for the
lulls, right? It's just, he's just shitposting. He's just spreading memes. He's just fucking around,
but he's touching real things. Like, you know, when, when he speculates that his, his former
head of trust and safety is a pedophile, right? And just kind of freewheels on Twitter about that,
he completely deranges this guy's life. I mean, I think this, I think you all were off,
had to move as a result of all the death threats he got, right?
That's, it's, it's complete, that, that is completely predictable. I mean,
the reason why I thought Trump should have been kicked off Twitter long before he was
was not because of his politics or how I viewed his presidency or anything. It was,
he was doing this on Twitter. He was, he was singling out specific citizens for abuse
when it was absolutely predictable given his platform and given the nature of his fan base.
It was absolutely predictable that those people would then have just excruciating
security concerns, possibly for the rest of their lives, right? It's just, it was just like
death threats and people doxing them and people showing up at their houses and at their kids'
schools. And it was just going to be, they were just, they were just, it was such a massive fuckover
of every one, every single person he mentioned by name and he knew this, right? And he had to know
this. Elon has to know that about anyone he puts on blast on Twitter. He's got whatever,
130 million people following him. And some percentage of those people are crazy, right?
Guaranteed to be crazy, right? 1% of any audience is crazy, right? So he got 1% of 130 million
people. You've got, and I would, and I would bet it skews worse than that in, in his audience,
frankly. And it certainly would be skew worse than that in, in Alex Jones's audience, right?
Alex Jones, at a certain, if Alex Jones didn't know it initially, he knew it ultimately that he
spent, I think it was at least a year putting the Sandy Hook families on blast, knowing it was
documented what was happening to them, right? Given the craziness of his audience, given the craziness
of the claims he was making about them, we can't have the most powerful connected people in our
society, certainly not someone like Elon, who can decide whether or not to put satellites over
Ukraine, you know, in the middle of a war, right? Just fucking around the way he's fucking around
on Twitter. I get that he is what he wants to do. My point is, if he had an ethical compass,
he wouldn't want to do it. So how do we get that? That feels to me, honestly, like the thing that's
missing. We don't have an anchor anymore. We don't have a national story. We don't have a religious
story. We have hyperfragmentation, algorithms pull us into these super narrow little niches.
How do we get a unifying dogma? I just did an interview yesterday, in fact, where I wanted to
compare and contrast Andrew Tate with Marcus Aurelius. And it's pretty interesting in terms of
when you really look at their sort of mirror images of each other. You've got one guy narcissistic,
totally self-obsessed, sees himself as the greatest to ever do it, whatever it might be.
Then you have the other guy who's reminding himself, don't become purple-dyed, you know,
so that you think that your royalty has the guy walk around whispering, remember one day you're
gonna die, like just always looking at the ways that he could be fallible and not letting the
power go to his head. And you've got right now kids really looking up to somebody like that. I'll
let Andrew Tate be a stand in now that the potential allegations or the allegations hanging over his
head, but he represents like the flashy, tough, fast cars, access to women. That's what I want.
I want to have that kind of fast, easy fame. And then Marcus Aurelius is about being a good
person, being a decent man is extraordinarily difficult work that you have to focus on every
day. You do it in the shadows, you do it when you're alone, and that just doesn't get the airtime.
And so given that reality.
Yeah, but so there you're making an argument for, which I totally agree with, for signal boosting
Marcus Aurelius in whatever way you can. And when you meet some semblance of a Marcus Aurelius
sort of person, that's the person you want to give a platform to. That's the style of argumentation.
That's the obvious ethical compass. It would be way better for the world
for Elon to be much more like Marcus Aurelius, right? It would be better for Elon, be better
for his life personally. But that aside, it's like that would be, to model that would be so
much better, objectively better for everyone involved. Like those are the virtues you want to
spread. And yes, it's the androtatification of everything that we're suffering under. And I think
in large measure, the business model of the internet has something to do with that. I mean,
the fact that we anchored it all to ads and to the dynamics of viral spread.
But it's also true that in any, I mean, even if it was all subscription and you get what you pay for,
you need, things still need to be entertaining. It's like you can't just be an eat your vegetables
culture. So you need, we need captivating stories and we need it to be fun. So in Elon's defense,
he would say, just get a sense of humor and just say, this should be more fun
than it is. If it's not fun, it's not worth it. The line between fun and real ethical
transgression is, I mean, it's not always immediately findable in real time, but
it's usually pretty clear, right? And there's a kind of callousness. There's a kind of just
not caring about the casualties that is so obvious in most of the cases, most of the examples I just
gave, right? I mean, it's frankly, so obviously, I don't know Tate. I don't know whether any of the
allegations against him are real. And, you know, and maybe he's going to grow up at some point.
I mean, oh, he's what, he's 35 years old, maybe 20 years from now, he may be a very different
sort of person. But right now, he's obviously an asshole, right? It's like, I mean, his ethical
center of gravity is just so displaced from what it should be to be a valid model of successful
manhood for that you would want, you know, 100 million teenagers in America to be following.
It's just like, it's just, yes, he needs to read Marcus Aurelius. He needs, like, there's just,
he's not messaging any, I mean, he's messaging some wisdom, like the wisdom of getting things
done, the wisdom of getting out of your own way, the wisdom of realizing the dynamics of competition
between people and just, you know, take and protecting yourself, right? Like all of that.
But it is so self-directed. It's so selfish in principle. He is so selfish. He's so narcissistic.
He's so turned inward. It's so, there's such a, an ambience of bullshit about, about him, right?
Like just, it's all spin. There's no self-reflection. It's, it's the superficiality of what he cares
about. It's like there's no awareness of the deeper project of living a, a, a durably happy life
where you have real ethical engagement with the world, with important causes, with people
where you're, where you're, where you care about other people, really, and even care about other
people more than you care about yourself in many instances, right? Where your, where your happiness
is born of, of making others happy and reducing unnecessary suffering, right? Where it's like,
where compassion is, is really what animates you. It's like, there's none of that. I mean,
I haven't seen all his stuff or even much of his stuff, but I've seen enough
to know that the kind of the center of the message is like, you know,
if you check these boxes, if you've got a Bugatti and you, and you can fuck as many women as you
want, you've basically solved the problem of being a man, right? Like that's like, like, there's no
way you're doing much wrong if you've checked those two boxes, right? Like that's just bullshit.
It's just, I mean, it's not only bullshit. It's completely backwards when you're talking about
what's really worth caring about and prioritizing in this life. I'm not saying that you, that wealth
isn't important. I'm not saying that relationships aren't important. I'm not saying that status
isn't important. I mean, there are very few people who can sort of get past the,
the general concern about status, right? So status is very high leverage with respect to
people's sense of their own well-being and whether their lives are, are, are working. You know,
the story they tell themselves at, at four in the morning is very, is very likely a reflection of
how they feel they're, you know, they're functioning in some kind of status hierarchy.
I get all that, but, you know, like my status hierarchy includes so much more than Bugatti's and,
and hooking up with, with new women. And in fact, it doesn't, like, if that's what I was doing,
I would be convinced I had just gone off the rails, right? Like, so it's just,
you know, nothing against Bugatti's, but it's like, I don't want one, right? As if by magic,
I don't want a Bugatti. You know, it's, it's, so, yeah, I would agree with you. There's something,
something has gone wrong in our culture that we don't have a long list of people who are very
much like Marcus Aurelius, each more captivating than the next, who are getting their own reality
TV shows, who have figured out how to, I mean, or forget about just the media, I mean, look at
the, the, the 2024 presidential campaign, right? Like, where are the, the shades of Marcus Aurelius
to choose from, right? Like, how, how is it that we, I mean, I'm not the only person to have marveled
at this, but how is it that in a nation of 340 million people, these are our choices, where
we've got this laptop from hell, you know, waiting to discourage all of these completely
unseemly relationships that, you know, the president's son has spun out in, you know, in, in
multiple countries. And we have to worry about some scandals, you know, wafting out of that and,
you know, destroying his, his prospects for, and his prospects are only important because
he's what's, he's the, the precarious object put in place of a former president who
truly desecrated the office of the presidency. I mean, just, he literally shattered the most
important norms we have in our democracy. I mean, I would, I don't know what to put
above a commitment to a peaceful transfer of power. I mean, it is the, you know, I mean,
Ronald Reagan, you know, who people right of center, you know, used to care about,
single that out as just the, the kind of the central miracle of our society that we, that we
had that, you know, with all, whatever else is happening and whatever the depth of our
political differences, the fact that we could rely on a peaceful transfer of power every four years,
right? That was an absolute miracle. It's the thing about us that is most astounding to
all these other societies that can't manage it, right? In any generation, they either don't
even have a system that even purports to manage it or even having one, they can't keep that together,
right? We haven't had that problem historically and yet we have it now and we had it last time
because of Trump. How do we begin to unwind this stuff? So if there's something, it seems
something broken in culture to me, I think culture is downstream of the individual.
That was why I wanted to contrast the two different people. What that got me thinking about is what
is the animating philosophy of everybody's life? And I think for most people, they never take the
time to define what their animating spirit is. They don't have a life philosophy. They're just
engaged in the day-to-day river of algorithms that sort of pull them along and confront them with
the things they need to do, the things they find funny, the things that they find out raging.
But when I really stop and think about what people need to do, I come back to the thing that
Jordan Peterson has been circling around. This has been really interesting for me.
So Jordan goes on his dad arc when he really first burst onto public fame. I was completely
blown away by how much he was helping people. He then gets sick and he comes back and he's
super religious and I don't know what to make of it. And for a long time, I was very confused.
And then I started thinking, he might just be ahead of his time in that what I think he has
his finger on is that there is, all of us have a God-shaped hole inside of us. You have to fill
it with something. And what I think, and I'm very much putting words in his mouth, but what I think
Jordan is putting his finger on is the Christian text is the way to anchor people to a set of
beliefs and values so that we have something that we can point back to so that in times like these,
where people are going astray, you can point out, does your behavior make sense? Yes or no?
You think yes because you're getting a bunch of likes on Instagram. That's ridiculous.
You should think yes because you're healing close to the words of the Bible,
which are really deep mythological stories about the truth of the human condition.
Now, again, I've not spoken him about this. I don't know that he would agree with that assessment,
but that's my gut instinct. Unless he really now is like, I am a believer, but he even publicly
tweeted at Richard Dawkins and said, basically, he was, I think, saying something about atheism,
and he was like, this is a mistake. I will debate you any time about it. So even if he
doesn't believe in the literal word of God, he is really convinced that it is a necessary thing
to help people orient themselves to a life well-lived.
As you know, Jordan and I have debated this topic of ad nauseam. I think we had four
public debates. We did two or three podcasts, and then we had a bunch of live debates that were
fun. I don't know how much his thinking has changed since. Then he got sick, and then he's
probably, I'll take your word for it. I haven't seen much of his stuff of late, but-
When was the last time you guys connected?
Well, I was on his podcast, certainly during COVID,
but it's probably been at least a year, I think, since I've connected with him anyway.
Maybe there was an email or so, but I don't think it's- I would be surprised if it's thinking
has fundamentally changed. I mean, yes, as you say, he thinks that religious stories, and in
particular, a Judeo-Christian story is really indispensable for western civilization, and we
should recognize how much we owe to that story. It's in the absence of that recognition that you
have this eruption of weird political commitments on the left that seem to have a kind of religious
fervor. I think there's a bunch of half truths in there that I would sort of agree with, but
generally speaking, I think that's just a mistaken diagnosis of our problem
for a bunch of reasons. One is- I'll break this into kind of two layers.
The most important thing I think to recognize is that stories aren't good enough. We need more
than stories. What genuinely ails us is, at a level psychologically, that
isn't remedied by just having a consoling string of thoughts to think again and again and again
a story to tell yourself, a story to tell your kids, a story to have them pair it back to you,
a culture of stories that just ramifies all of these ideas. That's not good enough. It's not
the thing that allows you to recognize the real sacred depth of the present moment. It's not
the thing that you encounter when you really know how to meditate or take the right psychedelic at
the right moment with the right guidance, with the right set and setting, and have a real breakthrough
into a landscape of mind that transcends your sense of egocentricity. To really get over yourself,
to really be available to self-transcending love and connection and ethical commitments
is a deeper move than any new set of thoughts is going to engineer for you. It is, in fact,
it requires an insight into the superficiality of thought itself. You have to recognize what the
mind is like prior to thought, prior to identification with thought, prior to
being continually spellbound by the voice in your head that is telling you one thing or the
other, is telling you you're great and everything is working perfectly, or is telling you a failure
and nothing worked out. On the relative level, on the level of being identified with thought,
it matters what story you tell yourself. It's much better to feel like everything's going great,
if in fact it is, than to feel morbidly and masochistically self-critical and self-doubting
and depressed. You can get a lot of leverage from stories, but you can't get the thing you
really want to get at the end of the day spiritually and contemplatively and ethically
by just telling yourself a new story. That's the deepest claim I'd want to make. The baby in
the bathwater of religion that we should want to save, what it would take to really be like
Jesus, what it would take to really be like Buddha, that's not a matter of endorsing any
particular story. There's a deeper engagement with the reality of the present moment and
just the mechanics of one's own attention that's required for that.
In addition to that, even if we were just concerned about stories and having the best stories,
the best stories are not in the Bible. The Christian story, the Judeo-Christian story,
is not the best story. It's not the most life-affirming story. It's not the clearest
ethical compass we can engineer. In fact, it has its moments. If you have a
Jeffersonian a la carte attitude toward the Bible, yes, you can get some great wisdom there,
but it is also chock-full of modernity annihilating bullshit, and you have to
push all that away. You have to find some principle by which you would disavow that stuff.
The very real hatred of homosexuality, literally homosexuality is a killing offense in the Bible,
and nowhere in the New Testament does it cease to be a killing offense. In fact,
it pretty clearly is in Paul's letters. Even the most basic
religious ethical test of sanity, slavery, what's our policy on slavery? You don't get
a good one from the Bible. That is as pure a defeater of ethical omniscience
as you could ask for. Is this the best moral document we have? Let's check the index. What
does it say about slavery? Oh, it gets slavery wrong. There's no way it's the wisest book we've
ever produced. That's where we are with the Bible. That's quite inconvenient for Christians
and Jews who really want to make that tradition, the soul repository of wisdom for us. I think
what should obviously be true to us is that every book we have, the Bible included, the
Koran included, was at some point the product of merely human insight and intelligence.
People wrote all of our books. We do not have a single book that was not written by a person,
leaving chat GPT aside. All we have is the totality of human insights and human conversations
to draw from. What traditionally religious people seem to recommend is that we limit ourselves
to the insights and conversations of a previous age. Whether you want to walk that all the way
back to the 7th century or 1500 B.C., or 1st century A.D., that depends on which religion
you favor, or some people will just want to go with Elron Hubbard. We'll go with the guy with
bad teeth whose driver's license we can literally inspect, but he's compelling enough for us to
just stop there. He got it right in Dianetics, and we need to look no further.
What I think should be obvious is rather than feel like we're entitled to any kind of religious
provincialism, we should just want the totality, and very much in the spirit of what you were
recommending earlier, we want the totality of human insights and conversations available,
and then we want to just see what survives contact with reality. We want to pressure test it in each
present generation in the presence of new technology. What is going to give us
guidance? What in our prior conversations gives us real guidance when we decide to build more and
more powerful AI? What should we believe about the totality of everything that's been said before,
its provenance? What equips us to make a truly wise decision in the present with respect to
this emerging technology? I would argue that you get close to nothing in the Bible to equip you
to actually navigate this appropriately. Again, we have these challenges,
some of which are quite foreseeable, but some of which aren't, some of which has come out of the
blue, and we just have to recognize that all we have collectively is conversation by which to
navigate. Again, I do think it's helpful to continually view all of this collectively and
also just personally as a navigation problem. We're constantly faced with the question of what
to do next, what to physically do next, what to do next with our resources, what to pay attention to
next, what to talk about next, what to think about next, what kind of laws to write next.
We're constantly tacking in the wind and
all we have is human insight and human conversation by which to do that. Persuasion is
important, understanding the dynamics of all of that is important, but to default to some prior
century and to say that these are the last words that are relevant on the deepest questions of human
life. They can never be improved, they can never be superseded by anything. All of their internal
contradictions are something that we have to pretend to have worked out. In most cases,
we're better off just ignoring them because who can understand the mind of God? It's like,
well, let's default to mystery there and the unknowability really of truth there,
but no, there's very specific truths we can know. I guess homosexuality, no, that's forbidden.
We know that. View it in terms of software. We know we have to keep improving it.
Culture is software. Culture is an operating system. We know it's continually
showing its bugs. We know it's continually failing us. We know it's throwing up new challenges that
we kind of emergent behavior that we have to correct for. We can't just say this 2,000-year-old
legacy code is perfect. It so clearly isn't perfect. It was not perfect at the time.
It was possible at the time to know that slavery was wrong. It's not like 2,000 years ago,
everyone thought slavery was okay. No, it's just the people who wrote the Bible thought slavery
was okay. It was possible to be wise enough as a human being. You brought up Marcus Aurelius.
There is so much more wisdom in his meditations. I'm not saying they're perfect. They're not
everything. There is so much more wisdom in that book than in most of the Bible. There's so much
less wrong with his meditations than is wrong with most of the Bible. If you're going to take
one book to guide your life, you could do a lot worse than Marcus Aurelius. It's so modern in so
many ways. It's like you don't have to go through this tortured translation, what he really meant.
He didn't mean keep slaves. It's a very modern set of insights into,
I don't know if he said anything about the ethics of slavery. Maybe there's something in there that
is inconvenient. The parts of Marcus Aurelius and Stoicism generally that are so serviceable
and so modern is that there's this basic insight into your mind being basically all you have.
I mean, whatever you have in the world, whatever you have in your life, whatever you're being
confronted with, the layer of experience is mind. What you do with your attention, what you choose
to focus on, how you choose to frame the thing that seems to have happened in the world,
that is the cash value of the world and of your life in it is what it convinces you to do with
your mind. If you can just seize those reins deliberately, you can be happy in objectively
terrible situations. Conversely, if you fail to understand anything about those mechanics,
you can be miserable in objectively wonderful and truly fortunate situations. You can have all
the luck in the world and not enjoy any of it. Do you ever worry that given that all that we
really have is our mind and attention, that AI ends up coming along and playing the role of God?
It focuses your attention, it tells you what to look at, it makes sure that you feel X, Y, Z way,
but that it ends up being able to either through culture or something far more individualistic,
it ends up being able to shape your values. Oh, yeah. I'm very worried about
the deepest questions of the AI alignment. I think that's a real problem. I'm amazed that
there are many people fairly close to this technology who either don't think it's a problem or just
figured that out last week after working in the field for decades. I'm truly mystified by the
people who don't think it's a problem. As you might have heard, I had Mark Andriesen on my podcast
and we debated this. He's super smart and super close to the tech and just thinks that
this is pure science fiction to worry about AI alignment. There's just no reason to worry about
it. I spent whatever it was, two hours talking in his direction. He's totally unconvinced by
anything I had to say. Everything I have to say on the topic is really, I don't think there's anything
original from me on that. I've just been very informed by people like Stuart Russell who is
also very close to the tech. He's a computer scientist at Berkeley, but then people who
more peripheral to the field who just have made very compelling arguments about the problem of
alignment like Nick Bostrom or Eleazar Yukowski or Max Tegmark. I mean, there's a lot of smart
people who are not actually doing the AI research, but then you have somebody like Jeffrey Hinton
who's the father of the most current tech of deep learning and he wakes up
three weeks ago and realizes we've got a problem on our hands. I don't understand why that took so
long, but that aside, even in success, or even not reaching anything like a catastrophe of
misalignment, just our engagement with machines that are smarter than ourselves and the way in
which that can be deranged. I mean, there's so many examples of the way it could derange us,
but I recently rewatched the film Her. I don't know if you've saw that recently, but it lands
differently. Now, I forgot what I thought about it 10 years ago. I saw it when it came out, but
now it just seems like, okay, this is pretty damn interesting. It was not consciously a very
dystopian film. I mean, it kind of split the difference between dystopia and something more
benign, but you can see just imagine all of us. I mean, even the model of success here,
we all have a kind of a superhuman AI tutor who understands us better than anyone in our lives.
He understands us better than our friends or our spouses. It has literally noticed everything we've
paid attention to for years. It's followed. It's caught everything we've forgotten.
Oh, you said in that email that you were going to tell Sam X. You never told him. You want to
tell him now? It's reading everything you wrote. It's reading everything you read. It's doing that
to a billion other people fairly similar to you and drawing insights from them and then
propagating that back into its understanding of you. So it's understanding you in ways that you
can't even understand yourself. So now you're in dialogue with this thing. Now, I'm not saying
there isn't some good that could come of this. I mean, it's just imagine just being in relationship
to the smartest and wisest oracle you could ever have access to. That's what's not to love about
that. But then you just imagine, as in the film, her that we all have a different version of this
thing. And it's slightly different because we're different. So it's a funhouse mirror
and our culture is fragmented. We don't have a shared reality because the AI is tuning itself
differently. So it's like, I think Jaron Lanier gave this example once, not so much for AI, but
for just the disorienting capacity of social media. It's like imagine if Wikipedia was different
for every person who went and read an article there. You would go read the article on the American
Revolution and it's bespoke just for you, given the kinds of things you have signaled that you
like in the past. So no one has a common understanding of the world, really, because we're
all sort of drifting off into this conversation with more and more compelling information tools.
Again, if this thing coughs up a cure for cancer next year,
the pragmatics of the moment are going to be such I'm going to say, all right, well,
let's just at least acknowledge that we really wanted that cure for cancer. I'm really happy
we got that. I'm not so worried about the misinformation problem today, given that
I and everyone I know are now know we're never going to die from cancer. So let's get our priority
straight. But it really is easy to see how it can
bend us in ways that will not be functional. I hope we equip ourselves to realize that in
time as these advances roll out. No kidding. All right, man. I think even at the end of this
amazing conversation, we still have a lot of work to do in terms of figuring out what our
compass is, how to sift through all the information. There's no letting us off the hook. But now that
you're no longer on Twitter, where can people engage with you? Well, just waking up.com has all
my stuff on meditation and really applied philosophy. And SamHarris.org is my website,
so anything I do will be announced from there. So yeah, and if in the age of deep fakes, I mean,
this is one thing I've thought about it's like, at a certain point, if something hasn't come
from one of my channels, I don't think you can be sure that I said that thing or if it's me
saying it. And so it is with you or anyone else with the platform. I mean, it's really strange.
That's where I am. Awesome. All right, everybody. If you haven't already,
be sure to subscribe. And until next time, my friends, be legendary. Take care. Peace.
What we are our avatars of the one, the one awareness is exploring all of its possibilities
through different avatars. So somehow there is this field of awareness.
