Hey y'all, today we'll be talking about spinners. These things are really cool. Once you learn
about spinners, your life will never be the same. You'll develop a lingering, justified
suspicion that this world is not as it seems. And you might also develop a lifelong addiction
to physics. So, you've been warned.
To set the tone, I'd like to start off with a quote by the renowned mathematician, field
and knight, Sir Michael Atia.
No one fully understands spinners. Their algebra is formally understood, but their general
significance is mysterious. In some sense, they describe the square root of geometry,
and just as understanding the square root of negative one took centuries, the same might
be true of spinners.
Michael was an extraordinary mathematician, and if he of all people says that no one fully
understands spinners, then it's okay if we're a little confused when we first learn
about spinners. Spinners are confusing, frankly they're disorienting, and not particularly
intuitive. You know, if you tell someone there's a thing that you have to rotate twice to get
back to where it started, they might think you're a little insane. But really, the insane
thing is that spinners are not insane. They're mathematically coherent, they show up in our
most fundamental laws of physics, and they refuse to go away. Spinners are really at
the core of fundamental physics. I mean, look at the way function of an electron, for example,
or any fermion for that matter. If not for spinners, we wouldn't have the poly exclusion
principle, and so we wouldn't have chemistry. Matter would collapse, and the world would
be a very boring place.
So there's no way of restructuring physics in a way that you don't have spinners, and
therefore these strange, weird, little mathematical objects we do actually have to deal with,
and we have to work with, and we have to understand, where does this come from, what does it mean,
why do these things exist, and it's really mysterious.
Okay, but what is a spinner? Hmm. Well, in the last few videos, we've been developing
some of the basics of relativistic quantum physics, we've looked at Klein-Gordon, we've
looked at the Dirac equation, we've looked at an example of Dirac equation for the eigenstate
of a particle at rest, and while we've done that, we've seen that spinners have emerged
as the sort of two component complex numbers. But today, I don't just want to define spinners
as a pair of complex numbers, because that's not particularly geometrically insightful.
Instead, I want to show you an argument for why we should expect something like spinners
to exist in the first place, and we'll do that by exploring a very subtle thing about
the way objects rotate in three dimensions. That'll open up a crack in reality that we
can use to smuggle spinners into our imagination. Then after that, we can explore the algebraic
properties of spinners, we can see where the complex numbers come in, we can see how we
can draw spinners as flags, we can look at how they transform under rotations, and finally
we'll tie it all back into the Dirac equation and we'll talk about how this relates to
electrons. This video will hopefully answer many questions, and it'll surely raise many
more. Spinners are one of those things where the more you learn about them, the more wonderful
and magical they become.
Before we talk about rotations, there are a few vocabulary words that we need to borrow
from topology. These are homotopic, simply connected, and homotopy class. So imagine we
have a whiteboard, and we've drawn a squiggly loop. The loop is alive and sentient and
is feeling its way around the whiteboard. As it goes along, in each moment it takes
on a different shape, but it doesn't break apart. It can stretch and shrink, but it can't
be cut. And from one moment to the next, its topology stays the same. The fancy way to
say this is that it's evolving into different loops that are all homotopic. Homo is in
same and topic as in topology, so homotopic means that they have the same topology.
Oh, whoa, little guy's getting nervous. Eh, that's okay. Stage fright, you know, it's
understandable. Oh, there it goes, shrinking down to a point. It's a defense mechanism.
That's fine, you know, I'm a bit shy myself, so who am I to judge? Anyway, the reason our
loop was able to shrink like that is that there wasn't an obstacle or a hole or something
weird that got in its way. Instead, it just had a nice, smooth, simple space, so it was
able to shrink on down to a point. And that is our next vocabulary word, simply connected.
A space is simply connected if all the loops that live in the space can shrink down to
a point whenever they want to. But now what if we take our whiteboard and we drill a hole
in the middle? So now as the loop explores its environment, it goes around and it realizes
that it can't go into the hole and it can't escape the board, but it can still shrink
if it wants to, so no problems there. But now consider this little guy which was born
into quite a predicament. It's wrapped all the way around the hole, so it can't shrink
down to a point. When it's feeling shy, at best it can only become a small circle,
not a point. So that tells us that this space, whiteboard with a hole in it, is not simply
connected. So now think about this. The loop on the left can evolve into a variety of different
shapes that are all homotopic to each other. All the different forms that it can take on
are all a loop that lives between the hole and the edge of the whiteboard. Likewise,
the loop on the right can also evolve into many different homotopic shapes, but those
are all wrapped around the hole. And so you see here we have two different homotopic classes,
class in the sense of like a set of entities that all have something in common. So we can
say that the loops fall into different classes depending on whether or not they wrap around
the hole. And actually it's a bit more complicated than that because in this case you could also
have loops that wrap around the hole multiple times. And so we actually have a different
homotopic class for each number of times it wraps around. And so the winding number matters,
the number of times that the curve is wound around the hole that matters, but those are all
the homotopic classes of loops on the whiteboard. You can organize them just by specifying the
so-called winding number. And a curve that has a certain winding number cannot be continuously
deformed into having a different winding number. So you can stretch them and shrink them, but
you can't change the winding number unless you cut the loop which is not allowed. This hurts
the loop. Do not hurt the loop. Okay. By the way, in this context the loop can pass through itself
so we don't have to worry about the loop getting tangled up in knots and what are the different
kinds of knots and all that. No no, it doesn't matter. The purpose of these loops are not to
model like physical rubber bands, but just to tell us something about the nature of the space
in which they live. Oh, one more thing on this topic. Imagine we repair the whiteboard so there's
no more hole, but now it has the magical property that the left and right edges of the board are
identified with each other, such that the loop can appear to teleport from one side to the other.
So there's no longer a hole in the board, but there is this weird teleporting situation. So now
is this space simply connected? To address that question, we have to think about what it means
for the curve to teleport like this from one side to the other without breaking. That means that
each point on the left side of the board and the opposite point on the right side of the board
must be literally the same point. So we realize that this space is actually the surface of a
cylinder without the top and bottom circles. And so from that point of view, no, this space is not
simply connected because in addition to loops that can shrink to a point, we also have the
possibility of loops that wrap around the cylinder and those cannot shrink to a point. Now when we
look at those loops on the whiteboard, they look like weird teleporting lines, not loops. But when
we're looking at the three-dimensional view that really shows the nature of the space without any
cuts and teleports, but we see the real space, the real for real, like how it actually is, then we
can see that indeed this is a loop and it cannot be shrunk to a point. By the way, here again,
it's the same exact situation as before where we can also have different winding numbers and it
turns out that all the homotopy classes of loops on a cylinder can be organized simply by their
winding number. It's not a coincidence that the hole in the whiteboard and the cylinder have the
same set of homotopy classes. Because if you think about it, a whiteboard with a hole in it, well,
that's a CD and a CD is a lampshade and a lampshade is a cylinder. So therefore, whiteboard with a
hole in it is a cylinder. I love topology. You know the difference between geometry and topology?
In geometry, you take your ruler and your protractor and you draw lines and angles and shapes. In
topology, you take your ruler and your protractor and you throw them out the window.
Okay, so now we know about homotopy simply connected and homotopy class. We also know that if a
space seems like it has teleports from one side to the other, this might actually be a totally
continuous space with no teleports, but embedded in a higher dimension, such that you can actually
pull those points together. And now we're going to apply these concepts to the group of rotations
in three dimensions. But first, we have to specify what even is the group of rotations in three
dimensions. Let's say we have a cube and let's go ahead and stick a flag in it to make it really
easy to see how the cube is oriented. Now let me ask you this, if we rotate this cube, what are all
the different ways it can be oriented? And how can we represent that set of all possible orientations?
Well, there's a couple different ways of going about this and they're all basically the same.
But probably the easiest way is to notice that every orientation can be defined with some axis of
rotation and some amount of rotation around that axis. And this is known as the axis angle
representation. So what this means is that let's say we have some reference flag that's say pointing
up and in a certain direction, then we can get to any other flag orientation just by rotating the
reference flag some amount around some axis. This fact is not obvious, but it is true. It follows
as a direct consequence of Euler's rotation theorem. Okay, now let's introduce the concept
of an axis angle rotation vector. So what this vector is, is it points in the direction of the
axis of rotation, and its length is the amount of rotation. So here I'm showing a cube rotating
around a single axis, and you can see that as the vector grows and shrinks, the cube is rotated more
or less around that axis. And so if you think about it, what is the space of rotations in
three dimensions? If you wanted to categorize everything, how can we possibly come up with
some kind of space that encodes every which way a thing can be oriented? Well, it's the space of
all directions multiplied by the space of all lengths. But it's a little bit tricky because
it's not really the space of all lengths. You know, if you rotate 180 degrees around some axis,
that's the same as rotating 180 around the opposite axis. So actually what you want to imagine is like
a sphere where if the vector pokes through the sphere, by the way, the sphere has radius of 180
degrees or pi if you want, but when it goes through the sphere, then it ends up teleporting to the
exact opposite side of the sphere, and it ends up coming back in if you keep rotating it. See,
because what happens here, and here we'll just go along a single axis to make it easy to see,
but as the vector grows and grows, the thing rotates, it gets to 180, and at that point we're
going to map its rotation vector onto the opposite axis 180, and then we're going to keep rotating,
and that's going to keep coming in and coming in, which is like a lesser and lesser rotation around
that opposite axis, until finally it ends up back where it started. And so in summary,
the space of all possible rotations in three dimensions can be represented as a ball,
a ball meaning a sphere and also the volume contained within it, of radius 180 degrees,
where every point on the spherical boundary of the ball is identified with the exact opposite point,
such that if you go outside of the sphere, you seem to get teleported back through the other
side of the sphere. But remember, this is not actually a teleport. There's not actually anything
discontinuous happening here. This apparent teleport is just an artifact of the way we're
drawing this space. In reality, the space of rotations in three dimensions, ironically,
doesn't really fit in three dimensions. And that's not that weird, because if you think about it,
what we have here is an abstract space that represents every possible kind of rotation,
so that's a different kind of thing than the space that we're rotating within,
so it's actually not that weird that this space ends up having this kind of topologically
interesting character. But a lot of weird things follow as a consequence of that, as we're about
to see. What I want to show you now is that there are different kinds of ways to rotate an object
back to its original orientation. And that seems weird, because you'd think any way you
rotate an object back to itself, it should all be the same, right? There shouldn't really be a
meaningful distinction between how you go about doing that. But that's not actually the case.
So first, let's recognize that if we rotate an object back to its original orientation,
what that means in our axis angle space is that we're starting with the zero vector at the origin,
meaning no rotation, then the vector is going to go out and grow in some direction and it can move
around and in general it can do whatever it wants to do. It can teleport if it goes more than 180,
whatever the case may be, but in order to return to the original orientation, it has to come back
to the zero vector. So the space of all possible ways to orient an object back to itself is exactly
the space of all possible closed loops in this axis angle representation. There is one caveat
here, which is that when we look at loops in the axis angle representation, we should think of it
only as going around the loop once, for reasons that we'll see in a moment. And so what we're
going to do actually tell you what, we're going to take a circular cross section, so not the full
three dimensional ball, but actually just a two dimensional disk. Now this is just a slice, it's
just a cross section, but it's easier to look at than the full three dimensional thing. And what I
want to show you about there being different ways of rotating things, all of that we can see by
examining this cross section. And then we'll see that the same exact concepts easily generalize
into the full three dimensional space. Now when we look at these loops, I'm also going to use a
color map that winds around the rainbow and then comes back to the starting color. And what that's
going to do is that's going to highlight for us the continuity of the loop. And in a similar spirit,
I'm also going to put a little dot on the loop that just goes around and around. And so when we're
looking at teleports, the ball is going to help us visualize which parts of the curve are connected
to which other parts of the curve. But remember, each of these loops only corresponds to rotating
an object once around this particular loop, okay? And that's important because as we'll see, there's
a difference between going around once or twice or three times or four times. And so there are some
subtleties there. So in our diagram, whenever we have a loop, think about it as that represents
rotating the object one time around this path in the space of rotations. Alright, well with all that
said, let's go ahead and start to explore some of the different kinds of loops we have in this axis
angle space. The first kind of loop that we'll look at is maybe the simplest kind. It's just a
small loop that stays totally within the boundaries of the diagram. And this corresponds to a wiggle
where the cube never rotates more than 180 degrees around any axis. It just sort of wiggles around
for a bit and then returns to where it started. As you can imagine, this loop is homotopic to any
other wiggle that stays within the boundary and passes through the origin because you can always
just imagine stretching it and shrinking it and exploring the entire homotopy class of wiggles.
And again, these loops can pass through themselves, so we don't have to worry about the question of
knots and the different kinds of knots. So aside from wiggles, what other homotopy classes might
there be? Well, consider a cube that rotates once along some axis. So it does a full 360.
That means that its loop is going to start at the origin, and then it's going to go out to 180
degrees. Then it'll come back in along the opposite axis. And finally, it'll return to the origin
again, having completed a full 360 degree rotation. Now that's a rotation, right? That's not just a
wiggle, that's a full rotation. And by the way, if you look at the loop, it might not look like a
loop, it looks more like a weird teleporting line, but remember the cylinder. And remember that the
apparent teleportation here is just an artifact of the way we're drawing the space, but it doesn't
represent any real discontinuity in the space. You have to imagine that the space is curvy in a way
that doesn't really fit in the dimensionality of your screen. And so the points that the curve
appears to teleport through are actually literally the same point. And in this diagram, all pairs of
opposite points are literally the same point. Now this kind of loop is a genuine rotation. I mean,
look, it goes all the way around. It's way more than just a wiggle, it's a full 360. And you can
see that it can't be reduced to a wiggle because there's no way of continuously deforming this
loop into a loop that doesn't cross the circular boundary without cutting it. Okay, so then now
we have at least two different homotopy classes of loops in the axis angle space, wiggles and full
rotations. So the space of rotations in three dimensions is not simply connected, which is
really surprising, right? You wouldn't necessarily expect that, but here we can very clearly see
that there are at least two totally distinct homotopy classes of loops in the space of rotations
in three dimensions. And you know, that's just a fundamental fact of reality. All right, well,
this feels similar to the cylinder example, where you had loops that didn't teleport,
and you also had loops that teleported, and then you had like multiple winding numbers of
teleportations. And so we might expect to find infinitely many homotopy classes here for the
rotations, depending on how many times the loop goes through the boundary. But surprisingly,
that's not the case. There are actually only two different homotopy classes. Consider, for example,
the fact that a wiggle is homotopic to an octopus. That's got to be a brand new sentence. I don't
think anyone's ever said that. You're hearing it first here, folks. Freshly minted sentence.
Okay, so the wiggle crosses the boundary zero times, but the octopus crosses many times.
And yet the two are totally homotopic, as you can see as we're going back and forth between
these two, you see their homotopic, it's all continuous transformations here, there's no
cutting. So we don't have one homotopy class for each winding number, like we did with the cylinder,
because now it's a different kind of teleporting boundary. The boundary is round and has a
different geometry, and so the loops can slip around and slip through the boundary. And what
that ends up doing is it means that you can always add or subtract two boundary crossings
by continuously deforming the loop. See, for another example, let's say we have a rotation
that teleports once. And by the way, each pair of points here, we're counting as one crossing.
Notice they're the same color, they're really the same point. It looks like two points on our
diagram, but that's an artifact of the way we're drawing a diagram. Okay, so this is one crossing.
But you can show that this loop is homotopic to a loop that teleports multiple times.
But when you do that with this loop, because it started off crossing once,
you can only ever get to an odd number of crossings.
And so, as it turns out, we only have two homotopic classes, and they're based on
whether we have an odd number or an even number of teleports. You can see this by noticing that
you can always pull part of the loop through the circular boundary, but when you do so,
you'll always pull two line segments at a time, because we're grabbing onto a closed loop and
that's just how it is. And by the way, you can see that this argument generalizes not just to
the circular cross section, but also to the whole spherical situation, because it doesn't
matter whether you're pulling a loop through a circular boundary or a spherical boundary,
because either way, the loop is going to come through two line segments at a time when you
pull on it. So this thing about the two homotopic classes, even though we've demonstrated that
for this circular cross section, it actually does hold true for the entire space of rotations
in three dimensions. Oh, and here, let's go ahead and introduce some terminology.
So we'll say that a loop is class one if it has an odd number of teleports,
and we'll say it's class two if it has an even number. This is easy to remember,
because one is odd and two is even. You know, we've now arrived at a checkpoint,
like in a video game, when you get to a certain level and your progress is saved.
You'll want to make sure that you're really comfortable with all of these ideas discussed so
far, because we're about to get algebraic, and it makes all the difference in the world if you're
able to see and to feel in your soul that the rotations in three dimensions are not simply
connected, but actually have two different homotopic classes of loops. I really want to
emphasize that this is a fundamental insight, a pivotal transformation of your worldview that
you have to go through if you want to study spinners. You know, even though we haven't
used any equations yet, there's a lot to think about here, and it may take a while to digest
these ideas. I know it took me a while, so it's worth meditating on these concepts until they become
second nature, because seeing that the rotations aren't simply connected, but have rather two
homotopic classes, is really the difference between your intuition holding you back and
pulling you forward. If you get this concept about two homotopic classes, if you really feel it,
then instinctively you'll suspect that maybe there might be some mathematical object that is
sensitive to the homotopic class of rotations. And so it would necessarily have to double cover
the space of rotations, and it might not exactly return to itself after a single rotation, but
instead might pick up some phase factor that alternates depending on whether it's a class one
or a class two, and so if you really get this, then your imagination is going to pull you in
the direction of spinners. You'll yearn for them even before you've seen what they are,
and you'll be prepared and excited when it comes time to actually write an equation.
Alright, let's get algebraic. So we have this idea of an axis angle representation of a rotation,
and now the question is, how do we actually work with this? What do we do with this? Let's say we
have some rotation vector, and we want to say, okay, I want to rotate an object in accordance
with that axis angle vector. What equation do I write? What code do I put in the computer? What
do I do? And I want to tell you about two different ways of rotating an object, the vector way,
and the spinner way. So I want to focus on the vector way first, and this involves rotation
matrices, and then later I'll talk about the spinner way, and this involves SU2 matrices.
So starting with the vector way of rotating things. Actually, you know what, here, first
we're going to go into two dimensions. I'll show you how to rotate vectors. I'll show you the
implications for this vis-a-vis rotating objects, and then we'll expand up into three dimensions,
but I'll use the two dimensions as an example to lay out some of the mathematical framework.
Alright, so imagine we're in a two-dimensional space, and we have a unit vector pointing along
the x-axis, and you know a unit vector along the x-axis is kind of the simplest thing you can put
in a vector space. So we're going to use that as our reference object because, you know, no need to
over-complicate it. Now in order to rotate this vector, what we can do is we can construct something
called a rotation matrix. In two dimensions, the rotation matrix about some counterclockwise angle
theta has the form cosine of theta, negative sine theta, sine of theta, cosine of theta.
And if you investigate the properties of this matrix, you'll find two things. First,
the inverse of the matrix is the transpose of the matrix. So if you transpose the matrix,
and if you take the inverse, that's the same thing, and another way of writing that is that the matrix
times the transpose equals the identity matrix. So that's the first thing, and that means that the
matrix is orthogonal. So when the inverse of a matrix equals its transpose, that is an orthogonal
matrix. And another thing we can see by inspection is that this matrix has determinant one,
because, you know, cosine squared plus sine squared is one. So our matrix is orthogonal and it has
determinant one. And so the fancy word for that is it is a special orthogonal matrix. In particular,
it's a special orthogonal two by two matrix. And so what we say is it is an SO2 matrix.
So a rotation matrix in two dimensions is also known as an SO2 matrix. Oh, by the way,
even though we're talking about SO2 in terms of matrices, the term SO2 can also refer to the group
of rotations in two dimensions in a more general sense, whether or not we use matrices to represent
them. For example, instead we could represent 2D rotations with unit complex numbers and complex
multiplication, because the group of e to the i theta's under complex multiplication is isomorphic
to the group of SO2 matrices under matrix multiplication. And that's a neat little connection
there between the complex numbers and the SO2 matrices. We'll see in a moment that there's
a similar connection between the quaternions and the SU2 matrices, but more on that later.
But for now, I just wanted to let you know that there are many equivalent ways to reformulate
all of these concepts. But I like the matrix representation because it's very mechanical
and transparent. Now, if we look at this blue thing swinging around, we realize that we can use the
set of all rotated blue vectors to visualize the set of all SO2 matrices. Because if we define the
unit vector along x as our reference vector, then each SO2 rotation matrix corresponds to one
and only one rotated unit vector. So if you tell me, hey, here's a reference vector, and now here's
a rotated vector, then by looking at how rotated the rotated vector is, I can figure out what SO2
matrix was responsible for the rotation. Likewise, if you give me an SO2 matrix and a reference vector,
then I can draw you the rotated vector. So there's a one-to-one correspondence here.
And this is true regardless of what reference vector we pick, no matter its length or orientation,
which you can prove to yourself by skeptically tilting your head and leaning back.
So anyway, we can see that we can loop through the SO2 matrices in a periodic way, passing through
each of them in order of increasing angle, and then ending up back where we started.
And so we can see that the topology of SO2 is just a circle, and that's why SO2 is also called the
circle group. So in two dimensions, we can represent an SO2 matrix, in other words a rotation,
with just a vector. But when we go to three dimensions, because of the extra degree of freedom,
we're gonna have to use a flag. And the reason we're using a flag is because if you just had
a vector in three dimensions, then that kind of points in a certain direction, but then there's
the question of how is the vector rotated along its axis? And so with a flag, we can see that flag
rotation angle, and so we can use that to represent the rotations in three dimensions. But before we
get into three dimensions, I want to show you how to rotate a flag in two dimensions. And basically,
the way to do it is just imagine the vector that points from the origin to each of the interesting
points on the flag. So the zero vector points to the flagpole base, then you have a vector that
points to the top of the flagpole, a couple of vectors that point out to the sides of the flag,
and then another vector that points along the flagpole to the point where the flag meets the
flagpole. So basically, we just treat those five points as vectors, and you apply a rotation matrix
to those vectors. And as it turns out, the whole pattern of the flag will rotate when you do this.
And that's because rotation matrices preserve the relative lengths and angles of vectors that
they're transforming. And so any lines drawn between two vectors, which is also the difference of
those two vectors, will transform in the same way as all of the other vectors. Now here's a view
where we offset the flag from the origin. So here, this really drives the point home that if you
have some shape made out of vectors, and you rotate all the vectors, you end up rotating the shape.
There's a couple of other concepts I wanted to touch on while we're here. For example, what would
happen if we scaled up our rotation matrix so that its determinant were greater than one? Well,
now it would no longer be a special orthogonal matrix, but it would still be a matrix and it would
still transform a vector field. And as you can see from this animation, if we take a rotation
matrix and scale it up so that its determinant is greater than one, then that's just going to expand
all of the vectors. Likewise, if we scale down a rotation matrix so that its determinant becomes
less than one, then that's going to shrink the vectors. And the reason I bring this up is so that
you can see the connection between a matrix having determinant one and a matrix doing a rotation
transform. Because with a rotation, we don't want to expand or shrink vectors, we want to keep them
the same length. And by the way, when you're transforming a vector space with a matrix,
it's not always a uniform expansion or contraction, sometimes you can also get a skew,
and a matrix that skews a vector space is not an orthogonal matrix, because it doesn't preserve the
relative lengths and angles of the vector field, you know, it squishes them. And so anyway, that's
another reason why we want to use a special orthogonal matrix for rotations, because they
don't skew the vector field. Oh, and also if we go ahead and allow the determinant to go negative,
you can see that an inversion of the vector field happens. And by the way, I know this looks kind
of three dimensional, but it's actually two dimensional, and it's getting squished along
one axis until it flips around and goes out on the other axis while at the same time I'm rotating
it. But anyway, the main thing I wanted to show you there is that an inversion can happen when the
determinant goes negative. So I hope these examples of growing and shrinking and skewing
and inverting vectors gives you some sense of why we want to use special orthogonal matrices to do
rotations. Okay, so now that we're experts on SO2 and rotations in two dimensions, we'll go ahead
and pop up into the third dimension. A lot of what we just talked about in 2D will transfer directly
over to 3D. But of course now we're in an expanded environment, so some of the concepts will be
adjusted accordingly. But something I want to emphasize is that all of this special orthogonal
terminology gives us a precise way to describe what kinds of matrices we're looking for, regardless
of the dimensionality of the space that we're in. Because all of the same intuitions apply in 3D
as in 2D, about not wanting to grow the vectors or shrink or skew or invert anything. And so what
we're looking for now are SO3 matrices, that is special orthogonal 3x3 matrices, where the same
constraints apply about the inverse being the transpose and the determinant being 1, but now
there's just an additional dimension. And so the essence of special orthogonality is the essence
of rotation. And yes, by the way, this also applies in higher dimensions, but save our tears for
another day. So anyway, earlier we saw that given some rotation angle theta, we can construct the
2D rotation matrix as cosine, negative sine, sine, cosine. But now in three dimensions,
instead of just an angle for the rotation, we now have an axis angle vector like we talked about
earlier. And so we're faced with the question of how do we write the SO3 matrix that goes with any
particular axis angle vector? This is actually quite a difficult problem, but don't worry,
it was solved in 1840 by Alinde Rodriguez, and the solution is called the Rodriguez formula.
The Rodriguez formula is just a recipe for converting an axis angle vector into the SO3
matrix that does that rotation. So you take an axis angle vector, put it into the Rodriguez formula,
and out pops your SO3 matrix. And then you take that SO3 matrix, you just slap it onto a vector,
and it rotates the vector. And that's how that works. That's how you rotate vectors in 3D. It's
pretty neat. So in theory, in principle, according to everyone's intuition and imagination, that
should be good enough. If we want to represent rotating any object, you should totally be able
to just list out a bunch of position vectors of points on the object, rotate all your position
vectors with special orthogonal matrices, and then that should be like all you need to rotate things
in math and physics, like you should only ever have special orthogonal matrices for rotations,
like we have it already, it's good enough, right? This is fine. Well, not exactly. We got to talk
about SU2. SU2, I don't even know where to begin with SU2. Well, here, how about this, we'll start
off by thinking about SU2 as a complex generalization of SO2. Let me clarify what I mean by that. So
think about an SO2 matrix. As we've seen, you can write an SO2 matrix as cosine theta
minus sine sine cosine. Or equivalently, we can say that the general form of an SO2 matrix is a
negative b, b, a, with the constraint that a squared plus b squared equals one.
And you can see that this is the same thing by the substitution a is cosine of theta and b is sine
theta. And when you write it in terms of a and b, and a squared plus b squared equals one,
you see that we have a unit circle of possible SO2 matrices. Okay, now with that in mind,
let's look at the definition of an SU2 matrix. So an SU2 matrix involves complex elements.
We'll symbolize them as alpha and beta. And it has the form alpha negative beta conjugate,
beta alpha conjugate, where alpha and beta are complex numbers. And the magnitude of alpha
squared plus the magnitude of beta squared equals one. You can see that in the special case that
alpha and beta are real numbers, then this matrix has the form of an SO2 matrix. But because alpha
and beta can be complex numbers, SU2 is actually a more general kind of matrix than an SO2 matrix.
It has more degrees of freedom. And whereas an SO2 matrix acts on real valued two component
vectors, an SU2 matrix being complex naturally is going to act on complex valued two component
vectors. Those complex valued two component vectors are called spinners. And this is one
way of thinking about what a spinner is. It's the vector like thing that an SU2 matrix acts upon.
By the way, there are ways of generalizing the concept of spinners using other kinds of matrices,
but I'm not going to worry about that today. Today we're just focused on two component complex
spinners, which are the most common kind of spinner you'll encounter in physics.
Okay, now something you can see by exploring the properties of these SU2 matrices is that they
have determinant one, and that the inverse of the matrix is the complex conjugate transpose of the
matrix. So this is very, very similar to a special orthogonal matrix, but technically the correct
word now is special unitary matrix, where unitary refers to the fact that the inverse of the matrix
is the complex conjugate transpose of the matrix. And that complex conjugation comes in because the
dot product of two complex vectors involves a complex conjugation. And so in order to preserve
lengths and angles between complex vectors, we have to preserve the dot product. And so there's
a complex conjugation that comes in in order to preserve dot products. But anyway, I'm not going
to go into too much detail on that, just know that these are the constraints on SU2 matrices.
Okay, so what we've looked at so far is a very algebraic definition of SU2. And what we should
look at now is the picture of what do these matrices actually do. So the way to do that is to first
draw some reference spinner, and this will be analogous to the reference vector we looked at
when we looked at SO2. And then we're going to multiply it by an SU2 matrix, and we're going
to see how it transforms. So first of all, how should we even draw a two component complex
vector? Well, there's a lot of different ways of drawing it, but today I'm just going to keep it
simple. We're going to look at one complex plane, and then I'll put two dots in the plane, corresponding
to the two components of the complex vector. And I'll draw a line between them just to highlight
the point that these two dots are actually two parts of the same object. There's another way
of looking at all this math in four dimensions, but we're not going to get into that today.
Anyway, so when we multiply our reference spinner by SU2 matrices, we can see that it kind of goes
around, and it spins, and it transforms in this rotational kind of way. And so naturally we can
ask the question of what are the degrees of freedom here? As we're transforming our spinner,
how does it evolve and how many degrees of freedom does it have? Well, naively, it should have four
degrees of freedom, right? Because there is two complex numbers, and each complex number has two
degrees of freedom in the complex plane. But we're going to take out a degree of freedom by virtue of
the fact that the SU2 matrix has determinant one and is unitary. And so what that means is that
this spinner is not changing in size. And that means that the magnitude squared of the first
component plus the magnitude squared of the second component is always going to equal one. So we
actually have three degrees of freedom here. And these three degrees of freedom are isomorphic
to the hypersphere, which is the locus of points in four dimensions that are all equidistant from
the origin. Which you can see when you think about it, right? You start off with four pure
degrees of freedom, and then constrain them so that they have to be constant size. What you
end up with is the hypersphere. Interestingly, the hypersphere is a simply connected space.
That'll be really important later. But for now, just think of these spinners as
rotating around and spinning around in a way that is simply connected.
Okay, so here we have three degrees of freedom. And it involves some kind of spinny, rotating thing.
So the question arises, does this have any connection to SO3, that is, the three dimensional
rotations? Maybe it will, maybe it won't, right? I mean, if we're just thinking about it from a
mathematical perspective, that's a legitimate question to ask. And as it turns out, shockingly,
there is a very, very close connection between SU2 and SO3. And in particular, SU2 double covers
SO3. Let me explain what that means. So imagine we have SO3, which acts on some three dimensional
vector and rotates it. And we also have SU2, which is going to act on some two component
complex vector that we call a spinner. And it's going to transform it and kind of spin it around.
What the double cover means is that we can draw a connection between any possible rotation in three
dimensions and any possible SU2 transformation on these spinners in this two complex dimensional
space. But the connection is not one to one, it's actually two to one. For every rotation
in three dimensions, we have precisely two possible SU2 transformations. And moreover,
those two SU2 transformations are related to each other in that they only differ by a minus sign.
So you know, at the beginning of the video, I mentioned that quote by Michael Atia,
where he was talking about how spinners are in some sense the square root of geometry.
And you really see this in the way that SU2 double covers SO3. Because if you think about it,
what is the square root of four? Well, it's two, but it's also negative two. And what is the square
root of nine? Well, it's three, but it's also negative three. So when you take the square root
of something, you get an answer, but you actually get two answers that differ only by a minus sign.
Likewise, if you look at any rotation in three dimensions, which corresponds to a single SO3
element, and you ask, what is the corresponding SU2 element, you get an answer, but you actually get
two answers that are related by a minus sign. Okay, now let's talk about the spinner way of
rotating things. So because SU2 double covers SO3, there's an intimate connection between
every SU2 transformation and every rotation in three dimensional space. Therefore,
if we wanted to, we could mathematically deal with rotations using the framework of SU2 matrices
instead of SO3. But we would just have to ignore the redundancy that comes with a double cover.
But that's not really a problem. I mean, we can literally just ignore the redundancy, right? We
can just project it out. Let me give you an analogy. So suppose that there is a math problem,
and you have some computer program that calculates the answer, but it's kind of slow,
and it takes a while to run. So you run your program, you wait a moment while it calculates,
and then let's say you see that the answer is 4. Well, okay, if you're not in a rush, that method
works fine. But let's say you're really in a hurry, or maybe you have to do a bunch of these
calculations super fast. So you look for a way to do it faster, and then you discover a faster
method, but the catch is that it doesn't give you the answer, but instead it gives you the square
root of the answer. So if the answer is 4, then sometimes the fast method gives you 2,
and sometimes it gives you negative 2. Okay, fine, that's actually not a problem at all,
because you can just square it, and the ambiguity washes out, and you've got your answer.
The same reasoning applies to using SU2 to do rotations, because it turns out that SU2 lends
itself to faster, more numerically stable calculations than SO3. And even though there are
two possible spinners for each SO3 orientation, they only differ by a minus sign, which can easily
be washed away. Don't get me wrong, SO3 is pretty fast too. I mean, I used like a million SO3 matrices
while making this video, but then again, I also rendered these animations overnight. I wasn't
in a hurry, so I just took the easier route in terms of thinking about SO3 and axis angle vectors
in Rodriguez's formula, and that worked fine. The only time I really had to use SU2 for 3D rotations
is when making these colored flag animations. Those are actually based on SU2, because I wanted
it to match the spinners. Anyway, with animations, there's not really a time constraint, so you
might as well just think in terms of axis angle vectors, Rodriguez's formula, SO3 rotation matrices,
because it's easier on the brain, and usually there's no benefit to rotating a vector like
a microsecond faster, so why torture yourself if you don't have to? But if you are writing
software for video game graphics, or a vision system for a self-driving car, or the attitude
control system for a rocket, then you'll for sure want to use SU2, because in those cases,
you're gonna have to rotate a lot of vectors very quickly. And the only cost of using SU2 is that
it's harder to think about when you're writing the code, because your imagination has to roll
around on a hypersphere, and it's kind of dizzying, but at the end of the day, you'll end up with a
code that's faster, uses less RAM, and is more zen than a code that uses SO3. The numbers flow
more gracefully when you use SU2. SU2 also lets you avoid the problem of gimbal lock,
which affects SO3. I don't have time to go into it today, but Google Apollo 11 gimbal lock
for a cautionary tale about the perils of SO3. Also, when using SU2 for rotations in three
dimensions, people often use the quaternion representation, because it's clean and simple.
We saw earlier that there's an isomorphism between SO2 and the unit complex numbers,
and similarly, there's an isomorphism between SU2 and the unit quaternions. And by the way,
this isomorphism makes manifest the hyperspherical topology of SU2. So anyway, whenever you hear
people talking about a rotation algorithm that uses SU2, or spinners, or quaternions, it's all the
same. The basic idea is that you're doing your rotational math in this weird, simply connected,
hyperspherical, kind of redundant group that somehow lives, like, kind of underneath the
vector rotations. It's very bizarre, but it works. Somehow it works. And so SU2 is actually used
ubiquitously in applications that demand maximum performance. And so SU2 is more than just some
fanciful abstraction. It's actually very practical. And you know, it'd be one thing if it were just
practical. It'd be one thing if SU2 was just, like, a more efficient way to do rotations,
and you just ignore the spinner phase. Fine, I mean, okay, that's cool, but that's not particularly
profound. But the thing that's really a trip is that in theoretical physics, the spinner phase
actually matters. So SU2 is not just another way of doing rotations, but that redundancy that you
wash out if you're just doing, like, video game graphics, that actually is something that's relevant
to the wave function of a relativistic electron, for example. And as we'll see later in the video,
that is a very, very deep mystery as to why that's the case. Okay, so let's look at one more double
cover animation, and then we'll talk about the physical mystery of spinners. So here we have a
very, very complicated rotational path. And it's all like, and it's all like swooping around and
doing all these moves. And the point I want to illustrate here is that even when the rotational
path is super complicated, there's still this connection between the flag rotating an SO3
and the spinner rotating with an SU2 matrix. There's still that two to one connection,
such that if we go around a class one curve, we end up with the phase switched.
And then if we run that class one curve again and bring it full circle, we end up doing a
class two, and we end up back to where we started. So let's take a closer look at this, and we can
see exactly how that happens. Okay, so first it comes in, it's like shoo, shoo, and then look,
it's about to teleport right there. Do you see that? Okay, cool. Let's keep it going. Now it comes
around. And look, we'll pause here. Okay, now it's come back towards started, but the phase is reversed,
as indicated by the fact that the flag is red. And also if you look at the plot, you can see that
the spinner is the negative of what we started out with. Alright, and continuing, it's gonna swoop
around, and it's gonna teleport right now. And it's gonna come back through, and it'll end up
back where it started. So we've done two class ones, and that's a class two, and that brings us
back to the starting point. Isn't this neat? I think it's neat. The thing I really want to
impress upon you is that SU2 double covers SO3, and it's like a perfect double cover. It's like a
hand in the glove, or like, I guess, a hand in two gloves, you know? So like, that's really cool,
you know? Like, what does that mean, right? I mean, the algebra, I think, as you can see, the
algebra is formally understood. I mean, look at all the numbers on the screen. If you pause it at
any moment in time, you can check for yourself, the matrices are right, and you know, all the
equations we've looked at, that's all true, it's all good. But why? Like, what does this mean?
You know, the funny thing is, when making these videos, the equations are the easy part,
because an equation is just a recipe, and I can put it in the computer and make an animation,
and I can just tell you how it is and how it works. The hard part is conveying the sense of mystery.
I mean, aside from the fact that it's just kind of confusing and like, whoa, what are these things,
but how can I share with you that sense of awe and wonder that so many people have when they
work with spinners, especially in the context of physics? And you know, that's much more of a
storytelling problem. That's the objective there is to really share a state of mind or
an attitude. And so I just want to tell you about it from my point of view. So please take
everything I'm about to say with a grain of salt. This is just my perspective, but I hope
it resonates with you as well. Okay, so you might have heard of the five stages of grief. Well,
I like to think that there's a similar five stages that you go through when learning about spinners.
Hear me out. So except it's not as bad. Instead of anger, its astonishment, and instead of depression,
it's existential shock. Now, I don't think anyone's ever gotten to the fifth stage,
but I can tell you about the first four. So starting off with the denial stage,
if you tell someone that there's something that you have to rotate it twice to get back to where
it started, they're just going to tell you, no, you're wrong. Like that can't be like,
have you ever rotated an object? Everyone knows all you need is to do a 360 rotation in any axis,
and then you get back to where you started. This is like a basic fact of reality. And look,
I get it. I mean, I understand. I've rotated objects too. I've actually personally rotated.
Back in the days when I used to jump out of planes, I spent a lot of time rotating
atmospherically. So I'm not naive when it comes to rotations. I've been around a time or two.
Sorry, I couldn't resist the pun. Anyway, if there's one thing that I know and you know and
everyone knows, it's that a rotation of 360 degrees is all you need to get back to where
you started. You don't need a 720 rotation. So what is this spinner stuff? It makes no sense.
So that's the denial stage. And what breaks you out of the denial stage is when you become
really familiar with the math. So when you get to know SO3 and SU2, and you see that SU2
double covers SO3, you see that SO3 is not simply connected, but SU2 is. And so now you have two
different ways of looking at rotations. And one of them is kind of more elegant, but in some sense
more redundant than the other. And it's sort of like, okay, there's something here. Now when you
become familiar with the math, it's very astonishing. So I like to call this the astonishment phase.
And this is when you might be very curious about the math, and you might study it a lot more,
you might explore it, you might write some Python codes, you might investigate every which way you
can rotate these different things, and you might make pretty plots. And it's very wonderful and
beautiful. And you find that there's a very rich structure here that you can spend a lot of time
exploring. And after having done that, there's no way that you can go back to the denial stage,
but even still, you feel the need to contextualize the math. You feel the need to say, okay,
but what does it all mean? And how literally should I take it? And what are the physical
implications, if any? And the part of you in your heart is not going to want there to be
any physical implications. I mean, you want to think it's just the product of a mathematician's
overactive imagination. You don't want to think there's anything in the world that actually
does have to rotate twice to get back to where it started, because that's deeply unsettling.
And so we enter into the bargaining stage where we say, okay, fine, mathematically, sure, yeah,
spinners are a thing, but it's not physics. This isn't real. This isn't like tangible.
And so you can sort of argue the math and physics and say, no, it's just a useful fiction. It's
just the structure of the equations, but it doesn't have any physical implications. And the problem is
that is a losing battle. Because the more you learn physics, the more prominent and essential
spinners become. You know, for example, look at the Dirac equation, look at the wave function
of an electron, it's a bispinner field. And it's this thing that's written in terms of spinners,
and it's at the heart of quantum physics. So okay, but you still want to bargain some more,
you still want to say, well, our understanding of physics is incomplete. And so the Dirac equation,
maybe there's a way of writing it without spinners. So you look into geometric algebra and these
different ways of writing the Dirac equation, and you find that nope, no matter what, you always
have spinners or something equivalent to spinners. And so then you say, okay, but maybe the Dirac
equation itself is wrong in some sense. And then so okay, it's like, what is the Dirac equation?
Well, it's three ingredients. It's Lorenz invariance. It's the quantum mechanical energy momentum
operators. And it's the requirement that the equations be first order in space and time.
Now, to the first one of those things, no one has ever observed a violation of Lorenz invariance.
And in my opinion, in my lifetime, probably no one ever will. Now, do I think that Lorenz
invariance is literally true at every scale? No, personally, I don't. But I also don't think
we're ever going to be observing any deviations from it anytime soon. So if you want to try to
undermine the importance of spinners in physics by arguing against Lorenz invariance, it's not
going to work out. Likewise, with the quantum mechanical energy momentum operators, I mean,
there's really not much room for flexibility here because they describe so well pretty much
like everything. I mean, you want to look at the blackbody spectrum, you want to look at like
the hydrogen energy levels. So you're not going to be doing away with the quantum mechanical
energy momentum operators. But if you look at the third ingredients, the fact that the equations
have to be first order in space and time, here we do have a little bit of leeway because with the
benefit of historical hindsight, we can say that Dirac was a little bit misguided in his original
approach. You know, I think it's fair to say that he was right, but perhaps for the wrong reasons,
or maybe better, for reasons that were not fully appreciated or understood at the time.
Anyway, with the development of quantum field theory, we now know that you can have particles
that aren't fermions. And so there's no reason for us to think that the electron must be a fermion.
It just so happens that they are and it just so happens that the way to write that way function
is to say that it's a first order equation in space and time, take the square root of the
mash shell spinners pop out, you know, that whole thing. So it's right. But it's not obvious that
it's like mathematically necessary for an electron to be a fermion. Aha. So the way we're
going to bargain out of having to deal with spinners is to say that the electron is not
actually a fermion. Instead, we can just choose to model it as a spinless particle, right? So
instead of a by spinner field, we could just use a complex scalar field for its wave function,
sort of like Schrodinger or Klein-Gordon. And there are kind of ways to do that if you're
dealing with one electron and are okay making an approximation. But the problem is, if you take that
approach while you're trying to deal with multi-electron systems, like if we're doing quantum
chemistry or condensed matter physics, then that approach doesn't work because we get slapped in
the face with something called the spin statistics theorem. And it's such a hard slap that we get
knocked out of the bargaining phase and into the existential shock phase. The spin statistics
theorem deserves its own video. And actually, for now, I'll just say there's an excellent
book written on it called Polly and the Spin Statistics Theorem by Ian Duck and ECG Sudarshan.
It's a very interesting book and I highly recommend it if you want a good overview of the
history of this theorem and its profound implications and what is known about it and what is still not
known about it. But anyway, for today, we just have to know what the theorem says. In a nutshell,
it says that particles with half-integer spin are fermions and their wave function
will pick up a minus sign when two particles are exchanged. And that leads into Fermi-Durok statistics.
On the other hand, particles with integer spin are bosons
and their wave function will remain the same when two particles are exchanged.
That leads into Bose-Einstein statistics. In short, the spin statistics theorem says that
there is a direct and mysterious link between the minus sign, or lack thereof, picked up by
a particle under 360 degree rotation, and the minus sign, or lack thereof, picked up by a
multi-particle wave function under the exchange of any two particles. This fact is going to lead
to radically different behavior, depending on whether you're dealing with an ensemble of fermions,
or an ensemble of bosons. Bosons don't mind being all up in the same quantum state at the
same time, it's all good. But fermions will never share the same quantum state. They do not like
to be together. There's a principle that every high school chemistry student learns
called the poly exclusion principle. It says that no two electrons can occupy the same quantum
state at the same time. This is a profound principle with far-reaching consequences.
It plays an absolutely fundamental role in chemistry. It's the reason, for example,
that atoms have different orbitals that the electrons have to stay in, because you might
wonder why isn't it that an atom at rest, why can't all the electrons collapse into the ground
state together? What is it that keeps some of them propped up into higher energy states?
Well, it's the poly exclusion principle. The lower orbitals are already filled up.
So chemistry students take this for granted as sort of one of the axioms of chemistry,
but with physics we go a bit deeper, and right now we're actually logically one level underneath
the poly exclusion principle, because it follows as a consequence of the more fundamental spin
statistics theorem. To see this, just consider a system of n electrons whose multi-particle wave
function can be written as psi is a function of x1, x2, dot dot dot, xa, dot dot dot, xb,
dot dot dot, xn, where x sub n in this context refers to all the quantum numbers of the nth
particle, including spatial coordinates and spin. Now, suppose we switch electrons a and b.
According to the spin statistics theorem, because electrons are fermions, the new wave
function is just the minus sign of the original one. So psi of the original quantum numbers
is going to equal negative psi of the same quantum numbers, but with the numbers for a and b switched
around. So all we've done so far is basically just stated generically what the spin statistics
theorem tells us about fermions. But suppose now that we force electrons a and b into the same quantum
state with the power of imagination. Then, by the symmetry of what it means for two things to be the
same, we conclude that there is no difference between the original and swapped wave function.
By definition, there can't be. If a and b are the same state, then you switch them, nothing can
change, right? Because they're the same. Well, now here we have two apparently contradictory
things. When particles a and b are exchanged, the wave function both does and doesn't pick up a minus
sign. How can that possibly be? Because we're saying that psi has to equal negative psi. Well,
that can only be the case if psi is precisely zero. And because psi is a probability amplitude,
we conclude that it is absolutely impossible for two fermions to occupy the same quantum
state at the same time. There is zero probability of that happening. And that is the poly exclusion
principle. Notice that this argument does not apply to bosons. With bosons, there's no minus
sign picked up under particle exchange. And so there's no logical tension when you put two
particles in the same state. Switch the identical particles around all you want, it's all good.
And that's why the poly exclusion principle does not apply to photons, for example. Photons
are bosons, and they can share the same quantum state, no problem, and in fact they often prefer
to do so. You can see that the spin statistics theorem is quite profound, and plays a major role
in shaping the world all around us. But why is it true? Where does this all important principle
come from? Well, we know that the spin statistics theorem is true. Every moment is bursting with
an abundance of empirical evidence supporting the theorem, as electron orbitals continue to exist,
and photons continue to be able to occupy the same state. Additionally, the theorem follows
logically from the assumptions of quantum field theory, and it's been proven rigorously in that
context. But despite all that, nobody really understands, in a geometric or visual way,
why there is this mysterious connection between spin and particle exchange.
If you think you do understand it because you've seen Feynman's topological argument or some
similar intuitive proof, read chapter 20 of the spin statistics book. Long story short,
those so-called proofs are actually analogies without any explanatory power, but they are fun
to think about. Okay, fine, now there is one last battle where we try to work our way back into the
bargaining phase, and that is to say, well maybe the spin statistics theorem is not actually
logically underneath the poly exclusion principle, maybe it's just some kind of cosmic coincidence,
so maybe spin doesn't play a fundamentally consequential role in the spin statistics theorem,
but instead maybe it just so happens to be that the particles in our universe that happen to be
fermions happen to obey the poly exclusion principle, whereas bosons do not. Now this is
unlikely, but we're really grasping at straws here to try to retain some semblance of our
natural intuition, you know, we don't want to feel like the world is much more bizarre than it seems,
but it is. But anyway, the final nail in the coffin is to say, okay look, what if we take an electron
and we change its spin so that it no longer is a half-integer kind of thing but actually behaves
as a boson? Then, if that electron is set free of the poly exclusion principle, we would know
that we actually are logically underneath the poly exclusion principle right now,
because that experiment would give us a definitive proof that the poly exclusion principle actually
does arise from the spin statistics theorem in a really meaningful way. Now it's actually not
super easy to convert electrons into bosons, but it can be done. In some materials, because of the
way electrons mutually interact with the crystal lattice, you can occasionally get a spin-up electron
pairing up with a spin-down electron, and that pair of electrons has a net spin of zero.
And so the pair of electrons is collectively a bosonic entity. So in the material, you can have
a great many of these, and they're able to condense into something that's spiritually very
similar to a boson-stein condensate, and they genuinely are occupying the same state at the
same time, which electrons hardly ever do, but when you convert them to bosons, all we're doing is
modifying their spin, we're not changing their charge, we're not taking away any mass or any of
that, we're just pairing them up so the spin cancels out, and now we set them free from the
poly exclusion principle. They condense into a very low energy state and can slip through a material
like a ghost without interacting with the atoms along the way. And this is the phenomenon of
superconductivity. And so superconductivity gives us an undeniable proof that the spin
statistics theorem is genuinely underneath the poly exclusion principle. By the way, we'll have a
lot more to say in the future about superconductivity. It is an incredible phenomenon, and you know,
I've personally seen what a superconductor can do. My colleagues and I have sent enormous electrical
currents through superconductors, many thousands of times the intensity that would melt copper,
and I've watched it stay cool as a cucumber. It doesn't heat up at all because all that current
is being carried by these super electrons that are behaving as bosons. And so it's not even like
regular physics like we know and love it, it's like this weird surreal like crazy version of
reality where the poly exclusion principle only, you know, doesn't always apply to every electron,
like it's amazing. It's a wonderful thing. So we'll talk about that a lot in the future,
we'll get into Ginsburg Landau and flux quantization and all that good stuff. But anyway,
today I just bring it up to highlight that this whole spinner thing, you know, it's real, it's
mysterious. And if you take away the spinner nature of the electrons wave function, you get some
pretty bizarre and surreal effects that actually are real. This is not just theory. This is not
just Socrates philosophies and hypotheses. No, this is like real, like technology, like engineering,
people are building devices with this stuff. So, you know, so that's something to think about.
Anyway, is it possible to reach the acceptance stage and to really understand spinners in a
way that would satisfy even Michael Atia? Maybe, but we're not there yet. Among other things,
the lack of an intuitive but rigorous proof of the spin statistics theorem shows that we don't
fully understand the significance of spinners in physical reality. We're aware of spinners,
we're able to work with them, we know how their algebra works, but we still do not know why spinner
valued wave functions are anti symmetric under particle exchange. Now you might be thinking
Rich, come on now, you're just dramatizing your own ignorance. This isn't actually a mystery,
you just don't know the answer. Well, it's true that I don't know the answer, but I'm not the
only one who thinks that this is a mystery. Let me share with you this quote from the spin statistics
book. This quote is in a passage about whether or not physics can explain the spin statistics
theorem or is just consistent with spin statistics. We should modify the meaning of understand.
And at the same time reduce our expectations of any proof of the spin statistics theorem.
What is proved whether truly or not, whether optimally or not, in an acceptable logical sequence
or not, is that the existing theory is consistent with the spin statistics relation.
What is not demonstrated is a reason for the spin statistics relation.
To belabor the point, it is difficult to imagine a fundamental mechanism for the poly exclusion
principle upon which all depends, which predicates it upon the analyticity properties of vacuum
expectation values of products of quantized field operators. Did God, for lack of a better word,
build a series of failed worlds which sputtered and died, or exploded and disintegrated before
discovering the stabilizing effect of anti commutation relations for half integral spin fields?
Was this before or after imposing the requirements of Lorenz invariance?
Are we the lucky winners of a Monte Carlo simulation in which every choice was tried
and one survived? Must we reduce our demands on physics to require only consistency?
Does an understanding of the why of the spin statistics relation have no direct answer in physics?
Or must physics be formulated to include it?
The poly result does not explain the spin statistics relation and cannot.
The Noinchwanders and the Feynman's of the world must remain unsatisfied,
because the consistency of relativistic quantum mechanics and quantum field theory with the
poly exclusion principle has every reason to be as complicated as these subjects are,
not as simple and direct as the poly exclusion principle itself.
So in short, there sure is a lot of mystery here and it's confusing, but it's kind of cool to
think about, right? But you know, honestly, I can only think about spinners for so long
before it starts to hurt. It's like diving underwater. You try to go as deep as you can,
but at some point you have to come back up for air. And it's all so disorienting that sometimes
when you stop thinking about spinners it's all so confusing and you feel like you're right back to
square one. But my friends, if there's one thing that spinners have taught us,
it's that just because you returned to where you started doesn't mean you haven't picked
something up along the way. So in that spirit, I'd like to reiterate part of the quote from
the beginning of the video. No one fully understands spinners. Their algebra is formally understood,
but their general significance is mysterious. I hope today I've given you some sense of the
algebra, but most importantly, an appreciation of the mystery.
If you enjoyed watching this video as much as I enjoyed making it, then please consider supporting
my channel on Patreon. On there, you'll be able to download these beautiful, magnificent PDFs
with the equations and diagrams discussed in this video, and other videos too. Also, if you sign up
on Patreon, your input will help determine the future direction of this channel. I know what
I'm going to do for the next few videos at least, but beyond that, I don't know, I need your advice.
What do you want to see? Where do you want to go? You want to go into electromagnetism as a gauge
theory? You want to go into superconductivity? Do you want to go into whatever the case may be? So
anyway, your support is not obligatory, but it is greatly and sincerely appreciated.
All right, well hey, thanks for watching, and I'll see you in the next one.
