Hello, everyone. I'm pleased to speak today with John Vervake, a colleague of mine. He's
an associate professor in the teaching stream. He's been teaching at the University of Toronto
since 1994. He currently teaches extremely popular and well-received courses in the
psychology department on thinking and reasoning with an emphasis on insight problem solving
associated with creativity, cognitive development with an emphasis on the dynamic nature of
development, and higher cognitive processes with an emphasis on intelligence, rationality,
mindfulness, and the psychology of wisdom. He's the director of the cognitive science program,
where he also teaches courses on the introduction to cognitive science and the cognitive science of
consciousness, wherein he emphasizes 4e for consciousness embodied, embedded, enacted,
and extended models of cognition and consciousness. In addition, he chooses a course in the
Buddhism psychology and mental health program on Buddhism and cognitive science. He's director of
the consciousness and wisdom studies laboratory. He has won and been nominated for several teaching
awards, including the 2001 Students' Administrative Council and Association of Part-Time Undergraduate
Students' Teaching Award for the Humanities and the 2012 Renjini Ghosh Excellence in Teaching Award.
He's published articles on relevance, realization, general intelligence, mindfulness, flow, metaphor,
and wisdom. He's the first author of the book, Zombies in Western Culture, a 21st century crisis,
which integrates psychology and cognitive science to address the meaning crisis in western society.
He's the author and preventer of the YouTube series Awakening from the Meaning Crisis,
and the meaning is what we're going to talk to John about today. John, do you remember when we met last?
I think the last time we were physically present was in 2015. We were at a Mind
Masters discussion. You and I, it's on YouTube, and we were talking about meeting in life at that
time. That was the last time, I think, we were present together. Six years, man. A lot of water
under the bridge since that time. So tell us about your current projects, if you would.
Oh, well, I've currently engaged in a project. There's two projects, one I've just finished,
one I've been finishing. One was a COGSI project on consciousness called Untangling the World Not.
And in that, I was experimenting not only with new theoretical material, I was experimenting with
a new way of presenting material. So I presented the material rather than monologically. I presented
it dialogically with a friend of mine, psychologist Greg Enriquez. And so the material was presented
dialogically, which was very interesting for me because hopefully we can talk a bit more about
that. My core project is a project of trying to understand more deeply the process of dialogue
and what it does in distributed cognition. So what do you think is the difference between
dialogue and thought? I mean, is thought an inner dialogue or trial or quadrilogue?
Well, that's a really good question because one of the things that I think we are playing around
with right now in the culture is a consideration of whether or not the monological model of thought,
which has been very predominant, and the prototypical way in which you present your
thought is with the treatise, for example. And we're now opening up to the idea that perhaps
thought is more dialogical in nature. In fact, the idea that thought might be, even reason,
might be more dialogical in nature is coming into sort of the mainstream of cognitive science.
Well, let me throw an idea at you and tell me what you think of it, something I've been working with.
We might as well dive right into this. It seems to me that thought has two main components. There's
a revelatory component, and that manifests itself most remarkably, I would say in flashes of insight,
but those maybe spread all the way out to religious revelation along a similar continuum.
So there's a revelatory element to thought. And that's the thought that in some sense
springs out of the void. And I think the way that you manifest that thought is by
consciously or unconsciously posing yourself a problem. And I think in some sense it's akin
to prayer, although we don't notice that. And maybe that's because we've internalized prayer
so deeply, we don't even notice we do it anymore. I mean, people have been praying for a long time,
right? So you have a problem, you want a solution, you ask yourself, well, what do you think of this?
And then you wait. And then at some point, sometimes when you're sleeping, sometimes when
you're awake, I mean, sometimes so powerfully when you're sleeping, it jerks you awake. The
answer appears and you think, well, I thought that up. But that's a strange thing to think. I mean,
one of the things Jung said about thought was that most people encounter thoughts,
nobody will ever find this quote, of course, because I'm sure I've modified it. But
like they find a table when they walk into a room, it's just there. And then we attribute it to
ourselves. But then there's the dialogical element where we take a look at the thought, or there
might be the dialogical element, if you're further along in the development of your thought, you
take the thought and you subject it to a critical dialogue or trial longer with that with inner
avatars. So okay, your turn, man. Yeah, that's great. So I think that's an important note.
I do a lot of work on the nature of insight. And I think the theoretical argument and the
empirical evidence, I think it's converging on the idea that in the insight processes,
well, perhaps just say the insight process makes use of cognitive machinery that's very
different from inferential machinery. And in fact, there are times when they can even be opposed
or interfere with each other. Okay, so I have a comment about that. Yeah. You know that when
people develop prefrontal dementia, sometimes they experience a burst of creativity. Of course.
And yes, and it's because the editor module goes down. And that's associated, I think, with
the cognitive module for thought, that's Verneke's area, rather than Broca's area, if I got that
right. Yeah, you do. You do get, you also get similar things if you get sort of minor damage
in sort of right prefrontal. You'll also get Riverberry did some experiments where people
who had that kind of damage also show increased facility with insight problems. Right. So, you
know, I'm building this writing app right now. And I'm, we're going to launch it in about a month,
but I'm suggesting to people that when they write, they separate out the editing process entirely.
And so they try to rely on the non-critical revelatory process to generate ideas. And that
means they can't try to write a perfect sentence to begin with. They just have to live, they have to
restrict the editor and ask the revelatory system to step forward. And so what do you think about?
It's a kindness to prayer. I know that's kind of a radical idea. Well, it's a really radical idea.
I don't think it's that radical. Well, you're a radical. So that's, that's why
that's why it's fun to talk to you. Well, the idea, I think it's only radical if you go in with
some presupposed epistemologies of what's going on in thought. I mean, you may be an empiricist
in which you think your relationship to thought or any knowledge acquisition process is a purely
passive receptive one, or you may be in a romantic where you think that thought is literally, you
hear it literally in the expression, an expression pushing out an active imposition on the world.
But what I think the phenomenon of insight does is reveal that a lot of our thinking is neither
active nor passive. It's what I like to call participatory. It's the same kind of thing like,
you know, participating in a conversation. It's not just a sequence of, you know,
actions and passive receptivity. There's a co-collaboration. We're co-creating. We're
making something together. In fact, that's one of the defining features I have for
what I call the a logo. So I try to use the ancient Greek word rather than the modern word.
The logos. Yeah, because yeah, well, that's also my, you know, word I use frequently.
We haven't talked about why people want us to talk. And the reason they want us to talk is because
our ideas dovetail to a substantial degree and also diverge interestingly. And so
I guess they want us to talk so that we can think. Well, that's it. And I see that's what
I was going to say. That's one of the defining, I would say one of the defining.
It certainly seems to be the case as a defining criteria for Socrates, that if you and I can
get to places in the Deologos that we couldn't get to individually, then real Deologos has
come into existence. And that's Philea Sophia, the love of wisdom, as opposed to Philea and Ikea,
the love of victory. And so, right, right, right. I didn't know those phrases. Philea, say it again.
Philea Sophia, which is the Philea, Philea Sophia. Wisdom is the feminine essence of God.
Yeah. Well, the Philea is, you know, it's itself a collaborative love.
Did you say Philea? Yeah. Yeah. Philea. Philea and Philea. Philea Sophia. So Philea Sophia.
The three loves, the Aros Philea Agape. This is Philea. And Philea is the love that is done,
is expressed and shared in community. And then Sophia, of course, is the word for wisdom.
That's where we get philosophy from. I mean Philea, Philea and Ikea is the love of victory,
like Nike victory. And right. And yeah, it's interesting because the,
tell me what you think of this. I think the YouTube dialogues that we undertake our
characterized by Philea, Philea Sophia and the YouTube dialogues conducted in the main by the,
what would you call it, legacy media are Philea, Philea, Ikea. And I think people
appreciate Philea, Sophia much better. You better believe it. I certainly appreciate it much better.
I did. I just did a, I did two of these with Bernardo Castro. One was three hours and one was
four hours. And the accepted wisdom is nobody's going to listen to those. And these are extremely
popular. People are willing to hang in precisely. How popular? Well, I mean, they, you know,
there's been, I think 20,000 views for the first one, and it's been up for like a week. And there's
been like, I don't know, 8,000 views of the second one. It's been up for a couple of days. And this
is for a four hour video. Yeah. I mean, people came, 10,000 people came to see Tom or Sam Harris,
and I talk in, in, in Ireland. And that was primarily Philea, Sophia with a hint of Philea
wrapped. I forgot it again. Philea, Nikea, Nikea. Yes, of course. Nike the shoe. I just have to
picture the shoe. Philea, Nikea. Yes, I'm, I'm accused of loving Philea, Nikea, but I don't. I
find that distasteful. And I'm much more comfortable with Philea, Sophia. And I hope that's evident.
Well, that's, that's very much, I mean, this sort of started with my projects, my, my, my major
project right now. And this is why I'm doing these other things in this manner, is I put
together an anthology for publication. And, you know, I'm doing a lot of work on it. As I'm trying
to understand what is the logos, how do we bring it about? And I'm looking, my, my, the two areas
of research are, I'm, of course, looking back into the philosophical heritage, the whole
Socratic tradition. But I'm also doing a lot of participant observation, participant experimentation
and all these emerging communities, you know, the circling community, the authentic relating
community, philosophical insight, philosophical fellowship. I'm trying to learn how to do this,
share with this with other people. It seems to me, tell me what you think of this. It seems to me
that this, okay, so you're a participant or participant observer. I feel like we're tracking
something and that this must be associated with our hunting instinct that the Philea, Sophia is a
I feel like I'm tracking. So I believe this is from the Lord of the Rings with Bilbo,
but I could be completely wrong about this. There's a scene near the end of the book where he
wakes is makes his way across a swamp full of souls and he feels for the rocks underneath
that make out the path, but he can't see them because the water is murky. And so he feels the
mountain. It seems to me that Philea Sophia is associated with that is that you feel your way
to a solid, to something solid, and then you take the next step. And that manifests itself in speech,
but is it mutual tracking? Is it a reprogramming of the tracking circuit that we used for so
long when we were dialogical hunters, like signaling to each other? We're on the track of wisdom as a
beast. Yeah, I think so. I mean, I think, you know, right. Well, I mean, it's a main claim
of most of 4e cognitive science is that our higher cognitive processes are
exacted for more from more direct sensory motor interaction. And, you know, and you're right,
Socrates talks about, you know, a willingness to follow the logos wherever it goes. And the
interesting thing when you do do you think that's any different than prayer because you could hardly
say that in a more Christian way? Well, well, yeah. Well, let me say something about that because
when I've done a participant observation, what happens is that first people are taken aback
by a kind of intimacy that is not, you know, is not sexual or, you know, it's a kind of immediacy
that the culture doesn't currently prepare them for. So they're taken aback. We write this kind
of intimacy and connection. And that's exactly what I experienced when people come up on the
street and tell me that they've been watching my videos and that their life has been changed. It's
there's this instant immediacy that takes me aback and it's it just it just it floors me and
it really does. I get the same thing. I get and I get people when I talk to them and they've
watched the series or something like that. And they've spent like 50 hours with me in their head.
And they think they know me. Well, maybe they do, John. Yeah, maybe they do. You don't know them
or maybe you do. You know, they're Philea Sophia and it knows yours. And so it's instant it's
instant intimacy, but it's it's very disconcerting. It is. And it's very hard for me initially,
because I'm by nature, very sort of socially phobic. Well, it doesn't get easier.
But when I'm doing the practices, what happens is initially people are caught up in this
intimacy. And then what happens is and people have various names for it, the we space,
the geist, logo spirit. There's a sense of wherever I am between you, I'm with you. Yeah,
we're two or three gathered in my name. There I am also. Right. And so there's the
that's a name for it. All right. There's a sense. Put the Christian spin on this.
Well, I mean, there's there's there's there's sections in there's sections in the episodes
in the series where I talk a lot about Christianity. I mean, one of the odd things that's happened to me
is I did I did an episode on Agape. And I've had many Christians, including Christian pastors,
like Paul Vendorclay said, that was one of the best explanations of Agape they ever heard.
And it was sort of startling from them. So Vendorclay is following you obviously as well.
They said it was odd for a non Christian to be doing this. But well, somebody had to.
Oh, that's that's fair enough. God, what a nasty bastard I am. No, no, no, no. This is fun. Yeah.
But the thing I wanted to say is, like, when you're in like, because I've done circling,
I've been in these events. And when this happens, you know, you get people from all kinds of
backgrounds, religious, non religious, you know, sort of, you know, officially atheist or something
like, and they start using spiritual language to describe. I've been in that situation in my therapy
sessions many times. As soon as you talk about anything that's really serious, you use religious
language. That's, and that means religious language is the language of extraordinary
seriousness. I mean, when you talk about good and evil, and you do that in therapy, when you're
talking to someone who's been touched with malevolence repeatedly, there's no alternative.
Then you're in this religious ground. I think that's right. What does that mean? And this,
this spirit that this spirit that we're tracking, that's the spirit that's laid the golden thread
throughout history. And we're in dialogue with that spirit. And that's this, that's the ancestral
spirit. And so that ancestral spirit reaches, that's the way that's the spirit that manifests
itself, I think is God the Father. That's the ancestral spirit that lays down the golden thread.
That's what's different than logos. Maybe I don't know how to, how to parse out the
triune conception exactly, you know, because you talk about this logos manifesting itself in the,
in the dialogue on Sophia. Yeah. And the logos is in there, right? Dialogue.
So is, is the son the love of wisdom? I mean, that makes, that makes sense. Or is that the spirit?
Well, I don't know. And neither do I.
A Trinitarian interpretation. I do know that what happens and maybe.
Well, what do you think of the God the Father interpretation that I just laid on you, man?
Well, I mean, I mean, I've just been reading a lot about Christian Platonism,
and I watched your talk with Jonathan. And I found it, I mean, you guys were talking
Christianity and fair enough, and I appreciate the earnestness and the authenticity. But there was,
you know, a lot of the my ear to my ear, there was a lot of Platonism in there.
Have you read the immortality key? No, I haven't read the other mortality.
Oh, you need to read it. I just interviewed the author. He's been tracking the use of psychedelics
in the, in the, where, where all the Greeks went to be enlightened, you know, the, the.
Delphi. Yeah, yeah. And in the Delphic mysteries. Exactly. And.
Well, I was going to, I was going to say that, I mean, I read a book I would recommend, too.
And, and he, and he integrates that with Christianity, you know, is stressing the Greek. And
so I asked him and Rock, Dr. Rock, who's from Harvard, he wrote the road to Aloysus.
Aloysus. So it's the Ellucinian mysteries that I'm, I'm reaching for. He's been tracking the
use of psychedelics for 2000 years in Greece in the Ellucinian mysteries, making the claim that,
that psychedelic experience in Ellucis was core to Greek culture. The bedrock of Greek philosophy,
that's part of the revelatory element that we're talking about. And that, that all of Greek
philosophy emerged as a consequence of that revelatory Ellucinian experience.
It could be. I mean, Courtford made a lot of good arguments about, you know, the divine men
that were the precursors to the philosophers being influenced by Thracian shamanism. And you get,
you get figures that are right on the border. Who was that?
Hornford, Hornford.
Hornford influenced by shop, by what brand of shamanism?
Thracian shamanism. Shaman's from Thrace, which is north of Greece. And so Courtford talked about,
like, you get, you get very weird things about Pythagoras. He did a, a thunderstone ceremony
where he went into a cave and was died and came back. And of course he,
How do you, how do you spell Hornford or Courtford?
C-O-R-N-F-O-R-D, Courtford. And he, the idea there is that the, the sort of soul flight
practices within shamanism are taken up into Pythagoras's notion of soul flight.
Well, I imagine the soul flight practices are the same thing as the Ellucinian mysteries,
essentially. They're a continuation of the shamanic tradition into the present.
Well, that's, that's, that's the, that's the thesis of this book anyways.
What, what's interesting to me is, you know, that Psyto represents Socrates as being able
to bring about that state in people through dialogue alone. And yeah, I know what that means.
Yeah. And so do you. Yeah, very much. And when I see people in these practices, what happens is they
first, they first orient on each other, then they orient on the logos. They find an intimacy with
the logos. And then what do you mean by that? Well, what they do is they come to find that they're
not only in relationship to each other, they're in relationship to this geist or logos that's
happening in the distributed cognition. I mean, yeah. Okay. So that's a very interesting way of
phrasing it. So that's what I see as the spirit that's guiding the golden thread. And that's
what you're praying to when you ask for a revelatory thought, when you're confused. So imagine that
you have, if we're, imagine we're holographic in relationship to this distributed cognitive net,
right? So the part contains some of the whole. Very much. And the whole would be this
distributed spirit that you're just describing, at least as it's enacted. And so in so far as you're
a holographic, miniscule, but complete in some sense, canotic, canotic representation of this
spirit, you can ask it for it to bestow its wisdom on you. And its operation in your unconscious
produces the revelatory thought. Okay, well, that is deeply converging with a lot of the
cog side that I'm bringing to it. Oh, good. Okay. So the idea here is that,
that distributed cognition has a property collective intelligence that can, that is
something that is not just the sum of individual intelligences. And there's increasing evidence
for this. Yeah, well, you can imagine, sorry, I'm prone to do this, but you can imagine,
it's like reading a book. I mean, I have this distributed spirit in my head, plus I have my
own experience. And so I'm the combination of that distributed spirit and my own.
Well, yeah, that's the extent. Okay, so that's probably what the sun is, John, in the Trinitarian
spirit is that combination, because that's an incarnation of the spirit in a particular time
and place. And that's what I bring to the dialogue. Well, that's good. Let's play with that. I'd
like serious play. I think that's how we go through. Okay, well, so, okay, so we've got the father as
that distributed entity that stretches back in time. Well, no, you see, let's play with that,
because let me first try something and then let's see if it maps in because, you know, people get
into, they start to realize that the presence of the collective intelligence above and beyond
the presence of Tom and Sue and Anne, right? And then they start to enter into relationship with
that. But then there's a further thing that happens. And this, I think, might point to what
you're okay, so maybe that's the spirit, that thing that's inhabiting everybody at that time,
right? So it's akin to the sun and it's akin to the father, but it's, it's, it constitutes that
distributed space. And so what I think might control, I think of it as the Neoplatonic one.
And that may correspond, right? And so that's your peculiarity.
Well, we'll come back to why I think that language is helpful. I'm not claiming it's
exclusive. I'm not doing that. Hey, I'm not claiming it's not helpful either.
So what they do is they get to a place where, and not everybody does this, because you can imagine,
it depends, you know, it's, you know, what did you just say? Not everybody does this?
Do you want to put that on your t-shirt?
What I mean is that most people that are doing the circling, they don't,
many of them are happy just with what you might call the psychological intimacy. Then
God, yes, no wonder. Yep. And then some people move to what you might call logos intimacy.
And then some people move through that and by means of it to an intimacy of what is the
fount of that? What is the ground of that? What is it about the reality that makes this kind of
thing possible? They start to think of it. So they're reflecting on it? They're reflecting on it.
Like we're doing? Like we're doing? Is that? Yeah, very much. And you can think about this kind
of move. And for me, this is where the prototypical Socratic Platonic move comes, where you get the
idea that the very process of intelligibility is the most profound access we have to the way
reality is realizing itself. And that's how people start to talk. They start to talk about
reality beyond the we space. So there's us, the we space, and then the reality. And maybe that
corresponds better with the trinity that you're looking for. Well, I think you've probably lost
me to some degree with that last move. So maybe I can lay it out a bit more. So what people start
to do is in in relationship to the way the logos is unfolding, they start to see a pattern
of how things can unfold and make sense. And then they start to see that maybe that's the pattern
that is ultimately discloses reality to them. That's how they start to think. Well, that's okay.
So is that again, this is why you're so interested in consciousness. I mean, I think maybe one of
things you and I share is that we find it difficult to make a distinction between
the consciousness of reality and reality itself. So I think, yeah, I mean, that's why I've coined
this term transjective to try and talk about the relationship, these kinds of relationships of
participation, that they're being co created by objective. Okay, so so expound upon that.
Well, I mean, the notion is ultimately, ultimately derived from Tillich's idea of the
symbol is that which grounds and makes possible the relationship between the subjective and the
objective. It would be the kind of idea that you have in ancient epistemology, whereas instead
of thinking of knowledge as representing something over there, you know, Aristotle's idea is the mind
and the object that is known come into conformity. I'm using shape as a metaphor for form, where
form means something more like, you know, a plonic form, the structural functional organization
that makes it be what it is. This is the key Greek idea that which makes it be what it is is also
what makes it be knowable as it is. And so I'm not representing the cup, my mind conforms to it,
it has the same form as it. And so it's not right to say that it's sort of, well, that's what you do
when you reach to pick up the cup according to PSA. Well, yes, very much. And so in some sense,
you're mimicking the cup by understanding it, you're shaping yourself to it, right, which is
difference. So this is the difference between a Cartesian and a theological approach to knowledge,
right? Because the Cartesian approach is, I don't have to undergo transformation in fundamentally
in who I am in order to know, I just have to properly organize my propositions. But if you go
before Descartes, right, even reading was pursued, not informatively, but transformatively, the idea
was, unless I go through fundamental transformations, there are deep truths that will not be disclosed
to me. That's a conformity theory of knowing as opposed to a representational theory of knowing.
And what happens, what I'm saying is people, they feel themselves being conformed to reality
through the logos. So that's a feeling of personal transformation. And is that the feeling of,
is that that same feeling of tracking? Is that the same as stumbling uphill with your cross
towards the city of God? Well, that's why I asked the question. Well, let me try. I don't know
either. Okay. So I mean, this is some metaphor that pops into my mind all the time. We're
shouldering this burden. What is the burden? Well, for you, you said it's transformative
consciousness, or I think that's what you said. And we stumble uphill with it towards what?
Well, let me try. Let me try. That's a great question.
Thank you. I spent a lot of time thinking it up.
Well, for me, so one of the things, and this is, this is again, for me, from the Socratic
tradition, this kind of knowing that we're talking about this kind of transformational
knowing, there's no clean separation from you knowing the thing and you knowing yourself.
You think there's a clear separation from the inside experience? Or is that the same thing?
I think the inside experience is exactly that kind of thing in small doses. And then when you
start to link them together, you can get flow experiences. And what happens in flow? And if
you link them to get together too much, it's nonstop flow experience. And then the question is,
can you tolerate it? Well, that's that's another, I mean, that's a good question. There's another
question. We maybe we can get to that. I'm not sure I can tolerate it. Well, there's, there's the
possibility and this comes from my, my, you know, my, my experience, my decades experience as a Taoist
Tai Chi player. I mean, Chik Senpahai largely talks about what you might call hot flow and,
you know, the flow that you experience that the flow and you experience when you're there's a lot
of metabolic expenditure. But you can get into the flow state when you're doing Tai Chi Chuan.
And you're not doing a tremendous kind of at least physiological, I may enter their stuff
going on cognitively, but you don't have that same sense of I'm going to burn out. You have this
difference. Well, I need some of that because I have that sense of I must be in a hot state of
flow then all the time. But, but the thing about the good state of flow is that it opens up the
possibility for you to, you can, you have more time to explore that participatory sense. So
like, you know, Chik Senpahai says, you're in the flow state, you have the sense of atonement,
right? That powerful, that's one of the defining features. Atonement. Yeah, exactly, exactly.
Right. And you have. And so what do you think that means? Cause that pulls original sin into it.
What, or the other way around or original sin made use of the idea of atonement that is originally
as, as the, as the, as the antidote, as the, as the, yeah, as the, as the stuff of the grail
is atonement. But that's the city on the hill too. It is. I mean, or it's the wandering up to the
city on the hill. That's the other possibility or another possibility. You've got some, I've got
John Barney and pilgrim progress going through me. I've got Augustine City of God trying to parse
them. That's a tough road to hold there, John. What I was, what I, what I was saying is, I think
that when you're doing this, when you're, when you're, when you can get into a more of a cool
flow rather than a hot teach me, teach me. Well, I'd love to, that'd be great. What I've noticed,
and I, and I see this also happening in, you know, this, what do you want to think of what
we're talking about when we're talking about like these, these circling practices and that
these the logo practices, is you're getting shared flow. You're getting flow. Yeah. Oh,
definitely. Yeah. I'm hoping that's what I'm inducing in my listeners on YouTube. And I think
it happened with John, with, with my carver friend, Jonathan Peugeot, Jonathan. Yes. Yeah.
And that was a very peculiar podcast. And I thought it did that. And this one will too.
Well, that's the thing. That's the thing is, and look, it got a million and a half views,
like what the hell's going on? Because I think Jonathan is, Jonathan,
I don't know if he'd like, I mean, I say that's in love and I have a lot of affection for Jonathan.
I think Jonathan is more radical, a more radical Christian than he realizes.
Yes. I think that, I think that might be true of you too. And there's always the possibility
that it's true of me. Well, that's, that's funny. You're in you and your logos, John.
I've had, I've had, that's funny because I've had some Christians say that to me
recently and I don't, and I want to receive it properly because receiving statements like that,
like your receptivity matters as much as anything else.
Yeah, it's not exactly a trivial compliment, John. No, it's not. And, you know,
O'Dowah's friend on the border between chaos and order. Well, yes. Right. And that's,
but it's what I'm interested in is the possibility that, well, perhaps maybe, maybe we could,
this ties it together. Maybe when people are seeing, I hope people who know me and see many of
my videos know that I'm deeply respectful to religion. So I do not mean any disrespect
in what I'm saying. I'm not trying to be pretentious, but people who claim to see the
spirit of Christ in me, I hope what they are referring to, because that's what I aspire to,
is somebody who is trying to realize in both senses of the word that goes back to what we're
talking about, transjectivity. It's both something that I'm, this is Nishitani's use of realize.
It's both some, in realizing, in both sense of the word, something that's coming into my awareness
with intelligibility and something that's being actualized in reality. I hope that I'm realizing
the logos with other people. That's. Well, I think your effect on your students is evidence of that,
John. But what do you think of your name, by the way? Just out of curiosity.
My last name? No, your first name. John, a gift from God. I don't know. We don't have to go there.
Well, I, I, I, we could go there. You know, I, my middle name is Berent and it's Norwegian.
And I've always been somewhat embarrassed about it. I'm going to say that publicly.
I probably never that admitted that to anyone, but because it was parodied as burnt because
that's B, E, R, N, T. That's how it's spelled. And so it was an object of mockery, but so I didn't
look into it much, but it's Berent and my great grandfather after whom I am named built a ship
and sailed it to North America. And he was a remarkable inventor. He invented a potato
harvester and built it in his own, is his own shop. And he raised my father. In any case,
I had a Indian carver build my third floor, which you'll have to see sometime because it's quite
spectacular. And he built a totem of me and I'm standing in the arms of a bear. And I didn't know
that that was the meaning of my name. Oh, really? Yes. Really? That, that really happened. So,
people have been, you know, describing my name to me on, on YouTube comments. And so that's where
I got that information. So, you know, who knows what's in a name? Jordan Berent, Peterson.
John is my favorite gospel, if that means anything. Yeah, that makes sense. In the beginning was the
word. Yeah, the logos. That suits you. And I guess. What do you make of this comment that the Spirit
of Christ is manifesting itself in you? I mean, that's something you come up and just say to
someone on the street, you know, it's like, if you take that seriously, it's, how do you take it
seriously? Yeah, well, then how do you maintain yourself? Well, the thing is, it's not just,
I mean, it's people that I talk to on video, but it's also my girlfriend, you know, who
she's sort of officially an atheist. But she's, and she knows that I don't profess to be a Christian
because I have a very ambivalent history with Christian Christianity. But she said to me,
you know, I actually think you're like the rest of what the Western world you mean. Well,
yeah. And I noticed that was coming out in your discussion with Jonathan. And there was, you know,
I had tremendous empathy. You know what my, the most powerful takeaway for me was from my biblical
series, which was what the meaning of the word Israel wrestling with God, we who wrestle with
God, who struggle with God. Yeah, yeah. It's like, well, maybe that's the real Christian spirit is
and that's what that phrase implies. And that's the real Jewish spirit.
Yeah, wrestling, John. It's the white is why, you know, why does why is there that strange scene
of the wrestling with the angel? Like, why would you possibly fight with God? And then you think,
well, God, isn't that what I'm doing all the time? And he's doing all the time. He partially wins,
though. That's what's even more mysterious and hurts you doing so. Yeah, I mean, that's, that's,
that's the story. But isn't that the story? I mean, it doesn't believe it's the wrestling with
belief and and and it's wrestling in the way that you're wrestling. Well, I mean, I do sparring,
and I often use sparring as a metaphor for the kind of. Oh, so that's the other metaphor for dialogue.
Yeah, exactly. It's not just the tracking. It's the sparring. Yeah. And we have to remember,
you know, that kind of sums up men's relationships. Well, well, play, each other,
tracking and sparring. Plato means big shoulders. He was a wrestler.
That's what his nickname, his nickname is Plato, because he's a wrestler. And we have to remember
that the Greeks are in the gymnasium even more than they are in the academy. Right. I was watching
this suits episode last night. And yeah, the, the, the man are always sparring with each other
verbally, you know, and they're tracking something. They're tracking victory in this series. They're,
they're, uh, and they wrestle, they wrestle when they fight. They have to go into a clinch in a
fight to settle their disputes like a physical fight. But there's, you can shift off of that.
This happened for Bernardo and I, when we were doing this, we both said this, you can shift
off of it. And this happens when you're actually martial arts sparring, because you get into the
shared flow state. You can shift off of victory to the aesthetics of the dance. There's a beauty in
that that is an independent Vic that's independent of victory that you can come to appreciate for
its own sake. Plato talks about this. He talks about this, the beauty, the eros that draws you
into the, that's why he dance. Yeah, a dance, but it, but it's a dance that draws you beyond
yourself. He does education, right? To draw forth from you. And so is that the, is that the battle
with the adversary? Is that related to the, this is another very serious question, obviously.
It's a question related to the book of Job. I don't know, because I see parallels, you know,
in Nietzsche's quote, you know, I hate Socrates. He's so close to me. I'm always fighting him,
right? You can see, you can see both Nietzsche and Kierkegaard wrestling with Socrates. Kierkegaard
said, I follow Jesus, but Socrates is my teacher and he wrestles with Socrates all the way through.
Everybody's wrestling with Socrates. I follow Jesus, but Socrates is my teacher. So is that
the statement of the West? I think that, I mean, that was your objection at the beginning of this
talk, right? At least to some degree, because you said how influenced you were with Greece,
you insist upon how influenced you were by Greece. I think the West is the attempt to,
if I had to try and summarize the West, what an audacious thing to try and do.
See, Ruck said that, because I asked him why Dionysus transformed into Christ,
because we were answering simple questions too. And he said, well, Greece met Judaism.
Yeah, but Judaism also met Greece. I mean, phylum starts theology because of the interaction
with platonic philosophy. I think Christianity is trying to integrate agape and logos together.
That's how I try to understand his project. And please clarify that claim.
Sure. So I think, I mean, we've talked a lot about the Greek heritage of logos,
and logos is also central within. Especially in the book of John.
Yeah, especially in the book of John. And saying that metaphorically with regard to you as well.
But also in the epistle of John is where John also said, God is agape.
Right. And then that's the epistle of John. He makes that famous statement.
And the idea is there's something about the way the logos gathers things together,
so they belong together. That's the original. So that everything comes together.
Everything comes together. And then there's the idea and play of the ascent from the cave,
the anagogy. You and Jonathan talked about this. The world discloses itself to me,
that transforms me, and then I can see more deeply into the world,
than that transforms me. And I do this reciprocal opening. And the thing is,
that's very much, you know, you know, agape, that's you define that. That's love.
Yeah. Accelerating mutual disclosure is how it's even.
Well, it seemed to me. Well, it seemed to me that that the relationship between truth and love is
that love is the is the something like the goal and truth is its servant. It seems to me to be
same because I think. So this is how I've worked it on my in my mind. Is that
well, I think the truth is the best servant of reality. Truth is the servant of reality and
reality, I think best manifests itself as love.
Well, what are the slogans I have? That's why this power claim is so
abhorrent to me. The claim that power is the central motivating factor for the western endeavor
is tandem. I believe to saying that it's the basic endeavor of the human species. And I think
that's opposite of the truth. I think this agape is and logos is more accurate. And so
it's not just a counter claim. It's an antithesis. Well, I'm trying to pick up on what you're saying
here. I mean, you know, I'm trying to touch on the culture wars, obviously. Well, that's
yeah. And I mean, I think, I mean, for me, you're saying something very analogous to a critique
that I've built in awakening from the meaning crisis. Oh, that's here, man. Well, shut up.
No, it's okay. I mean, I was going to say one of my signatures is, you know, it's in Latin,
but it translates as love is its own way of knowing. And the kind of knowing there is like
noticing like news. Great. That's the Egyptian eye. Well, yes. It's noticing. It's not thinking. It's
attention. And maybe you're tying that with that revelation of the form. You're tying that to that
revelation of the form and that conforming. Yeah. And that's exactly it. That's exactly it. It's
and this is very similar to the Buddhist idea of that the what you're trying to do is shape
attention and mindfulness so that you get that reciprocal opening so that your your self knowledge
and the knowledge of the of the world will become indistinguishable, become interpenetrating,
like what you have when you really love somebody in a committed long term relationship,
you're knowing of yourself and you're knowing of them become bound up because you indwell them
and you internalize them and they indwell you and internalize you right. And how much how much death
of the old you has this involved for you? I know that's a strange question. No, it's a good question.
It's a damn good question. Why? It's a good question because it brings up the idea of the fact that
there is a level of knowing that deals with the process of identification itself in both
senses of the word identifying, designating something and assuming an identity in both
those senses of identification, the kind of knowing that I most care about this participatory
knowing involves and identification. And therefore, if we're talking about the transformation at that
level, we're talking about like that's what I mean about when I talk about knowing knowing
yourself. I don't mean representing yourself. I mean the knowing that constitutes you as a self
and that's what's undergoing the transformation when you're engaged in participatory knowing.
When I really love my partner, right, I'm not just forming. What does it mean that you love them?
Do you think if you have to express that? Well, I mean, it means a lot. It means that
reciprocal opening I was talking about. But it means that I, I mean, it's like what Eckhart says.
And again, I don't mean to be pretentious. Like, you know, he says, you have to make a space.
I don't think you're going to be able to help it in this conversation.
Yeah, that's true. That's fair enough. He says, you know, you have to
the goal of Rhineland mysticism was to this kind of receptivity. You have to make a space so that
the Son of God can be born within you. And again, no, not being just religious, you know,
irreligious, but for me to love my partner is to cultivate that kind of receptivity,
a space in which she can be within me. And I don't mean in any purely romantic metaphorical sense.
What I mean is she finds a purchase within me, whereby she can realize herself in both senses
of the word realize. And she can come to trust that that space, that place of realization will
always be available for her. And she can come to rely on a place through which she can transcend
herself when she needs to. I mean, and being and being committed to that and finding that
inseparably bound up with my own project of trying to realize who I am. That's for me,
the core of what it is to love somebody. That's great. I wish you luck with it.
Well, that's all we can ever wish anybody. I mean, if you're the grace of God,
or yeah, or that there is a life to this relationship that will eventually grow strong enough
that we can come to trust in it as much as we trust in each other. And that's what I believe
is happening for me. And I think there's kind of three loves involved, and they're all bound
up together. There's, you know, Socratic self love, not narcissistic self love. There's the love of
the other and then there's the love of the relationship. But that's for me is like a
trinity talking about if those are separate is the mistake. You have to talk about it analytically
as if they're separate, but they inter penetrate and inter afford each other in a profound way.
They become they become in an important sense indistinguishable from each other.
I've been trying to develop a counterposition to the claim that our society is predicated on the
expression of power and that our social relations are structured as a consequence of the expression
of power. And therefore by inference, our prime motivation is power, none of which I believe
to be true. I think that's all of that's an aberration in the deepest sense. And I think
that what we're talking about is the true path, let's say, to the degree that any of us are capable
of realizing that. And I certainly don't claim to be I struggle with it to my to an immense degree.
But I do believe that it's the proper counterposition. And then that well, so what do
you think about that? I mean, is the culture war we're in that deep? I mean, is the counterclaim
genuinely the adversarial position? I mean, what else would it be if it's not saying it's basically
saying that the claim is something like the driving force of Western culture. But I don't
know how you distinguish that from the driving force of human culture. Exactly. I don't think
most of the people who make that claim would say that there's something it's hard for them to say
that there's something radically different about Western culture. And the world spirit, let's say,
without only attributing all that is negative to Western culture. And that's, I think, very difficult
to do. So if the mainstream of Western culture is the mainstream of human culture, or akin to it,
so akin to that shamanic tradition, for example, then the claim is that that mainstream is
the desire for power. And that's the opposite of what we're saying, genuinely the opposite.
It's the antithesis to that, because that isn't phylo-nikea, the antithesis to.
Yeah, I think it is. Well, I mean, that's part of it.
Is it genuinely the antithesis? I mean, so is this a claim of satanic possession of the West?
I mean, is the culture war that deep? Well, I don't know. I mean, the claim is that it's about
fundamentals, right? It's a fundamental critique of Western society. It means fundamental. That's
why Derrida went after phylogocentrism. Yeah, and I think, and there's in Foucault,
it does similar things. But the thing you have to remember is, you know, toward the ends of
Derrida's career, right? He's reaching into Neoplatonic mysticism, negative theology is
something he starts to take an interest in. And Foucault, you know, technologies of the self,
and he gets very deeply interested in the work of Pierre Hadoe, right? And what is ancient philosophy
and the wisdom tradition in Philea Sophia? And he starts to turn towards it and starts to recognize
it. I know nothing of that. I know nothing of that. Yeah, well, that's what, so I mean,
well, that's that's very interesting. And then he dies. Yeah, Foucault also Foucault. No, Derrida,
we were sorry, we were speaking of Derrida. I was speaking of both. I said, you see getting very
interested in negative theology, Neoplatonic mysticism. And then you see Foucault getting
very interested in, you know, stoicism and Pierre Hadoe's work on the whole Socratic.
And so what do you make? Okay, so do you, is it reasonable for me to assume that Derrida and
Foucault's thinking is at the bottom of this counterclaim that I'm discussing, which culminates
in the assumption that power and is at the core of the Western endeavor, like the exercise of
arbitrary power? Is that the center of the culture war, that claim? I don't I mean,
I think the the that's symptomatic of something that's been going on much more deeply and much
longer. Fair enough. I don't know if that answers my question. But you know, because I'm looking
for a corrective or perhaps for agreement, but that's completely up to you. Because if it's
a corrective, then that I need, you know, so be it. I mean, am I taking this in the wrong
direction? Or am I seeing it clearly? I want to say something other than those. I want to
I want to I want to I want to say that that our relationship to power as a criterion of
realness should be properly acknowledged rather than be made an absolute or be set up as an
antithesis. I think what's coming out, I would argue, out of four e cognitive science is the
is the growing claim that we don't have a single way of knowing the world. We have a
propositional way that, you know, as it says that is carried in proposition and results in
beliefs, we have, which is not knowing that, but we have also procedural knowing, we know how to
do things, and it doesn't result in beliefs that results in skills. We have perspectival
knowing, which is neither about belief or skills, it's about states of consciousness and how they
create situational awareness for us. And then we have this participatory knowing that we've
been talking about throughout where I know not at the level of my beliefs or my skills or even
my states of consciousness, but I know in terms of my traits of my character and how I've been
shaped in order to fit the world in a way that seems to fundamentally matter to me. And I think
each one of these has a deep has a different sense of realness attached to it. I think
propositional has truth. I think procedural skills give us a sense of realness when they
empower us. Our perspectival knowing, what's the sense of realness there? Well, we're getting a
good sense of this from virtual reality work. It's a sense of presence, a sense of presence.
And then what's the sense of realness for participatory knowing? And that's what we're
talking about. We're talking about this, like people try to capture it with these words of
faith and connection and belonging and fittedness and at one minute. And I think instead,
I think what's happening is our culture is realizing that we have tried to reduce all
the knowing, Ella Descartes, to purely propositional knowing. And then we're slowly realizing the
inadequacy of that. I think the fact that we are trapped in ideological battle means we think we
can capture all of the meaning-making machinery at the propositional level. But what Fourier
cognitive science is saying is, no, no, human, you talked about tracking. The skill of tracking
affords our conceptual abilities, but also states of consciousness afford us being in
relationship to the world. You can have totally ineffable states that nevertheless seem the most
real to you. And also these transformations of ourselves also carry with them a sense of
realness. And I think what's happened is the West is realizing, but in a negative way,
that the propositional reduction is inadequate, insufficient. And it's groping for the closest
thing at hand. And the closest thing at hand is what technology makes salient to which is power
and control. This is Heidegger's critique. But I think we have to go deeper. We have to say,
no, no, there's a place for that. But your skills ultimately depend on your situational awareness.
And your situational awareness, the states of consciousness you get access to,
ultimately depend on your character. We have to bring back that whole rich philosophical
anthropology. And why did they ultimately depend on your care? Well, that's that's a lot to swallow
in, you know, 10 statements. Yeah, I mean, I'm going to scuttle back to my power claim momentarily,
and then try to wrap my head around what you said. Okay. Well, sorry, I didn't mean to dump so much.
No, no. Well, no, no, no, not not at all. I mean, it might have been the answer, the proper answer.
The proper answer is often that the question isn't sophisticated enough, you know,
but it sort of throws the questioner because he's operating from within the space where that's
the germane issue, right? So my claim was that the culture war right now is being fought over the
claim that the fundamental animating tendency of Western civilization is the desire to exercise
and the exercising of arbitrary power. And I believe that to be fundamentally wrong.
And so I phrased it as an adversarial hypothesis as a satanic hypothesis,
essentially from a symbolic perspective, that the accusation is that the West is possessed by
this satanic demand for power, and that's its characteristic spirit. And I don't believe that,
I believe that its characteristic spirit is phylaea, Sophia, fundamentally, and that that is a
contamination, which occurs repeatedly, which would be phylaea.
Nikia, Nikia, I think if if we're using your language properly, or perhaps we're slandering
phylaea, Nikia, I mean, because I think part of the claim that you're making is that there's a
positive aspect to phylaea. There is, that's being damned as the mere arbitrary expression of power.
Well, I do think that's something like series like suits are getting at, right? Because you have
these characters in that drama, who are motivated primarily by phylaea, so phylaea and Nikia.
But you see phylaea, Sophia, emerge between them. And that's what makes them tolerable as
characters. But both those things seem to be interrelated, one leads to the other.
And that seems to be related to your wrestling argument in some sense, and maybe to mine.
Yes. So okay, so you think that this, so is your claim, let me get this right, at least in part that
first of all, I want to know what you think of my claim about this central argument. What you're
doing is saying that's a sideshow on a much deeper, that's a sideshow of a much deeper problem. I mean,
that's quite the bloody claim, John. It's not easy for me to process, but yeah, well, so I'm having
some trouble with that. But do you think that that invalidates my claim? Or does it just render it
irrelevant? No, it doesn't. Given this discussion, okay, so that can do, is it okay if we deal with
that and then move on? Sure. I mean, I guess what. Okay, am I misreading early Derrida and Foucault by
attributing to them the claim that it is power that they identify as the central spirit? And
am I wrong in saying that that's just a modified Marxist claim? It's a transformation of the
idea of the class struggle into the domain of the sheer power struggle for power.
I think you could make a claim that Foucault sees the deep interpenetration, the earlier Foucault,
maybe even the middle Foucault sees a deep interpenetration between power and knowledge.
For Derrida, I do not think that difference really is a good translation, is well translated by the
term power. Difference is much closer to, you know, what I would call relevance realization,
the idea that our claim, that the relevance of our claim can't be bound. I mean, somebody within
classical cognitive science, computational science, Jerry Fodor makes a similar argument
that the relevance of a proposition can't be captured within the syntax or semantics of the
proposition. I mean, that's the main thing that Derrida is on about. That's the consequence
of what we're bringing to the table, because the relevance is the interpenetration of the
semantic and the syntactic with the unique. Well, it's also the pragmatics that goes beyond it,
because I mean, this is the central claim of pragmatics that I always have to convey way
more than I can say, because I have to rely on you, you know, picking out all the possible of
all the possible implications, the ones that are relevant out of all the right, which means I have
to know you, which means I have to embody whatever is that I'm speaking to you. Now you're back to
my claim that the character traits are at the bottom of this. Right. If you go ahead, man,
if you can't, if you don't know, if we can't actually conform at the level of our character,
we can't. Right. So that's trust. Yeah. And so when you trust, you trust what's honest. Yeah.
You trust what's honest. So you trust the logos. Right. And what because that's honesty driven by
love. Right. But I don't think I trust you. That's what I trust. So my sense of that, my sense, just
I want to go back to something I asked you to define love, and I'm going to define it on my
terms now. And that is the best in me serving the best in you. And I think that's the deepest
pleasure. That's the deepest and most lasting pleasure. And it is the most fundamental motivation.
It's the inexhaustible source. Because if I can do that, whenever I do that, I feel that I'm being
properly. And there's nothing better than that. And you can extend that to, you can extend that to
to the world, to situations, places. Well, I think that's what you're supposed to do by accepting
the proposition that God is love. I mean, it's God is love and God is logos. Those are, those are
both there. So then the question, to some degree, is the rank order of the two. And I would say
God is truth within love. And that's the animating spirit of mankind. And that's a way different
claim than the one the atheists are going after, by the way. Think about it, everyone. Is truth
is truth in the service of love, not the best animating spirit of mankind? When it isn't pursuing
an aberration, we can all ask yourself that question. I think that's a good question to ask.
Thank you, John. What I mean is I think it re,
I think it reorients us to the fact. We can put that on a t-shirt. Is truth in the service of
love a good question? I guess I see them as more, I see them as more interpenetrating. I want to
make a stronger relationship between them than just a relationship of service. I mean, this is
a matter, man. Yeah, that, that, this is why I like the term realization that love is a way of
affording realization. And that, and the deepest knowing you have of reality is in realization.
That's what I, if I had to. Okay, so, well, so it seems to me, okay, so I'll make, I'll make an
appendage to my claim. Right. The reality that is most justifiable is brought about by the
action of truth in the service of love. Yeah, but I guess what I'm saying is I see truth
I, I think you're using it and I've heard you use true as something beyond
a correspondence between the semantic content of a proposition reality. I've heard you talk about
Yes. Right, right. And we even use that when we, when we use the phrase true. Yes, it seems to
incorporate some of those other dimensions that you've been talking about. Exactly. Exactly.
Okay, well great, man. So fill me in. Well, that's what I'm trying to get at. I'm trying to get at
that power is a way of, you know, when, when, when your shot is true, your skill has been effective
and you're going to hit the mark. Right. But, but, but presence is also a way in which things are,
are true to form. Right. And then care of the, the participatory knowing is when we're like the
deepest sense of true, which is, you know, related to trust and, and being betrothed to the world in
an important way. So if you will allow me to expand what you mean by true to cover all of those
dimensions. Betrothed to the world in that you extend the same courtesy to the world that you
described extending to your partner. Exactly. I think the answer to nihilism isn't some
propositional answer. This is what I get from this. Yeah, right. It's to relearn.
And I mean this deeply in the, in the Buddhist sense of Sati, to remember
what it is to fall in love with reality, to fall in love with being. And if that's what you're
saying is that you think that's what Sam Harris is striving for in his spirituality.
Well, I mean, it's not a, it's not a throwaway answer. It's like, what's he up to exactly? I
mean, he's on a, he's, he's, isn't he on a Sophia, um, finally a Sophia adventure?
I think everybody is, how can I put this? Everybody lives from the, the non propositional
kinds of knowing emphasized by Plato. And that's what all of the scholastic research is pointing
to now that Socrates was trying to point people to the non propositional knowing, the procedural,
the, the perspectival, the participatory. I think we all have to live from that, given a lot of
things I've said and a lot of things we've said. Maybe you could, you could expound on those a bit
more for us and clarify a bit more. And so you said the answer to nihilism, that isn't, that
isn't exactly a comment on my comment that the culture war is about a claim that the drive to
power is at the core of Western being. I think that's an equally nihilistic claim. I, that's,
that's my point. The claim, the claim is nihilistic or my claim about that is nihilistic or both.
That power is a fundamental reality is an attempt to assuage the wounding of nihilism,
but it is fundamentally mistaken in its endeavor. It will, it is, it is, it is constituted the wrong
way. It's like framing a problem the wrong way so that you know, you know, do not get the insight
needed to get to the solution of the problem. So I think of it as a fundamental miss framing.
That's what I'm trying to say. And that's why I'm not, I'm, that's why I'm hesitant to say
either yes or no to it because I get it. Well, I believe that I believe that it is
misframed because I don't think it would be taking us in such a pathological direction. The whole
argument. Exactly. If it wasn't misframed. And so part of what I'm, I'm trying to, and for me,
this dovetails with the, you know, the, the, the increasing crescendo within 4e cognitive science
about embodiment and embedded and extended and enacted cognition is most. Right. You see this
as a subset argument of one of those elements. Yes. But that's a heel, but like I said, I'm really
having a hard time. I know what you mean, but, and I suppose what you're trying to do with
everything you do is to expound upon this, but I certainly want you to expound upon this. Let's
go into those three modes of alternate cognition a little bit more deeply. Okay. So, I mean, so the,
the first distinction, of course, is was classically made by Raoul and, and we even carry it in,
in psychology when we make distinctions of our own procedural memory and things like that,
which this is the distinction between propositional knowing that something is the case
in which what you're trying to do is basically assert, you know, the truth of the semantic content
of a phrase. Right. And that's, that's akin to the proposition that to believe in God is to accept
a set of propositions about the nature of God. Exactly. Yes. And that's what always strikes.
That's why I never answer that question because I think that's the wrong framing of the question.
So I can't answer it. Exactly. Okay. Well, man, you're helping me out here. So,
because you're differentiating, you're helping me differentiate my sense of the non propositional
space. And I mean, I know some of this because I know that the knowing what and knowing how
circuitry is separate. Yep. I've known that since I wrote maps of meaning. And I know the
insight circuitry is separate. And, and you know, that's what I've been getting at also with regards
to this idea of revelation and then critical thinking, which we started all this with and never
got back to, even though it's just a trivial issue. We're following the logos. We're following the
logos in love. Oh God, I hope so. Yeah. I hope so, John, because it's certainly the only justification
for my existence. Red skull and all. I think there are many reasons that justify your existence,
my friend. Yeah, well, I think that's an inadequate self appraisal. Oh, thank you,
John. That's vastly appreciated. So I think you would admit, and I think, you know,
there's been a growing consensus from the failure of computational cognition or even behaviorist
to, we can't reduce consciousness. Why failure, John? Because what we've noticed is that
consciousness doesn't seem to be something that's explicatable in terms of the
logical relations between propositions. It's not propositional. Very good. Very good. So you think
we've actually found that out, and that's the failure. Does that mean the failure of AI as
it's presently constituted? It depends. It depends, because what's happening in AI is that AI is
moving off a sort of proposition. Propositions. Yeah. The idea that cognition is computation,
and that the mind is a formal system is being replaced with the idea that the mind is an embodied
autopoetic dynamical system, and that thinking isn't in the head. It's the way the embodied
brain is dynamically coupled to the world in an ongoing evolution of your sensory motor, right?
They mean hence the justification for freedom of speech, you might say.
Well, and also the freedom of action. Freedom of action and also, you know, a freedom for people
to explore different ways in which they inhabit their body. I think that's also an important thing.
So I did want to get back, though. So if you, if there's a growing plausibility,
so much so that, for example, Bernardo Castro, and I take him seriously, I don't agree with him,
but Bernardo is a sharp guy. He proposes a kind of absolute ideal. Who is that? I don't know him.
Bernardo Castro. Bernardo Castro. So Bernardo is so convinced, and he's a very sharp guy,
that the arguments of trying to reduce consciousness computationally, etc., have failed,
that he is willing to advocate for, and I don't disagree, I don't agree with him on this,
but he makes a plausible case that reality, you know, absolute idealism, that consciousness is
the ultimate reality. And whether or not that's the case, all I'm trying, I'm making a weaker
claim on the basis of that. I'm taking that as evidence that there is a growing consensus,
that the attempt to, you know, explain consciousness computationally, or even just in terms of sort of
sort of behaviorist set of skills or something like that, I think that's failed.
So to go back to the four kinds of knowing, you've already acknowledged the propositional.
Yeah, so sorry, I want to inject one more thing here that's relevant to what you just said,
if you don't mind. I don't mind it all. Well, you know, I think the atheist critique of religion
is a critique at a propositional level. I've made this similar point, Jordan. I've made the point
that they're not, you know, they're not paying attention to, I mean, when Nietzsche runs into
the marketplace, he is talking to the atheists when he says, you don't know what you've done when
you've killed God, right? And so to think that religion is primarily about asserting
propositions for which there is no evidence is to miss all of the non-propositions. So I make a
distinction and it lines up with this, you know, I think that religion is not primarily about
knowledge. I think it's primarily about wisdom, because wisdom is about that fundamental transformation.
It's about embodying it. Pardon me? It's about embodying it. It's about establishing a relationship
with it. Yes. It's about worshiping it. It's about taking it into your identity. That's what I mean.
That's the worship, I think. Well, I think it is. And well, Jonathan described worship as celebration.
So it's a celebration of and reverence. Well, reverence for sure. But the celebration part is
interesting because what you celebrate is what you hold in highest esteem and to hold something in
highest esteem is to pursue it in the hopes of embodying it. And that's worship. But yeah,
but we've, well, maybe this is, maybe this is to your point about worship. We've lost the depth
of celebration. We have reduced it. Yeah, you see it in black gospel music, don't you? And then it
runs into rock and roll from there. And then you get the, you get stadiums full of people
experiencing it without noticing what they're doing. Well, I mean, I felt that spirit when I
went to a Leonard Cohen show when he stood up and everyone clapped and, you know, he sings hallelujah
or is it the apocalypse? I think that's the song. He's got a couple, him and Johnny Cash in his
later years got a couple of songs that put you in that space right away. But I agree. I think that's,
that is, that is a version of celebration. But the problem with that is, right, is it's been too
located in the, it's ontological locus is entertainment. Yes, you're right. It's exactly,
John, entertainment. It's like, no, no, it's enthusiasm. Yes. And pheos to be possessed
by the God. And that's what I was trying to get at, right? In celebration. We don't even notice
when it happens. That's what a stadium is too, when you cheer when someone puts the soccer goal
through the net. Of course it is. Hey, look at that man's aim. Couldn't we all aim like that? And
wouldn't that be wonderful? Yes. And we'll do the wave to that. And don't we notice that we're
worshiping God? No, because we've killed our religion by presuming it was a set of axiomatics,
set of presuppositions and listening to the 18th, 19th century rationalist atheists.
Well, what we've done is we have confused modernity's understanding of religion with the
phenomena, which is, I think, a fundamental mistake. No, with our blind critique of the
phenomenon. Because first of all, we have to make the phenomenon trivial and then critique it without
noticing things like the spirit in black gospel music and taking that seriously.
Yeah, yeah. I like your reformulation. I think that's better said. Thank you.
So to go back, if consciousness and this kind, so there is there's a knowing that is like dependent
on your state of consciousness. There's a knowing through consciousness. And that's what I call
perspectival knowing for what consciousness does is it foregrounds some things, backgrounds others,
makes things salient. So it's doing, if you'll allow me a term I coined, it's doing salient
landscaping for you. And what that does is that does that drawing things to your attention?
Yes. But your attention always also does that. So is that part of that? Because you kind of
you kind of choose where your attention goes. You choose, right? Or you participate in it.
You participate in attention. That's what I that's what I was saying. You don't just attend,
and you don't just receive, you participate. There's both, you know, and they use these metaphors
without, you know, I think fully unpacking them, you know, there's the top down the bottom.
Do you think that it is that a part? Is that participatory attention akin to the dance between
revelation and critic criticism? Is it revelation and dialogical evaluation that constitutes the
participatory or element of attention? Well, I think what it's doing is it's if I'll speak more
the theological language, it's realizing. So there's attention, right, is doing something
like prioritization, relevance realization, right, in the dialogue between imagination,
where we stop thinking of imagination as just images, useless images in our head. I want to use
it the way Corban uses it, imaginal. And this is what's coming out in Friston's predictive processing.
Imagination is it permeates your perception. It's permitting your, it's right to say that
I'm as much imagination. That's why Jung said we live to dream. Well, but there's something true
about that. But I want to caveat it because people will say it's all an hallucination. No, no, no.
It's not. No, it's not. Most of the prediction. That's weird. Yeah. Most of the predictions are
accurate. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. It can't be just a dream. Exactly. Exactly. So you've got,
you've got imagination. If you'll allow me the spatial language coming down and out.
Right. That's right. And it covers it covers what's out there. And we see the imagination,
but it pertains to the reality. Yes. There has to be a member. So what we're doing is continually
adjusting the imagination to the reality of the logos and the prioritization is the way of adjusting.
So we see the map. We don't see the territory, but we also see the, is that right? We see the map.
We don't see the territory, but we also see the errors in the map. Right. We see the map and the
errors in the map, but we don't see the territory. Yeah. But the errors are where the territory
pushes its nose through. And what those errors do is they can, if we're properly receptive to the
way the errors are deforming the map, they can turn it into a globe. And a globe is still not
the thing, but it's damn better than a map. And so that there's a receptivity that's also
important. And yeah, well, then, you know, and it is definitely the case that in so far as our
map is accurate, which means it's been generated as a consequence of a rectification of our previous
errors is that it is an adequate representation of the external of the, of reality. It's an
adequate representation of reality, which means we have molded ourselves to reality.
See, this is also why I think, John, that the, I think that men and women select each other for
manifestation of the logos. I mean, I'm talking, well, because I said this was a deep critique,
you know, it goes all the way to the, well, what? Okay. So look at this. So men organize themselves
into groups and they, they, they take the, the quarterback out of the stadium on their shoulders
and they say by doing so cheerleaders, here's your chosen mate and the cheerleaders jump up in the air
with their legs spread and say, hooray, bring him to me. And that's the, isn't that the dialogue between
men and women down the ages? And you might say, well, why would men vote for the stallion when
they're not the stallion? And the answer is, well, it's better to be a follower of the stallion.
If you can't be this stallion, then to not be at all. And I mean that in the deepest evolutionary
sense as well, or have I got something wrong? Because when I said this is the fundamental
animating spirit, I really meant it. And so then if men and women are choosing each other for
manifestation of the logos, then that's the spirit that drives the evolution of consciousness.
It's not, it's random, it might be random, random variation on the option side, but that doesn't
mean it's random variation on the selection side, obviously. And so then the question is, what are
you selected for? I imagine your wife is pretty fond of you when you manifest that. Well, yes, I, I
have a wife too, and I can, and understand her displeasure with my multiple shortcomings.
Displeasure with my multiple shortcomings and justified displeasure, I might say.
But I'm sure that she's happy when you do manifest that part of you that you said you wanted to
manifest. But I get, I mean, I get, maybe I don't get you. What I see is you're mapping the
receptivity and the selection onto sort of masculine and feminine, maybe sort of yin and yang
in a Taoist thing. But if I was to respond as a Taoist, I would say, but can't I have that
relationship also with you? Does it have to be necessarily embodied in a sexual difference?
No, but I know, I think it's also embodied in that, in that it goes all the way to the bottom
wherever you look. Well, wouldn't that suggest then that something like the Taoist notion of yin
and yang there before is a more fundamental representation of the reality precisely because
it applies to other cases? Well, more fundamental than what?
The idea of masculine and feminine. I mean, I, I understand.
That's certainly possible. That's certainly possible. I mean, I think, you know, I think
reality is the battle of good and evil against a background of chaos and order.
So the chaos and order would map quite readily. Sorry, go ahead, please.
I was just saying, I can see that in sort of, that's a very valid, the reason is the order is
the map that you're describing, right? Because in so far as it's in cordon concordance with
reality, it's a map that enables us when we apply it to get what we desire. Of course.
Okay. And then disorder emerges when that prediction, it isn't just a prediction because
it's predicated on desire, which is where the cognitive scientists went wrong,
because it's not just expectation, it's, it's desire. But that's changing.
The map is motivated. Well, that's good. Because that was a fundamental problem.
The predictive processing model is changing. In fact, the idea that the, the, the, the idea that
we're even talking about something inferential, working with Bayes' proposition is largely
Namoribund. Princeton himself and Andy Clark and somebody, one of my former students that I'm
collaborating with, Mark Miller, and also with Brett Anderson. It's like, no, the work of Michael
Anderson, the embodied understanding of predictive processing is now, is now the dominant model in
which affect, like look, relevance, realization, relevance realization is not cold calculation.
It's okay. So look, it's motivation and affect, let's say, but that's a hierarchical structure.
And in that hierarchical structure, there's a central organizing spirit, a spirit that drives
towards unity. And because then it's predicated on the very idea of the attentional, of attentional
focus itself, right? What do you hold in the highest esteem? That's what directs your attention,
right? What you hold in the highest esteem directs your attention.
What you care about. So how is that not a religious claim? How can that not be a religious claim if
the claim is also embodied? You see what I mean? I do think because maybe there's one more step past
motivation, it's personality, right? Because motivation manifests itself in personality.
That's the next step for the cognitive scientists, if they haven't got there yet.
I mean, I knew that motivation and emotion was that the step past pure expectation because,
well, in Jeffrey Gray's work, which is brilliant, Neuropsychology of Anxiety is a great book,
but he assumes that the map predicts expectation and that we're sort of cold cognitive
expectors, right? Prediction machines, but we're not. We don't predict what's going to happen.
We work to make what we want to happen happen. But that's not the same thing.
But that's the change that's happening, Jordan, that they're shifting off of prediction as the
primary metaphor into anticipation. And is the shift gone to the point where
it's personalities manifesting themselves within us that determine our direction?
Yes. Not quite what you would call explicit personality theory, but the notion that
this is the term that's used. And of course, it is fraught with millennia with issues of contention.
But the idea of the discussion around the self, what the self is as an organizing principle,
it's a personality. It's a personality. Well, obviously, personality theory and cognitive
theory have to be united. I mean, they're major domains, right? So I'm trying to get a paper
published that tries to integrate them. And the bridging point is actually inattention,
because what's what's come out in predictive processing is what's called precision waiting.
What you have to do is you have to get, you have to privilege you because you can't model
everything. They hit combinatorial explosion, right? You have to privilege chaos, right? You
have to privilege certain, you have to privilege certain predictions. We can come back later
why anticipation is a much better word. And that's what attention is. And that's where the
relevant. Yes, I'm writing a paper. Okay. So, but then the, so Pajot's point would be the basis
of worship is what directs attention. And I think that's ultimately right. I mean, I, well, Jesus,
that's a hell of a thing to say, you know, because especially if the, because it, well,
then the case that the apex of your attention, you know, has a, has this drive towards unity
and that it's based in personality. I mean, these are claims that are very much tantamount to
religious claims. I, as far as I can see, I, well, okay, then I, you know, I have a sequence
of argument, a sequence of episodes in my series where I lay out an argument step by step, trying
to build the, the experience of sacredness and its reference. It's the sacred, but they're trying to
build the experience of sacredness out of the way in which attention and relevance,
realization and participatory knowing and perspectival knowing are all seeking to bind
us to ourselves, the self, to each other and to the world. And the sacred is that which most,
you know, most powerfully, truthfully and presently and belongingly achieves that for us.
Right. Great. Well said, John. Hooray. Where do you put awe and admiration in that? So think
about this admiration is the instinct to emulate. Okay. So then we look for the most emulatable.
That's the ultimate spirit. And, and I think Gerard is right that, that that always carries
with it the dark side of memetic envy and covetousness and that those two are always playing
off against each other. Because, because we think we can possess it by, by, by ill-got means. Yes.
That's the story of Cain. Yes. Yes. And of course that's carried with us because the story of human
history is the battle between able and Cain, which is also why I asked you about this fundamental
cultural crisis that's tearing us apart. And you said, well, that's a manifestation of deeper
things. And that's, well, that's what I asked too. Yeah. And that's, and I, and I hope that what we've
been doing is actually my answer to, to that. I can say more about, because I've been, I've been
involved and I'm involved in some actual experiments on awe and the effects on cognition and some of
the work. I don't know if what we've been doing is the answer to that or the antidote to that.
To which, sorry. Well, if the question is posed wrong, we can't really answer it, can we? We
have to provide an alternative formulation. But that's what I think we're doing here.
Yeah. So it's an antidote rather than an answer. And that's fine. And I know, I know, I'm just
clarifying it. I'm, I'm, I think, I think looking for the answer is in some sense a fundamental
way of misframing it. That is to, that is to give in to the problem. Well, how do we address it then?
How do we address it, John? Do we just by step it and just offer the alternative?
No, no, to think about this. That's a genuine question, because perhaps we do just by
sidestep it and offer the alternative. Yes. That's what I'm saying. That's what I, that's,
sorry. I want, I want to be more responsible. That's what I'm recommending. That's what I'm
recommending. I'm recommending that we remember that, that meaning in life, and this is also
something I'm doing empirical work on, right? That meaning in life is mostly bound, right,
at the non propositional level. And it does feed into things like sacredness. I think reverence
is the proper virtue of awe. Reverence is the virtue that helps us appropriate. Well,
reverence means it is hold, is hold in ritual and as hold as a marker or as a, as a pointer for
ritual emulation. I think it's, I think that's embodiment. That's, and that's the, that's the
pulling in of that personality into the self. I think that's right. But I think what awe,
see awe is really interesting because awe, because you can measure this, awe is one of the few
instances where people's sense of self and egocentrism is, is shrunk and they, but they find
it a positive experience and they want it to continue. Right. Well, that's, that's how what
we experience in relationship to our current ego, when we hypothesize our ideal as well.
I think that's right. And that goes to, I mean, those are the same things because
awe is the ideal, awe is our unconscious ideal capturing us.
Think about it, it's the spirit within. So imagine this, you already admitted,
so to speak, that we're, you know,
kinaotic representations of the central animating spirit of the ages. And that speaks
from our unconscious because it's, it's embodied within us. And then it finds its,
it finds its grip on us in awe, in admiration. Would you say though, so this is quite like,
would you say that it's not only the, the unconscious within us, but the unconscious
without us? Because I think what awe is doing is disclosing. It's the unconscious in the books
behind you. Yes. And also the unconscious in the world. Because I think part of what,
what we're, I think, I think we got too locked into the notion of the sacred as perfection
completion. This is one of my critiques of Plato, although I'm normally a lover of Plato.
And I think you can see in the mystics and in many traditions, this is a claim I can
back up, but I'm just going to throw it out there. Right. Even in, even in Jonathan's tradition,
Eastern Orthodoxy. It's the sacred, the good becoming better.
Well, the sacred is an inexhaustableness. Right. And yes, that's why I'm asking that question.
Yes. Yes. Because when I've had visions of heaven, heaven is a place that's perfect and getting better.
Well, okay. Well, okay. Let me give you my sense. The place where I don't have visions,
but the place where I experienced what I'm talking about. I wouldn't recommend them necessarily.
Yeah. Well, I mean, we can compare altered states of consciousness another time, perhaps.
Yeah. Okay. You'd really like to do that, wouldn't you?
Let me just finish the point I was making. Okay. Don't be far on to another universe, you mean?
Yeah. See, for me, I tell people that Plato is sacred, which does not mean that I cannot,
that I can't question him. It does not mean that I can't disagree with him. It means the following.
Plato transforms me. I go out and live my life for a while. The world then changes me because of
the way I've been changed. I come back and I see things in Plato I didn't see before. And then I
go back to the world. The thing is, the Bible does that for people. Yes. And that's why the
Bible is sacred. And what Plato, I think, argues and what Taoism argues, and I think Christianity
argues where there's also the book of nature. There's always the two books of Revelation.
You can actually experience that with respect to nature. I don't particularly like that term,
but you can experience that with right where the world is sacred. I think introverts do that in
particular. That's a hypothesis of mine. I don't have evidence for it, but I've noticed my introverted
clients need to be renewed by nature. And it's something that seems, so if extroversion is
adaptation for the social world, is it in some sense, is it possible that introversion is adaptation
for the natural world? That strikes me as a plausible hypothesis. Well, all you introverts
out there, you could tell me, if you're introverted, do you find sustenance in nature
differentially? Because I don't think it's true for extroverts. They want to party and be with
other people. Yeah, but there's, sorry, when you said all you introverts out there, I remember
somebody, a former partner, she gave me a... In a group, all you introverts. Yeah, she gave me a
poster. She said, it was like a propaganda poster, introverts of the world unite quietly,
alone in your room. You know, John, in my classes, I used to segregate my classes into groups based
on extroversion and introversion. I'd ask them to... Yes, because I had them debate, and so I put
all the introverts together, and then they would debate because the most extroverted would talk,
right? But it worked wonderfully, and the students appreciated it. So it's something,
I'm humbly considering that it's something to contemplate. It worked extremely well when I
had them debate, because otherwise the introverts, you know, they're always likely to say the right
thing a second later. And so they don't get to talk because the most extroverted leaps up,
and that was almost always me, you know, the most extroverted leaps up and says the thing.
That's really helpful to me, because I'm trying to understand its machinery of the logos, and I'm
trying to understand the things that come in. Obviously, there's the cognitive factors,
there's attachment factors. I hadn't given enough thought to personality factors. That's good.
That's very good. Thank you. That's something... Yeah, well, I think the whole cognitive field
hasn't given enough thought to personality factors, because they haven't realized that
motivation and aft factor manifested in personality. Well, I'm trying to respond to that.
Because they set goals, right? Well, great. I know I see that. I'm so thrilled about it,
and I wish you every success. It looks like you're tromping away, man. So...
Well, more specifically, I'm trying to get a paper published that tries to integrate
relevance realization theory, cognitive theory with, you know, big five personality theory,
making use of work of a shared student, Colin DeYoung. And so...
So, you tell me about that.
Oh, well, the idea is, you know, well, I mean, it's a long argument, but to so
receive it charitably, because I'm just giving you the gist. But the idea is, you know,
Colin's idea about the meditrates of stability and plasticity, they tend to, well, I should be
more cautious because I'm making a proposal theoretically. A plausible way of understanding
in that is that they map on to the the the medic constraints that are working within
relevance realization of efficiency and resiliency. And so you can see in a lot of machine learning
that what you're doing is trying to get them the system to improve its problem solving learning
ability by constantly trading between efficiency and resiliency. And that tends to, you know,
push towards stability. Is that a consequence of the fact that when machines were taught to identify
penguins or birds and fish, and then they were given a penguin, it blew the prediction system.
It comes, yeah, it goes way back. It goes back to Jeffrey Hinton.
Because that's where I derived the idea from the difference between
plasticity and stability to begin with.
And it's in, it's in.
So you heard that. Did you, I derived the idea from that, from the sources that you're citing as
its corollaries. So, yeah, I mean, that's great.
It was from Greenberg, I think Greenberg, I think
that that's very convergent. So thank you. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Okay.
I mean, and you, you might want to know that, you know, because he was a colleague of both of
ours, Jeffrey Hinton at U of T. I mean, the basic idea, what the paper I published on
relevance realization 2012 basically attributes that core idea to him in his wake sleep algorithm
for deep learning. So long story short is there's, and you're, you're, you're reinforcing it,
which thank you, I appreciate that. There's this growing convergence between sort of what
machine learning is saying about, you know, opponent processing. And then, you know, the,
what personality theory is saying about the kind of opponent processing between stability and
plasticity. And so the, and then what we're trying to do is say, right, there's, there's, there,
we can take sort of embodied cognitive science and properly integrate those
together. And then there's a, there's an additional idea, which is that personality,
there's might be an aspect of which it's affording not only individual cognition,
but it might be, and this is, this goes back to your classroom example, I think it might be also
a way of affording distributed cognition, improving relevance realization, because
you can see the various traits as moving subpopulations to emphasize stability,
others to open things up. And so what personnel, so personality is simultaneously helping to
glue cognition together within the individual, but also glue distributed cognition together,
which goes back to your point about the role of personality, that would, that would explain
to some degree the existence of the niches of the, because imagine that there's niches, obviously,
that these personalities fill because otherwise they wouldn't be useful. And exactly the niches
are valuable. Your claim in some sense is that the niches are valuable because they both expand
and stabilize the, the map that the analogies in biological selection is, is intended in the work.
So you're picking up on it. It has to be, if you're thinking,
well, it has to be, if you're thinking it's going to go anywhere, right?
I think so too. I think so too. Yeah. Well, this is why I was interested in your reaction to the
idea that, you know, we're selecting on the basis of logos, because that's a, well,
you know, you've been talking about the metaphysical status of consciousness,
and that's what drove me to, to bring that issue up, because the issue of God in some sense hinges
on the issue of the metaphysical significance of consciousness. That's what it looks like to me.
That's right. Do you think that's right? I think it's right in that this way. It depends. I mean,
I don't want to do the simple party trick of what depends what you mean by God, but what I'm trying,
what I'm saying is, I think there, I don't, or real, it depends on what you mean by real.
But when you ask questions like that, is God real? It depends on just as much on what you think is
real as what you're asking about God. Exactly. And here's the, here's the, here's what I will say
as a claim. I do not think we are going to solve, and I mean that in cognitive scientific terms,
the problem of consciousness without addressing fundamental ontology. I've been arguing for
that. Yeah, that's because that's where, where the consciousness field studies has got it wrong.
Consciousness isn't the fundamental mystery. Reality is the fundamental mystery.
Exactly. And that secondary mystery is the relationship between consciousness and reality,
because is it, is it a primary relationship? That's the fundamental ontological question.
And one of the offshoots of that is, well, how can you, where is the reality without consciousness?
That's that objective world that's out there without us. But what is it that's out there
without us? Without, forget us. Consciousness. Well, and that's, and what people, what people
need to hear is that one of, this is an odd sentence because, but one of the most exciting
areas. It's going to be one of many, John. So like, rock them up, man. One of the exciting areas
within, you know, metaphysics right now is the rise of what's called speculative realism.
Yeah, right. And, and, and what's called object oriented ontology. And it's, it's, it's like
object oriented programming as a metaphor. I won't go into it. But the primary thing that
they're on about is they say, look, if you are going to be a realist, again, I'm compressing a
lot into very little, but if you're going to be a realist, you have to admit into your metaphysics
relationships between things that are do not depend for their existence on us being aware
of those relationships. So, yes, things have to be able to influence and disclose each other in a
way that is dark to us. And then what's like dark matter, dark matter on the, on the, on the
metaphysical. Yeah, exactly. And what does that mean? Well, it's interesting, you know, it means,
it means to some degree that you can pick up the orbit of the earth using Foucault's pendulum.
Yeah, it means that. You know what I mean? What I mean, it means that because somehow
the all is embedded in the, in the, in the, in the, in the singular. I got what you meant. And you
see that with Foucault's pendulum. Sorry. Yeah, I was, I was playing between, I was just, there was
two reference in my mind. There was the, there was the, the historical thing. And then there was the
book, right? And I said, oh, okay. Right. And so, yeah, I think that's right. And, and, and, you
know, people like Morton and. So then that, that brings up the question is, is there a,
is there a distinction between the unknown real and un, and the unconscious? That's the question of
the Moonus Eundus, I think. But that's why I asked you earlier about an unconscious in the world,
Jordan. That's why I asked you earlier. But I know, I know, John, that's exactly why I'm bringing
it up. Yeah, exactly. So. So is the unconscious in the world, then the, then, you know, the
corollary question, obviously, obviously, is the unconscious in the world, striving to make
itself conscious? Well, well, I don't know about that. But let me answer something that I think
you're going to love from a Jungian perspective, which is what, how Harmon talks about it. I'm
going to use this language, but I think it's fair to him. He thinks the only way, so he picks,
the idea he has, and I think there's something fundamentally right about this, is objects are
not only shining in phenomenon, but they are also withdrawing. They are always inex, they're
inexhaustible, right? So they are simultaneously shining into our intelligibility, but they are
always withdrawing into their reality. Right, because every object is more than it appears
by an infinite amount. Exactly. And that's partly what you experience in experiences of awe
in the inanimate. Yes. Right, because the infinite is contained somehow within the finite.
Okay, this is great. So here's a proposal he has, that the only, it goes towards my claim
of a participatory kind of knowing. The only way I can really participate in the withdrawal of
this object into its unconscious, because if I'm conscious of it, I've defeated the very thing
I'm claiming, is how I can relate to my own unconscious, the way there's aspects of me that
withdraw beyond my consciousness, but nevertheless shape and make an impact.
My participating in this axis, if you'll allow me a metaphor, allows me,
and he means this in a profound sense, symbolically, aesthetically, to participate in
the realness of this object. That's the kind of stuff that's going on right now in speculative
realism. Let's get back to your fore-tier. I have to digest that in ways that I don't,
I'm not going to be conscious of. I don't know how to follow that with the appropriate question.
It's the depth within that allows you to appreciate the depth without.
It makes me think of the Psalms. I mean, it's the verse, you know, the deep calling to the deep.
And that's not you calling, right? That's what I mean about the transjectivity.
Yes. Well, that's also the, that's also akin to the metaphor of rescuing the father from the
underworld, because we're constantly doing that. So the father is in the inner underworld always
as a consequence of our reflection of the external social and natural worlds.
So you're, I didn't see that. And when you've, when you've talked about the before,
you're seeing a deep kind of resonance between those where each discloses the other.
Well, you saw it. I'm just pointing out my
vision of it, I suppose. I'm wondering if that's the analogous vision.
Yeah, I think that's right. I think that's right. I think, you know, and it's, it's,
yeah, we're rescuing, as we're rescuing. It's the discordancy. It's interesting because it's the
discordance between the map and the reality that drives the seeking of the father within,
right? Because you see what I mean, because when, when, when you're, when your desire does not
manifest itself and you despair, you call to the father within to reveal himself. Yeah, yeah.
And it's, and so that's the, that's the rescuing of the father from the dragon of the, of chaos.
So, so you, the, and you're canotic, right? Because you're this, you're canotic, you know,
you're your books behind you, but which is why you array them behind you in no small part. But
as you said, in your own defense, when you're putting your ideas forth, I'm just the gist.
There's another t-shirt. But that's the same idea as canosis. Yeah, I know the emptying.
And I'm deeply interested in the relationship between canosis and genosis.
Because I don't know, Hennosis. Oh, Hennosis is the, is sort of horrifying and great to talk to
someone who knows a whole bunch of things I don't know at all. Oh, thank you, Jordan. That's quite
the compliment coming from someone like you. Hennosis is the, Henn, one, it's the, it's the,
it's the, it's the, it's the, it's the summation of the neoplatonic, the neoplatonic ascent,
whereby the, the one within you becomes one with the one without until there is only the one.
It's, it's ultimate at one minute. And also it has the sense of atonement because it's the ultimate
healing of that, which is most existentially distressing to us, which is are being separated
from the ground of reality within and the ground of reality without and also separating those.
Yes. So that is what is most existentially distressing to us. You agree with that?
Yes. So that, that's why I titled my next book, the title that I am titling it,
which is we who wrestle with God, because that's the, that's our fundamental problem,
is that dissociation. I believe that's the case. So that, that, oh, that calls something
forth for me now, the wrestling. But then that means that, okay, please, please go ahead with
that. What I, what I was going to say is, you know, we're, we're, we're talking about this
bivalence of how reality presences it to itself. This is Heidegger's big thing, right? And there's
a sense in which it shines, it shines into our intelligibility, shines forth, but it also
withdraws, right? It's moreness. It shines it with its suchness and it withdraws, withdraws into
its moreness. And wrestling is like that. If you think about it, because wrestling, I'm making
contact, but I'm also being surprised. Think about the two, the two, the two phenomenologies
of our sense of realness. One is when things are confirmed, and oh, it's real, because look
at how it all fits together. And then the other is, oh, I didn't know that. I didn't know that.
That surprises me. That's right. That's right. That is the two things that are the most real.
Isn't that something? Yeah. And wrestling, wrestling is both of those. And notice it's a
conformity metaphor too, right? You have to come into conformity, literally form yourself to the
body of your opponent, right? And you're right. So there's the shining, but there's also the
realness because there's shocking you from beyond. I hadn't picked that up on the wrestling metaphor.
The wrestling metaphor is actually pointing to, it brings together, right? The two ways in which
reality grabs us, the confirming from within and the surprising from without.
So that's why we're spoken to in parables, isn't it? I think it takes us thousands of years to
make them conscious. And then we keep doing so and we keep doing so to make them more and more
conscious. I mean, I took, I didn't, you know, taking apart Genesis like that was really revelatory
to me because, but I, I differed from the atheist because I had text, I approached the text with
reverence and ignorance and humility, believing that I was nothing in comparison to what it contained.
You thought that there were truths available through transformation, not just through information.
Well, what are we stupid? Are we stupid? Is that what we were guided by this book for so many
thousands of years and preserved it is because we're stupid? Yeah, I don't think so. Yeah. So maybe
that means there's something I don't know about it. It's Paul, we're all stupid, either one stupid,
which is highly probable or we're all stupid, which is not so highly probable. I think, well,
I mean, as I've said, I think one of my deepest criticisms of the new atheists is, is precisely
the fact. I think I have a lot of criticisms of theism, too, because of the way it has bound
itself. I mean, current theism, it has bound itself to a Cartesian conception of modernity
and reality. And that's why I go into that, go into that. Well, I want to talk to you about
dogman spirit a bit. Okay, well, let's go into what you just said. Okay, so I got to put out,
I'm going to say thing. I'm going to put a pin at it because we're still trying to do the four
peas of knowing, but, but, but the new atheists lose the three other peas and they lose,
they look for scientific knowledge in the Bible, not paying attention to how it cultivates wisdom
and the fact. Right, and not knowing that there's any difference between scientific
knowledge and wisdom. This is what I talked about with Stephen Fry recently, because Stephen,
who's allied with the atheists, knows that there's such a thing as wisdom, which is why he pursues
and embodies myth. But he's annoyed at the church because of its dogma. And he confuses the church
with its dogma. Exactly. You know, I'm also going to say a few positive things about dogma.
Dogma is the map. I think, I think dogma is, you know, in signal detection theory, I think dogma
is the in the inescapable need to set the criterion. At some point, you can't like, yes,
in signal detection theory, you have to set the criterion. And all you do to set the criterion,
this sounds like Pascal, is you assess the relevance of the risks. Because if you all gather
more information, but then you have to set the criterion for that again and again. And at some
point, yes, that's right. That's right. But you, so the criterion, the criterion we're talking
about is the worship of that ultimate spirit. Well, that's the setting of the criteria. And
there's a dogma, there's an element in which dogma serves that. So we can't just because Fry says,
well, I like the spirit, but not the dogma. It's like, no, because no, because you have to make
a decision. That's your point. Okay, that's right. In every act, there's a decision. So
in every act, there's a worship of the dogma because you set the criterion.
Right. But you set the criterion, but that's not the same thing as making the connection.
Don't forget that credo is later. And I say should always be in service to religio,
religio, which means to bind. That's that connectedness we've been talking about throughout.
And the point about setting the criterion, and this is like a, you know, this is like a William
James thing to say. The point of setting the criterion is to get as reliable a continuity
of religio as you possibly can. And when credo goes from giving your heart to I assert, we stop
making credo, we stop conceiving of credo in a way that sees it intricately in service of religio.
And that's a part of my critique of what's okay. So that seems to lead wisely into the four areas
that you were going to discuss. Well, yeah. So I went back to, we had propositional and then
of the non propositions, we have procedural, then we have perspectival having to do with
consciousness. And then finally, we're down to the kind of knowing that we keep bumping up into,
which is the knowing, I'll use a sort of a Gibsonian way of talking about it,
the knowing that creates affordances that makes all the other knowings possible. Right. There's
a way in which biology and culture and my online cognition shape me and shape the world
so that they fit each other. I mean, this is Geertz's even notion of what culture is. It's
simultaneously models the world to me and models me to the world. That's the participatory level.
Like I use a metaphor from Geertz, Chris and I do in our work, right, of the agent arena
relationship, which is like your forum for action, right, that what participatory knowing does is
it gets you to assume suit and it's a process of co-identification with the Stoics talk about.
I assume an identity as I'm assigning identities to things such that affordances between me and
it emerged. I'm a grasper. That's graspable. That's an affordance. And therefore I can come into
relationship with the cup. That's the level of participatory knowing and that grounds everything
else because without the affordances, you can't get any of the other kinds of knowing going.
You can't get a grip. Yes. You can't get Marlo Ponte's all optimal grip. So here's what I would
say. The participatory knowing gives you a field of affordances. The perspectival knowing making
making make certain affordances salient to you. Perspectively, that gives you a situational
awareness. The situational awareness tells you which skills from your procedural knowing you
should bring to bear. And then once those skills are in action, you are getting the right kind of
causal interaction with the world for your propositional evidence. I don't think that you
realize how much you pack into those statements. Maybe you do. I know you thought about each of
them for years, but it's like the cup metaphor you use. There's a lot lurking behind the scenes
there and you hit your listener with that when you lay out that. So I'm going to ask you to do
that again if you would. And I'm going to listen to it again. I'm happy to do so. And I know that
my presuming that if I don't understand that there are probably a few other people who don't.
I think that's a fair listening. That's a fair assumption. And I do not want my and the us
to undermine my attempts at logos. So we'll put it that way. So the participatory knowing
you know, we participate in affordances. It generates a field of affordances for us.
Okay. So let me stop you there. Okay. So my value structure determines what field of
affordances manifests itself to me. So tell me more about what you mean by value structure.
Because if you mean value value is value is is the determinant of my attentional
resources. I'm going to attend to that which I believe is most valuable. And so I have a value
hierarchy lurking in the background. That's in that deep unconscious, let's say. But that value
hierarchy should be predicated on the manifestation of the highest spirit. So what I should want to
afford itself to me are those affordances that afford me the opportunity to pursue the path of
the highest spirit. If I'm oriented properly, if I'm worshiping properly, yes or no. Sorry,
it's not a command. Ultimately, or ultimately, because there's a difference there. I mean,
so like, I probably mean both failing to distinguish between them. But I mean, in the ideal,
but that would be the ideal that I would be, what would you say inclined to pursue if I were
conscious of its existence? So I would say, let me see if I can, let me see if I can map this,
because this is interesting. Because I'm using the term affordance because it's become one of the
central terms with it. I understand. Yeah. Great. Well, that didn't know that either. But that means
that, well, why? Because that work was shelved. I mean, I became enamored of it when I encountered
it, but that work was in some sense shelved for a very long time. Well, there's a personal reason
and there's a collective reason. The personal reason is I was lucky to study and enter into
collaboration with one of Gibson's great protgs, John Kennedy. And so that's how I learned to
appreciate this. The field as a whole, because of the notion that cognition is not in your head,
it's between you and the world. That cries out for the notion of affordance, right? It cries out
for. And so it's had its influence now? Yes. Or increase. I mean, it had its influence to begin
with. What an influence. It's now a central construct within 4e cognitive science,
central construct. Now, the idea, now the idea, and I think, I think this lines up with you, but
let's see, because the idea is like, I don't have to be conscious, right, of the affordance
relationship between me and the cup, that's given by me having a particular kind of body,
the cup having a particular kind of location. Now, but what you're saying, you're conscious of it,
you're only conscious of enough to make use of it. You're only conscious of it, what's necessary
in order for you to make use of it. If that didn't work, you'd have to become conscious of more of
it. Right. But okay, I'm trying to get some, maybe I'm worried that we're talking at cross
purposes. What I mean to say is, right, there is, there is a constitutive, I'm going to use your
term, there's a constitutive value of adaptivity, and that my affordances arise for me, precisely
because of the kind of adaptive agent I am. So for example, to use Gibson's, to give one to be,
or want to be, I'm not sure it's what I am, or if it's my, I'm not sure if I'm directed by who I
am, or I'm directed by my ideal, I think I'm directed by my ideal, because it's in the space of
desire. That's the thing. Yeah, but, but you, but, because John, are your affordances affording you,
or are they affording who you could be? But I want to say both, right? I don't, I don't,
okay. Yeah, right. I want to say, right, because I want to be, because I want to be able to say
that both is sufficiently radical. Well, I mean, I think that's, we'll have to talk about it. I mean,
we are, we are investigating the claim in some sense that the world calls you to become.
Yes. So, right. So, so the ideal is implicit in the affordance. But I would also put the
Heideggerian thing on it. My Dasein, my way of being in the world also calls things forth from
the world. Yes. Those are, those are. This couple is not graspable to a fly, right? That,
it doesn't, that affordance doesn't, doesn't, that agent arena relationship doesn't exist for the,
no matter what the fly wishes or wants, that's not going to be the case. I want to, I want to say
that there are things that are the case for me that are, that play a constitutive role in the
affordances that are available to me. That, that's what I, that's what I want to emphasize.
Yes. Well, that's the dogma element as well. Perhaps. That's the element of structure. It's
the element of, of setting the criterion. It's the element of what already is. And it's respect for
that. But it's also the element of, of, you know, that the world is also shaped independently of me,
sometimes by culture, sometimes by technology, but sometimes by nature itself, such that I can
make a purchase on the world. I, I want to resist the romantic notion that the world is a blank
slate that I simply express myself upon. The world has its own structure that constrains and puts
demands on me. So the, and sometimes we, we work with that. Like if, if this has revealed in our
errors. Yeah. Well, yeah, exactly. And if this, if this, if this, you know, this cup didn't have
what Spinoza would call its canadas, its, its, its structure, its resistance to force. I couldn't
use it to hold up, to hold water, et cetera. That's, that's what I meant. So let's say that
a participatory knowing generates the affordances and we've got some variation on that that we're
playing around with. But then what I would say is the perspectival knowing makes them salient to me.
So this is graspable right now to me and I foreground it. I size it up because salience
landscape around it, it's present to me now in the way that other affordances are not present to
me. Okay. Why is that different than, than what we just discussed? I don't think it's different,
but what I wanted to make room for was a distinction between them because I wanted
there, I wanted to, I mean, I think you, I think you would agree with it. I wanted there to be,
you know, an unconscious level at which, at which we know the world, at which the world and I are
being co-shaped together. We talked about that before. And so I want, I, I, I, I, that's what
I'm trying to make a place for with the participatory knowing. I want to make that it precedes us in an
important way as, as sort of self-aware beings. Perspective. The room is there before you walk
into it. The room is there, but also my body. I mean, this is the big thing about embodiment,
it's taking the body deeply seriously as constitutive of my cognition. If I didn't,
I didn't make my body, right? I participate in it. I can shape it. I can move it. But,
but it's given to you in a sense. It's given to me exactly. And that givenness
gives, it constrains the way in which the world can be given to me. That's what I'm trying to say.
And I want, I want to make a deep, I'm for you. That's the definition of reality.
Well, I, yeah, at least the one sense we were talking about earlier, but
I take embodiment deeply seriously. And so another way of putting it is participatory
knowing is knowing at the level of embodiment. You know, I think that's why the Christians
emphasize the resurrection of the body, by the way. I mean, what Jonathan said about the Christians
emphasizing the body and the goodness of the world over against the Gnostics. I'm a little bit
worried about that term because Gnosticism wasn't a group of people. It's more like a style
of religiosity, like fundamentalism. But I get his point. There were certain, at least the
Valentinians. Yes. Well, I mean, it really struck me that valorization of the body,
this insistence across, and this is something, again, I would say that the new atheists don't
appreciate it all. It's like, well, the resurrection of the body. Well, what does that mean? It means
profound respect for the body. It means attributing to the body, the value of the spirit,
but it means something psychologically, which is what you're getting at here, which is
consciousness is not separate in some sense from the body. Yeah. So the participatory knowing is
at the level of embodiment. And then your consciousness, your state of mind makes certain
affordances salient to that's what situational awareness is. That's what the whole psychology
of situational awareness is. Like, how do people pick up on the affordances that are available?
How do they make them present? How do they also present themselves to it? Right? That
co-presencing. And that's what you're looking and the funny talk about realness. That's what
you're looking for in the video game. You know, it's not very similar to the predicts
that sense of presence or how real the game. Right. Well, you can tell that if you watch The
Simpsons or play Tetris, Tetris, exactly. Yeah, gives people a sense of presence.
It's not based on verisimilitude. What it is, is they're getting into a flow state. They're
picking up on affordances. They're making them salient. They're getting a dynamic flowing
situation. Music does that too. Yes, exactly. And music is how we do serious play with our
salience landscaping. Okay, now it says as a casual outside. So that's the perspectival
knowing. Once we have situational awareness, what does situational awareness do? Situational
awareness basically tells you which skills should you bring to bear? Is swimming relevant here?
Well, no. Well, how do I know my situational awareness? So that's so the perspective ability
to read the story. Well, yes. Right. Exactly. So which skills should you bring to bear? That's
the procedural knowing. Once you've got your skills engaged, and this is the fundamental
point of the pragmatist, right? That it's your skilled activity that undergirds your
propositional. Once the procedural knowing is definitely engaged, then understand means.
Yes. Yes. Right. Exactly. So that's what I'm doing. You see, I'm trying to build it up
participatory, right? Into perspectival, into procedural, into propositional. And the new
atheist and modernity and all of this stuff is locked in a propositional tyranny, and it's cut
us off from all of this. And cutting us off from this cuts us off from the body, cuts us off from
the primary connect. And that propositional, that propositional tyranny is that best encapsulated
in the idea that there's nothing outside the text. Well, I think that's right. Except, you see,
so I've read Derrida deeply, right? Except, right? And Derrida, I forget who wrote the book
Semi-Logical Reductionism. He's open to this kind of critique. Derrida, of course, has something
outside of the text, which is deference itself. And that's the whole point. Difference can't
be captured in the text. It can't be separated from the text. But so he has this doorway,
and that's why he gets attracted so much to negative theology. That's why, well, I would argue
that's why negative theology. What do you mean? So negative theology was part of Neoplatonic
Christianity heavily influenced by the ineffable experiences that people have within mystical
experiences, which is ultimate. And it's also based on a critique of you shouldn't think of God
as a thing, right? This is the no-thingness of God, not the nothingness, the no-thingness.
We should also talk about the confusion of those contributes to nihilism, but we'll maybe come back
to that another day, right? So the idea of negative theology is you fundamentally, I wonder if this is
like young circumambulation, you fundamentally understand God by saying what God is not. But
not, of course, randomly, right? What you're trying to do is... Oh, that's sort of like the
God of the gaps. Well, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Oh, sorry. No, no, that's don't apologize. We're
friends talking. Well, I don't want to derail the conversation. So it's been like this,
and it's been wonderful. It feels to me like doing poetry. No, it's more that it's more of a
recognition of not of the God of the gaps, but of a recognition how our categorical scheme is
always inadequate. So for example, is God an object? Well, no, that's wrong. Is God a subject,
like the way we are? No, that's wrong, too. That's inadequate. Right. So God is... Well, God escapes
our categorical... Right. God is by definition, in some sense, what escapes our categories.
Because God is supposed to be the grounding of the intelligibility that makes the categorical
scheme possible. At least that's the deal for us. Right. But there's also presence within the
category scheme if it's set up properly. Right. So the point about negative theology, that's why
it's not just the God of the gaps. The point is to see within the category, that it's present
within the categories, but it's not captureable within the categories. That's what you're trying
to do. Right. The reality supersedes the categories, which is why you're not supposed to make idols,
you're not supposed to make representations of God. But you can make icons to summon Jonathan
back into the conversation one more time. You can make icons, right? And you've got John Luke
Marion's distinction between the idol and the icon. And what's the distinction? The distinction.
The icon does not capture God. Right. That's exactly it. That's an artwork. So an artwork is
an icon. Exactly. And a propaganda is an idol. Yes. I would agree with both of those statements.
Well, isn't that something? Because they're really, in some sense, far astray, aren't they?
But they do map. And so how cool is that? So art is the icon. How cool. And propaganda is the
idol. Exactly, man. And I had these paintings in my house and they were melds of the icon and the
idol. Right. Because there's all this socialist realism. I have 200 pieces of socialist realism
watching the icon and the idol fight with each other. And the problem is they are,
and I want to get the entomology of this word, they, at a superficial level of similarity,
they can easily be confused. They can be confused. Okay. Yes. Well, that they, and I would say they
were inevitably confused in the absence of God. Well, and I, because propaganda, like this is
something I've been working out too, John, is that, you know, we make religious the next thing on the
hierarchy. If we don't give to what is religious, it's proper place. And I think the new atheists
are beginning to realize this. It's like, Oh, look at that. We didn't eradicate the religious spirit.
No, it just moved somewhere else. It just moved somewhere else. It just moved somewhere and
becomes pathologized by its association with that. This is Tillich's critique of ideology.
Well, I've got our ideology, because I think ideology is a form of idolatry. But this is
Tillich's critique of ideology, which is, we cannot, and I think you've said things along
this discussion that point to this, we cannot, we cannot abandon our ultimate concern. Right.
That's his, that's his. Yes, that's right. We can't know. And so this isn't a negative discussion.
This isn't a negative definition of God either, because to get back to your negative theology
point, I've been concentrating in my thought recently on the positive attributes of God.
And so like to drive towards unity and the motivational hierarchy.
That is so neoplatonic, Jordan. I mean, my gosh, that is so neoplatonic.
Well, you know, we were all unconscious avatars of great philosophers,
and some less unconscious than others, but it's still there. And so, but, but you can't,
you can't do away with that drive to unity. And in some sense, you also can't critique it,
because when we say the good, we assume that there's a unity between goods.
I think, yeah, this is Pertinus' transmoral notion of the good. And you and Jonathan talked
about the transmoral notion that there's, right, he says, look, any sort of moral
or aesthetic goodness is ultimately based on the goodness of being. And he says,
when do, when are we attributing being? He says, we attribute being the more we find that there's
a oneness of something. And when we understand we are, we are, we are bringing things. So the,
the, the knowledge is, is a process of oneness. And what we're doing is we're conforming to the
reality, which being is a process of wanting. And when those are at one, that is when the
heart starts to become, starts to rest from its suffering. And I think there's something
fundamentally right about that. Can I ask you something? Because I think I'm getting you.
What I heard you, you're saying it's like, let's take the metaphor of the idol
and the icon fused. And if there isn't something beyond them, you can't actually pull them apart.
That's what I'm hearing you say. Yes, they collapse into one another. Look, what happened
with the deification of Stalin and Marx and Lenin and Mao? That's not accidental. It's inevitable.
And we have the, we have, we have the deification of celebrities and we have the deification of
products and we have the deification of ideologies. And what, what I wanted to say, but just before
we lose the threat of Derrida is for Derrida, you know, how we are talking about how it's
trans categorical, but also present within the, that's what difference is, at least my reading
of Derrida. It's, it's within the text, but it's also points to that which can't be reduced or
captured in the text. That's why I think he, that because otherwise, like, why is he attracted to
negative theology? What's going on there? What's the interest? And so you'll have to delve into
the difference idea a bit more and flesh it out for me. I know it's key to Derrida's thought,
but it's a long time since I've thought about it. And so what's your, what's the, what's the
current, let's say, cultural understanding of difference and what's your understanding?
Well, okay, I don't, I don't know if those two are identical. That would be,
I don't think they are. That's why I wanted you to say, to talk about both of them.
I think Derrida and Foucault are often invoked and very, very rarely read. I think, so when
you're asking me about the cultural, I think that that is by and large the case. I think there's
an indication of ideas or themes from them, but that the hard work of wrestling with their
arguments is often not done. So I hesitate to say what the cultural, because I think,
I don't hear when deconstruction is invoked. I don't hear, I don't hear difference being
talked about or spoken about. I hear, I hear, and so I hear deconstruction being reduced to a
kind of demolishment as opposed to what I think Derrida wanted it to be. I'm not, I'm not here
to defend Derrida either. I have criticisms of Derrida, but I think if we're going to criticize
Derrida, I spent, I spent, you know, years literally working with it. This is my understanding
of difference to answer your question. So the idea of difference is, it has to go at the,
it's basically like John Searle's argument that semantics is not reducible to syntax and pragmatics
is not reducible to semantics. It's that whenever I'm saying anything, the way you understand it
is how it differs from other things, contrast class. So when, you know, you know this from
psychologist, well, maybe it's been a while, but you know, when you ask people, what are some things
that are flammable? Well, they'll say would because it contrasts with metal and stone. They
won't say people, right? Even though people are flammable, because it doesn't belong to the contrast
set, right? That, that, that's just sort of, that's sort of standard. So we understand something in
terms of its contrast, something it differs from, but we also defer. We, what we do is we go to the
other thing and we get some information that isn't in, and we bring it back to often insightfully
reinterpret. So we're both defer differing and deferring in whenever we're understanding anything,
which means we can't limit the interpretation of the text to just what is captured within the text.
Yes, exactly. Well, no, definitely, of course not, of course not. I mean, the text has a reader.
Yeah. It's like there's, I've thought about this, there's a word, there's a phrase, there's a sentence,
there's a paragraph, there's a chapter, there's a book, there's a library. Yeah, well, that's
built into you. You're the reader. You're the breeder, reader bringing the consequence of multiple
texts to this text. And the text is therefore the interaction between those, that multitude of text
speaking within you. And this current text, it's a dialogue. The text is a dialogue. That's right.
It's a dialogue between the, if it's done properly, it's a dialogue between the universal human spirit
that engages the golden thread across time and this current text. And that's philosophia.
Yes, I agree. And you can tell when you're doing that, because that's the meaning, that's meaning.
So I think that's, do we agree on that, by the way? Because we're both so concerned with meaning,
is meaning the manifestation of the philosophia? I think meaning.
In its highest form, I would say then. I would say, I understand meaning when we're not talking
about sort of semantic propositional meaning. When we're talking about the meaning that goes into
meaning, existential meaning. Yeah, yeah, that meaning. So I think the non-propositional meaning.
Yes, exactly. Fair enough. Because when we say meaning in life, we're using, we're using meaning
as a metaphor. We're saying there's something about, there's something like sentences that's
like between me and the world, right? And I think we have to remember that that's what we're doing.
Yeah, I think that meaning is, meaning is the connectedness, the dynamic affordance
that allows us to optimally grip the world and thereby affords the cultivation of wisdom. If
we think of wisdom, not just knowledge. Yes. Okay, okay. So that, well, that's the driving spirit
of the West, not power. Right. When it's, when it's, look, I mean, we deserve to be criticized.
I'm not saying that. I'm not saying that, that things are above criticism and that power doesn't
play its nefarious role because it certainly does. And so does the love of power, all of that.
And it leads to terrible consequences. But we're actually trying to analyze that. And we're trying
to say, look, it's what you have to pursue wisdom. And you find it in, you find the pathway to wisdom
in meaning, in the manifestation of meaning as an experiential phenomenon. I agree with that. And I
think, I mean, I mean, a few minutes ago, you sounded like Daredon. I don't mean that as any kind
of insult. Now you're sounding like Heidegger. I mean, the question concerning technology
was the whole idea that we have reduced our relationship to the world as a relationship
of power. And we need to think, right? Oh, that's his claim. I see. I didn't understand that. Exactly.
That's the fundamental claim though. And so we power control. Oh, that's why David Suzuki
criticizes the West and Genesis because he sees that he's responding to that mastery as control
phenomenon power. Yes. Right. Rather than the dance. But I think when it's done right, it's the
dance. He's Heidegger is worried that the dance will be reduced to power, which I suppose mixes
dalliance with Nazism all that more. Yeah. Well, I think Rolkowski is a warning, a warning. Yeah.
If Heidegger had kept to his original reading of Plato, instead of turning and making Plato
as a sort of the villain in his story of the history of nihilism, Rolkowski makes a great
argument that that is what sort of sensitizes Heidegger to the Nazis. And so Heidegger basically
gets Platonism. He gets it and then he inverts his interpretation. And it looks for kind of
suspicious reasons that he does that. And then he recast later. I also wonder too,
should we take Heidegger's turning to Nazism as an indication of his corruption or as a
dreadful warning about the dreadful attractiveness of precisely such things to the unprepared mind?
Well, I mean, Heidegger is a mind to be contended with. So that's a terrible warning.
For sure. And I mean, I mean, Heidegger's deep reading of, see,
yeah, I mean, you know, people have wrestled with this, you know, like Rolkowski, like Derrida,
about just like, why does Heidegger end up here? And, well, like I said, I think Rolkowski makes
a very good argument. But it's deeply perplexing because what's happening in Heidegger, Heidegger
reads Nietzsche very deeply. And then what he sees is he sees that he wants, he wants,
he wants to reconstitute fundamental ontology so that our primary relationship to being is not
will to power. He wants to get outside the power framework, which is the question concerning
technology and all of this stuff. And, you know, my friend, Johannes Biederhauser.
Yes. And that's driving the positive side of the environmentalism movement as well, right?
Let's say the desire for a dance rather than for the imposition of power.
This is Heidegger appropriating Eckhart's term, Galesenheit. Galesenheit is this idea of
participating, letting be not in the passive sense, but the way you let your partner be
when you're dancing together, right? The affording, the affording. And Heidegger says what we've done
is we've, instead of, instead of that, we've turned everything into what he calls standing
reserve. Right. We're tempted. I see. That's the standing reserve idea. It's for the consumption
of power. Yes. Yes. And then there are only relationships. And this is Fram's critique,
right? The modal confusion that we are trapped in the having mode. But you'd say then it would be a
propositional materialism that would lead to that outcome. Because if it's dead matter that we're
dealing with, then that's the logical consequence of that. That's the logical moral consequence of
that. What would you say? It's a stance that's supposed to be outside the moral world, right?
So the objective world is dead material. Well, what do you do with dead material?
You store it for, are you not inevitably tempted to store it for the consumption of power?
Exactly. Exactly. That's the core of the Heideggerian critique. And then the idea is,
can we recover ways of being, ways of knowing that put us into, and this is a religious notion.
So then why did he turn to Nazism? I mean, if that's what he wanted to recover.
Because. There's a romanticism about extremist movements that the propositional world doesn't
grasp. Maybe that has something to do with it. But it still doesn't explain to me why he fell
prey to it. So I mean, I think he, and we have to remember, because we're misled by the Nazi
war machine to understand how much of a nature movement Nazism was, how much a return to nature,
how much the body, how much this was about getting right side of. There is immense nature
romanticism in the, in the precursors to Nazism. Yes. Yes. And. Right. And it included eradication
of foreign species when they were introduced into, into the natural environment. And there was a,
there was a nature as purity. A dimension that. Yes. Yeah. That came, came out of that nature
as purity. Yeah. And that, that's, that's a very complex idea. So you think Heidegger was
attracted by the nature romanticism? I think he was attracted by the nature romanticism. I think
he was attracted by the original. I mean, we forget this too, because of the later deals that
Hitler made. But, you know, you know, and this is why, what's the leader of the, of the brown
shirts? Yeah, I can't remember the, the essay. Auslie? Auslie? No, no, no. I can't remember.
It's, it's German. And he called for a set. Once the German, when the Nazis had taken power,
he called for the second revolution, the second revolution against the capitalist and against
the technology. Well, Nazis and. Camcineer? No, it's, I think it's something like Rome or something
like that. The head of the essay, the brown shirt. Okay. Okay. Well, I guess it doesn't matter. Okay.
So there's a secondary revolution. Okay. That's why, that's why he's assassinated in the night
of long knives, because Hitler realized that if the second revolution happened, he would piss off,
right? The industrialists, he would piss off the right, the technology that he needed. And so that's
why that's, that's one of the reasons for the night of the long knives when they're, when they're
all assassinated. And we have to remember that. Because this was because the second revolution
was being. He was off the guy that was with the head of the essay was pushing for the second
revolution. Right. And because. Okay. And the second revolution, sorry, I need to know more
about that because this is something I don't know, obviously enough about. So if you read Heidegger,
there's not only there's a nature romanticism, but there's also an agrarian romanticism. There's
that getting back to the soil, you notice the, you know, blood and soil also getting back to the
soil and getting back to the earth and right. That's. So that's all a call out of the propositional,
but it's a pathological call out of the proposition very much becomes pathological.
Yes. Maybe that's because it doesn't find his proper expression in logos, because I often think of
Hitler. Hitler uses his logos, antithetically, but he has a gift, the gift of the word, but he
perverts it and and subverts it to the service of power. And then these, I think that's right.
I think that if Heidegger had stayed with his original reading, which he was lecturing on all,
you know, through the twenties and some into the thirties, Rolkowski argues, if he had stayed
with that original reading of Plato, he would have stayed sensitive to the logos and the way
Tillich did. Tillich got it. Tillich is the first non-Jewish academic to be persecuted
by the Nazis and he eventually leaves because he gets it. He gets the logos. He really gets it.
What does he get exactly? He gets that the attempt to separate, using our language, the logos from
the love of being and the capacity to love other people. And sorry, this sounds like a hallmark
card, but I think we've talked enough that these words won't just be heard trivially,
that the attempt to separate, I mean, and this is what Christian... That's when you can tell you've
talked enough when such words are not to be heard trivially anymore. Yes. That's a very good
thing to say. Yeah, I like that. Tillich gets, if you try to separate love from logos, agape from
logos, that you are, you are malforming logos. And that's why, that's why you have all of this sort
of crypto love going on within the Nazis. There's even the homoeroticism, which is so bizarre,
given the other aspects of the Nazi ethos. At least that's what I would argue.
You can drive nature out with a pitchfork, but she always comes roaring back in.
Yeah. And Heidegger was also... I think he thought like many people that he could somehow
manage this, right? I think he... You see, one of my big critiques of... See, Heidegger is all,
has always been attracted to sort of nebulous gravitas, right? The mystery and it's important.
And that's wrapped up with his own building of his own mystique, that I am the great thinker,
that I know how to constantly move forward. Oh, that's interesting. So I see. So you think he
also got caught up in a kind of egotism that the Nazis called to. That's interesting, because
that's a very dangerous thing for a thinker, because the first thing you should think,
if you're a thinker, is that what you don't know is a lot more than what you know, and you almost
know nothing. And so you don't want to... Yeah, well, you know, in Jung's relations between the ego
and the unconscious, he discusses that in great detail, how to not be taken over by... With the
ideal, once you're beginning to allow it to manifest itself within you, or even when it forces itself
upon you, to never identify with the sun. You're not the sun, you might be revolving around the sun,
but you're not the sun, S-U-N. And Plato says you can only... In the analogy of the cave,
you can only glimpse the sun, and then you're supposed to return down. But classic hero myth.
Yeah, the egotism. Rokovsky argues that he does some of Heidegger's letter
around the period when he's turning in his interpretation of Plato. And while he sort of...
He says, you know, this is paraphrasing with considerable liberty, but Heidegger basically
says, you know, I'm having trouble, I'm sort of worried, because I'm really understanding Plato,
and there's nothing for me to say. There's nothing for me to say. And then he turns.
Heidegger says that. Yes. And then he turns, and then he says, no, no, wait. There's nothing for
my ego to say. Yes. Right. And then, no, no. Plato is actually the villain of the story of
the history of metaphysics. Plato turns being in the metaphysics. Oh, interesting. And launches us
down the... So he finds a convenient demon and puts himself in as a counterposition.
Yeah. And I think that desensitizes him to the Socratic dimension. And that's driven by egotism.
Yeah. And that's the hook for the Nazis. I think so. And I mean, and one of the things...
Well, the inner totalitarian has to welcome the outer totalitarian.
Oh, that's well said. That's very well said. I like that.
Yes. Well, that's what makes me skeptical about people who claim that power structures human
relations. Is that a proposition or a confession, dear sir? And, you know, I had this really
interesting experience, John. I was debating Slavoj Zizek. Yeah. And I started with a critique of
the Communist Manifesto, which, according to my critics, only indicated my rabid ignorance of Marx.
But despite that, I thought it was a central document in all of my ignorance. And I talked
about its call to bloody violent revolution. And a quarter of the audience laughed and cheered.
And it stopped me in my tracks for like five seconds. I thought Freud should be here to hear
the, and Jung as well, to hear the Freudian slip, but to hear the collective unconscious manifest
itself so clearly in the relative secrecy of the crowd. And so is it that power structures human
relations, my dear Marxist, postmodernists, or is it that that's the inner totalitarian within
you, cheering the outer totalitarian on and justifying it? Because if power is the fundamental
motivation, then why shouldn't I use my will to power as my fundamental motivation? Or if I do use
my will to power as my fundamental motivation, why shouldn't I justify that by the criticism that
that is, in fact, once the blinders are off the central human motivation, and therefore I'm
entirely justified in my attempts, just like all the great people throughout time.
And that's what we're, that's what's riveting our culture apart, I believe.
I think, yeah, I mean, I think the glorification of power, I would say that they're just like
the deification of power as the ultimate, as the ultimate motivational personality.
But I would say that that has a considerable history. And I think it goes back to the rise of
the scientific revolution and the understanding of God. I mean, it predates a scientific revolution
when you get the nominalism of Scots and Occam and say there are no real patterns in the world.
You denude the world of logos, and then you understand yourself and God as will, as will.
For me, and I talked about this in the series, that's the fundamental, there's a fundamental
change. Look at how rapidly things, like look at it by the time of Shakespeare, God is just this sort
of this absurd power that's on the fringes of intelligibility. And that's somebody who's as
sensitive to cultural depth as Shakespeare, and he's getting it. He's really getting it. It's like,
what happened? And if you're a feared author, by the way, you could equally say,
I've read and understood Shakespeare, what is there left for me to say? Yes. And you'd be equally
wrong and equally right. Yeah, I think so. I mean, I think, I think that that there is there. When
we talked about this around the notion of dogma, I mean, if you don't understand faith in the way
it is in the Old Testament, faith is to be coupled to God, married to God. It's more like faithfulness
than it is the assertion of belief without evidence. Yes, definitely. But when you move
to that notion of faith, and we now use the word belief, and we forget that it originally comes
from the German believe in, right, believe in to give your heart to something. But we now under,
we now understand it as assertion. And what is assertion? It is an act of will. So at the heart,
right, at the heart, even of our theology, we have the will to power. And that's why Heidegger's
critique of me rather than the will to humility, or, or, or what Aquinas was trying to save,
which is love, right, love is when the will is when the will is moved by something outside of
the will or something like that. But, you know, that's, that's why Heidegger's critique of Nietzsche
is so profound. I mean, now to say something positive about Heidegger, right, because he,
Nietzsche says, well, you know, here's this structure of Christianity and all Nietzsche
does is invert it. And the will to power is in both. And Heidegger says, no, no, no,
you're still bound to it in so far as you're just negating it. What you have to do is, right, try to
get outside of it, you have to break the shared presuppositions of both sides. I say something
similar with, I think that the, the, I want to break free from the shared set of presupposition
between the modern theists and the modern atheists. That's why I call myself a nontheist. Because I
think nontheism is the attempt to say the shared presuppositions are ultimately misframing our
relationship with sacredness, and we need to get beyond them. And it's not only a philosophical
argument, the mystics, I would say, converge in a position that's very much like nontheism.
John, I'm going to stop us there. Yeah, that's fine. That's a fine closing statement. And good,
because I'm done. Well, thank you very much. It's an inexhaustible conversation. And I
appreciate you participating in it very much. Well, thank you for having me. And I've been a
great proponent of yours. You know, I mean that, I mean that in the sense of noting the greatness
that's in you and, and seeing how it's manifested itself, especially in your relationship with
your students and noticing that and, and having admiration and respect for that. And I respect
your work. And, you know, I disagree with it in parts, but it's always, we've always been able
to do that in a way that is born with affection and respect. Well, God, it's always nice to find
someone who disagrees with your work, who could help correct it. Exactly. I mean, thank God, man,
that's why I want to talk to you. I don't like being wrong. So, and I know you don't. And so,
no doubt, we're still both pretty wrong. Mostly so. If the history of science is
something we should pay attention to, which we should. Yes, or the history of our own life,
for that matter. Yeah. All right, John. Thank you very much. Take good care.
We'll talk again, man. Definitely. I would like that. I would like that very much.
I would like it too. So we'll set it up.
