Andrew Doyle is with me today. Andrew is a British comedian, playwright, journalist,
political satirist and author who co-created the fictional character Jonathan Pye and the
equally or perhaps even more fictional character Titania McGrath. He recently published his first
book, Free Speech, Why It Matters, which came out in 2021, but previously published two more
as the aforementioned Titania McGrath. The first of those was Woke, a guide to social justice
published in 2019. And the second was my first little book of intersectional activism published
in 2020. I haven't met Andrew before. I'm looking forward to talking with him about Free Speech and
about his satire and about the intersection between those two and whatever else comes up.
Thank you very much for coming on today. I'm looking forward to speaking with you.
Thanks so much for having me.
So, shall we start perhaps with the discussion of your book? I finished it yesterday.
I've become notorious, I suppose, for my particular take on Free Speech. And so,
it was a book that interested me. Tell me why you wrote it and what you learned and all of those
things. Well, it's not the sort of book I ever envisaged that I would have to write. I think
if you go back 10, 15 years, the idea that Free Speech, which is obviously the seedbed of all our
liberties, would be something that we would have to defend, would have probably seemed a little
bit ridiculous to me because I basically took it for granted. I thought that everyone was on
that side. But I fear that something has happened, particularly over the past 10 years or so. And
it is connected, I feel, with the rise of this social justice movement, or what we might call
critical social justice, or however we want to call it. A lot of people call it the woke movement.
However you want to label that ideology, which at its heart has a real mistrust of free speech.
And you hear it all the time in the kind of phrases that the activists use, phrases like
words are violence, or this kind of language normalizes hate, or legitimizes hate, or all
this kind of thing. And there's a real genuine mistrust of the power of language to effectively
corrupt the masses. And what I wanted to do, I suppose, was try and marshal a defense
for this principle that I had always taken for granted. But at the same time attempt to grapple
with the concerns that people might have. Because my worry with the culture war, as we call it,
is that you have two sort of extreme polls arguing against each other. And most people
are caught in the middle. I think most people are broadly for the idea of free speech, but they
have a few reservations. For instance, when it comes to demagogues espousing hate or hate against
a particular minority group or something like that. Or people are concerned about the ways in which
language can cause harm. And I don't think anyone would deny that words can be hurtful. So most
people I think are somewhere in between and are open to persuasion. And I think my point,
my principle argument in the book, is that absolute freedom of speech is always going to be better.
And in fact, by promoting free speech, you're doing something to help those very
people that you are concerned about. So recently, the Scottish Parliament passed
hate crime law that has its supporters and also its detractors. And I'd be interested in your
feeling about that. Now, you said, I believe in this book, if I remember the statistics correctly,
that there have been 120,000 incidents of police investigated speech hate crime in
Britain in how long? That's been over the last five years or so?
It's worse than that. The statistic, I quote, is between 2014 and 2019, there are 120,000
recorded incidents of non-crime. They call them non-crime hate incidents. And this is something
which is now routine in the UK. I mean, obviously, I'm going to be talking about the UK and the US
and Canada is a very different kettle of fish, I'm sure. And I'm sure a lot of the people who are
watching won't be familiar with the problems we have in the UK. Of course, we don't have
constitutional protection for free speech. We don't have a First Amendment. We don't have anything
like that. So we are particularly vulnerable. And at the moment, unfortunately, in the UK,
the police who are trained by the College of Policing, who do issue very specific guidelines
about this, and anyone can check this because if you go to the government's website on hate crime
and hate speech, they make very clear what they're talking about. What they say is that there are five
protected characteristics and these fall into race, gender, sexuality, gender identity and disability.
I think I might misquote that, but there's one missing. But anyway, there are five protected
characteristics. And if a victim, and they do use the word victim rather than complainant, if a victim
perceives that any speech or crime was motivated by hatred towards any of those five protected
characteristics, then it qualifies as a hate crime if it's criminal. If it's not criminal, if it's
just speech or something like that, it qualifies as a non-crime hate incident. Police will investigate
that. They will record that. And although non-crime incidents don't lead to prosecution, they do go
on a criminal reference check that many people take. We call it a disclosure and barring service
here. So it can affect your employment prospects. And is that without a trial? That's recorded
without a trial? Of course. There's no trial. So you get a quasi-criminal record. You get
something flagged up. Particularly if you're applying for a teaching job, say something like
that where you're working with children, it's very important. And you get this thing flagged up. So it
does have serious ramifications. But even beyond that, we have hate speech laws which are encoded
into the Public Order Act, which is one example. But the other, the main example, is the Electronic
Communications Act 2003. In this country, and I do quote the statistic in the book as well,
we have roughly 3,000 people arrested a year for offensive things that they have said online.
In other words, nine people a day, roughly the police in the UK are arresting. And people in
the UK will be familiar with this. Because if you see the Twitter accounts of various police
forces, various police departments across the country, they often put things out like,
you know, make sure you don't say anything offensive or thoughtless online, or we will be
knocking on your door. They say these very kind of frightening things. There was a recent police
display outside a supermarket in the UK. It went viral, this image. It was them next to a big
digital billboard. And the slogan on the billboard was being offensive is an offense. And this was
flanked by police officers who were socially distanced, but they were there in their masks,
because it made it seem slightly more sinister. They got in a lot of trouble for that, because
people were saying, well, being offensive surely isn't a crime. But actually, the problem with
that is that the police clearly thought it was a crime. And they, you know, they were acting on
that basis. They'd obviously hadn't just concocted this billboard out of nothing, they'd really
considered what it should say. And more to the point, actually, they were right. In this country,
you can go to prison for jokes, for offensive remarks. And people have gone to prison,
have been arrested routinely for causing offense. And of course, the notion of offense
is incredibly subjective. In fact, in fact, the legal stipulation in the Communications Act
is that you will have broken the law if the judge and jury deem that you have
communicated material that is quote unquote, grossly offensive. Well, I don't know how you
define that. I wouldn't know. And also, who defines it is the real question, as far as I'm
concerned, I mean, I've looked into this legislation to some degree. And one of the things that struck
me about it was that it seems to be purposefully left up to the hypothetical victim to define
offense, which has become a subjective reality. And you can understand why that might be,
to some degree, because how would you define hate? And how would you define offense without,
especially the latter, without making recourse to someone's subjective experience? But then, of
course, well, we'll delve into that in a moment. I should start with the hard question, I suppose,
which is, well, clearly, people can say hateful things. And those things can be damaging
psychologically and physiologically, I suppose, if people are stressed enough, and the borderline
is very difficult to identify. Why is it that people shouldn't just assume that you're a
mean loudmouth and that they shouldn't pay any attention to you at all, because you're concerned
about this? I mean, which is, that's the general criticism of critics of hate speech, let's say.
And so why in the world aren't we aren't the people who are putting this forward just trying to
make the world a nicer place? What's the big problem here? Well, I think a lot of people do
assume that I'm a mean loudmouth. I think they assume that about most people who defend freedom
of speech. And I'm sure the latter part of your question is absolutely right insofar as I imagine
a lot of the people who are skeptical about free speech are in fact trying to make the world a
better place. I don't think that's mutually exclusive. I mean, the problem here is that
the legislation as it currently stands here means that, for instance, if you say something critical
about me, and I perceive that it was motivated by hatred towards me on the basis of my sexuality,
for instance, I could phone the police and that would be recorded and would appear on hate crime
statistics in this country, because it's all about perception. That word is used about five or six
times within the one passage in the hate crime legislation, the word perception of the victim.
And again, I say victim, not complainant, which suggests a complete disregard for due process,
but I suppose we can leave that aside. But the most common, the most common and the most frightening
misconception I have found when it comes to people defending free speech is that they are doing so
because they want to have the right to say appalling things about people with no comeback
whatsoever. And they want to go back to some imaginary good old days, you know, where you
could just be casually homophobic and racist and sexist and all the rest of it. And no one would
call you out for that. Now, I don't know anyone who falls into that category. And most people who
are advocating for free speech are doing so precisely because they are aware that in countries
where free speech protections are meager, minorities tend to suffer the most. And in fact,
there is a, it seems to be a corollary to me that those who are genuinely for free speech are also
for equal rights and protecting the bondable in society. And this perception, which I really
find unpleasant, this perception that if you are standing up for this most foundational of principles,
for freedom of speech, if you're standing up for that, you can only be doing so if you have a nefarious
motive. I mean, what a horribly pessimistic view of humanity. And it seems to be...
Well, it seems to be a direct derivation of the hypothesis, for example, that all Western
social organizations, particularly Western, are based on power and are best conceived of as tyrannical.
And so if that's your view, why would you not assume that most use of speech is essentially
an exercise of power in the service of tyranny? But then why would you assume that the government
in control of any particular country isn't part of that tyranny that you're describing? It seems odd
to me to be mindful of the potential for tyranny, but then to outsource all your individual liberties
to the state. It seems contradictory to me. Well, I guess the way that that is
elided over is by allowing the hypothetical individual victim to define the offense.
This is the problem, though. I mean, the problem I've run into, and this is partly why I appreciated
your book, is that increasingly, people are called upon to defend fundamental assumptions
that were so taken for granted that virtually no one has an argument that's fully articulated at hand.
When no one questions free speech, no one has to defend it thoroughly. As soon as it's questioned,
well, it becomes an extraordinarily complicated problem. The same with gender identity. When
no one's paying attention to it, it's obvious, but as soon as you have to think it through,
it becomes a rat's nest to say the least. When I was in the UK a few years ago,
I saw a number of things that I felt were disturbing. People seem to have accepted the
omnipresence of CCTV cameras to a degree that I found horrifying, frankly. I don't like CCTV
cameras. I don't like the message they portray, which is that everyone is criminal enough so
they should be surveyed all the time and someone needs to be watching. I noticed, too, in London,
in particular, that many buildings had instituted airport-level security so that you had to pass
through a metal detector and have your bags checked, et cetera, while you were moving in and out of
buildings. It struck me as quite horrifying given that, as far as I'm concerned, Great Britain and
its legal and parliamentary traditions are at the epicenter of Western freedoms. You could
make a case for France, I suppose, but not a strong one, as far as I'm concerned. Yet,
your citizens seem to have accepted this with virtually no problem. Now, on the heels of that,
we have this multiplication of hate crime. That's as much a surprise to me as it is to you.
You won't have seen all of the CCTV cameras believe. Apparently, they're absolutely everywhere. You
can't walk anywhere in the UK without being potentially monitored. I'm not saying someone's
watching you all the time, but things are being recorded and digitized. It's interesting to me
because I remember back in the early 2000s, when the government was trying to push through its ID card
scheme and, broadly speaking, the left were unanimously against it. They didn't like this
idea of living in a society where there's someone on the corner saying, papers, please. No one really
wanted that. But we've become very docile and very accepting of the idea that we need to be
coddled and monitored by the state. I know there's a recent debate about vaccine passports. People
seem very blasé about this idea that we might have to have our ID embedded and encoded onto a
card to get anywhere or to do anything. I think there's something going on there and it is connected
with what you've brought up in terms of hate crime legislation. We've just become accustomed.
I mean, you mentioned specifically the problem in Scotland. Seriously, it relates very closely
to what you're saying because the SMP, who are the only really party with any clout in Scotland,
that's the Scottish National Party. It's never a good idea, is it, when you have one political
party which doesn't really have an opposition. They have a reputation for quite nanny, statish
policies. They introduced a, what was it called, the named person scheme. It didn't go through in
the end, but they wanted to assign every child born in Scotland with a state guardian. They
effectively didn't trust the parents to raise their own kids. They have other examples, minimum
pricing on alcohol or a ban on two-for-one pizzas because they don't trust poor people
not to gain weight. All sorts of these sorts of policies. But in this current hate crime bill,
which has just sailed through because there's no opposition, Humza Yousef, the Justice Secretary,
has pushed through, he specifically included an element to this bill which says that they
can criminalize you for things you say in the privacy of your own home. I mean, that's just
a given. I would have never thought that anyone in this country would not consider that to be an
incredible invasion on individual liberty. You can make a strong case for Scotland as the ground
zero for many of the, developing many of the concepts that undergird the entire Western notion
of freedom. And to see that emerging in Scotland is absolutely stunningly terrifying as far as I'm
concerned. You think of Mill Gibson with a face covered in woad shouting freedom as he's executed,
you know, in that in Braveheart. You do think of Scotland as being associated with it, but
honestly, Scotland for some reason, and I don't know what it is, and it might be to do that it's
effectively this one party state. It seems to have this incredible sense and they've really
brought into this idea that unless they can police the thought, the thought and speech of their
citizens, then they will just run a, run amok. It's there's another element to that bill. I don't
know if you know about this. There's a specific element on the bill which talks about the public
performance of a play. So they've effectively said that they will criminalize public performances. So
say if it can be deemed that those performances were designed to stir up hatred, that's the
formulation, stir up hatred. I'm not quite sure what that means necessarily, but the when when
Humza Yousef was questioned about this in Parliament, he actually said, well, theoretically a neo-Nazi
or someone from the far right could get together with a group of actors and put on a play to recruit
people to his cause. And as I said at the time, you know, I don't know any neo-Nazis, but they're
not into amateur dramatics. That's not their thing. They don't do that. They wouldn't get involved. And
yet he's got this idea in his head that that is a feasible, I mean, it seems ridiculous, but it's
not really because the ramifications are quite serious. And the way it's just gone through without
any opposition really, really troubles me. I mean, there have been modifications, I should say,
in fairness. In the initial bill, in the initial draft of the bill, they had said that you could
be criminalized irrespective of intention. In other words, yes, that was terrifying.
Awful. I mean, if you wrote a play that then stimulated someone to join the far right, then
you were still responsible whether you intended it or not. Now, the problem was, you know,
with theatrical representation or any kind of artistic representation, is sometimes you want
to represent the worst aspects of humanity, because that's part of drama and literature and
all the rest of it. I mean, you would be, there would be no artistic freedom if that went through.
So fortunately, that element of the bill was modified.
Well, and also the attempt to reverse the idea that intent is important is that's even, that's
even more catastrophic. It's always been a miracle to me that our legal system ever became
psychologically sophisticated enough so that intent rather than outcome was what mattered,
because you have to be a sophisticated thinker to see that someone has done damage to someone else,
but and so the damage is real and market and troublesome and costly, all of that painful.
But because the intent wasn't there, the severity of the action is dramatically mitigated.
That's a sign of maturity and sophistication to note that and the fact that it's built into the
legal system is nothing short of remarkable. And then to remove that and to make the felt
consequences, the arbiter of the reality of the situation is a dreadful assault on the integrity
of the law as such as far as I can tell. Well, moreover, it's something that everyone
intuitively understands. We all understand the difference between murder and manslaughter.
You know, we all understand that intent actually does, like you say, escalate the
severity of a crime. And it's bigger than that, isn't it? Because this idea that
intention doesn't matter is actually built into so much of this, what we call social justice
discourse. If you think of critical race theory, it's just a given that there are racist structures
and you can be racist without intending to be racist. And I really do dispute that,
because I think in order to be racist, intention has to be at the heart of that.
Otherwise, it's incoherent to me. But this is really a degraded view of humanity,
I feel, where we are effectively like marionettes and that we're just being played
and that we don't have any agency anymore. And therefore, we can't be responsible for our own
words, not just our actions. We can't be responsible for our own words and their
and the ramifications. So we have to be controlled and we have to be stifled by the state. And it's
very, it makes me very nervous. So I've been thinking through the importance of free speech,
I suppose, from a psychological perspective. And it seems to me that, well, we can walk
through some axioms and you can tell me what you think about them if you would. So
I mean, the first thing we might posit is that it's useful to think, it's better to think than
not to think. And that might seem self evident. But thought can be troublesome and stir up trouble,
and your thoughts can be inaccurate. So it's perhaps not that unreasonable to start the
questioning there. But I think it was Alfred North Whitehead who said that
thinking allows our thoughts to die instead of us. And so he was thinking about the evolution of
thought in some sense from a biological perspective. So imagine a creature that's incapable of thought
has to act something out, a representation of the world or an intent, it has to be embodied.
And then if that fails, well, it fails in action. And so the consequence of that might be death,
it might be very severe. Whereas, once you can think, you can represent the world abstractly,
you can divorce the abstraction from the world, and then you can produce avatars of yourself,
sometimes in the image like in dreams, let's say, or in literature and fiction and movies and so on,
produce avatars of ourselves that are fictional, and then run them as simulations in the abstract
world and observe the consequences. And we do that in our stories, we do that when we dream,
we do that when we imagine in images and depict a dramatic scenario playing itself out. But then
we also do that in words, because we encode those images, it's one more level of abstraction,
we encode those images into words, and those words become partial dramatic avatars,
and then the words can battle with one another. So thought seems to work, let's say verbal thought,
you ask yourself a question, you receive an answer in some mysterious manner, there's
an internal revelation of sorts, that's the spontaneous thought, you know, when you sit
down to write a book, thoughts come to you, perhaps because you pose yourself a question,
and no one knows how that works, but we experience it, that thoughts manifest themselves in the
theater of our imagination. So that's the revelatory aspect. And then there's the critical aspect,
which is, well, now you've thought this, and perhaps you've written it down, can you generate
counter positions? Are there universes that you can imagine where this doesn't apply?
Are there situations where it doesn't apply? Are there better ways of formulating that thought?
And but I would say, with regard to critical thought, and to some degree with regard to
productive thought, an indeterminate proportion of that is dependent on speech. I don't think it's
unreasonable to point out that thought is internalized speech, and that the dialectical process that
constitutes critical thinking is internalized speech. So you and I are engaging in a dialectic
enterprise, you'll posit something and all respond to it, and you'll respond to that. And
we're in a kind of combat, there's some cooperation about it as well.
And we're attempting to formulate a truth more clearly, at least in principle, if we're being
honest. We do that when we're speaking. So our thought, the quality of our thought is actually
dependent on our ability to speak our minds. Absolutely. And then, so go ahead.
I couldn't agree more, because I think speech is the way in which we collaborate on our thoughts.
You know, that's how it works. You refine those thought processes that you've described. I mean,
I'm no psychologist, but I understand this basic premise that we have these various thoughts that
are continually in conflict within ourselves, unless we're able to articulate them and to engage in
others through that process, through that transactional process of speech, then those thoughts
are never refined, and they remain in this kind of infancy. Yes, well, they're as refined as we
can make them as individuals, but that's also assuming that you even have the words, which you
also learned in the dialectical process. Right, exactly. It's not as though the truth is ever
fully graspable, but we can get nearer to it through that collaborative process of speaking and
articulating the thoughts. And in fact, even in the act of, like you say, writing or articulating
yourself, with your self-authoring program, for instance, the act of writing things out
is what clarifies the points of view for you. I've actually found that the way that I think
about these issues now is largely a product of the fact that I've written so much about it
and changed my mind through the act of learning how to express myself on these points. And the
consequence of not having that opportunity, I think, is something I would barely want to
contemplate. And I think to give an example of the moment, which is that because any kind of
attempt to have a discussion or debate about the perceived conflict between trans rights and
gender critical feminism, because to even attempt that discussion at the moment will have such
grave social consequences, and certainly in terms of career prospects, major consequences,
people will not have that discussion. I have people I know in politics in the media, and they
say to me quite honestly, I will not talk about this, I have concerns, I have qualms,
I want answers to questions, but I absolutely will not open my mouth about this. And if you
don't do that, this is why no one understands the issue. This is why no one has reached any kind of
consensus on this issue. All we have is a sense in which to have the quote unquote wrong opinion
makes you a pariah. And therefore, I'd better not have that opinion. Well, then that's not a
sincerely held conviction. That's just... Well, if the definition of wrong is continually
transforming and in an unpredictable manner, then it's best just to sidestep the issue entirely.
And then that leaves it murky and ill-defined and assuming that you believe that thought has
any utility. And so when you're sitting down to write, when I'm sitting down to write,
and I produce a sentence, it might have come from some theoretical perspective, maybe I'm
approaching something from a Freudian perspective or a Marxist perspective or an Enlightenment
perspective, et cetera. I mean, it's a psychological trope, I suppose, that we all think the thoughts
of dead philosophers. We think we have our own opinions, but that's really very, very, very,
very rarely the case. It's not that easy to come up with something truly original and generally
make incremental progress at best. And so your ability to abstractly represent the world and
then to generate avatars that can be defeated without you dying is dependent on your incorporation
of a multitude of opinions. And that in itself is a consequence of... I mean, that works to the
degree that communication is actually free and that you can get access to as much thought as you
can possibly manage. So I can't see how you can deny the centrality of free speech as a fundamental
right or the fundamental right, perhaps, unless you simultaneously deny the utility of thought.
But maybe if you are also inclined to remove the individual from the central position of the
political discourse, then maybe you can also make the case, at least implicitly, that individual
thought doesn't matter and that mostly it's just causing trouble. But I think individual thought
is key. And actually, even in the outline you've described there, there is individual agency
in reaching a conclusion that has been articulated before, insofar as if you are engaged with a
multitude of writers and philosophers and artists and ideas and you've come out with a perspective.
That perspective may not be original to you, but the process that you've gone through to
reach that viewpoint is individual to you. There is a power in that. There's something
important about that. No, there's something crucial. If you're a practicing psychotherapist,
one of the things you have to learn is to not provide people with your words too much.
What you want is for them to formulate the conclusion. And you can guide them through
the process of investigation. You talked about the self-authoring process, which is online at
selfauthoring.com, that it steps people, say, through the process of writing an autobiography,
of analyzing their current virtues and faults and making a future plan. The utility of all of that
is dependent on the person who's undertaking the exercise, generating their own verbal
representations. And that seems to cement it somehow as yours, if you've come up with the words.
And so it's the uppermost expression of personhood, the ability to
have the words that you should speak reveal themselves to you and to have the right to
express them as you see fit. Yes. In which case, if you are merely repeating an accepted script,
then to what extent can you even say to be an individual at all? This to me...
Well, I think that's part of the philosophical conundrum, is that if you believe that all people do
is repeat predigested scripts, especially if your view is that the fundamental human motivation
is power and the entire social landscape is nothing but a competition between equally,
what would you say, selfish and single-minded power strivers, then there is no individual.
There's no individual in that conceptual world. And it seems to me that that's the world that
we're being pushed to inhabit and are criticized for, on moral grounds, for criticizing. And I'm
still trying to get my hands around this. I mean, when I went to Britain, I saw the CTTV cameras
and the increased security, and it isn't clear to me how that's related to the social justice issues
that so-called social justice issues that we're discussing. But they seem to me in some very
difficult to comprehend way, part and parcel of the same thing, the same dangerous thing.
Well, I think it's probably connected just in terms of this distrust of humanity or this
belief that people need to be shepherded, otherwise left to their own devices, chaos will reign.
I think that's the connection. It's not directly connected as far as the issues relating to Liberty
and CCTV, obviously predate what we now call whatever the current social justice movement
is called. But I think there is something there. I mean, the censorship, the impulse to censor
what people read, and this is something that particularly hits home to me in the arts, is
based on this view that ultimately the people are or the populace is liable to corruption
if they're exposed to the wrong materials. And what's very interesting to me about that, I mean,
you've written a lot about the way in which literature, for instance, informs our experiences,
because it is in a sense like when you read philosophers, you're feeling your way through
other lives and other experiences that are trans historical and cross cultural,
and they inform the way that you react in your own individual experience.
But if you start to say as an artist, no, you can only represent for a start what you personally
are or have experienced. And you cannot represent anything which is morally problematic to use
the phrase that they absolutely adore. Then art fails to, and literature in particular,
fails to function in the way that it should, because you can't explore those things. This is
why I often, when it comes to censorship of the arts, I often go back to what Oscar Wilde said
about this, he said there's no such thing as a moral or an immoral book, books are well written
or badly written, that is all. And that actually art and morality sometimes are not, in other
words, art shouldn't just be about promoting whatever the ethical trend is of any given time,
it's much bigger than that. Well, it's not art at that point at all. As far as I'm concerned,
if you can state the purpose of the art in explicit terms, especially if it's in accordance with a
let's say an ideology that's shared by a multitude of people, it's not art at all, it's propaganda.
It's totally banal. This is why so many people are getting sick of Hollywood, to bring it down
to a different level, that people are sick of the entertainment on their TV, on their streaming
services and on Hollywood, because they have this constant feeling that they're being hectic
by some moralistic person in a studio saying, our focus here is on diversity, our focus here is on
the right moral message, that the message of the story is one that would be approved by a group
of intersectional activists, and you get this all the time seeping into mainstream entertainment,
and people get really, really sick of it. It's not that when you see a lesbian kiss in
Star Wars, that that offends you because you're a homophobe, most sci-fi fans are,
they've never had a problem with diversity or anything like that. What bothers them about it
is this sense of someone saying to them, we think you're all evil bigots and you need to be educated
and that's why we're going to shoehorn in a lesbian kiss into the end of this film. That's
why people have a problem. I mean, you had it yourself recently with that ludicrous Marvel
comics thing, where you became the Red Skull, and that to me was a perfect example of the banality
of an artistic endeavor that becomes an exercise in political pedagogy, because that was quite
clearly, I mean, you couldn't even say it was satirical, because it cannot be satirically
effective if the thing that they are comparing you to is the precise opposite of the thing you
believe. I mean, of all the sort of public figures I can think of, you have the most clear track
record of opposing tyranny in all its forms, which anyone who knows anything about your work
will know. You've spent years lecturing about the evils of authoritarianism, including Nazism.
So the idea that you would then become this super magic Nazi is propagandistic, it's totally
banal artistically. Firstly, it's not satirically right, but also it's just, it's just, it's just,
do you know what it reminds me of? Actually, I don't know if you remember after the fatwa against
Salman Rushdie, there was a film made in Pakistan called International Gorillaz,
where they turned Salman Rushdie into this evil villain playboy who was colluding with the
Israeli military services. And at the end of the film, these flying copies of the Quran float down
and shoot laser beams into his head and kill him off. But, and that is such a ridiculous laughable
film, you know, you put your enemy as the main villain, and you just misrepresent him in that
way. But that's just what they did to you. It's as banal as that. And that's, I think people are
sick of that. Well, the response thankfully seems to indicate that, you know, it didn't,
did people, it didn't do me any harm as far as I can tell. I mean, it was very shocking to me
that it happened. It took me about 12 hours to sort of regain my composure, because I actually
couldn't believe it to begin with. I was sure that it was a fabrication, especially, but then
it was even more shocking when I found out who had authored it. You know, it wasn't, it was someone
who had an intellectual reputation. And so. But he's an activist, isn't he? He's an intersectional
activist. He definitely, his opinions definitely place him on the radical, on the side of the
radical left. So it's very difficult to, so there's an attack on the essence of free speech. I mean,
I remember reading Derrida. Derrida criticized our culture, Western culture as phallogocentric.
And it's really actually quite a precise word. So the phallic part of it is masculine, obviously,
related to the phallus. And logos is, well, that's the central concept of Greek rationalism,
but it's also the central concept of Christianity. And the logos is
something like the magical power of genuine and true speech. It's something like that. And
there are representations of the magical power of speech that predate Greece and Christianity.
You see it in Mesopotamia, that the equivalent to the Savior and ancient Mesopotamian
religious thinking was Marduk, and he could speak magic words. He had eyes all the way around his
head, which meant that he paid attention to everything, but he could speak magic words. And
so that idea of the centrality of speech and its association with the very fabric of reality,
that's been an idea that has strived to make itself manifest for thousands and thousands of
years. I mean, in the Judeo-Christian tradition, in the biblical tradition, the word is given
cosmological status as the thing that brings habitable order out of chaos, and it's identified
with divinity itself. And so the assault on free speech is an assault on a principle that's
fundamental beyond, say, its centrality, its central importance to the Enlightenment,
and it's an assault on the idea of the logos itself.
I agree. This is why I always mistrusted the post-structuralist. So when I was studying for
English, it was the Deridam, Foucault, and Lyotard, and these were taken as a given, and this idea
that there is no truth beyond language. Language is all. Language is the way in which we construct
our perception of reality and our perception of truth, and that actually there is no truth at
the heart of it. I just found it so depressing, depressingly pessimistic, because it also means
that you can construct any kind of reality you like. Well, and maybe that's part of the motivation
for it is the hypothetical lack of constraint by anything that that seems to imply. I mean,
if there's no canonical reality while there's no responsibility, that's for sure.
You could argue that there's no meaning and it's deeply pessimistic, but maybe the payoff
for that is no responsibility, but there's also no constraint of any sort. There's certainly no
ethical constraint. And I mean, I keep trying to dig to see what's at the bottom of this,
this anti-logo sentiment, and it's a very difficult thing to get right.
Maybe it's not even as deliberate as the way that it sounds. Maybe it is just the fact that
these theories, for whatever reason, became fashionable in universities about 20 years ago,
and now for whatever reason, they have escaped into the mainstream. I mean, most of the people
that push this stuff don't read Foucault, and they don't know about the people whose ideas
they've imbibed and actually very much misunderstood. I mean, the whole point of the
postmodernist was to trash the notion of grand narratives. And what we have now in the social
justice movement is an incredible grand narrative. We are on the right side of history. We are the
righteous ones, and everyone else needs to be decimated. It seems to me that this stuff,
I don't think it's as conspiratorial as that. I think it's just sort of circumstances of history,
one thing after another, and this is where we're at now. But the end result that we have to deal
with, which I think you've alluded to, is this idea that if there is no such thing as reality
beyond language, then you are at liberty to construct whatever pseudo reality that you desire,
or it is easiest for you. And we see elements of this reverberating, I think, in a lot of the
discourse at the moment of things like lived experience, you know, you can present as much
data as you want, but it will be disregarded if it doesn't tally with what lived experience really
means, which is what I want to be true. Well, there's also this insistence that seems part of it,
that I mean, I objected to some legislation that was passed in Canada, and that's sort of what
propelled me into public visibility, let's say. And to begin with, I was mostly concentrating on
the violation of the principle of free speech that the legislation seemed to me to represent,
because it compelled certain utterances. And I was never a fan of hate speech laws to begin with.
This was something beyond hate speech laws, because hate speech laws stop you from saying
things, whereas compelled speech laws force you to say something which is much worse,
even though the first one is also ill-advised, as far as I'm concerned. But I've realized
more recently that I was also disturbed, although in a less explicit manner, with the
theory of identity that was an implicit part of the legislation. So with gender identity,
for example, and we're engaged in a discussion across our culture about gender identity,
I mean, I know as a personality psychologist that there are females, biological females who
have masculine personalities, and there are biological males who have feminine personalities,
that the link between personality as such and biological structure is
suggestive but not absolute, and there's a lot of variability. But the idea that identity is
something that you define yourself and that you can change at will at any point seems to me to be
entirely counterproductive and dangerous because it's inaccurate. So your identity isn't merely
your membership in whatever group you happen to identify with at that moment. It's certainly
not merely your sexuality or merely your race. In fact, your identity is barely your race,
because your identity is something more like how you conduct yourself in the world.
And if you define yourself as black, let's say, that doesn't give you much of a map to
encountering and approaching the world. It's nowhere near detailed enough.
And then the idea that you define it, I've been thinking about that a lot,
but you never define your identity by yourself. You can't because you're surrounded by other people
and they have to play along with you. And if they don't play along with you voluntarily,
which means they appreciate the quality of your game and they understand it, then
you're either going to be alienated or you have to impose your identity by force.
But that's also not a very good solution. I mean, I just spent some time interviewing
one of the world's foremost authorities on aggression, and that'll be released in a bit.
Perhaps it's been released before this will be released.
He's done longitudinal studies of aggression. And if the idea that our social structures are
predicated on power was true, then children would start out not being aggressive and they would
become more aggressive with time. And the more aggressive children would be more successful.
And none of that is true. Children start out more aggressive than they are on average by the
time they're adults. Aggression levels decrease with age rather than increasing. And there's no
evidence whatsoever that it's a useful long-term strategy in the social world. Identity is
something you negotiate the way you negotiate a game. It has to be that way.
There's something rather sinister, isn't there, about the way in which present-day identity
politics is about imposition onto others, rather than an assertion of who I am or whatever that
might be. I mean, I always mistrusted in. So I can see the utility of identity politics politically
speaking in scenarios where people are marginalized. You know, I understand why gay people collectively
came together back in the 60s to fight for their rights, because there was obviously a
serious problem, or the civil rights movement in Northern Ireland in the 60s and 70s and that kind
of thing, where Catholics weren't able to have the vote or to get housing. So that sort of makes
sense to me. The current identity politics, or what we might call identitarians, a lot of it strikes me
as about power. In fact, I feel like they would be an incredible subject for Foucault if he were
alive today, because I've noticed this correlation and a lot of people have noticed this correlation
and I never get an answer about this. But why is it whenever online, whenever I'm viciously attacked
or threatened, something particularly pernicious, the person doing it always has their pronouns
in their bio or a rainbow gay flag in their bio. Why is there a correlation that I've experienced
again and again? I mean, it's almost inevitable at this point between the need to self-identify in
terms of sexuality and gender, and a kind of cruelty or viciousness or a need to attack
an aggression. Well, one of the things that disturbs me constantly about ideological representations
of the world, broadly speaking, is that their fundamental danger is that they always contain
a too convenient theory of evil and malevolence. And for me, any theory that locates the fundamental
problem of evil somewhere other than inside you is dangerous. Now, that isn't to say that
social structures can't be corrupted and aren't corrupt. That's an existential problem in and
of itself. It's always the case that our social institutions aren't what they should be and
they're outdated and they're predicated to some degree on deceit. And people who use power can
manipulate them sometimes successfully. That problem never goes away and it never will. But
when the evil can be easily located somewhere else, then you have every moral right to allow your
unexamined motivations to manifest themselves fully because you can punish the evildoers
and always remain on the moral side of the fence. There's a huge attractiveness in that.
I think, I mean, this is something you've explored a lot with the idea of the Solzhenitsyn's idea
about the good and evil cutting through the heart of every human being. Because that, to me,
it really gets to the heart of a lot of what I would call a kind of infantile culture. I think
this is a symptom of childishness. Whenever I was learning about literature and what
constituted more sophisticated literature and what didn't, Disney films, childish films,
let's take Tolkien, for instance, bad people look bad, they look like orcs, they're ugly,
and they are villains, and then there are heroes and they are good. There isn't complexity. And if
you have a more complex novel, like a Mervyn Peake novel where people aren't necessarily good or bad,
they're both, they struggle within themselves and with other people, that is a mark of a kind of
adult novel as opposed to a childish novel. That's quite an important distinction. And I think
most of the political and ideological battles that I find myself in the middle of, and I'm sure
you do as well, are because people are just reducing everything to this binary of good versus evil
and putting themselves on the side of good. It is a very infantile, almost like a caricature of
religion. And I see it again and again, we had it in this country with the Brexit vote,
effectively, what happened in the vote here. And the reason why it became so toxic and families
fell apart and you wouldn't believe, I know it wasn't reported very much elsewhere, but it was
like a kind of ideological civil war here, but not a very sophisticated one. Because it came down to
this narrative that if you voted to leave the EU, you were evil, racist, stupid. And if you voted to
remain, you were good and progressive and all the rest and noble and virtuous. And of course,
there are all sorts of good reasons to have voted either way. And this kind of caricature,
and it happens again with... Well, you described it as a caricature of religion. And I think that's
what an ideology is. And this is one of the reasons that I've been inclined, let's say, to go to have
my shot at the rational atheists, much as I'm a fan of enlightenment thinking. I mean, I was convinced
as a consequence of reading Jung primarily, but also Dostoevsky and also Nietzsche primarily,
and Solzhenitsyn, I would say, as well. And then biology as well, as I studied that more deeply.
There's no escaping a religious framework. There's no way out of it. And if you eliminate it,
say, as a consequence of rational criticism, what you inevitably produce is its replacement by
forms of religion that are much less sophisticated. I mean...
Well, it's not religion. It's a fundamentalist. If I look back to my Catholic upbringing,
actually acknowledging your own capacity for sin is at the heart of Catholicism.
That's why we have the confessional. That's why you sit there and tell this stranger all these
things you've done wrong, because it's reckoning with it. Well, that's far from trivial. It's
unbelievably not trivial. And because it was so common, like a common part of Catholicism,
it can be passed over without notice. And so the religious structures that we inherited,
I'm going to talk about Christianity most specifically, because it's the form of religious
belief that primarily undergirds our social structures. It's our operating system. My
producer came up with that term the other day, and I thought it was apt.
And it does localize the drama between good and evil inside, and makes you responsible for that,
and encourages you, let's say, to attend to the ways that you fall short of the ideal. And
when you criticize a structure like that out of existence, you don't criticize the questions
that gave rise to it out of existence. And the questions might be, well,
what's the nature of the good? What's the nature of evil? Those are religious questions. What's
the purpose of our life? How do you orient yourself if you're trying to move up, let's say, rather
than down? How should you conduct yourself, et cetera, et cetera? Those questions don't go away,
and they can't not be answered. And so the way that a traditional religious structure answers them
is in a mysterious way. It uses ritual. It uses music. It uses art. It uses literature. It uses
stories. All these things that are outside the realm of easy criticism. And then some of that's
translated into comprehensible, explicit dogma, and that's the part that's most susceptible
to rational criticism. But when that disappears, I've been thinking about this a lot this week
because of what happened to Richard Dawkins recently. And I have my differences with Dawkins
and the rest of the rational atheists because I think that they underestimated the danger of
dispensing with what they were attempting to dispense with. And I see the influx of religious
fervor associated with political ideas as a direct consequence of the lack of separation,
let's say, between church and state psychologically.
But Dawkins has fallen foul of this new religion, but his case actually really is testimony
to what we're talking about, that this is not a religion in a traditional sense. It is an
infantile religion that only sees things in binaries of good and evil because he was effectively,
he was posing a question about identity. He was saying if it is possible for Rachel Dollazal
to identify as black, why is she universally condemned and derided? But somebody can identify
as the opposite sex and they are celebrated. And all he was doing was posing the question.
He wasn't even actually making a claim. Yeah, well, he was doing, he was doing what a scientist
actually does. I mean, I've been shocked frequently in my interactions with journalists because
I've worked as a scientist for three decades and I'm accustomed to the way that scientists think
and speak. And when I'm sitting around with my graduate students and there's a problem or an issue,
what they do, and my colleagues as well, is generate a bunch of hypotheses about why that
might be. They don't necessarily believe them, but that the first trick is to generate as many,
what would you say, hypotheses, I said that already, that might account for it,
ranging from biological through social, etc. And that is exactly what Dawkins did. He even said
that's what he was doing. That puts you on the side of the devil. I mean, there was a viral tweet
this week from a teacher saying, I will never allow my pupils to play devil's advocate. I will
never allow that in the class because some views are oppressive and are not to be entertained.
I mean, but that's the point. That's why the Vatican will call in a devil's advocate when
someone is potentially being canonized. Well, if you can't play devil's advocate,
you can't think. That's it. You have to have a devil's advocate in your head.
If you don't have a devil's advocate in your head, torturing every thought you generate,
you're not engaged in critical thinking. Right. That's for sure.
That's the scientific process to disprove yourself. I mean, that's what surprises me about
Richard Dawkins' response because I think what he didn't realize is that he was caught in this
good versus evil binary and he was the heretic now. He had been branded. He posed the question,
you're not meant to pose. Therefore, he's now outed himself as one of the demons.
He's there in pandemonium with the other demons. Then he, of course, backtracked and
apologized and said, well, I didn't want to offend anyone. Of course, in an adult rational world,
that would be taken in good faith. I don't think he fully appreciates what's going on here,
is that he's already marked himself as the sinner. Well, here's his apology, let's say.
Now, what he should have said, as far as I'm concerned, here's what he said.
I do not intend to disparage trans people. I see that my academic
disgust question has been misconstrued as such and I deplore this. It was also not my attempt to ally
in any way with Republican bigots in the US now exploiting this issue. It's so interesting that
that's what he did because... Well, it's buying into the tribalism thing. It's not the best response
to defend him. What he should have said was something like, look, people, here's something
to think about that I was posing. That's what scientists do and you didn't understand that,
but that's not my problem. It's your lack of sophistication. But instead of saying that,
he immediately removed himself from the bad people and that was the Republican bigots,
which just seems to me to pour fuel on the fire. And then he also said that he didn't
intend to disparage trans people, which isn't the issue at all.
Well, also, there was no implication in what he asked that he had ever intended to disparage
trans people. But to be fair to him, I understand when you're caught in the middle of a Twitter
storm, you just want it to stop. And I've heard you talk about this as well, is actually your
response probably isn't going to be the best one. You just wanted to go away.
Well, look, I mean, one of the things that's really worth pointing out here, and it's not
like I don't have sympathy for Dawkins. I have sympathy for Dawkins. I sent out a tweet defending
him yesterday. I mean, Dawkins is an admirable scientist. In my estimation, I learned lots from
reading his books. That doesn't mean I don't have my criticisms of Dawkins. But just because you
have criticisms of someone doesn't mean that they've never done anything worthwhile or that you
haven't learned something from them. And that's especially true in the scientific realm.
I just don't understand why. Okay, so back to the Twitter issue. So what I've seen repeatedly,
and this is worth some discussion, is when I'm watching Twitter, when I'm watching these attacks
on people, what I've seen the most general pattern of response to be is that it doesn't take very
many people attacking you on Twitter before it's seriously psychologically disturbing.
And that is interestingly related to this whole issue of hate speech that we've been discussing,
because it is the case that vicious attacks have quite a pronounced psychological effect,
especially if they're personal. And people generally fold and apologize instantly if my
sense has been if the Twitter mob is 20 people. It's sort of like they're reacting to 20 of their
neighbors showing up on their doorsteps with pitchforks and torches. And I think it's actually
an admirable response in some sense, because a well-socialized person actually does care what
their neighbors think. And if you offend 20 of your neighbors, it's possible 20 of your tribe,
it's possible that you've done something wrong. You might ask yourself that. Now,
on Twitter, you're connected to hundreds of thousands of people. And if you would
offend 20, it's not clear what that means. It might just mean that you said something.
It feels a lot worse than it actually is as well. It feels amplified,
because there's all these people who are strangers who know absolutely nothing about you.
And it's particularly frustrating because more often than not, when it's happened to me, it's
always been an imagined grievance. It's not actually something I've said. It's something that
they've assumed that I've said, or a way that they have interpreted this. And the more you
try and fight back against it, or try and explain your actual position, the more they double down
on their... And you've had this as well. People are going after a figment of their own imagination.
That's impossible to fend off. And it does do psychological harm. And I've never denied that.
And this is something I addressed in the book, because I quoted, I can't remember her name now,
but a writer talking about how hate speech could be said to be violence in Safara's,
the psychological impact can have... It can have a physiological impact. It can make you sick.
It can make you unwell, the impact of words. But of course, the example I use is taxation. I could
become physically sick, because I'm under stress from being overly taxed by the government.
Does that mean that the government has committed an act of violence against me? It could be applied
to absolutely anything, I think. An anarchist would argue yes. Right, sure, exactly. But that
wouldn't be me. But you could apply that to absolutely any conceivable scenario,
where anything that has happened to you has led to stress and physical degeneration. And so,
I don't think it's right to single speech out and say that speech is... But we can say that that's
violence. Well, also, it's a one-sided argument, because dangerous as free speech is, we don't
ever have to deny that there's such a thing as hateful speech or damaging speech or corrosive
speech or untruth speech or pathological speech in every possible direction. That isn't the issue.
The issue is, what's more dangerous? To regulate it or to leave it be, despite its dangers?
That's the only rational argument or the only complete argument, let's say.
Even if you have the most repugnant character who is advocating the most vile ideas about society and
attempting to proselytise even someone who's attempting to recruit people to his or her cause,
even something as vicious as neo-Nazis or something like that, the question isn't,
you know, do I support what that person is saying? Because obviously we don't.
The question is, do you take a few instances of people behaving in this way and use that as a
reason, a justification to empower the state to make a decision about what people can say and
think? That's the bigger principle that's at stake here. I worry that with social media and Twitter
as well is that we end up buying into the illusion that there are more hateful people in the world
than there actually are. Because even the people who send these hateful things probably wouldn't
behave like that in real life. There's something about the online world. And what it does is,
absolutely, I mean, this is the heart of cancel culture. This is why it works. Like you've said,
it's just a few tweets. That's all it takes. I've seen situations where companies and corporations
will backtrack on a policy just because of one or two tweets, because they fear this deluge
of people. It has such disproportionate power. And often with this kind of cancel culture,
it is often about something that someone hasn't even said. The example of Dawkins is perfect,
because a lot of the people and some prominent people I saw were saying, look, Dawkins has now
outed himself as a transphobe. If you said to them, where is the transphobic thing?
Him today, you tomorrow, buckle. Well, quite, because if someone is transphobic,
simply because you've decided that, you know, I mean, it was the same with JK Rowling.
It became suddenly quite normal for commentators on the mainstream media to say that she has
said transphobic things. Well, where? Because I've read her comments and her essay on the
trans issue that she posted on her blog. And it was a long essay, which was very compassionate
and nuanced. And at no point, it's the opposite. She says that she supports trans rights and she
would stand there against any discrimination. If you and I've been in these fights all the time,
if ever you ask someone to say, can you just quote the transphobic thing that she said,
they never can. And an adult would say, okay, I can't find the evidence of my preconception. So
therefore I should revise my view. But they don't, they double down on it. And they find these sort
of they use casuistry and whatever linguistic semantic tricks they can to come background
to the conclusion they'd already decided. Same with Dawkins. I mean, not just the American
Humanist Association, I saw a major blogger saying that anyone who was defending him is transphobic.
And like, well, if that's all it takes to be smeared in this way, if it doesn't matter what you
say, if all that matters is what people decide that you believe, then, then I suppose this goes
back to this pseudo reality we were discussing. Well, I guess what Dawkins got in trouble for,
let's take it apart a bit, okay, because it's worth, it's worth doing. He said, this is his
original tweet. In 2015, Rachel Dolezal, a white chapter president of NAACP, was vilified for
identifying as black. Some men choose to identify as women and some women choose to identify as men.
You will be vilified if you deny that they literally are what they identify as. Discuss. Okay,
so he put forth a set of propositions. But the proposition has a point. And the point is,
what is it that you can and can't identify with? And what, what power do people have to
enforce their decision on others? And that's really, that's really the question he's asking
if you strip it down. And that is actually a question that's very threatening to,
well, let's see, who would it be threatening to? Well, it would be threatening to anyone who
insists that you can choose an identity, say, in the realm of, of gender, and that you should have
the right to enforce your choice, despite other people's opinions, let's say. So he's, he's asking
why is there an inherent contradiction in the intersectional discourse? Why is it,
why is it that racial identity is not malleable? And in fact, has to be strictly
policed. Hence why we have all these debates about cultural appropriation. Why is that so rigid?
And yet, even if the lived experience, let's go back to that the lived experience of the person
tells them otherwise, I mean, Rachel Dollazelle wrote a whole book in which she outlines how she
feels that she has always been black, it isn't just I choose to be black one day, it is something
her lived experience is that in essence, she is. So why is that to be vilified universally
without question? And there's no discussion to be had here. And yet, someone who chooses,
you know, that gender identity is something that is malleable and open to options and actually
infinite options. Why? And I think there is a contradiction. Well, maybe he's vilified because
he asked a question that's at the heart of the problem with identity politics,
period. It's I mean, particularly because when it comes to race, I mean,
virtually all intersectionists would accept that race is socially constructed. This is something
they're always talking about. And so therefore, in a sense, there is more of a case for trans
racialism. If you want to say that you can, that it is an identity that that can be mixed.
Well, in some sense, we already accept trans racialism as a given. And so here's something I
might as well get in trouble for this. Well, if your ancestry is 95% Caucasian and
5% non Caucasian Asian black, let's say,
you're not Caucasian. Generally speaking, you can identify with the minority group. And so
at some point, the question becomes, well, it's a ridiculous question, which is why the whole
notion of group identity construed in this way is so pathological. But we obviously accept some
degree of trans racial identification. If your racial group is disproportionately in one category,
but you identify with the other and that's instantly not only accepted, it's standard
practice. Right. And I'm with the intersectionists on this. And so far as race, we're all the same.
You know, ever since we've broken down the human genome, we know there are no differences between
so this idea that it must be so rigidly police this this this this social construct these arbitrary
ideas. And yet, I mean, I think it's something. Okay, so now we know why now we know exactly why
Dawkins got himself in so much trouble. Okay, you know, put his finger. Well, for sure. For sure.
But but the magical super Nazis are always in trouble. So you are exactly, you know, exactly.
But then with the question of the gender identity debate, but this is the debate we
need to be having is actually the other thing he put his finger on there is that actually people
are arguing with different definitions in their heads, you know, for for for the identitarians,
the idea of a woman, a woman is an identity, it isn't a biological reality. But for most
for most people, the classification of woman is biological reality, not identity. So in other
words, and why can't why? Why is it that we cannot have that discussion? So okay, so you believe
this thing, we believe the other. And that's why we're at loggerheads. But but let's let's have
the discussion. Why can that not happen? Why does it have to be if you've decided well, that's what
we're that's actually what we're trying to unpack is what's the motivation at the root of this. And
it seems to me, I do believe it's something like a pronounced infantilism. I mean, one of the things
I've been toying with is the idea that the the gender that the demand for gender fluidity
in late adolescence, let's say, is something like the consequence of insufficient fantasy play in
childhood. That that I remember, for example, when my son was little, his sister and her friends
used to dress him up as a fairy princess. They did this with some regularity. And I kind of cast a
dim eye on that. But I thought it through. And, you know, it sort of disturbed me. And then I
thought it through. And I thought, wait a second here, leave the kid alone, leave the girls alone.
He is playing out what it means to be female in dramatic play. And he needs to do that because
otherwise he can't understand what it means to be female. That's how children understand. That's
how adults understand things. For God's sake, we go to a movie and we watch someone play out of female
and we identify with that because otherwise we wouldn't be enjoying the movie. And we get we get
a bit of a clue about what it's like to inhabit someone else's skin. So there's this necessity
for play in gender roles. And that has to manifest itself. And if the play has been interrupted,
let's say by electronic equipment, for example, or or or any of the other things that might be
interrupting it, well, maybe that desire comes back with a vengeance later. And I have to be
whoever I say I am, I have to be able to play with this. And well, if it's a developmental
requirement, there's going to be a lot of insistence behind it. And it looks immature. And it is.
Because it should have happened earlier, most people stabilize their gender identity by the
time they're three or four. But it doesn't always happen. So there is an infantilism in this demand
for fluidity of identity, this insistence that other people play the game that I insist they're
going to play. And then what about the idea that the gender critical feminists would come in and say,
well, the idea of dress a boy dressing up in a dress, there's nothing inherently female about
that or feminine about that in any case that all of this is a construct anyway. And why can't we let
the kids just some kids are not gender conforming and they can just do what they want. I mean,
the concern I have with the current identity obsessed ideology is that they see a boy in a
dress. And they will say, well, he could potentially be a woman. And by doing so, are reinforcing
the most conservative views of gender to begin with. And that to me, I'm intuitively against
that because I wasn't a gender conforming. I didn't play football with the other boys. I didn't dress
up in dresses, but I may have done if they were lying around. I find it very odd that this
supposedly progressive radical movement is so dependent on the idea of very, very traditional
unyielding notions of what it is to be male and what it is to be female. Yeah, but only in the
case where the identity is across the sex. So you can be, if you're a man who believes he's a woman,
that's inviolable and has a biological reference point. But if you're a woman who thinks she's a
woman, it doesn't. It's completely malleable. And so, you know, that's an inherent contradiction
again. And it's worthy of discussion, surely. And the contradiction doesn't just go away because
you won't allow the conversation to happen. No, the contradiction gets played out in
actuality if you don't allow it to be dealt with in abstraction. So then the question is,
how do we break through? And I mean, this is something I've been really, really thinking
about is that it's no longer just a matter of trying to persuade people. It's almost trying
to de-radicalise people at this point. How do I explain to someone, the world isn't this fantasy
world that you've created in your head where it's just full of transphones and neo-Nazis and all these
and good versus evil. The world is actually much more complex and nuanced and requires discussion
and thought. How do you break through someone's fantasy so that we can have that discussion?
Well, it used to be that you sent them to the university so they could study the humanities.
That's the last thing you should do now. Well, that was the answer. I mean, that was the whole
point to make people more sophisticated in their conceptions. In which case is it the case that
it's over now? If people were to be educated out of those problems and now that actually the higher
education itself has become so ideologically driven that to go to university means you end up
more indoctrinated than when you went there. What hope is there? I sound a bit frustrated here,
but I feel like I'm bashing my head against a brick wall because most of the time when I'm
caught in an argument with these ideologues, they are arguing, like I say, with a monster
they've created in their own heads. I'm not the person they think I am. I don't have the values
they think I have. Therefore, the discussion is stymied from the outset and it does make me very
frustrated. That's probably the real reason I wrote the book, actually, because I want the idea
of free speech to be elevated again as a sacrosanct principle so that we can have these conversations
and so that people don't get demonized and attacked for things they don't believe and so that we can
reach some kind of consensus on these issues that we've been describing, these contentious issues,
because when you have an issue that's particularly tendentious, it requires more
conversation, it requires more discussion and more understanding and I don't think we're
getting that at the moment. Yeah, well, I guess I'm somewhat optimistic about that because I can see
all the possibility that long-form conversations of this sort bring. Well, there's an appetite for
them, isn't there? But is there an appetite for them from the activists and the ideologues who
have seen so much control in our major educational cultural institutions? Yes, I think so. I've been
struck by how deep the hunger is for genuine conversation and very much heartened by it.
So that's a counter movement, let's say. I hope you're right. I just don't see any evidence
of that from the people I'm talking about. I don't see it from the people who will say to you,
educate yourself. It's another problem too, though, isn't it, with Twitter, for example, is that
it's never the same people and that plays with us psychologically because, of course, we are built
to more or less assume that we're interacting with a continuous community and we aren't. We're
interacting with a discontinuous community on Twitter and so we're led astray in our presuppositions
constantly. But it's worse than that because I know it's different people all the time,
but they all have the same views on absolutely everything. It feels like you're arguing with
the Borg. You know, it feels like just one mind speaking through many, many voices. Yes, well,
it is. Then that's the hallmark of an ideology. It is precisely that. It's a matter of trying
to understand the ideology ever more deeply to see what it's actually focused on. But I do read
their books and I do read their articles and I do try to understand. I don't believe the people I'm
talking about return the favor. They always use the phrase, educate yourself. What they mean by
that is read these select books and digest them uncritically. That's what they mean by educate
yourself. They don't mean read widely and tackle the various views and come to a conclusion yourself.
The last thing they want is critical thought. Critical thought is the enemy. Ironically,
it's the enemy of critical theory. It's a hallmark of white supremacy culture.
I can see. That's what they say. That's what they claim. It's amazing to see that
set of ideas propagate itself across the culture so quickly. The Canadian federal government in
its diversity, inclusivity and equity training program now uses those concepts like associating
white supremacy with punctuality, for example. They use those in the training of their civil
servants. It's been accepted wholeheartedly to that degree. I've seen them. I've seen the screenshots
that often get leaked of these training sessions. It's bullet-pointed hallmarks of white supremacy,
punctuality, politeness, hard work. Perfectionism. Yeah. All these noble things. I'm thinking,
well, if I was a person of color, I would be outraged by this. This idea that this is a culture
that's alien to me. It's so offensive. It's so absurd. It's so absurd that you can hardly
mount an argument against it. Conscientiousness is a personality trait. There's no racial differences
in conscientiousness. Right. It wouldn't matter to me. If it was just a few idiots on Twitter or
these extreme, it wouldn't matter to me, but these people have disproportionate power,
institutional power, political power. The Biden administration is onside with an awful lot of
this kind of stuff. And the end point. So is the Trudeau government. To have this in the training
documentation that's produced by the federal government is just absolutely stunning. It's
also the document that I was referring to. I tweeted about it yesterday. It's so badly written
that it's stunning. It's maddening with him. And how is it he's got away with his history of Black
Face, for instance? How is it that there is no consistency there? Lack of effective opposition
is a big part of it. It's insane. I mean, if you look at those old videos, it looks like he spent
more time in Black Face than out of it. And yet he isn't the one who's being attacked and vilified
for that. It's okay. He's got a free pass. It's weird to me. Yeah. Well, the opposition in Canada,
and this is a problem in general, is a real problem for our entire culture, is that the woke
narrative is very romantically attractive. It's got this rebelliousness about it and this impetus
to go out and march in the streets and to work on a global cause. And like traditional conservatives
and even traditional liberals can't mount a counter narrative. They don't have the imagination.
And it's a huge problem. The trouble is, though, the cause that they're fighting for is largely
illusory. And that to me is very frightening. We've had people in this country claim that
our major universities, such as Oxford and Cambridge, are structurally institutionally
racist. All of the data tells us this is just simply not the case.
Oh, yes. Well, that's just happening constantly in Canadian universities. The McGill Physics
Department has now put out a diversity inclusivity and equity statement that's predicated on exactly
those views. Well, I think we need to push back against this particular hyper-racialization
of society because it is re-inscribing old racial tropes, even to the extent of fear of
miscegenation, this old racist idea of this fear of mixed couples. There was an article
in The Guardian here recently talking about how finding mixed race people attractive is
problematic. It's almost just taking old racist ideas and just giving them a kind of hint of
respectability. And of course, the end point of that is segregation. You saw presumably the story
in California, the Brentwood School, the elite school that segregated its parents, but on their
what was it, a dialogue session with the teachers, and you would have white parents in one room
and black parents in the other room. You're seeing that in convocation ceremonies at universities,
too. How can this be anything other than racist? It's interesting that the group
Fair, the group Foundation Against Intolerance and Racism, a lot of those people who are doing
great work, I think, are starting to call this neo-racism. There needs to be a label for it.
And I think maybe that's the right way to go about it because the word racism has almost
become meaningless because the people who use it the most, they throw it around so liberally,
I never believe it when I hear someone branded that way. I assume it's someone
not being honest and not being truthful. So what do we call this? What do you call it when
people are advancing the cause of racial segregation in the name of anti-racism?
What do you call that? I don't know what... I think that's going to be the real struggle.
It's not just breaking through the fantasy world. I don't like this idea of having to
negotiate someone else's dreamland. There's that thing, firstly, but also there's the
linguistic mind fields. How do you convince people? The other reason, I mean, you mentioned the
rebellious aspect of it, I think the other reason why it's so appealing is because the language
sounds like you're doing good. Social justice, anti-racism. Who wouldn't be anti-racist? Black
Lives Matter. Of course they do. Who would disagree with that? But these phrasing can be
used to push through some very pernicious ideas. I mean, when it comes to anti-racism,
for instance, I mean, Ibram X. Kendi makes it absolutely clear in his book that he feels to be
not racist is simply another form of racism. That this dichotomy doesn't exist. Well,
and that's why I find it very hard when I'm having these arguments. Because if I say
I have a real problem with anti-racism, people will say, oh, I see. So you're for racism. And then
you have to explain what anti-racism means when used by these academics in these very niche
fields such as whiteness studies. You have to explain first what that means, why that's dangerous
for society, and how in order to genuinely oppose racism, you have to oppose the discourse of
anti-racism. I mean, when you say it like that, it's maddening, isn't it? It's like,
it's the stuff of nightmares because there is no coherent sense. And because so much of it is
rooted in language and misdirection through language and shielding what is actually meant,
it becomes impossible to win the argument. And maybe that's the point. Maybe this,
they gave the word to us gaslighting. When they gaslight all the time and say that culture war
is a right-wing myth, or cancel the people who are the chief practitioners of cancer culture
saying that cancer culture doesn't exist. When they say the opposite of what is the observable
reality, I don't know how to break through that, how to break through those arguments. Because not
only have they constructed a pseudo-reality in their own minds, they've constructed the language
with which to sustain that pseudo-reality so no one else can be drawn out of it. And that to me
is going to be the challenge. Let me ask you, let's go sideways for a minute now. And I suppose
this is an exploration of potential solutions as well. This has been a very serious conversation,
but you're a satirist and a comedian as well. It's terrible how unfunny I am in real life.
Isn't that awful? When I'm doing stand-up, if I've got a script, I can be funny, but I can't
be funny spontaneously. People are very disappointed about that. I'm sorry.
Well, I'm curious about your motivations. Let's talk about Titania McGrath. Why don't
you define, describe her first for everyone? So Titania McGrath originated as a Twitter character
in around April 2018. And the idea of the character is that she is a very privileged,
po-faced, young, white, intersectional activist who is determined to be offended by absolutely
anything. She can problematize absolutely anything. You know, you could give her a pair of shoes or a
hat or a holiday in Margate and she would find a way to say that it is irredeemably transphobic
and white supremacist or something like that. She can do those things that the activists always do.
So nothing is ever good enough for her. She's also immensely privileged. She comes from well,
independently wealthy background. She lives in, you know, one of those sort of gated communities
which is 99% white. But she has a deep mistrust of the working class. But she thinks that she is
virtuous and noble and good and she goes on Twitter and goes on the attack all the time,
trying to isolate things, trying to save the world in her through intersectional theory.
And it's a very recognizable type of act. Even if you know nothing about intersectionality or
anything of the stuff that came out of the School of Thought of Kimberly Crenshaw or any of those
academics, even if you know nothing about that, you will recognize this type of figure because
this figure is ubiquitous on Twitter, on social media. They always have their pronouns in their
bio. They always use the same terminology such as hegemony or discourse or problematic or
phallogocentric if you want to go back to Derrida. And she knows the right jargon to use,
lived experience, cultural appropriation, mansplaining, toxic masculinity, all of those
kind of things. And we know, and all of these things tend to be slogans in substitute of thought,
you know, they're just things that get thrown out there. And so what I wanted to do with the
character is- Do you know what slogan means? What you mean is etymologically? No, I don't.
Sluag garram, it means battle cry of the dead. I love that. Oh, God. That doesn't send a chill
up your back. You didn't understand it. Well, this is it. I'm going to use that. That's great
because it is a kind of, it's almost like a battleground of zombies who don't have any
capacity for independent thought anymore. I mean, you try to get into a conversation with
someone like this and- I have many times. Well, sure. Very publicly.
And the slogans that come back at you all the time and the lack of interrogation of those slogans,
you know? But what I find so frustrating and so horrifying in some sense, I mean,
I think a great canonical example of that is the interview that Helen Lewis did with me for the,
for GQ, which is, it's now more popular online than the Channel 4 interview, which I think the
GQ interview has like 32 million views or something preposterous, but I never did talk to Helen Lewis.
I just talked to the ideology and it's not, I don't like that. I like to talk to the person
and find out what they think, but- I heard you saying as well that before the interview,
she was very frosty and almost as though she had decided what you were in advance,
Oh, there was no almost. She definitely decided what I was before the discussion.
And she's been beating the same drum more recently as well, which has driven many
people to the interview because she published an article in The Atlantic Monthly and in another
locale as well. So when you're faced with those, I mean, I just see it all the time so often.
And to give another recent example that we had the, obviously since the Harry and
Meghan interview with Oprah Winfrey, and there was a controversy over here because Piers Morgan,
who hosts a show called Good Morning Britain, got into an argument with another colleague on
the show, man called Alex Beresford, I think. And it was really interesting watching once they'd
had the argument, they sat down, they tried to talk through the issues. And Piers Morgan pointed
out that some of the things that Meghan had said in the interview were factually wrong and had been
proven to be factually wrong. His response was, Alex Beresford's response was, but that's her
lived experience. And then he said, yes, but we have the evidence here that it is factually
incorrect. And again, he said, but it's her lived experience. So in other words,
See, that's that insistence that the fantasy world, the subjective world trumps everything.
Right. So, and that once you've, it's almost like these, these phrases, if you use the right,
if you use the phrase lived experience or toxic masculinity, whatever, you're in the club, what
you've signaled that you're, you're, you're right. You know, and I know that academics have always
done this, you know, the jargon, you're in the group, you're in the in group, if you've got the
right, if you know how to deploy the right words. But there's something more sinister about this,
because it is morally right in these situations. That's the sinister thing is that it's morally
incontrovertible. You've made the statement and that's it. And there's no further discussion.
Yes, well, you're not evil. That's what you're saying. I'm not evil.
So I think, so with, so the reason with Titania, I wanted her to be obsessed with this language.
And so, and, and, and why I read so much of this stuff so that I knew the way that they speak
is because I thought the best way to expose the inherent contradictions of, of, of that position
and the thoughtlessness moreover, the thoughtlessness of that position is, is, is to, to embody it in
a character. Right. So you were playing, you were playing a dramatic game, essentially, which is a
form of thought. In doing so, I've actually come to understand the people I'm satirizing a whole
lot more. And look, let's face it, every now and then they'll hit on a point that is actually
right. And, and, you know, even when I read White Fragility by Robert DeAndrele, which I think is a
terrible book and is, is, is so flawed throughout every now and then she'll hit on something and
you think for a moment, oh, there's something in that. And then she'll undercut it by saying, well,
everyone's a racist and all the rest of it, you know, and it just goes back to being absurd.
But, and that book in of itself is a very good example of this, you know, setting up a reality
that cannot be penetrated, because she will say that any kind of critical questioning of her
position is evidence of the very pervasiveness of white supremacy that she's identified. So you
can't win because even engaging in a discussion is proof of your malevolence, according to her
theory, it's absolutely hopeless. But I thought, I thought, I thought because the movement is so
rhythm with contradiction, actually, the more effective way of tackling it isn't through dialogue,
firstly, because the people I'm talking about seem impervious to reason. They mistrust dialogue,
they see debate as a form of violence. So you're never going to get through to them that way.
Yeah, and that that's actually an explicit part of the theory.
It really is. So then in creating a satirical character, it's not that they're anti free
speech, there's no such thing as free speech in that theoretical framework. No, it's a misapprehension
all the way down to the bottom, which is why I get so frustrated. I've often been in debates
where I've tried to invite these very people to participate in the debate to hear them out.
And they would say that to even appear would be to dignify the position. So it's an absolute
nightmare. And it also protects themselves from potential criticism, which is, of course,
the whole point. But I thought by creating a satirical character that embodies those
contradictions, that thoughtlessness, it might reflect back onto them. I suppose how they look
to normal people, because I don't think they appreciate I think they're so caught up within
their own little bubbles, with their own little groups, they never hear an alternative point of
view. I mean, I used to work with academics like this, who were so within their little groups,
and they're constantly quoting each other and supporting each other and giving the illusion
that their views cannot be disputed. But what if you're suddenly confronted
with how other people perceive you? And will that give you pause for thought?
Okay, so when you started Titania, you didn't announce that she was a satirical character.
You started playing on Twitter. Tell me the story. What exactly would happen? Because
that Twitter account became extraordinarily well known and very rapidly. So I'm curious about
how you did that and how you responded once it started to amass some cultural significance.
I was very surprised that it became so popular so quickly. And I'd started it
because I'm more to entertain myself more than anything. I was so frustrated with this and I
wanted to try and expose the absurdity. I mean, my background is as a stand-up comic. And as a
stand-up comic, I'm not necessarily satirical. I will stand there on a stage and ridicule the thing
that I perceive to be a problem with society. With satire, what you're doing is you're often
embodying it with a kind of ironic detachment or you're addressing it. You're always going after
what you perceive to be the vices and follies of society. And I thought that was a good way of doing
it. Right, so you had to stay on a kind of edge. You had to be believable enough as the character
so that you could pass. But you had to push it just past the point of what, of rationality or
believability? It's a funny edge. I was continually getting into arguments with people and staying in
character. I've always stayed in character even to today. And I've actually, if you go to the
Titania account now, my pinned thread is a thread of conversations that I've had with people in
character who are angry about the things I've tweeted. And these can go on for pages and pages.
And it's fascinating to me because it's close enough to the truth. She says really ridiculous
things, really absurd things like speaking or writing in English as an act of colonial violence.
She'll say that, you know, the only way to guard against fascism is if the state are allowed to
arrest people for what they say and think, you know, stuff like this, which is so obviously absurd.
And yet it's close enough to what people actually say that people believe it and get annoyed about
it. And what I've always liked to do is to stay in character and have those conversations
with these people. And then I posted the screenshots of the conversation. But part of the point of
that is not to humiliate the people who had fallen for it, because actually the point I'm making is
I understand why they would fall for it, because it's so close to what people actually say.
And by doing that, my hope is, I suppose, that it exposes the folly of this stuff. Sometimes
even when I'm in those arguments, I will say something that is so
out of the out of, you know, just completely out of the realm of possibility, so stupid.
And yet they still don't, things have become so absurd that they don't twig. I mean, even today,
there was a story today in the UK, a museum, a Jane Austen museum, is now going to interrogate
Jane Austen's use of sugar in her tea, because it has connections to plantations and white
supremacy and slavery. You know, something like that, which is just so absurd, or the recent
controversy over Bluey, the Australian cartoon dog, because it doesn't have enough dogs of colour
and gender diverse dogs in the cartoon. Now, that sounds like something I would make up as a joke.
But it's real, it's actually happening and people are taking it seriously. And so therefore,
in a sense, it's become harder with Titania, because anything that I come up with,
is going to be topped by real life very, very quickly. What have you learned about the people
that Titania annoys? So she's a hyper politically correct avatar, but she tangles up people who are
opposed to that sort of thing. And so that must have also shed substantial light for you on
people on the other side of the... It does. And so what have you learned?
Well, one of the things is that the people on the other side, who might even be quite...
might even be of my opinion about these things. A lot of people are very quick to anger and verbal
abuse as a goat, as an instant response. So a lot of the people who get angry with her really go
after her looks, and I mean, she's not real... A friend of mine, Lisa, created the image of the
woman. She's a composite of four different women. So it's not a parody. It's not a parody of any
particular person. It's a type of person. And yeah, the people who get angry with her, and the people
who are genuinely angry about the social justice movement, are absolutely furious about the way
it is impinging on every aspect of their lives. They are sick of it. So when they see someone as
extreme as Titania, they really let rip. And I don't think that's healthy. It's not in my nature
to go and abuse someone online or to get angry online. But I've seen the extent... What it shows,
I suppose, is that that kind of instinct to immediately go for the abusive or the vicious
or the attack or the ad hominem is present across the political spectrum. It's everywhere. Or maybe
that's just a sign of Twitter. Maybe that's just a symptom of social media. And I've learned a lot
about how social media works. I think that's another thing about it, is that I've really,
for one thing, the fact that she's been banned a number of times, and I've learned how to avoid
the bans about the way that big tech censors and how they censor and why... What has she been banned for?
So the tweets that she was banned for a couple of times, she's had a number of one-day suspensions,
a number of seven-day suspensions. Once or twice, it's been inexplicable to me why
she would be banned. It seems a bit like someone at Silicon Valley has twigged
that their precious ideology is being mocked and they don't like it. That's the only explanation I
could think of. However, on a couple of instances, it's when she's... I suppose what they would say
incited violence. And of course, she hasn't done anything of the kind. There was one tweet where
she said she was going to go to a UKIP rally. UKIP is a right-wing nationalist political party in the
UK. And she said, I'm going to go to this UKIP rally to punch people in the name of compassion
or love or something like that, which is the idea that a lot of these activists have that actually...
Whereas words are violence and awful, actual physical violence can be defended in their view.
It's so perverse. And of course, I was making a comment about the perversity of that idea that
you think microaggressions are actual violence, but you're perfectly content to go out and set
fire to cars and beat people up if they have the wrong opinion or pepper spray people in the face
if they voted for Trump. There's an obvious contradiction there that I was trying to expose.
So she had a ban there. I think that might have even been the one where she was permanently banned.
I had an email from Twitter saying, this is a permanent ban. You're not getting back on.
And then there was a bit of an outcry from people who follow her, some prominent people who follow
her. And Twitter rescinded, changed their minds and brought her back. And as a result of that,
inevitably, her follower account leapt because, of course, when you try and censor something,
you draw attention to it. But you're always treading a fine line. I mean, my friend Lisa,
who I mentioned, Lisa Graves, used to have a Twitter account called Jarvis de Pong,
who was one of my favorite accounts on Twitter. And he was banned, completely permanently banned.
They actually went on a bit of a purge of satire accounts. There was one afternoon
where Twitter purged 12 or 13 satirical accounts and deleted them.
Titania came back for some reason. I think it's because she was the bigger account.
But a lot of them just got ditched. And that, I think, shows that the powers that be at Silicon
Valley, they don't like to be mocked. Well, no one in authority likes to be mocked. It's the best
way to undermine authority, isn't it? And it's why every despot in history has killed the clown.
Well, that's why we have to be so careful when any of our laws start making comedians nervous.
They're the ultimate canary in the coal mine. Even more so than artists, I think. The artists are
next, probably. Absolutely. I mean, you all know, in Canada, Mike Ward was fined, I think,
$42,000 by the Quebec Human Rights Commission for a joke that he told. And by the way, if you...
Yes, and Montreal, of course, has one of the world's great comedy festivals. And some of that
humor, I've been to the comedy festival a couple of times. And at midnight, you can go and hear
particularly outrageous comedy comedy, which I actually think it was one of those where he
said what he got fined for. And I don't even know the context, because he said it in French, for
one thing. So I didn't fully understand. But I read the transcript and I spoke to him about it.
And what was interesting is that he's not some open Mike act who hasn't been on the set. He's
an established, famous, successful comedian who was fined for a joke that if you actually break
it down and analyze it, there's nothing remotely offensive about it. I mean, it's perfectly...
I don't think comedy can exist without the potential to cause offense. Neither can truth.
Right, quite. And comedy is almost always truth, almost always. That comedian says something funny
and it's true in a way that people didn't expect and they know it. Well, it's also that thing
of teasing the boundaries of tolerance, of almost having that kind of cathartic effect,
the way that the ancient Greeks would watch a tragedy and hear about the dismemberment and
all sorts of vial thing philosophically to purge themselves of that evil that lay within.
In a sense, when you hear a comedian say something utterly outrageous, it can have that effect on
you and you laugh in spite of yourself. And then you laugh again, because you are saying to yourself,
why did I laugh at that? That makes me... I shouldn't have done that. So you're almost laughing
at your own response as well. It has a double effect. And we are really losing that. I mean,
I don't know how it is in Canada, but in the UK, a lot of this kind of mistrust of comedy and
mistrust of jokes and the idea that certain jokes normalize hatred is coming from the comedians
themselves. And a lot of comedians take it on themselves to police other comedians' material
and they get very angry when people broach certain subjects. I consider it very, very unhealthy.
And not all comedians, by the way, I'm not saying that all comedians... I'm just saying,
certainly, the more establishment comedians absolutely would fall into this category. And
it's really shocked me. This has been... Since I started Tanya in particular, a lot of comedians
have been very angry that I mocked the social justice movement, which to me is a bit absurd,
because I spent years, three years writing, co-writing the Jonathan Pye character. And because
that predominantly mocked Trump and the right and conservatives and, you know, it went... Those
were the targets. That was okay. So I never got this kind of venom about that. But as soon as
I was mocking social justice ideology, which I perceived to be an extremely powerful ideology,
you know, this isn't... I don't think I'm punching down. I think I'm punching up at these people
who have captured these institutions and are ruthless, by the way, absolutely ruthless and
bullying. I think the social justice movement utterly legitimizes bullying. And I don't like
bullies. And I like to stand up to bullies. And that to Tanya is my attempt to stand up against
the bullies. But what they will do is misrepresent my intentions and will say, oh, no, you just want
to have a go at gay people or whatever, or have a go at minority groups. And I've been very shocked
by that, because that kind of response has even come from comedians. And my view is that if you've
got half a brain, you know, that's not what I'm doing. I mean, you absolutely have to know
that that's not what I'm doing. And yet, maybe they do know, maybe this is a willful misinterpretation
as a means to attack me, because I've mocked the ideology I'm not meant to mock. But I tell you
what, whenever there are consequences for mocking someone, then I think that's the person you ought
to be mocking, right? I think that's a sign. Would you... What effect has producing Tanya had on your
life? And if you could go back and decide whether you were going to do it again, would you? I mean,
it must be shocking. I would think it's shocking to have seen what happened, to be at the center of
what happened when you created that character. But I'd like to know. Well, for one thing, I didn't
expect the reaction that I got. Also, you've got to remember that for a long time, the character,
I was anonymous, because part of the effects of the character was that people thought she was real.
That was so sort of integral to it. And then I was outed by a newspaper over here the week that
her first book came out. And although that was very good for the book, because it generated a lot
publicity, because then the story became that I was the person behind the character. In effect,
it had an innovating impact on the character, because now what happens, people know it's me
behind the character people. However, what I will say is even to this day, there's always
some people who fall for it whenever I tweet something, there's always some people who fall
for it. So it has that. So there's that. But then there's the impact on my personal life. Well,
I would do it again, because I feel very passionately that the movement that I'm mocking,
the ideology that I'm mocking is a dangerous one. And I feel very passionately that it is
divisive and damaging to society as damaging as any ideology can be. I think it has the potential
to go to those lengths. And so that I think I would almost be in dereliction if I didn't
mock it. It would be, I tell you what it would be, it would be an act of self-censorship if I
didn't go after these targets. And that's, by the way, how most comedians, I mean, a lot of comedians
think this stuff is ridiculous. They won't go near it, because they know that if they do, they won't
get on the BBC, and they won't get booked by certain clubs. So they just leave it well alone. But I
think I couldn't do, I just, that's not in my nature. So I don't regret that. The fact that
so many friends of mine, former friends on the company circuit, no longer talk to me,
that's something which I suppose I could say is unfortunate. On the other hand.
And how many times does that happen to you? How many friends do you think you've lost?
It's in double figures. It's certainly in double figures. And I think,
and it's not just Tanya, it's also partly, I suppose, my politics. It's also,
it's effectively being honest about what I think and saying opinions that might not be the establishment
of fashionable opinions. And it gets people very angry. I mean, one particular incident I could
think of is when I met for a drink with two friends, very old friends of mine, a married couple.
And he started screaming at me in the pub, I won't swear on your podcast, but calling me an
effing Nazi. And then another word, which I probably shouldn't say at this point.
I thought he was joking at first. And we had this conversation. And it was true. He'd completely
bought into this fantasy of who I was. And there was no going back from that. And I know it was
fueled by alcohol, but no apology was forthcoming. And then every now and then there'll be, I mean,
it happened to me a couple of months ago, we're a comedian I've known for many, many years from the
circuit. Suddenly sent me this abusive message online on Twitter and started attacking me and
saying he said I was funded by dark foreign powers or something utterly absurd. And I thought, well,
okay, so this is now my presentation. Of course, that is what you'd say if you were funded by dark
foreign powers. Well, this is this is the problem. Like I said, you know, I've said it before, like,
if you know, if I am getting all this dark money, it must be very dark because I haven't seen any
of it. It's not, you know, that'd be great. Fine. But I'm not. And this idea that I'm this sort of,
it's that going right back to what you said at the start, like that I'm defending free speech,
because I because I'm an evil person who wants to say evil things. And so there's all of that.
All that I'm mocking, I'm mocking minority groups through to Tanya, which is absolutely not what
I'm doing. It's the opposite. I'm mocking those very affluent and powerful people who very patronizingly
assume that they they they know what's best for minorities, you know, it's the opposite of what
people say it is. But these kind of experiences. On the one hand, I think it's a bit sad, isn't
it? Because there are people now I've had to go through my phone and delete lots of numbers,
because I know we'll never talk again. But on the other hand, were they my friends to begin with?
I'm not so sure, you know, if they can, if they can suddenly become so bigoted, and that is the
word, they are an indication of how profound the divide has started to become in our culture,
right? That I mean, 20 years ago, I never lost any friends because of my hypothetical political
opinions. But and what would you say that you must have lost your case must be much more severe than
mine. You know, because you're so much more famous and so much more known has have lots of friends
turned on you? No, actually, not a lot. Some there's some outstanding exceptions, although even
in those situations, I would say there was extenuating circumstances. No, I've been,
I've been really fortunate in that regard that my the my close circle of of intimates my family and
my my close friends have been staggeringly loyal to me under which is wonderful, severe distress.
Yes, that's wonderful. So is it maybe the case? Does that tell us that actually what it's really
about is the fact that I was working in an industry, which is, you know, the so the comedy industry
is so on board with the woke ideology to such an extent that in fact,
so many of its so many comedians are now really just advertised for that for that ideology, maybe.
Maybe. I mean, my professional colleagues certainly haven't leapt to my defense.
Well, that's that's what I was going to ask, actually, surely. No, that's been no, that's
pretty much done with. I mean, I would say my name, I've decided this recently, because of
the slurs that have been associated with me. I can't in good conscience accept graduate students
anymore. Because if they go out, you know, you talked at the beginning about this register where
that's being set up in Britain, where if you are charged, accused of a non crime hate act,
it's recorded without a trial. I mean, I've been on hiring committees many, many times. And
especially in academia, there's an oversupply of highly qualified people of radical oversupply.
And so if there's anything in your record at all that's the least bit contentious, it's like
you're you're done. And so being my student, that's not a little bit contentious. That's
really, really contentious. And so it's now become impossible for me to
to serve my proper function as a as a scientist and as a university professor. So that's
it's taking a lot of adjustment on my part to get accustomed to that. And I don't practice
clinically anymore as well. And there are a variety of reasons for that. But certainly the
I've become very, very susceptible to attacks through the College of Psychologists,
the governing board, they can make the life of a practitioner brutally miserable with a single
letter. And that's very, very punishing. And it's also perhaps not necessarily good for my
potential clients to be associated with someone who's controversial, they already have enough
trouble. So although I've been fortunate on the family and friends front, the on the professional
front, things have have been, you know, more dismal. Isn't that just suggestive of the of the
power of this movement and the effectiveness of cancel culture? In fact, the way the ease with
which people can become stigmatized, you know, all it takes is a few accusations of your far
right or alt right or whatever. And it's there, you know, any prospective employer can Google that
and it comes up and who's going to take the risk? You know, the accusation is sufficient to damn you.
And that's that's what
well, they're that you put the finger on the on the absolute catastrophe of the
non crime hate index. It's like, well, it's it's a permanent stain, especially in a
in a technological universe where nothing is ever forgotten, no matter how long the lag.
And it's worse because the government here feels no compunction to address this or to
no politician seem to has. Well, I suppose they are, well, because the strategy is that if you
oppose hate speech laws, you're obviously a hateful person. Why else would you oppose hate
speech? You know, it's the old thing. And and a politician doesn't want to stand up in parliament
to be the one who is seen to be siding with the evil guys, the bad guys. Well, you have to make a
very, very subtle argument to stand up against hate speech laws, because you're faced with the
problem that there is such a thing as hate speech. Yeah, obviously. So when it's pernicious and
terrible, it's like, OK, so you're arguing uphill. This is again why it's such a bloody
miracle that we ever had free speech to begin with. It's almost inconceivable to me that we
managed to generate the baseline presumption of innocence. That's a miracle. The fact that you
can go bankrupt and start again. That's a miracle. The idea that you ever had free speech and that
that was genuinely the case. That's a miracle. And none of this is given the appropriate respect
and awe that it deserves, because it's so unlikely. It's hugely unlikely. I mean, I know in the book,
I talk of a kind of very, very short history of free speech from the ancient Greeks to today.
The point of that is to accentuate this point that actually the fact that we have it
is astonishing and unlikely, so unlikely. And all the more reason why we need to defend it. We
need to be really, really vigilant about any cracks that appear in this, because it will go
away very, very easily if we don't defend it. And it's hard, particularly when it comes to the idea
that's why I wrote a chapter on hate speech. And took the other side's view seriously,
because just trashing the opposing argument isn't going to help. We have to talk about it and explain
why it's important nevertheless. Well, for one thing, like you say, hateful speech exists.
Let's start from that point. Let's acknowledge that that hateful speech exists, and it can be
hurtful, and it can do damage. But then the alternative is a state that might in the future
be completely unscrupulous, that is going to decide for you what you can say. And those are the
things that we have to tackle. And the other key thing is that no one knows how to define hate
speech. You know, UNESCO, the European Court of Human Rights, they've all agreed there's no way
to define hate speech. Every European country that has hate speech laws has different hate
speech laws, different definitions, subjective abstract concepts such as hate, such as offense,
such as a perception, you know, and these are on the statute books, and you don't want this stuff
on the statute books, because it's all very well. I mean, I know the, we talked about the SMP and
their hate crime bill, the defense I'm always running into is people are saying, yes, okay,
technically, someone could be arrested and imprisoned for saying some an offensive joke,
technically, yes. But no one in their right mind, no jury, no judge is going to, we've got
common sense, it's okay. Well, that's so myopic. I mean, what, because you don't know who's going
to be in charge in 10 years time, you don't know who that judge is going to be. How can you possibly
just- You can be certain that someone will be in charge that doesn't approve of you and that
you don't approve of that will in that will in certainly happen. You don't want vague, vague
wording on the statute books. It's going to be exploited at some point, even though even if it's
not today, there's absolutely no way that you can guarantee it against future, against the future
abuses of that. And I don't, it is, as you say, it's a certainty. So I'm, I'm, yeah, I think it's,
I think it's actually one of the most important arguments that we should make. And that we need
to do, you know, free speech needs to be defended in every successive generation. It's not something
that you, you know, you know this, you get it, and then it's there forever. No, that's not true.
But there's something about human nature and something about people in power. There's something
about the way that we are, that it will collapse. It's an edifice that is not secure at any given
time. And but it's hard. It's that thing of, of being smeared, the risk is you're going to be
smeared, you're going to be associated with the worst possible kinds of people, because of course,
it's only really controversial speech that ever requires protection. And people are going to say,
well, then you must support what, what these awful people are saying. And it's, it's hard
to make the case. But it's a case that nonetheless has to be made. And particularly by politicians,
I've been incredibly disappointed, by the way, in which politicians in this country have not
made any kind of effort to, to, if anything, is from what I can see, there are moves even in the,
in the English parliament to push through further hate speech laws, we should be repealing them,
not pushing for them. But no one wants to have the argument, no one wants to be tainted.
Yeah, well, they get identified one by one and taken out. That's what happens.
When you get put on a list, this is it. The, the, the, the, the identitarian left,
if that's what we're going to call them, I don't know what to call them. That's the problem. Is
they're very clever about evading even a label. But they like making their lists. They like
observing and saying, you know, you are you are problematic. You have sinned.
and and and now they have a an electronic trail they they these are the
people that absolutely love going through all of your old tweets and
messages and anything they can find and of course the point about that is you
can do that to anyone there is no one alive who if you had complete unfettered
access to everything they've ever written online or in their emails or text
messages that you couldn't construct a case to dam someone it's actually one
of the things that's more or less saved me is that right well by the time I made
my political statement which was a philosophical statement or even a
spiritual statement not a political statement I already had 200 hours of
lectures online and so essentially everything I'd ever said to students was
recorded and there wasn't it it wasn't possible to pull out a smoking pistol so
this was very smart and also I mean but this is why it's also astonishing I find
it unendingly astonishing the way you are mischaracterized because because
it's all there everything you think is out in the open you've been very very
very clear and explicit about your points of view and so when they try and
demonize you and turn you into this thing people can check and they'll
realize that you're I think what they're doing is they're relying on the
reputational damage being a kind of barrier to people even investigating who
you really are yeah well to some degree that that works but it doesn't really
work because what genuine generally happens is that you know for every
person who wouldn't open the lecture because of my reputation there's three
or four who do because they're curious and and then it has an even more perverse
effect on in some cases on the true believers because they're primed to
find anything I said offensive but that doesn't happen or maybe they even find
it useful and then that's not good at all it's like well he's interesting when
you meet the people when you get into conversation with people and you and you
can see that you're not what they thought you were and they don't know quite
what to do with that you know and that that to me is that to me is why another
reason why we need more speech not less we need to have the conversation so that
people can be disabused of the fantasies that they've been wallowing in you
know but I do very much enjoy that when when people expect one thing and then
they actually actually speak to me and and they they they don't see that that
there's no evidence of it because it doesn't exist yeah well it's interesting
to watch that unfold in the public domain too I mentioned those two interviews
the channel for interview that being viral and and the interview by by
Helen Lewis at GQ and those those interviews basically consists of consist
of nothing but the attempt by the interlocutor to have a conversation with
the person that exists in their imagination right there's almost no
relationship to me at all that was particularly the case with with Kathy
Newman and yeah I was less so with Helen Lewis but it was still that was still
essentially the issue it's quite reassuring though isn't it that that
once it's out there people can see through it you know it's very reassuring
isn't what's what saved me and this has given me an endless supply of hope I
would say is that all I've ever had to do is be it's just show everything it's
like here's the situation no edits like this is what happened and every time so
far so far you know I haven't been fatally damaged yeah I mean one of the
things one of the things I've learned most I think since since Tatania kicked
off and and it became a known thing is I've learnt simply never to trust the
perception of someone as as as constructed in the media or online or
you know I it's a not it's never the same person I've ended up meeting someone
coming from the background I did most of my friends were always on the left I
didn't really know conservative people and now I have a lot of friends who are
conservatives you know and they're just not this villain that they were made out
to be and even some famous conservatives who people have said they're
absolute monsters they're evil they want to eat babies basically the equivalent
you know and you get to know them and you realize oh my goodness they're the
perception is so removed from the so far removed from the reality that even I
once had had bought into it myself because everyone's telling you this yeah
the same thing is certainly had that experience repeatedly repeatedly I never
trust it now I like whenever I hear the way people talk about people online I
I never trust it unless I know someone personally I'm never going to trust that
again and I think that's an it's an important lesson for me so what's next
for you and also how how do you make a living you can't make a living to tell
you McGrath I mean you're locked down still so it's got to be hard being a
comedian right so I mean well comedy came to an end I mean the last I did a tour I
did a stand-up comedy tour in 2019 early 2019 and that was really uh the last big
thing I did because as soon as I was about to do some more live performances the
lockdown the lockdown came and and it's the same you know I'm not complaining
because absolutely every live performer has has the identical experience and
we've all we've all you know I'm not in a position to complain uh and what yeah
it's a very good question I like it because it's also very direct how do I
make my money well I am I write articles for various publications I there's the
the Titania books have kept me going I obviously used to work on the Jonathan
Pie character we had a couple of television shows and live tours those
those were particularly lucrative and for a long time I did just make my money as
a stand-up comic so literally just the money I would make from from from the
circuit now I've I've just got a job with well it's it's you know I gave up
being a full-time teacher for this and I was on a regular wage it was a good it
was a good salary and I left it at great risk you know because I don't come
from a wealthy family I don't have the means to support myself without
this kind of stuff so I uh I went well I actually went part-time first and was
on the stand-up circuit and then I started earning enough from stand-up to
to get by and so I went full-time stand-up but I was really I was genuinely
struggling financially for a long time and then um then Jonathan Pie happened
which was very successful particularly because we had a big viral hit around
the time of the Donald Trump election which actually went viral in America as
well and that really helped broaden the character and then we did live tours and
all the rest of it we played the London Palladium and the Hammersmith Apollo and
so it was a big thing for me and then Titania happened
and the book did very well and the second book did well and
how many copies do you and you don't have to tell me obviously but I don't know
actually the truth is I don't know I I that's something I should ask at some
point it's the sort of thing I don't look into
you know it's I I got a royalty check the other day and I thought that's
separate I thought it was done and actually this was quite a lot of money
I thought okay that so that's good this is something that I can keep me going
but I've also just got a new job as a broadcaster on a new channel called GB
News in the UK and that will be a pretty full-time full-on presenter job
so I will be a but what's good about that job is you know I think we have a real
problem in them with the news media in this country is that we don't have enough
diversity of thought and and the conversations that we ought to be
having this gives me an opportunity to do that so it's very much related to the
work I've been doing but in addition I'm going to continue with
my comedy work and Titania we're doing a some live shows with Titania
played by an actress we did that just before the lockdown
we had to postpone the tour now we're going to do another one
so I will yeah it's a lot of people get very scared by
making a living as a creative person because you're always on the line they
should be Jesus it's a tough way to make a living man
it really I mean you're taking a massive risk and most creatives I know
are very very poor you know it's it's simply not and most have other jobs you
know there's a tiny fraction that are hyper rich
and everyone else starves virtually no one and I consider myself extremely
fortunate to be able to do this full the stuff I love
full-time because for most of my adult career I couldn't
and I was you know I had to have a full-time job and as well as go out in
the evenings and do all of this stuff and
and so it's a real you have to really commit
and and you also have to be aware in the back of your mind
of the likelihood of failure that's it you know that's the other thing that
you have to be fully aware of and I'm by no means taken for granted
you know I think I'm yeah it's the stuff I've done comedy into
Titania and the book I've just written is that none of this stuff
would make me rich it would it would it would keep me going
the new job I've got is going to be a more regular income which is something
I miss I haven't had this since I was a teacher I missed that you know there
I missed routine and all the rest of it yeah well that's another complicating
factor is not only if you're trying to exist creatively not only
is it a very high-risk proposition financially but
you lack that psychological comfort that comes from routine which you know
people artistic people often are hyper critical of routine but go out
life man routine keeps you sane and trying to invent yourself every day
that's that's not for the faint hearted I've seen very few people manage
that successfully across decades now absolutely and I think particular
you know particularly in comedy you know you because you have to work for
about three or four years on the circuit without getting paid anything in fact
you're losing money because you're paying for your travel expenses and then
you get somewhere and you don't get you don't get paid for it and and it's
this is why a lot you'll find a lot of comedians particularly in the UK are
from quite wealthy backgrounds or privately educated because they you know
they have rich parents who can help them out put them up in a flat and they
don't have to work during the day and they escalate much quicker through the
ranks but if you come from my sort of background you can't do that you have
to have the job and then and you have to it's like having two jobs and so you
have to really care about it I mean my advice is always I do believe
although it comes with that insecurity if it is a vocation for you
you have to do I mean for me I couldn't have done anything it's it is a
genuine vocation for me even if I were making no money whatsoever out of comedy
or writing or the rest I would still be doing it because I would feel
unfulfilled if I were not doing it I think there's something also quite I
mean I take your point about the practicalities of living in the business
of living but my god I think depriving yourself of your vocation can be so
soul-destroying I know it is well for for I've spent a lot of time studying
creativity scientifically and the first thing that's useful to note is that
creativity is not common I mean everyone isn't creative that's wrong
some people are very creative a minority of people are very creative
and I mean it's it's a continuum but you don't get
you know you don't get creativity till you get out to the point where
what you're doing is original and that's very difficult so it's a minority
proposition and then of those original people there's only a tiny fraction that
can make a successful financial go of it because it's just
you have to be creative plus you have to have some sense for marketing and
sales and business and you have to be reasonably
emotionally stable and etc etc it's very very difficult but
if you are creative by temperament well that's you
and to not do that is to not be you it's like asking an extroverted person
not to be around people or an agreeable person
not to engage in intimate relationships or a conscientious person not to be
driven by duty it's like that's what you're like
and so yeah you're stuck with it it's a double-edged sword creativity it's
vital it's entrancing it's necessary
it's transformative it's disruptive but it's a high risk high high risk
high return game and the probability of failure is
overwhelmingly high even if you're an entrepreneur and
you know more practically oriented in your creativity the probability that
you'll make money from your innovation or your invention rather than other
people is very very low but but you need to find a way
I mean it's also very difficult if you're a creative person to a lot of creative
people don't think in practical terms they don't think in terms of
money actually they're hopeless a lot of them I know are hopeless in this
no they also tend to be casually contemptuous of that to regard as
practical concerns is selling out it's like
you should be bloody happy if you have the opportunity to sell out
so I think that the ideal is to find a way to pursue your vocation but have
one eye on the reality that you know you will have to
earn money somewhere or another I mean yes and I think
it's it's that's why I think I'm lucky in so far as
with Titania I hit on something that had commercial viability but it was very
true to what I desperately wanted to do and I think that's so rare
I think some of the stuff I've written some of the plays I've written for
instance I don't think would have any commercial success whatsoever but I
wrote them because I needed to write them
and and and some of them didn't even get on and maybe one day they will and
that would be great but what I will just think what you have to
accomplish though right you have to have your creative
endeavor aligned with market demand at exactly that time
it's impossible yeah it's very very unlikely actually
that's why I always say don't attempt to to anticipate the zeitgeist because
you won't like the best thing an artist can do is do what they
believe and hope because a lot of it is luck
you know I mean there's actually there's a technical literature on that too
I mean what essentially what you do is continue to produce ideas
and it's a Darwinian competition essentially they're like life forms
these ideas and now and then one will find a niche
that it can thrive in but but the best way to maximize your chances that
that niche will manifest itself is to be is to overproduce
because I look yeah for I'll give you an example I answered a bunch of questions
on Quora so that's a website where anybody
can ask any questions and anybody can answer I answered about 50 when I was
playing with Quora and one of them was a list of
everything people should know of things people should know in their life and I
derived my books out of that list yes it was disproportionately
successful most of the answers I generated got virtually no views
but it got it must be hundreds of thousands now but even before I wrote
the books it was tens of thousands but had I not written 50
I wouldn't have got that one the other 49 failures
so to speak were the answers weren't necessarily
worse they just didn't hit the zeitgeist like that answer did and
I think that's a great piece of advice over production because it's the same
with the Beatles they they they look like an overnight success it's because
they've been playing endlessly in those dingy clubs in
in Europe you know before before it happened it's
you you produce as much as you can they say it takes 10 years to become an
overnight success that's that's it so it you know
of most of the things I've written have done nothing and gone nowhere and had no
success whatsoever it's just but but the one thing
occasionally when it hits that's that's what sustains all the rest of it and
it's also why creativity is continues to be selected let's say from a
biological perspective it's like that's why I said it was a high risk
high return game almost everything you do creatively will fail
but now and then you're disproportionately successful
and so that keeps the whole game going you didn't have any sense did you that
when you put the lectures on youtube that it would explode in this way did I mean
not in this way this was completely I still
I'm still shocked constantly by my life I'm shocked out of out of sanity by my
life I just can't this is why I asked you about
Titania you know you you get at the center of a whirlwind like that and
there's something very surreal about it and
I mean yeah I keep getting hit by surreal things and it's very hard to wrap my
head around it like this Red Skull episode was just
one of many equally surreal occurrences but
yes no I had no I had no idea I knew I was working on something important
back when I was in my 20s when I wrote my first book and
it was out of that that all my lectures came and I spent 15 years working on
that book and I worked on it about three hours a day
and so I and I thought about it all the time
and so I knew there was something to it not necessarily because they were my
ideas but because of the people who I had read and
delved into while I was writing the book I knew the ideas were
significant and and I could see the effect of the
ideas when I was lecturing on my students so I had some sense that
there was something vital that I was involved in something vital but
sure but had you uploaded those videos a couple years before or a couple years
later you probably would have missed the zeitgeist and nothing would have
happened you know I mean it doesn't matter I
always think with any kind of creative endeavor or intellectual endeavor it
doesn't matter how good you are in a set it has to be good and the
timing has to be right and and like you say if you just keep I
think persistence is it if you just keep doing it not only
does your craft get better and you are when if it does hit
you're in a position to be able to handle it. There's no doubt look if you if you
okay so in scientific literature the hallmark of
impact is citations and so if your work is cited it means that someone
who's written another scientific article makes reference to something you
wrote and that's all tracked and it's used for promotions and
it's used to judge scientific merit it's it's it's it's its own science
citation tracking. A very small number of your published
papers accrue most of the citations so that's the first thing so what that
means is the more papers you publish the more likely it is that
one of them will become highly cited and my highly cited papers aren't
necessarily the ones that I thought would be most impactful
so yeah you but the other piece of information from
literature on creativity is that the best predictor of quality and so you
could index quality by impact let's say or by citations is quantity.
Yeah it's not a great predictor but it's the best one and so
and this is a good advice for everyone out there who's a musician or an artist
it's like produce produce produce produce as much as you can because you do
get better at it right. You absolutely do and and so there's
that but there's also I think the other important thing is to
to actually be true to yourself in in your artistic endeavors in so far as
don't be trying to anticipate the desire guys don't be trying to anticipate
what other people are doing. My big concern in the current climate
that we live in is that a lot of artists are choosing to self-censor
because the penalty for risk-taking has got too high
you know you can be completely I mean if I think of an example like.
Think about what kind of catastrophe that is because we've already discussed
the fact that the impediments to creativity are almost insurmountable
and so then you add an additional one which is self-censorship because of
social pressure it's like you just decimate the creative enterprise by
doing that. We wouldn't have anything. The western
kind of would be decimated ridiculous. I mean an example I often think of is
one of my favorite playwrights is Edward Albee and when he came to write his
play The Goat which was a very controversial play because it was
about a man having an affair a sexual affair with a goat
behind his wife's back and obviously that doesn't sound palatable.
Well at least he went beside behind his wife's back.
Exactly at least it wasn't sort of an open sort of paganistic thing absolutely
but I mean it's it's a shocking play and it's meant to be
it's about where our lines of tolerance
are where they lie and why and all of his friends told him
don't do this you've got a valuable career an incredible reputation you're
turning 80 you're 80 he was probably 80 years old when this play came out
and they said you're just going to scupper everything and he said that
when he got that response that's the reason he did it.
He went out there and he put the play on and it turned out to be a huge success
it won I think the Tony Award for best player was
critically and commercially successful it was absolutely massive so
it just goes to show I think to an extent I mean I'm not saying
disregard feedback from other creative people or people who have suggestion
what I'm saying is if you're true to your muse whatever that
that is the rewards will come actually or they are more likely to come.
Okay so that brings us back to free speech too because
you know the problem with laws that abridge free speech is they abridge
creative endeavor and that's a terrible thing because it's the source of
endless renewal and it's the thing that fixes corrupt
structures and so to to take aim at that is to take aim at the very
process that would rescue you from the conundrum you
you are pretending to be obsessed by. I mean has there been any
innovation not just in artistic terms but in scientific terms
without the risk of offense without you know I mentioned I mentioned the
example of Galileo in the in the book because you know he wasn't
he caused a great deal of offense by. Oh hell Darwin offended himself so badly
that he was sick he was sick for like a decade
because of the implications of what he'd thought up which were
thoroughly offensive to himself. As they would be you know in
with his belief system at the time and but but that's that's the
we can see in hindsight what we would have lost if people weren't
willing to risk offending others in fact even what you said to Kathy Newman
in that interview about you're risking being offensive by disagreeing with me
now in this way like it's how it's important to risk offending
people it because otherwise you just end up in this kind of
you know this hive mind and and and for the arts
it becomes utterly stultified it becomes so
boring when everything is predictable and everything is in line with a
viewpoint and no one wants to you know the art is the best way that we
interrogate the complexities of humanity it's it's it's
I love what sometimes what the filmmaker Lars von Trier
he said in an interview once that sometimes when he's making a film
he will take an indefensible moral position and attempt to defend it
through the film which i think is such a fascinating idea. Dostoevsky did that
all the time in his great novels and so brilliant I mean
that's what what made Dostoevsky so staggeringly
brilliant was he would take positions that he
despised with all his soul and make the people putting those
beliefs forward that's strongest characters in the book I mean he's so brave.
It's the best thing to do it's it's uh I wrote a play once where I I
completely I it was a one-man play where I completely tried to embody
the kind of person I despise it was someone who enjoyed
relished watching via acts of violence and he would
take a scour the internet for clips of real life violence and
it's something I can you know whenever I've had that whenever someone's tried
to show me a beheading or something I I know I never
want to see that kind of thing I know I never want that in my head and so I
wanted to write a character who who relished it but from a position
from a non-judgemental position I've never put that play on I've written it's
done but but but the act of doing it was so
incredibly liberating and interesting and the idea that you can
you know you keep hearing this all the time you know
whenever a new film or a play comes out of a book um is this sending the right
message David Lynch's last series the the latest Twin Peaks series was
criticized I read a review saying well there's violence against women in this
and he needs to be called out for this well representing violence against
women isn't an endorsement of violence against women
you know maybe that's what the character does and maybe we're supposed to hate
him for it or whatever you know and or if you read a an autobiography of a
complete reprobate there can be something really interesting about that
and and imagine all of this gone all of this potential
but that is the end point of of that's why I believe that this this current
social justice ideologies anti-art I think it's it's it's opposed to the
the artistic spirit quite quite fundamentally opposed to it
which is why I feel we must push back against it
so it's a great place to end no no that's great
that's great well thanks a lot eh uh much appreciated
yeah it was a pleasure and and the time flew by which is a good marker of a
engaging exchange of free speech let's say
absolutely thanks so much for having me Jordan my pleasure
good luck eh thank you
you
