Hi, everybody. I'm pleased today to be talking with
Jaco Willink, who I've talked with on his podcast on three separate occasions. I don't think I've had
Jaco on mine. And my memory isn't what it should be. So, but I'm quite sure that we've so far,
when we've talked, it's been on your podcast. So I thought I'd take the time today to get to know
you in some more detail. Jaco is an American author, podcaster, and retired naval officer
who served in the Navy SEALs. He co-authored the book's Extreme Ownership and the Dichotomy of
Leadership with fellow retired SEAL, Leif Babin. Did I pronounce that right?
It's actually Leif Babin. Oh, so I didn't pronounce it right at all. Leif Babin. He hosts a weekly
podcast with Brazilian jiu-jitsu practitioner, Echo Charles, called the Jaco podcast. He has a million
subscribers on YouTube, and his podcast attracts many more listeners. He co-founded the management
consulting firm Echelon Front LLC, and has extended his business development on a number of additional
fronts. His military service included combat actions in the war in Iraq, where he eventually
commanded the SEAL team's three task unit bruiser that fought in the battle against the Iraqi
insurgents in Ramadi, and was honored with a silver star and bronze star for his service.
He achieved the rank of Lieutenant Commander. Good to see you again, Jaco.
It's good to be here. Yeah, I feel the same way that it's good to be here. I'm really looking
forward to our conversation. I'm glad that you were able to gut through that ridiculously long
bio, and I felt that as you got to the end of it, you were breaking free of the chains of that
reading. So I'm glad it's over with. Yeah, well, it's so much better just to talk than to read in
this sort of format, but at least everybody who doesn't know already has some sense of who you
are, some minimal sense of who you are. So tell me what's been happening online with you over the
last couple of years, because we haven't spoken, I would say it's got to be two years, I think,
something like that. And so I've cast an eye on what's been happening with you on YouTube and
some of my staff have filled me in, but I'm really curious. Tell me about what's happening with your
YouTube channel and your online activities, your podcast and all of that. Yeah, a few years ago,
I started a podcast. That was actually, it was quite a few years ago now, it was in 2015. It might
have been kind of as the explosion of prior to the explosion of podcasts. In fact, I think I read
something that said, at that time, it was like 17% of Americans were listening to podcasts and that
number's much, much higher now. And I kind of got lucky because at the time, Tim Ferriss was had one
of the most popular, still very popular, but at the time, just because the numbers of podcasts that
existed, his podcast was even more popular. And I went on his podcast and when we got done recording
and he pressed stop on the record button, he looked at me and said, you should have your own
podcast. And I kind of took that and noted it. And then a little while later, I was on Joe Rogan's
podcast and he had, you know, obviously another one of the most popular podcasts in the world.
And he told me in the middle of that podcast that I should have my own podcast. And so when
guys like Tim Ferriss and Joe Rogan are telling you to have your own podcast,
you have your own podcast. Now, I came to realize later that Joe Rogan actually would tell everybody
to have a podcast. So maybe he would tell everyone, oh, you should start a podcast. Well,
I actually listened to him. And so I started that podcast. And I would say probably if somebody
would have asked, you know, what should a person do to make a good podcast or maybe not a good
podcast, but a popular podcast, somebody would probably say, make it probably a half an hour
to an hour, bring a bunch of different guests on so that you can hear a bunch of people talking
and, you know, talk about positive things in the world. And so instead of doing any of that,
what I did was I have a podcast that's between two and five hours long. Oftentimes it's just me
talking, reading from a book and reviewing a book. And usually the books are about war or suffering
or some kind of human atrocity. And so that's what my podcast is. And really what it boils down to
is it's learning about human nature. And for me, human nature is best revealed or most clearly
revealed in times of suffering. And one of the, I guess, pretty good monopoly on the market for
suffering is war and right in there as well as, you know, human atrocities. So I started that
podcast. And like I said, when I started it, there weren't that many, there weren't as many as podcasts
as there are now. So it got some traction out of the gate and it kind of just stayed there.
So I was very lucky in that respect. And I've been doing ever since I've,
I've put out one podcast a week for five years, I've only missed one, one week in there. And that
was when my best friend was killed in a parachute accident. And so I didn't put out a podcast that
week. But other than that, I've been very consistent. And then the YouTube channel is, well, it's,
it's kind of the podcast. And then we do some excerpts there. And little clips and stuff like
that. And Echo Charles, I forget what you called him in the bio, a Brazilian jiu-jitsu practitioner.
He's also a video guy. And so he makes his little, he makes little clips and puts special effects
in them and stuff because he's creative and bored, which means it's a great combination for someone
that you're, that you're working with. It is indeed. So I think that's what's been happening online for
me and for the past few years. Who, who do you, who's your audience? Do you think? Or do you know?
Yeah, I know actually quite well that my, my demographic is people. It's people, it's human
beings. Really, it's, it's all over the place. And when I go and do live events, I'll have just the
entire spectrum of humans there. Hey, look, is there a, is there a, you know, kind of a typical
person? Yeah, there's a typical person, but we get everybody on the spectrum from the grandma
to the little kids, you know, I've written a bunch of kids books and the little kids show up as well.
Right. Pretty, pretty, pretty kids books. Yeah, pretty broad demographic. That's,
I meet all kinds of people, everybody from a, I'll meet a firefighter and then a hedge fund guy,
and then a stay at home mom, and then a retired Marine, it just meet everybody. It's, and that's
the audience. Do you, do you have any sense of what it is that's attracting people to your podcast?
I mean, you, you, you sort of approached that tongue and cheek in some sense for, for a dark
topic, you know, you concentrate on things that are, that are pretty negative or they're pretty
dark. And so as you said, that might fly in the face of any advice you'd get about what to talk
about. But obviously, I mean, one of the things I've encountered is that there's a very, there's a
vast hunger for serious dialogue. And I mean, one of the things that struck me always about your
podcast was you often read something that's very, very emotionally demanding, stark, harsh, rough.
And well, and it's interesting to think about why people might be attracted to that. What's your
sense? And also, why are you doing it? I think that it's emotional. I think that these are emotional
topics. I think these are things that people can be a little bit afraid of and a little bit nervous
about and being able to brush up against them a little bit gives them a little bit more familiarity
with them. And therefore, when you see when you come close to things that are that stark and dark
and horrible, it also makes you look up around at the present situation that you're in and maybe
it doesn't look as awful. Yeah, so. So there you touched on two things about knowing something
about history that might be really useful or about human affairs, right? One is that, I mean,
it's a tenet of clinical psychotherapy that a voluntary approach to what's frightening,
threatening, even disgusting is curative. It has to be voluntary. And it can't be too intense,
right? Because if it gets too intense, it can actually hurt you. But if it's voluntary and
measured, that actually seems to strengthen people, it develops resilience. And I would say that's
one thing that virtually all well trained clinicians agree on is that that kind of exposure,
whether it's discussing old, difficult experiences in an autobiographical manner,
or whether it's actually going out into the world and facing things that you're afraid of,
if you're an elevator phobic, for example, you might be faced with confronted with the necessity
of at least looking at an elevator, which is something you might avoid if you're phobic.
And then so that's the first thing. So there is some pronounced human tendency to be attracted
to what's dark, because that is a pathway to mental and physical resilience. And then the
second thing is, which I also think is extremely important is it's useful to cultivate gratitude
in my estimation. And one of the ways that you can do that, because you take a lot of what's
good in your life for granted, it gets invisible, especially if it's predictable, it gets invisible.
And that's unfortunate, because it's still rare and precious. And if you know how terrible things
can be, have been or could become, then that can alert you to how fortunate you are when
all hell isn't breaking loose right now everywhere in your life. So
you know, and you can also sort of learn some skill sets of how to handle these tough situations
when you get in them. And if you can see that someone went through something that's much worse,
and what did they do to deal with it? How did they get through it? What did they think about?
What did they do? You can say, okay, well, I've seen that before. And the situation I'm in isn't
quite as bad. But I know that that person took action. I know that person stood up and made a
move and made things happen and tried to move forward. And maybe that's what I should do too.
So you can you can definitely garner some skills from the past. And right. So that's a third element
is that it can expand your notion of human competence. And that's, you know, I think that's
partly that's one of the reasons that people love watching high end sports performances, you know,
because you think, well, look, there's that's what a human being is capable of. Isn't that
so remarkable? And I am one of those. And so that's a limit case. But there's obvious
obviously room for me to develop. And that's that's something that's very hopeful.
And so if you are in dire straits, and you've seen that other people can get through that,
you think, well, maybe maybe I could get through that if I could just learn how to do it.
So I had a guy on my podcast who had written a book, his name was William Reeder.
And he had, he was a helicopter pilot in Vietnam. And he was shot down. Well, he shot down two times
the first time he was shot down, he was able to make it back to friendly lines. The second time
he was shot down, he was captured. And he was captured in South Vietnam, which is actually
worse. You didn't want to get captured in South Vietnam, because then they had to get you to
North Vietnam to the prison. And getting to North Vietnam while you're patrolling through the jungle
for months on end is not a good thing. And at one point, he's in a two foot tall bamboo cage
in the jungle. And his legs are shackled. And it's nighttime. And he's trying to sleep.
But he's having trouble sleeping because the rats are gnawing at the wounds on his legs.
And so knowing that someone could suffer through that and survive and get through
and make it out the other side and then carry on with a completely productive life
tells me that we are pretty resilient as a species. If we can dig deep and find that resiliency.
Yes, well, that's exactly the kind of story that also makes you much appreciative of the fact
that you have a bed in an air conditioned room that in a house in a town that's not burning to
the ground with rioters. And you have that every night. And so you take it for granted. But
it's still worth noting that it's a kind of miracle compared to all the alternatives that
might manifest themselves. Yeah, I think people appreciate that. I think people, you know, look,
how many movies have been made about war? Countless movies have been made about war. Countless books
have been written about war. So human beings are definitely have some sort of a, I don't know if it's
fascination or at least an appreciation for the sacrifice and the effort that goes into fighting
a war. And I will tell you, and I can't speak for everybody, but certainly me and the kids I,
many of the kids I grew up with, and then many of the people that I served with,
that's what we wanted to do. We had some kind of, I had some kind of an instinct.
That's such a great thing for you to be able to say, you know, because there's, I remember watching
this kid once, I saw him in Montreal and he was standing, he's a big kid, about six, five, I would
think. And he was wearing these punk boots that were like military knockoffs, essentially. And
he was standing there, he's about 17 or 18, and he's standing there on the corner of this outdoor
shopping mall carrying these two pink shopping bags and looking completely out of place. And I
thought, you know, if you went there and offered that kid a chance to go off and have an adventure,
you know, to have a battle, he'd drop those shopping bags and be gone in two seconds because
he wants something more than to be, he's not built for that. It was so incongruous, you know,
he wasn't built for that. And William James, the American philosopher, said that we needed a moral
equivalent to war because war calls people to extremes, right, to the extremes in their life.
And there's something about that that was obviously compelling, as you say,
it's uncomfortable as well to state that blatantly because obviously peace is a desirable condition.
But the question is then, well, how do you put sufficient adventure into the peace?
And that's a very, very, that's a very complicated problem.
Yeah, you know, it's, it's, it's very true in the fact that in war, I was lucky enough
to go and I was lucky enough to serve in, in combat and to be in a position of leadership
in combat. And in those situations, I was able to witness with my own eyes,
on the one hand, the most heinous and despicable acts that human beings can partake in.
And I was also able to witness with my own two eyes, these soldiers, marines, the guys that were
in my task unit, making the most incredible sacrifices for their friends. So yes, there is
an extreme to war. And like you said, it's not something you wish on anybody. And I had this
conversation with Sam Harris a while ago, because he called me out and said, you know,
you're talking about how hard war is, and it's terrible. But at the same time,
you say it's the best thing that you have been through. And I asked him if he'd ever
known anyone that had cancer and survived it. And oftentimes those people will say,
it's the best thing that happened to me. I wouldn't wish it on anybody, but I'm glad it happened to
me. And that's kind of how I feel about war too. I wouldn't wish war on anybody, but I am,
I wouldn't trade it for anything. So when you look back on your involvement in the war in Iraq
and your country's involvement, how do you make sense out of it morally? I mean, we're in that
domain right now. You tell me already that you're pulled between these extreme views. You don't
wish war on anyone. I mean, if you have, do you have a son? Yes. How old is he? 18.
Well, so then you think, I presume, but I, or perhaps I wouldn't, I wouldn't deign to presume.
If you could have what you wanted for him, would that be peace?
Of course. Okay. Okay. Well, that, right. Well, of course, of course, but. Well, right. Right.
Exactly. Well, the other thing, the other thing that you do as far as, please correct me if I get
any of this wrong, but I mean, part of what you're also offering to people is the, is the,
the call of a kind of radical discipline, right? Now you post on Instagram, your,
the times you wake up in the morning, correct? Yes. 430, something like that, and pretty regularly.
And I guess you do that to show people that you can get the hell out of bed at 430 and get your
day going. And. Yeah, maybe not. I would love to tell you that I was that, had that much fore,
forethought into when I started doing that, but I was on Tim Ferriss's podcast and he told me I
should join Twitter. And I kind of said, what's that? And he showed it to me a little bit. And he
said, you really should join this. It's a way you can communicate with people. And I said, okay,
fair enough. So I signed up for Twitter and then whatever the next day, I woke up in the morning
and didn't know what to write or what to do. So I just took a picture of my watch and, you know,
here I go. And other people kind of noticed that. And so that's kind of how that whole thing started.
But. Yeah, well, it's not, it's not always the case that when you do something new and creative,
you know why you do it. I mean, sometimes you have few, and even if you think you know why you
do it, you might find out five years later that there were 10 other reasons that you did it that
you weren't aware of at the time. Like we live beyond ourselves all the time. That's especially true
if you're entrepreneurial and creative, because you're changing who you are all the time. And
there's no reason to assume that your understanding of yourself would keep up with the changes.
So, so my, my take, my take on the Instagram posts was, well, what I just, what I just mentioned,
it's like, well, you know, yeah, you can sleep until 10 o'clock in the morning if you want,
but you can also get a jump on the day. And I think part of what makes your,
I think part of what makes what you're doing attractive is that there's so little emphasis
in our popular culture, especially, especially with regards to the so-called mainstream media
on discipline and responsibility, that there's a tremendous hunger for anything that pertains
to that. And, and you have a right to be discussing that, I would say, because of your,
because of your background, which if nothing else required a tremendous amount of discipline.
Yeah. And I ended up writing a book called Discipline Equals Freedom. And I'm lucky that
I wrote it when I did, because if I would have written it two years later, everyone would have
said, oh, everyone's talking about discipline now. So yeah, discipline, absolutely. Discipline does
bring you freedom in life. And that's something that I kind of figured out over time. I didn't
know. So what do you mean by that? Like, how, how did you figure that out? And what do you mean by
that? Because they're often, and, and, you know, the, the classic sort of, what would you call it,
romantic rebel is someone who has, is free from excessive order, let's say, they don't see, they
see freedom and discipline as antithetical rather than seeing one as a precondition for the other.
And so, so how did you learn that discipline was a precondition for freedom? If I've, if I've got
the equation, how did that manifest itself in your own life? So we'll start off by saying this. And
look, I was a young kid, I joined the Navy to go in the SEAL teams, I went through SEAL training,
I showed up at a SEAL team, SEAL team one. And when I got there, and as I look back,
this is a very powerful thing, even though it's very simple. When I was, so I'm 19 years old,
when I show up at SEAL team one, I'm done with the basic SEAL training. And I have a goal in my head,
which is that, which is this, I want to be a good SEAL. That's what I want to do. That's like,
I don't know about anything else. I, this is what I want to do. I want to be a good SEAL. That's
what I want. I want to be a good SEAL. And so as a 19 year old with all kinds of energy, and
we haven't talked about my childhood yet, but I was kind of like a very rebellious kid. When
you talked about seeing a kid that looked like you could have handed him a club or a battle axe,
and he would have probably been feeling a little bit better. I was like that. I was constantly
looking around for a club or a battle axe, because that's what I felt like I needed to do.
And it was beautiful because I was running around the, running around the woods as a young kid
playing army. And I just went and actually played army. You know, that's what I ended up doing.
So I never really had to do, do, you know, force myself into some mold that I didn't want to be
into. So I got to SEAL team one, and now I, I just want to be a good SEAL. That's what I want.
And so now that starts steering some of my decisions. And, and for the most part, it steered
my decisions in a, in a decent direction. Now there were some times where as I look back now,
what I thought was a good SEAL was a little bit off, but luckily it wasn't 180 degrees off. It
might have been 30 degrees or 40 degrees. And as I got older and more mature and I figured out more
about what that ideal should look like to me. And I could keep chasing that ideal. That was good.
But even to be, even to be a 19 year old kid with a, with a 70 or 80 degree corridor to move forward
in is not a bad thing. No, it's a gift. It's a gift. Exactly. So then I'm looking around
at other SEALs that were older than me and more senior to me and trying to figure out
which one of those guys is a good SEAL. Yeah. And what I realized was that the guys that were
working harder for the most part were good SEALs. Now there were, look, there's just some people
that are just way talented and they could show up, you know, three minutes before a run or
three minutes before we do a shooting competition and they could just walk through it. No problem.
Right. And that's great for them. It wasn't me. I wasn't, I'm not that great at anything,
but I saw other guys that might not be a great at anything either, but they worked hard. They
showed up to work early. They did the drills that they were supposed to do. They had discipline.
And when you have a SEAL has amalgamated statistics, and I hope I get this right,
but it's approximately correct. If you work 10% longer hours, you make 40% more money.
Right. And so, and I think your comments about talent are also dead on. It's like,
in any field of enterprise, there are people who are phenomenally gifted.
And, and then if they work really hard, they're even more phenomenally gifted, right? Those are
the people who break records, but that talent apart, hard work actually works. And with virtually
everything, it might not make you the best at whatever it is you're pursuing, but it will
certainly make you better than you are. And, and then I have in this, I have this new book,
I hope you got a copy because we, did you get a copy? Okay. So I'm bringing it up for a particular
reason. I have a chapter in this book called, well, there's two that are relevant. Imagine
who you could be and then aim single-mindedly at that. That's one. And then the, of course,
or what would you call it? A complimentary chapter is work as hard as you possibly can
on one thing and see what happens. And that's also predicated on this idea that discipline is
a precondition to freedom. So, so you were fortunate, like you had this goal, right? So that meant you
had a goal, which is a really big deal, because you could learn about goals. You had a sense of
what a higher mode of moral being that I would rather be a good seal than the person I am now.
Well, it's a, it's a code of behavior and a way of perceiving. So there's an ethic in that. And
then you said as well, you know, your conception of what good seal meant changed as you matured.
But that's also fine. It wouldn't have changed unless you would have pursued that initial
only partially accurate goal. And so that's also a really good thing for people to understand is like,
if you don't know what you're doing, aim at something. Is it the right thing? No,
but it's better than just shooting randomly. So you aim at something and then as you aim and
you move towards it, you're going to find out why you're wrong. And then you might
recalibrate your aim. And that's going to happen over and over because as you move towards a goal,
it recedes or it broadens or it recedes and broadens. And otherwise you'd run out of things to do.
So, but anyways, back to the, back to the story, you're, you have this, this, this identity and
you said it was, it was there in you all right from the beginning, because you would play army
in, in the, by yourself, even in, in the, in the, in the forest by your house, I presume. And how,
how old were you? Do you think when, how long back can you remember having that as a fascination?
I do not remember wanting to do anything else.
So would you say what is as early, is that as early as four, three, five preschool,
something like that? Can you remember playing when you were that young?
I, I, I can't remember, you know, a specific age, but if I think back to,
hey, that looks like what I want to do. I remember I want to be a soldier.
And do you, okay, you remember when you were a kid? I mean, I'm fascinated by this because
well, one of the things I really noted when I had kids was how much their personality was there
right from the beginning. Like my children are quite different. They have their similarities,
but they're quite different from one another. And those differences were there right from
the beginning and they've maintained themselves throughout their lives. And so it's fascinating
to see that, that destiny in some sense is built right into the person to begin with. And so, well,
this was built into you by all appearances. And so it manifested in itself in what attracted you
even in play as a, as a child. And that's the beginning of identity formulation, that, that play.
And so what was it about being a soldier that you think attracted you when you were a kid?
Like what, what was it that was so compelling? Because being a soldier is a multi-dimensional
identity. There's, there's, there's the, the, the physical combat element of it. There's the
strategic element of it. There's the, the discipline, the camaraderie. What, what were you playing,
do you think? I got asked this, I was talking to some folks at the Special Operations Command
the other day and they asked me, they set me up with this kind of beautiful
possibility or opportunity for me to give some kind of an incredibly beautiful
answer to this very question, you know, and there was something along the lines of,
you know, at what point did the, did the opportunity to serve and sacrifice for your country
reveal itself to you or something along that, those lines. And all I'm thinking about is when I'm
eight years old, 12 years old, 15 years old, I want a machine gun and I want to go fight in a war.
That's what I want to do. I would love to tell you, I would love to tell you that I,
you know, read some heroic book. I read the Odyssey and, and realized that everybody
didn't need to read any of that stuff. Well, that wouldn't be right.
Anyways, right? I mean, that's why I'm curious about what it was so early, you know? And so,
okay, so for you, it had something to do with weaponry, apparently. I got to tell you a story
about my father, okay? And tell me if this act, we like produces any echoes. Before you go. Yep.
Weaponry was like, for sure, that's fine, but it could be a club. It wasn't, it wasn't,
I wasn't a kid that was obsessed with guns. Okay. It was, and maybe it was
just we're going to get out and, and run around with sticks and try and hit each other.
We're getting into rock fights. Do you ever have rock fights? Well, we, we had ice fights
because it was Northern Alberta, but also dirt lump fights. And now and then those would have
rocks. And I can remember it was usually the Protestant kids against the Catholic kids.
I mean, there wasn't that much of a division between those two in our town, but the Catholic
kids had their high, their junior high and high school, and we had ours. And so our gangs were
separate. And so we would have dirt lump fights in the vacant lots where buildings were being
constructed. And those were extremely exciting. You know, now and then you'd take a dirt lump
rock in the mouth. And that was a little bit on the painful side. And, but, but, but there's no
doubt that it was extremely exciting. And so, and, you know, that cuts you off about your dad and
the gun. Oh, well, my dad told me something, and then this might be more relevant to, to, to guns,
but my dad collects single shot rifles. And he has a lot of them, like hundreds of them. And
he's a gunsmith and, and makes stocks and hand carves them. And anyways, he's, he's an artisan
in that regard. And it's really, it's a, it's a real focal obsession. And he's a great shot. He
shot at the provincial level, which would be the state level in the US. But it was single shots.
And, and he hunted. And so we grew up on moose meat and elk meat. And, and he brought elk into
northern Alberta as part of a repopulation attempt. Anyways, I thought for, I could never understand
his fascination with, with guns, because it was really a deep fascination. So it was, it was
something that elicited my curiosity. And at one point I realized that
he only hunted with single shots. So he had one shot at whatever he was hunting. So it had to
be a good shot. And so he was pushing himself. And then I realized, well, he was really obsessed
with hitting the target, taking aim and hitting the target. And it was about that time I learned
that the Greek word for, for sin, hamartia meant to miss the target. So there's this tight alignment
between taking careful aim at the center of something precisely, and then bringing yourself
into alignment so that you would hit that target. There's a deep morality in that. It's a morality
of hunting. It might be a morality of combat. And it's really deeply embedded inside of people.
And that was what had my father in, in its, in its grip. And so I would, I was wondering if the,
if, if you're, if you're the automatic interest that, that even the club
elicited in you had something to do with that, that seeking, that hunting, that, that target
seeking, or if, you know, perhaps I'm barking up the wrong tree. I would say,
no, but when you, when you were talking about getting hit in the head with a dirt clump and
whether you get hit or not, when you get done with that situation, you are in an elevated state of
mind because that was dangerous. And it was a very high level competition. Because even when you're
throwing a baseball or, or, you know, kicking a soccer ball around,
there's no real danger in that situation. But when someone's hucking dirt clumps at your head,
you get a legitimate rush from that. And it feels good. And it feels
it's exhilarating. One of the most fun, yes, if there's no doubt that it's exhilarating,
one of the most fun days I ever had as a child, this was less dangerous. I, I had, I lived next
door to a policeman, an RCMP officer. And we went out one day, I was probably about eight
into my neighbor's backyard. And she had green tomatoes everywhere, far more than she was ever
going to eat. And we had a green tomato war for like an hour and a half. And he was moving them
at a pretty good velocity. So if they caught you, especially in the head, you know, you kind of
remembered it, but it was exhilarating. And it was really fun to engage in that with him. And I
really do remember that. And I do remember those, I hadn't until today, but I do remember those dirt
lump wars. And there is an exhilaration in pushing yourself like that. So,
and I also don't, I don't want to give the impression that I was, you know, running around
with camouflage paint going to high school, or I was, you know, I, I was doing a bunch of other
stuff too. I played soccer, I played basketball, I, I, we had, you know, a bunch of different bands,
we played music, I played bass in a band, I sang in a band, I played guitar. We, we did all kinds
of other stuff. But I was always kind of just in the back of my mind, sort of wanted to do that job.
All right. So you went to the SEALs and tell us about that a bit.
It was awesome. You're, you're, you're making more money than you could ever figure out to do with,
you know, I'm 19 years old, and I am the richest person that's ever existed in my mind, because
I'm making whatever it is, however many thousand dollars every two weeks. And, you know, my expenses
and so you're just totally stoked. You're getting, you got a great job. You're working out,
you're shooting machine guns, you're blowing things up, you're hanging out with a bunch of,
bunch of other guys that like to blow things up and you, you, you can fight each other at the
drop of a hat, and then you get done with a fight and you shake hands and then, and then you go eat
a steak. And so you're just in this environment and it's perfect. It's, it's freaking awesome.
So what was it like? It was awesome. That's what it was like.
It's funny. You read accounts of the Navy SEALs and I've never read it as enthusiastic an account
as that account right there. And so then how long after you, what happened after you were done your
naval SEAL training? What direction did your military career take?
Yes. So I got done with SEAL training. I went to SEAL team one. It was 1991. I just missed the
first Gulf War. I was all brokenhearted about that because this war had happened and I didn't know
when another one was going to happen. And so what do you do is you train and we trained a bunch. I
did a bunch of SEAL platoons, which is you form up with a group of guys, you do a training cycle
together as a platoon and then you go on deployment overseas. And when there's no war going on, you
go to other countries and you work with foreign nationals and you train them on the skill sets
that we have and learn some stuff from them. And then you come back and you do it again.
And then eventually from there, I went into a, where I became a trainer at SEAL team one
and taught the tactics to the SEAL platoons that were now training to go on deployment.
And I did that for a couple of years and then I got picked up for a commissioning program
and became an officer in the SEAL teams, which moved me up into a leadership position.
And then I did a couple deployments as a young SEAL leader. Then I had to go to college. The
Navy sent me to college because in order to be an officer in the Navy, you have to go to college
and I hadn't been to college. Where'd you go? I went to the University of San Diego.
You went to the University of San Diego. What did you take there? I was an English major.
All right. So you finished college and then what happened?
You're not going to ask me why I was an English major?
Why were you an English major? I thought when he hears English major, he's going to say,
wait a second, here you are, this guy talking about machine guns and blowing things up.
What in God's name are you going to go study English for?
I have to say that that thought did pass through my mind.
Okay. Why was I an English major? I was an English major because believe it or not,
when you're in the SEAL teams and especially when you're in any officer position,
you have to write and read all the time. So when one of your troops does something and
they deserve some kind of recognition for that, you have to write them an award.
And if the award is written well, there's a much better chance that it'll actually
be given to the person that you're writing it for. You have to write evaluations for your troops
and the evaluations that you write is how your troops are judged so that they can be promoted.
On top of that, if you want to go do a mission, you have to write a concept of operations,
which is a document, which is five, six, seven, eight pages long, that you send up the chain of
command, that then they scour through and see if they're going to prove your mission or not.
That's so insanely important. I mean, one of the things, I did a talk at Harvard
four years ago and I pointed out two things to the students in the audience. One was that
a tremendous amount of civilization and effort had gone into producing the institution that
they were now part of and that everyone who was part of that institution was hoping that they
would come there and learn everything they possibly could that was relevant and important and that
they would be the best possible people they could be and they would go out in the world and do as
much good as they possibly could. That was the essential mission of the enterprise and that
was really the case. And also that learning to write in particular was going to make them more
powerful than they could imagine. And a number of students came up to me afterwards and said,
I really wish someone would have said that to us when we first came here. And it's the writing part
of that. I kind of got obsessed with that when I was working as a professor and I'm working on a
piece of software right now to help, which we'll launch soon, to help people write. Because what
I observed in my own career and it's so interesting, the parallelism is so interesting, but not
surprising, is that nothing can stop you if you can write. And it's for the reasons you just laid
out. It's like when you write, you make a case for something, whatever it happens to be. And if you
make the best case, well, then you win and you get whatever it is that you're aiming at. And so,
you know, you said, maybe that's why I didn't ask you why you went into English. I guess that
might have been the reason, is that the utility of learning to write is so self-evident to me that
it could pass by without question. But it's also interesting to think about how it fits into this
broader, well, let's say, at least partially military slash strategic way of looking at things.
You know, you describe the intense relationship between marshalling your arguments properly,
getting everything in order on the page, and making strategic progress truly in the military sense
that those things are tied together very, very precisely. And it's obviously your ability to
communicate as well. That's, well, look what it's done. You have your podcast, you have your YouTube
channel, you have your books, which many of which you self-published. So that ability to communicate
is, I just can't understand why it's not presented, especially not entirely, but especially
to adventurous, well, let's say young men, we could say young people, you're adventurous,
you want to make a mark, is you bloody well better learn how to write. Because if you learn how to
write, well, then you can think and you can communicate your thoughts. So not only are you
deadly strategically, you become extremely convincing. And then you can go and do anything
you want, and no one will stop you. And that's never told to people. And I don't really understand
why, you know, you hear the pen is mightier than the sword, which is just a cliche, unless it's
fleshed out. But the reason you laid out the reasons perfectly, you have to communicate what
happened as well as having it had had it happen. Right. So you already connected the dots, but
obviously, not only am I having to write and present my argument, I'm also having orders being
issued to me, which are written, I'm sure you've heard the term rules of engagement.
Well, rules of engagement is a 12 page document that is in a bunch of legalese. And I've got to
translate that document to my troops, some of whom, you know, barely graduated high school.
And so I've got to be able to do that. So I've got to be able to read and then write and be able
to then communicate and talk to the team and brief them in a manner that they can actually
understand what it is I'm talking about and what it is our mission is and why we're doing this mission.
So that was why I decided to study English when I went to college. And so that was a conscious
decision. Absolutely. And with that end in mind that it was so tell me exactly what the decision
was with regards to studying English. What did you know that because it's not as you pointed out,
it's not self-evidently the most practical of pursuits and not necessarily what you'd expect
someone with a military orientation to pursue. Right. Here's the here's the thought process.
I want to be a good seal. The good seals that I see can communicate, they can write and they can
read. That's what I need to learn how to do. I need to learn how to do that better so that I can
persuade my chain of command that we need to do this mission or we need this piece of gear
or this guy over here needs to get an award or he needs to get promoted. All those things are done
by being able to write and communicate properly. Okay. So let's say you take the example of a seal
who's got it all, but this literacy. Okay. So what what happens to him compared to someone who has
all those skills? Well, if he can't, if he can't write well, and he's in charge of six guys and
one of those guys works hard or does something that deserves to be recognized. This is the
responsibility of that leader to write that person an award. Okay. So he can't reward his,
he can't reward his, his good workers, his good soldiers. He can give him a pat on the back,
but a pat on the back isn't going to get him promoted. An award is actually worth some points
towards your promotion. And the people that are on that board that are giving that reward,
they're never going to meet that leader and they're definitely not going to meet that guy.
There's no, there's no bias. It's based on this piece of paper that you hand in your hand in this
piece of paper. They read the piece of paper and they say award approved or award not approved,
or you want to do a mission and you send that up the chain of command. And it's the same thing.
It gets to a certain point where they're just looking at it and reading and trying to decipher
this pile of junk that you put together. And by the way, if I'm in charge and Jordan sends me
a concept of operations that doesn't make any sense, why would I possibly let you go out and
execute an operation that I can't even understand what it is you're trying to do? So it has a huge
impact. It has a huge impact. Okay, well, I'm dwelling on this because it's upsetting to me,
I would say that young people in particular aren't stringently instructed that the ability to,
that literacy makes them powerful in every way they can possibly imagine, except the
absolutely immediate. And so it's just sad to me that it's not sold in that manner. You want to
be weak, stay illiterate, you want to be strong, it's like put yourself together physically, fair
enough man, get brave and street smart. But then you could add some literacy to that and you're
unstoppable machine. So I concur 100%. And you know, you said being literate makes you powerful
and throughout recent history, if we're trying to oppress someone, what we don't want them to be
able to do is read or write or articulate themselves. Right, well, we haven't even talked about
reading, you know, we just talked about writing and fair enough. So but obviously you studied
English, so you also read. And so what's the advantage to that as far as you're concerned,
practically speaking? Well, obviously, there are so many lessons that you can pull out of
books. And you can get to a point where nothing really surprises you because you've at least
seen some indication of what can unfold through reading. So again, for me, it's very much focused
on combat and war. But there's there's lessons that you learn and you say, oh, I've seen that
before. There's a book it's is a book called about face, which I think the last time you and I talked
you were, I think you were writing the forward for for the gulag. And I was about to write the
forward to I don't know if that's your favorite book, but I was lucky enough to be able to write
the forward for my favorite book, which was re released because I was talking about it all the
time. And the book is called about the book is called about face. And it's it's about a guy that
was in the Korean War and the news in the Vietnam War. And his name is Colonel David Hackworth.
But I would read that book. When I was on deployment, I would read open up that book
anywhere and I would read two pages or three pages before I'd go to bed if I was in my bed that night.
And there were so many lessons that correlated to what I was actually going through and a real
obvious example was when he was in Vietnam, he's working with the South Vietnamese soldiers and
therefore by proxy, the South Vietnamese government. And guess what? They're all corrupt and
they're not motivated and they don't have the right gear. And here we are in Iraq and we're
working with Iraqi soldiers and therefore by proxy, we're working with the Iraqi government.
Guess what? They're all corrupted. They're, they're, they're not well equipped. And how do you,
how did he deal with it? How do we deal with it? So there's an example of when you read,
you can learn and you don't have to, you don't have to go through the school of hard knocks. You
don't have to get punched in the face repeatedly with things that turn out to be situations that
other people have absolutely gone through. And the amount of the amount of the level of capability
increases so much by seeing something one single time. Well, if I see something one time,
I'm, I'm infinitely better than if I'd never seen it before. So if it's like those little
puzzles, they give you a little puzzle, some kind of a mind bender, right? The mind benders only
work on you one time. The riddle only works on you one time. Then you go, I know the answer to that.
That's the answer. You know, you never get fooled by that again. So just knowing,
just seeing it one time, you're infinitely better. So when you read enough, you're capturing all
these lessons. And you know what? It's, I got to say this. It's not just reading. It's not just
reading. And I learned this because as I started doing my podcasts, and many of my podcasts are
just me reading books, I realized how to read more intently, even more intently than I did when
I was going to college and I was going to be, you know, writing a paper about a book. And so I'd
read it in a certain way. But you even that reading was a little bit detached, a little bit detached
because you're looking for a theme or you're looking for character development or what have you.
But when you read to learn about human nature and life, you detach less and you kind of put
yourself in there and you experience it a little bit closer. And then when you take a step back,
you go, oh yeah, I know what he was thinking right there because I was right there with him.
And so there's a certain attitude. You kind of have to put yourself into the work
and really read it with that kind of intensity, if for lack of a better word. Is it possible for
human being to read intensely? Absolutely. Because that's what I try and do. I get there.
That's no different than acting intensely or playing intensely. Of course, you want to put
the book on. You want to become that person. That can rattle you up, man, especially if the person
is thinking all sorts of things that you've never thought. I mean, I love reading for that reason.
I could pick my peers too, which I really loved. It's like, well, you know, I have these people
around me, but then there's these people who've lived before me and in different places and I can
set them up on my shelf. I can enter into their world and I can benefit from everything they've
thought and saturate myself with that person. And it's very disruptive, especially if the person
that you're reading has a mind that's more powerful and more well-developed than your own.
I mean, Friedrich Nietzsche has spun me around for about three years and I was reading Jung at
the same time intensely and the same thing. It was very disruptive, but unbelievably useful,
unbelievably useful to try on other people like that. And you get the benefit of their
entire life distilled into their book. It's 30 years of work. I read this one book called
The Neuropsychology of Anxiety, which is a great scientific work. I think it's the greatest
neuropsychological work of the last 50 years. It's a very hard book. I think it has 1800 references,
something like that. And this guy, Jeffrey Gray, he actually read all those references and he
understood them. And so it took me six months to read the book, but I got an entire education out
of it. I got to experience in six months what it took him 30 years to learn. Like, what a gift
that is. It's unbelievable. I was listening to an interview with Gary Kasparov, I think you
said, Russian. He was a chess world champion for 20 years, something like this. And the interviewer
didn't ask him directly if he could beat this young guy named Magnus Carlson, who's the current
kind of prodigy of chess. He's just phenomenal and the highest chess rating ever, et cetera, et cetera.
And he didn't get asked directly if he could beat him, but it was definitely implied if I remember
the interview correctly. And it was very interesting to me. Gary Kasparov, there was two things that
I found interesting. Number one was he said, he's younger than me. And he didn't mean that and
like that was an advantage for Gary. He meant it, he's younger than me, so he has an advantage.
As an advantage because he's younger. And I kind of thought to myself, well, that's kind of weird
because this isn't a physical, this isn't a wrestling match. This isn't a jiu-jitsu match.
Why would that help? And then sure enough, you learn a little bit about cognitive decline and
Gary Kasparov is 57 years old when he did this interview. And guess what? You start, well,
depending on who you are, but you start to see cognitive decline around that time. And I'm sure
it kicks in at 25. Well, there you go. IQ is pretty unitary, but you can fracture it into
crystallized and fluid. And fluid IQ is what enables you to learn. And it declines from 25
onward. Crystallized intelligence continues to grow, roughly speaking, because it's partly
dependent on such things as vocabulary, which you can learn and which accumulate. But interestingly
enough, you know, you were talking about physically, the best way to stave off cognitive
decline is not cognitive activity. It's exercise. Weightlifting and cardiovascular exercise can
by far the most potent means of staving off cognitive decline. So Kasparov would have the
advantage in terms of experience, but the younger guy would have the edge on sheer raw brain power.
That's what I thought too. That's what I thought too. But guess what? It's wrong. And it's wrong
for the exact reason that you just said. So Magnus Carlson, when he's 11 years old, he gets to open
up a book and see every single match and move that Gary Kasparov ever made. Because that's what
they do. They document that stuff. And so what he got to do was what you got to do, you got to
learn a person's 30 years experience in six months. Well, this young kid, so this where it
might have taken Gary Kasparov, you know, eight years or four years to figure out how to get
out of some particular quandary on the chessboard. Well, Magnus just opened to a page in a book and
said, Oh, that if I ever get in that quandary, I'm there. And so what Magnus got to do is he got to
start from here, right, and build. And so I make this point from a leadership perspective.
We can do the same things as leaders. We don't have to figure all this stuff out. We can jump up
to Gary Kasparov's level or at least get a baseline of what he knew and win because we learned.
Very interesting to me. Well, you think, and again, with regards to selling this sort of thing,
you know, I'm stunned that it's possible to make history boring, for example. People should be so
enthralled with history that they can't get enough of it. But with reading, you imagine,
you have this opportunity to learn whatever you want from the greatest people who ever lived
along that dimension. And well, it's stunning to me that that is a hard sell.
It's mysterious that that it's that that it isn't something that everyone is just clamoring for.
I mean, that to me, that points to a devastating failure, inadequacy of the education system,
a mysterious inadequacy. Yeah, there's a I think maybe the transaction isn't always clear for people.
I always talk about, well, if you're going to sell somebody, if you're going to sell somebody a book,
you know, if I'm going to sell you a book, Jordan, you've got to give me $20 and eight hours of your
time, right? That's what you know, you're going to give me, you're going to give me $20 and you're
going to give me eight hours of time, which you would probably, you know, have other things that
you might need to do. And the transaction is not always clear of what you're going to get out of
that, especially when, look, you can spend a lot of time reading books and not get as much as you
might want, you might not get your $20 worth out of a book. So you have to be somewhat selective.
Now, luckily, it's not even that hard to figure out which books to read because there's so many
reviews and history about where these books came from and the productivity that they resulted in.
So, but I think it's hard sometimes for, look, I can only speak for myself. When I was younger,
it was really hard for me to figure out that transaction. Yeah, fair enough. Like I had a
librarian when I was 13, who told me what to read, which is what a teacher should do, right?
There's nothing a teacher can do for you that's better than say, well, here's 10 books that will
change you completely. And who actually knows that to be the case. And one of the things I'd
really like to do, I've toyed with, well, with the whole concept of online education. One thing
I'd really like to do is to divide up the variety of domains of learning and identify the top 10
books in each domain. So to ask an expert, it's like, well, you're a historian, you're a great
historian. What 10 books are crucial? And I have a list on my website, a list of recommended books.
There's about 100 of them that have been instrumental for me. And lots of people have
used that list to purchase books. So that's been really good. But I'd really like to extend and
expand it. Yeah, I have the same thing on my website, the books from the podcast and the same
thing, all kinds of those books get sold. And it's beautiful to see. But the people that are
checking the website or listening to the podcast, they know that those books have been through a
filter. They're there for a reason. They're there because they're going to be worth that
transaction. And I think that's a tough sell for a lot of people. They can't figure out maybe
they've invested in books before and they didn't quite get the return on investment that they wanted
and buy two or three books and 50 or $60 and 20 or 30 hours. Yeah, that's a great observation,
I think, because one of the advantages to coming from a literate background is that you do in fact
reduce the transaction costs. Because there's an infinite number of books. Well, no, there isn't.
But as far as we're concerned, there might as well be. And so the question of what to read
really is daunting if you don't know anyone who reads. Where do I start? And how can I not be
a fool in doing this? Well, okay, back to English. So what were you reading when you were in
university? Was it fiction novels? Was it nonfiction? What were you focusing on?
It was like your basic English literature. That's what I studied. And so I read everything.
I read everything from each one of the little periods and it took the various classes and really
as trite as this may sound, it was actually the most impact was from Shakespeare. It was the most
impact on multiple levels. And I'll tell you the primary level. And when I've covered Shakespeare
on my podcast, I explain this to people. People think, well, I didn't really understand. I read
it and understand it. And so I start off when I talk about Shakespeare on my podcast, I start off
by saying, listen, if you think you're going to just pick up Shakespeare, open it up and read it
and understand it, you're not going to because it's barely written in English. It's barely written
in English. It's almost another language. And so you're not going to be able to just pick it up and
read through it. It's written in an almost other language. So what you have to do is you have to
start to interpret it. And so what I realized with Shakespeare is number one, the weight of the words
that these words were so pregnant with meaning that you had to pull those words and parse those
words and pull those words apart to see all the depth that each individual word had and then the
way that they're put together. And what was great about this was by the time I was back, because
then I went right back into the SEAL teams and somebody would hand me a rules of engagement
document that was written by some lawyer in Washington, D.C. And I'd pull it out and say,
wait a second, this word, I don't know what this word means. Let's pull this word out. Let's see
what this, let's see what this actual definition of this particular word is and how that changes
my viewpoint of these rules of engagement and how can I translate that for my troops so that they
actually know what to do. So that part for me was from a reading perspective, starting to read
Shakespeare and saying, oh, okay, you're not going to understand this. And if you don't understand
something, that's okay. You pull out the Oxford English Dictionary and you look it up and then
you not just find out what the meaning of the word is, but what's the root word and where does
it come from and what kind of depth and what kind of... Yeah, that's really, that's unbelievably
useful to discover the connotation of words. And the Oxford English Dictionary is particularly
good for that because you discover things that you'd never guess by looking at how the word
developed. I mentioned the word hamartia, like the fact that the word for sin was derived from
an archery concept was revelatory to me. It's like, that's so cool. It ties this moral concept,
abstract philosophy back down to something as primordial as weaponry and hunting. And just the
fact that that's the metaphor is absolutely fascinating. And then there's the overlap in
meaning that I already referred to. And virtually every word is like that because word is an
ancient artifact. It's like an animal in some sense. It has an evolutionary history and it
transforms across time. And each word kind of carries the echoes of its past with it too because
each word attracts other words in a particular unique way. So it kind of lives in a word ecosystem
as well. And the ecosystem contain information about the history of that word. And you think, well,
why is that important? It's like, well, hey, guess what? You think in words. You talk in words. You
have all these archaic entities, these words, these living entities that you use. It's like the
more you know about them, the more you know about you, the more you know about other people.
And the better you are at formulating and communicating your ideas. There's nothing
lost in that kind of investigation. There's nothing but gain there. So
Yeah. So that was the English road for me. And it was...
Good thing I asked you that question, eh?
Yeah. I'm really, really insightful for you to come up with that.
Thank you. Thank you. All right. So did you enjoy university?
Did you find a community there?
No. Okay. So when I was going to university, I was married. I had two kids. When I got to
university, I had three kids. When I left, I was not a university student. I was... In fact,
I would sit in the front row during my classes. I would have three pencils and three pens lined
up and staged on my desk. I would be ready to take notes. If the teacher said something,
I didn't understand. I'd be sitting in the front row, raised my hand. I don't understand what you
just said. Can you explain that? And I mean, I'm 28 years old and there's a bunch of 18 years
olds in there and they just want to go out and hang out with their friends. And I'm there. I'm
in there to... I'd love to really come off sounding good and tell you that I was there to learn,
but I was there to get A's, which meant I did have to learn. So I went at it as a competition
and I was competing not with the other students. I was competing with the teachers
because I'm a little bit crazy. Sometimes I would want to make sure that they couldn't
ask me a question on their test that I didn't know the answer to. So that's what I did. And so did I
have fun? Maybe not. And one thing, when I got back to the SEAL teams, what I told the guys,
I'd say, you know what I learned in college? And they'd say, what? And I said,
I learned never, ever, ever, ever get out of the teams, ever. Never get out of, sorry, get out of...
Never get out of the teams, the SEAL teams. Never get out of the team. Okay. Okay. Well, you know,
I taught older students in Boston and undergraduates. And the undergraduates, especially in Boston,
but also at the University of Toronto, were very, very bright and generally very hardworking.
The older students were generally not as highly selected, but man, they were committed.
And most of them had had jobs that they weren't thrilled with, let's say,
and had a hunger for what education could bring them that the younger people lacked.
And so it does seem to me often, and maybe this is just because I'm getting older, that
after high school, it might be good for people who want to pursue university to go do something
that they're qualified for, which isn't much at that point for a year or two, so that when they
do go to college or university, they understand just exactly what they're being offered.
Yeah, but I couldn't agree more. Working in the regular world will definitely
make you appreciate the opportunities that you may have if you go and learn more in the world.
All right. So you came out of university. You had three kids. You were married. What happens next?
Go back to the SEAL teams and go through the rest of my career.
Showed up at a SEAL team. September 11th had happened, so I show up at a SEAL team.
I become a platoon commander at a SEAL team, and then go on deployment. I get done with that
deployment. That deployment was primarily to Baghdad, although we worked kind of all over Iraq,
got done with that deployment. I went and became the aid decamp for the admiral that was in charge
of all the SEALs at that point in time. It was a very administrative job, but it was also a huge
opportunity for me to get to see the SEAL community in the most broad way that I could.
I got to learn a lot there, and then I went back to a SEAL team and was now what's called the
Task Unit Commander, which is two SEAL platoons combined together, and I was in charge of two
SEAL platoons combined together, which is called the Task Unit. My task unit was called Task Unit
Bruiser, and we deployed to Ramadi, Iraq, and that was in the summer of 2006. Very tough fighting,
very tough battle, and came home from that deployment. Hey, so could I let me let me ask
you there? Can you describe a typical day or a typical week? What was it like to be there?
I like all the details. Tell me what happens when you get up in the morning. What did your day look
like? We're there. We showed up there, and as soon as we got there, and we knew going into it
in 2005-2006, if you can remember watching the news in 2005-2006, just about every day you would see
in the news that there was three soldiers killed in Al-Ambar province, or five Marines killed in
Al-Ambar province, or three Marines wounded in Al-Ambar province, and the capital of Al-Ambar
province is the city of Ramadi, and the vast majority of those casualties were happening inside
the city of Ramadi, and we knew that going there. And when you say we, you say we were deployed there,
who are you, you're obviously referring to the country, to your country, but what does we mean
when you make, when you say that? But when I say we in this particular case, I'm talking about my
SEAL task unit, so I had... And that's how many, how many people? Yeah, so I had about 35 to 40 SEALs
most of the time, and then another 60, around 60 support personnel, and these people are
armorers that can fix our weapons and mechanics, that can fix our humvees and
intelligence people that gather information for us and radio operators that can receive our radio
calls. So there's a big support network that goes with the SEAL task unit as we deployed.
And why was it a SEAL enterprise? What was specific about this deployment that
required the, whatever it is that the SEALs bring, and what is it exactly that the SEALs bring that's
specific? So on this particular deployment at this, at this point in time, SEALs were deploying
to Iraq all the time. There was always SEALs in Iraq. My first deployment was in 2003, 2004,
and we were, in the beginning of that deployment, we were the only SEAL platoon there,
and then by this time, there would be many more SEALs. I forget what the number is, but
so we were in Iraq, and we were conducting special operations missions, and in particular
in Ramadi, when we got there, so a standard SEAL operation on my first deployment was
get, gather intelligence from various sources. So through various sources,
we would gather intelligence about the location of a bad guy.
Okay, so you had, you had a variety of people who were targets identified and they were leaders of,
what made, what marked them out as bad? What were their characteristics?
These are, these are people, well, if we want to talk about their psychological
characteristics, you might not be able to do a better job than that. I can tell you,
what they were doing for a living was trying to kill Americans, trying to kill coalition
forces, trying to kill other Iraqis, trying to create chaos in mayhem for the interim government
in Iraq. These are- And were they general leaders of, leaders of a group that you would target,
or the, are these people who were involved in the army on the other side, or like put them in
context? Yeah, so there's no, there's no, I mean, the Iraqi army is actually on our side. Right.
So these, the Iraqi army is our friends. And that's who we're working alongside. And now early
in the war, not so much because the, the coalition forces made a decision to disband the entire Iraqi
military. Right, right. Well, this is why I wondered if there were people with, on the military,
to what degree there were people with military chanting that were facing you?
Yes. So since that happened a lot. And as a matter of fact, in, in the city of Ramadi,
there, there used to be a massive military, Iraqi military base there. And so a bunch of
former Iraqi military lived there. There was a whole area that was called the, it was, there was
an area called the officer housing. There was an area in Ramadi that was called the officer housing
where Iraqi officers used to live. So, and I'm not nailing that name, but it's something like that.
So yes, there was, there was former Iraqi regime army people that were out there fighting. There
was also foreign fighters. And so would they have their own little groups, their bands of people
that were fighting with them? You were, you were targeting leaders? I'm just wondering how people
were selected. So the, the seals were after specific individuals generally speaking?
Yes. And here's what we figured out. If you only target the leaders, well, it's going to be a lot
harder to catch them because they're laying low and they're moving around and, and they try and
give misinformation about where they are and whatnot. So what we'd go and go out and grab,
you know, one of their lieutenants, grab one of their soldiers and find out where the lieutenant
is, grab the lieutenant and find out where the leader is. So where there would be these cell
networks, these little, these little networks and maybe they're a mortar cell and they're,
they're dropping mortars or they're a roadside bomb cell and that's what they're doing. And so we
would figure out who these bad guys were. And then through these various intelligence sources,
we would find out a location. Maybe it was a mid-level guy, maybe it was a high-level guy,
maybe it was a low-level guy. And then once we know their location, we're going to get them.
What were the typical motivations of the people that you were pursuing? What were, what were they
fighting for? So there's a variety of motivation. Some of the, you know, if you're a frontline,
guess what? If you're a 15-year-old kid with no money, guess what's a good motivator? Money.
And the insurgents say, hey, we'll give you 100 bucks to go launch an RPG at the American base.
So that's their motivation, end of story. The higher you get up the chain of command,
the more you're going to start leaning towards legitimate jihadists that, now there's jihadists
throughout the chain of command, don't get me wrong. And I mean hardcore jihadists. And I remember
the first time I was in my first deployment, the first time I saw a legit hardcore jihadist,
you can tell that this guy hated us. And it was very clear from the look on his face when we
captured him, it was completely, he was filled with seething hatred. So there's jihadists throughout
the chain of command. And that guy was like a mid-level guy. So the jihadist motivation was
well, by definition, in some sense, a religious motivation, but your experience of it was that
it was primarily a visceral hate. And hatred for what do you think? I mean, obviously, you're an
occupying force, let's say, and America is seen at least among the jihadists of that time as a
truly satanic force, I suppose. I mean, what's motivating, what was your experience of what
was motivating the hatred? Yeah, it's everything you just said. But I mean, you can trace it all
the way back to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. I mean, they're going to draw and view the West
as evil, as the great Satan. And so that's what... What did you think at that point about the
morality of the endeavor? I mean, because this is why I'm curious. And please do correct me,
I'm sure I'm wrong about many of the things that I think. But it seems to me that the clearer your
moral sense when you're engaged in a battle, the more likely you are, all things considered to win.
Because you're not... Part of you isn't going to be fighting against you, right? And I mean,
in any enterprise, it's like that. I find that if I'm involved in a project and I have reservations,
then the part of me that has reservations, 20% of me, pushes against the other 80%. And then I'm
only 60% as effective as I might be. And so whenever I engage in an enterprise, I try to walk
through it ethically and see, well, am I actually committed to this? What qualms do I have? What
doubts do I have? What resistances do I have? Because that's going to make me weak. And so
when you go into battle, I presume it's the same thing that you have to believe. I know they say
that soldiers also fight very hard for the guy who's in the foxhole next to them. So there's
that brotherhood camaraderie. But you go there as a representative of your country as well,
your nation. And there has to be that ethical dimension to it. And so how did you guys deal with
that? Looking at what we're doing, and what's really interesting is even though when you stare
at it from a strategic perspective, when you say, Oh, as a Western power, as this country,
we're going in here, and we could argue all day long about whether that's a right call or a wrong
call, whether that's morally correct, or whether it's an immoral move, we could have arguments
about that all day. Yes, well, they've been going on for 3000 years in the Middle East, right?
Right. Endless arguments about what's right. And here's what, here's what
one of the nice benefits of being on the ground is you get to see what's happening,
what's actually happening. So what you see in Iraq when you're actually on the ground is,
for instance, in Ramadi, what you see and what we saw is the Iraqi populace who are a bunch of
normal people that want to carry out their lives and raise their kids and run whatever
business they're going to run. That's what they want to do. They want to, they want,
they actually want life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness is what they want. That's a normal
Iraqi family. When we would, when we would go to an Iraqi family's house, that's pretty much what
you're dealing with. And amongst those normal people that just want to live their lives in peace,
there are insurgents and the insurgents want power, they want control, and they are willing to do
anything to get it. And so when you see fathers beheaded and their heads left in the yard of a
family, because he had, you know, had relate, he was, he was working with a shake that had said
things against al Qaeda. And now this guy is beheaded. There was a guy that was skinned alive.
There was torture. There was rape. So when you are on the ground and you see this stuff happening
and you see the local populace clapping and cheering when you kill insurgents,
your strategic vision isn't quite in focus as much as what you're seeing right in front of you
with your own two eyes. And so therefore, the 20% of you that might be arguing whether this is
right or wrong, when you see families slaughtered, you you very quickly tell that 20% of your brain
that you don't you need to look at what's happening right here. This is this is this is immoral,
and we need to do what we can to help these people. And do you did you feel then and and
then again, now, I mean, it's a quagmire. It's an ethical quagmire, the Middle East. And so
it seems in some sense that no matter what you do there, it's wrong. And I'm not trying to convince
you of that. Believe me, I'm really curious about this. You felt when you were there that you were
on the side that was doing the right things. Do you and now when you look back, I mean, I don't
know what to make of what what happened with the US in the Middle East over the last 15 years. I'm
just as happy and perhaps you are as well. There's less engagement in foreign wars now than there
was 10 years ago in the US, right, that seems to have receded to some degree. And that perhaps
that's a good thing. What do you think about the about about America's involvement in Iraq? What
conclusions have you come to? So you talked about this argument that you're going to have
in your own head. Well, you are also going to have that argument on a national level, right?
You're going to have a national level argument of whether this is the right thing or the wrong
thing to do. So my scale, my measure of this is if you are going to go to war,
if you are going to go to war, you have to make sure before you go
that you have the proper will, the proper will, and there's two types of will
that you need to have if you're going to go to war. The first type of will that you
need to have if you're going to go to war is you have to have the will to kill.
You have to have the will to kill. And guess what? I am sorry to inform everybody.
It is not just the will to kill the enemy because when you go to war, war is an imperfect
is an imperfect endeavor. And no matter how hard you try to just kill the enemy, you will kill
civilians, you will kill women, you will kill children. That is what is going to happen.
That is what is going to happen if you go to war. So you have to make sure you have the will
to do that, that sometimes you're going to drop a bomb and it's going to land and it's going to kill
women and children. That's what's going to happen. And anybody that thinks anything different
is naive and ignorant. We seem to let our politicians often convince us that that's
possible but it's not. So you have to have the will to kill and then on top of that,
obviously, you have to have the will to die. You have to have, you have to know and understand
that if you embark in a war, your sons and daughters are going to be killed. That is what
is going to happen. And anybody that says it's not going to happen is naive and ignorant.
Now, I think before we go to war, oftentimes we rationalize that we can mitigate the risk of killing.
We can mitigate the risk of dying. And for some reason, we think we can mitigate those risks down
to zero, which is impossible. So if you have the will, if you look at a situation and say,
we need to do something here, for moral reasons, for national security reasons, we need to take
action. Okay, so let me ask you a question there if you don't mind.
Now, whenever I have had to take difficult action in the past, so to take a risk,
my justification for that, so what allowed me to organize my will, let's say, was
a belief that inaction was a worse crime.
So I'm trying to think through what it takes to conjure up the will that you just described,
morally speaking. And it's very difficult to talk about the morality of war,
but it's absolutely necessary, clearly. Do you believe that in the situation in Iraq,
do you think that the argument was laid forth? It's such a...
So there was a terrible attack on New York, 9-11. And the response was
focused on Iraq. That's correct so far. Yes.
Focused on Afghanistan immediately and there after focused on Iraq, yes.
All right, it was never obvious to me why the focus shifted to Iraq.
Do you have any sense of why that was? I know that there was a lot of thought
at the highest levels of the American government prior to 9-11 about Iraq. And so there was a plan
that was already in some sense in place for Iraq. But it isn't obvious to me why attention was
shifted towards Iraq in the aftermath, apart from the fact that that plan already existed.
I think the shift came from... I'm trying to think of some kind of a metaphor here, but
you've got some rats in the garage. And the rats have nod through some of the wiring.
And so you go and you try and kill the rats in the garage and you realize, you know what,
this isn't the only place that these rats could be. There could also be some rats over here in
the basement. And we have wires over there too. We better go handle that situation as well.
You said that you were overwhelmed by the reality of the situation on the ground.
My first deployment to Iraq, we just worked with SEALs. Basically, all the operations we did
was just with SEALs. When we went back to Iraq in Ramadi, we were ordered to work with Iraqi
soldiers. Now, the Iraqi soldiers were poorly trained. They were poorly equipped. They had low
motivation. Some of them were not very trustworthy. And we were going out into the worst battlefield
on planet Earth at the time. And it was pretty hard to make sense of that order, right?
But when I thought through the order, why is my senior leadership ordering me to do this?
Well, the answer is quite clear after I thought about it a little bit. Hey, the reason that we
have to do this is because we need to work with the Iraqi soldiers so that the Iraqi soldiers become
proficient enough that they can handle the security in their own country.
Of course, yes. Okay. So my senior leadership isn't telling me to do something because they want
me to die or want my troops to get wounded and killed. They're telling me to do something because
it's a strategic move where in hopefully two or three years, the Iraqi military will be
at a level where they can handle security in their own country. Okay, got it. Okay, that's part one.
Well, when we got ordered to work with Iraqi soldiers, it wasn't just my seal,
tasking it was everyone. All coalition forces, all American Army and Marine Corps was getting
told you'll work with Iraqi forces and everyone kind of had that nervous feeling, right? Hold on
a second. You want me to have this person that has a rusty AK-47 and a pair of sandals? You want
that person to support me out on the battlefield? That doesn't make any sense. And so what the
American forces did was when they were ordered to take Iraqi soldiers with them on an operation,
then they would go out with a platoon of 40 Americans and they would take two Iraqis with them
because they were told to take Iraqis plural. So that means two, that's what we're going to do
and they'd leave them in the Hun V and they go conduct their operations. Well, senior leadership
got wind of this and this obviously is not in the spirit of what we were being told to do.
You're not going to get a nation's army trained up by taking two soldiers out. So the next thing
the leadership said was, okay, here's the new order. For every
one American that you bring out, you have to have seven Iraqi soldiers with you.
So they imposed a ratio on us. Now, Ramadi at this time was a complete war zone. Other parts of
Iraq were actually somewhat pacified. And in many of those pacified areas, that order actually made
sense. The Iraqis in some area, the Iraqi soldiers in some areas were actually capable of conducting
decent operations with very little American oversight. And the level of violence in those
areas wasn't that bad. So it was okay. Well, in Ramadi, it didn't make any sense whatsoever.
So I'm being ordered to take one seal for every seven Iraqi soldiers. Well, first of all, because
of the fighting was so bad in Ramadi, many of the Iraqi units only had 10 or 15 or 20 people
in their platoon. So if I was going to send out seals, I would only be able to send out two seals.
15 Iraqi soldiers. So now which two seals am I going to send? Am I going to send the medic?
Well, I want to send a medic for sure. But guess what? I also need to send a machine gunner in
case we get into a firefight. Well, what about the radio man that actually calls for help?
What about the point man that actually knows where we're going? What about the leader who's
going to make decisions out there? What about the explosive ordinance disposal guy that can dismantle
bombs from going off? So who am I supposed to leave behind? It doesn't make any sense. The
danger to the troops is so much higher in that situation. So what did I do? Did I say,
hey, that's what I'm being ordered to do? No. I took all this into consideration and you'll
appreciate this. I wrote a point paper up my chain of command, explained the situation of what was
happening, explained the number of casualties, explained the level of violence, explained the
size of the Iraqi elements that we were working with, and said, can I please get a waiver for this
and allow me to take however many seals I've deemed necessary to take to be safe?
And my chain of command read it and said, yeah, sure, I'll go do whatever you want to do. Thank
you. So what you're telling me is that you take what you're told to do and you take what you know
to be the case on the ground and you try to take both of them into account as much as possible.
Well, you're also shunting information back up the hierarchy, hopefully to modify their
decisions, the decisions they're making that aren't in accordance with the reality on the ground.
Right. So you do, I mean, you do your best under the circumstance, but that seems to be
a good answer. But it escalates, obviously, it can escalate higher than that. The decisions,
the orders that we're being given can escalate to a point where maybe this entire thing that
we're doing, I think is wrong. Right, right. Okay, so now we get into a situation where,
and the reason that I have to explain all these other things is because it happens very rarely.
It happens very rarely that, you know, someone in the military is looking at a decision that's
being made on a big scale and says, I think this is totally and completely wrong. Now,
I will tell you, and I wrote about this in my last leadership book, Leadership Strategy and Tactics,
if you're being told to do something that you believe is completely wrong, well,
I would love to tell you that that's a black and white decision, but guess what? It's not.
Even that's not a black and white decision because Jordan, if you order me to go and
assault a machine gun nest that's on a hill with my squad, and I know that this is a machine gun
nest in a bunkered position in an elevated position with interlocking fields of fire,
and if we go up that hill, we're all going to die. And I look at you and say, hey, boss,
I don't think that's a good call. They've elevated, they're bunkered, they're interlocking.
This doesn't make any sense. And you go, no, Jocko, shut up and do it. And I said,
I'm telling you, Jordan, this isn't a good idea. And you say, no, shut up and do it.
Now, here's my decision point. If I say, you know what, I will not do it. I will not do it.
You know what you do? You go, cool, Jocko, you're fired and you get your yes man come over and
your yes man comes in, you say, go assault that machine gun nest and he takes the squad up and
he gets everybody killed. So I surrendered my influence when I, when I drew that line in the
sand and said, no. And you doomed other people to death. And I doomed other people to death. Now,
my boss orders me, you order me and I say, okay, boss, got it. You definitely want me to do this.
There's no way out. Yes, you definitely got to do it. Okay. All right, guys, here's what's
happening. We're going to start, we're going to get into a covered position. We're going to start
maneuvering towards this thing. We're going to see what kind of fire we receive. If we start
receiving overwhelming fire, I'm going to lock some of you guys in that position. And I'm going to
send another squad over to the flank. And we're going to, we're going to take out this machine
gun from nest from another angle, or I'm going to hunker down in that position, and we're going
to call for air support. So you're decomposing, you're actually decomposing the process then
into micro elements and then testing the micro elements, then you can report back with that
information. Yes. Right, right. Very smart. Very smart. We have to be very careful. So when you
talk about, oh, I don't think we should go into Iraq. I don't think we should go, okay, so what
am I going to do? Hey, I don't think we should go. Now, are there times where that might be the right
decision? There are some times like that, where maybe I think that me as a senior leader standing
up and saying no to my boss is going to make, you know, Jordan suddenly looks at me and goes,
wait a second, Jaco has always been a good guy. And now he's sitting here telling me no,
he's really serious about it. Maybe I maybe I'm not seeing something. Maybe I can get you to
rethink your position. That's a risky move though. It's always a risky move to kind of draw a line
in the sand. Yeah, kind of an ultimatum because we use up your capital, you burn your leadership
capital, it's even worse than that. You just completely surrender your leadership guy, you
don't even use it. You obliterate it, it's gone. You have no more influence, you're done.
So we have to think very long and hard about those things. And so when I was never put in a
position like where I didn't, where I thought that what we were doing as a country was wrong,
I'll tell you, actually, probably the closest I've come to that was, I think it was 1993,
the massacre was unfolding in Rwanda. There was the Hutus were killing the Tutsis by the hundreds
of thousands. And I was on a Navy ship off the coast of Africa on standby to go into Rwanda
as this slaughter took place. And we didn't do anything. We didn't do anything.
So that's the cost of not going to war there? The cost of not going to war. And there's a very,
you know, it's a very interesting, I'm sure you've heard of the massacre that took took place in
Milan, Vietnam. And one of the most interesting things in that reprehensible scenario is
what stopped it. So this is, this horror is unfolding. There's murder, mutilation, rape,
just going berserk. A company of American soldiers is murdering, raping, mutilating bodies,
just absolutely heinous, absolutely reprehensible. And while this is happening, a helicopter pilot
comes in and sees what's going on. And these guys have lost their mind, really. The guys on
the ground have lost their mind. The helicopter pilot flies back to base. He walks into the
tactical operations center and says, Hey, they are killing civilians out there. The commanding
officer gets on the phone and says, Hey, stop killing people. And they stopped immediately.
They stopped immediately. That's, that's what tells you how important leadership is. Leadership
is the most important thing on the battlefield. And if you have a leader that's going to let
things start to go in this direction, all it takes is one person to step up and say, Hey,
everyone stop what you're doing. This is wrong. So you get a situation like Rwanda.
We didn't really do anything. We didn't do anything. And what would it have taken if, if we rolled
in there and said, Hey, no more stop. Do they look around with their machetes covered in blood
and wake up of their neighbors and say, Oh, wait a second. Yep. Okay, we're going to stop.
So I'm not saying these are easy predicaments, but certainly, you know, the idea of
are there situations where it's better to do something than nothing. I'll tell you what,
rolling into Baghdad and going into Saddam Hussein's torture chambers, which we did.
And you see the, the, the, uh, the, the hook, there was hooks like hooks hanging from ceilings
and, and, and drainage where blood would drain in these torture chambers. You see that a couple
times and you think I'm okay with us being in here and getting rid of this guy.
I'm going to switch topics. I want to talk to you about your books. And I, I'd like to know,
look, you said right at the beginning of this interview that you wanted to be the best Navy
Seal, a good Navy Seal. That's what you said. You didn't say the best. You want to be a good Navy
The best was aiming a little bit too high. Yeah. Yeah, I know. That's why I wanted, I wanted to
get the words right. Um, what are you doing now? But you, I mean, I, I presume that, that
your life is still being lived in an expansion of that, the pursuit of that initial ideal.
You've transformed multiple times. You're a civilian, you, you're, you're a communicator,
mass communicator in a variety of different, in a variety of different ways. I think you
mentioned, we were talking offline a little bit, for example, that you have a clothing line.
And I'm going to ask you about that because that's, that's, that's a curious thing to me.
And that is, I'm definitely curious about that. But like, what's your mission?
And is that the right question? Is that an appropriate question? So
there's a, there's a, there's a, there's a quality, let's call it. So as, as I, as I went through
that, that as I created in my mind, that ideal of, of what a good seal is, what is a good seal?
And, and I'm sure you could, I could say, okay, what do you think? Jordan, he's probably strong
and he's probably fast and he's probably smart and he's probably tactically sound and he can
probably shoot a weapon straight and all those things, absolutely, all those things are there.
And as you would kind of burn away the, the, or if you were to set up a hierarchy of importance
of what makes a good seal, you might think that some people would think, oh, well, it's
probably being the best shot, or it's probably being the strongest, or it's probably being
really good in the water. All those things, all those skills that you think it might be,
and you could talk to different seals and they would all kind of, you know, some guy would
say it's running, some guy would say it's strong, some guy would say it's a best shot,
whatever, best tactician. But if you offered them one thing,
99.9% of seals would agree on what makes you a good seal.
And that is, you look out for your teammates.
You put your team above yourself. Yeah, so that's a real inversion of the things that
you just described, because all of those things are dimensions along which you could be
excellent in a manner that distinguishes you from the group and elevates you above them.
But you derive from that acclaim that that should all be subordinate to a reciprocity.
And any seal that's a good seal would tell you that that would be at the top of the hierarchy.
You can be the best shot, you can be the best shot, you can be the best diver,
you can be the strongest, you can be the fastest, you can be the best tactician.
If you don't take care of your teammates, none of that, none of those other things matter,
you're not even wanted in the seal teams. That's what it is.
Well, do you think that seems to me to be true for functional organizations in general?
And certainly the people I've seen, this is part of the reason why casual critiques of
hierarchies annoy me so much, because the people I've seen who are radically successful don't get
there from power. They get there from ability, but also reciprocity.
Yeah, 100% right.
So when you say to take care, to look out for and to take care of, I think you said to look out for,
what flesh that out? What does that mean in the situations that you've been in?
And how did that guide your behavior?
It's a literal constant daily, hourly, by the minute attitude, which is, hey,
my buddy needs me to move over there and cover for that area. That's what I'm going to do.
My buddy needs to bring him some more ammunition. My buddy needs me to help him clean this weapon.
My buddy needs to, you carry the boat, I need to pick up the boat because we're moving across the
beach, all these things. So what are you doing? You're looking, so what, like you said, moment to
moment. So what are you doing? You're looking for ways to be useful constantly? How can I support
my teammates? What can I give to them? How can I make them, how can I make their situation better
right now? And that guy that has that attitude has going to have a great reputation in the
industry. Yeah, well, then you can think too. Of course, then the fact that you're outstanding on
any number of dimensions, let's say that becomes an asset of the team rather than something that's
a competitive liability. Because like, if you're going to be looking out for me, and I really
believe that, the fact that you're stronger and smarter than me is actually really good.
Because now I've got someone who's stronger than me and smarter than me who's looking out for me.
And so whatever competitive jealousy there might have been there could be easily subsumed under
appreciation for those positive attributes. Yes. And we are going to work together because
guess what? You might be the strongest, but I'm a little bit faster than you. Right, right, right.
And you might be a good shot, but I'm better in the water than you are.
And we're going to be in the water and shooting. So we're each going to have a chance to be number one.
Yes. So the reason I went to that.
How long did it take you to figure that out? Like you said something interesting about
assembling the image of an ideal seal in your imagination. And so was that something that
were you consciously aware of doing that while you were doing that? Or did you see that you
were doing that in retrospect? Unconscious and saw that I did it in retrospect. And the team,
the support your teammate is something that you hear immediately. And if you listen to it,
it's you can't miss it. Now guys miss it. Guys definitely miss it. But if your eyes are open
and your ears are open, you can't miss it. It's day one seal basic indoctrination. You take care
of your swim buddy. They literally say that day one, they'll say take care of your swim buddy.
And what does that mean in the swim buddy context? What how would that what does that
translate to practically? That means before Jordan gets inspected by the instructor,
I take a look at Jordan's gear and make sure it's all squared away and say you're good to go.
As opposed to seeing that your life jackets got a twisted strap and just sitting there looking
straight ahead. No, I want to make sure you're okay. That's actually before I check myself,
I'm checking you. Before I check myself, I'm checking you. I'm making sure that you're good to go.
Jesus is partly why these claims, the broad claims that are being made in the social world at
large now about hierarchical power being the fundamental attribute of society is so disturbing
to me because this is not true. It's literally not true. Only when a hierarchy becomes radically
dysfunctional does individual power come to dominate. The rest of the time it's something
like what you're saying is that and that's true. Let's you know, capitalism has a bad
rap, let's say morally, because of its selfishness. But the functional organizations that I've seen
that are business organizations, if the people in there aren't motivated by the ethos that you're
describing, no one bloody well wants to work with them. No one wants to buy their material. No one
wants to partner with them across time. They don't even want to go golfing with them. It's
so not true. It's completely not true. And that's, I mean, that's the essence of the books that I've
written about leadership is that story over and over again. I had a, I had a SEAL platoon commander
that operated via power, his authority and his power. That's how he operated. We did what he
told us because he told us to do it because he was the highest ranking guy and you better be
quiet and listen to me and it's going to be my plan and you all better just shut up and get on
board with it. And we had a mutiny. We had a mutiny in that SEAL platoon where we went to his boss
and said, we're not working with this guy. And he actually ended up getting fired. So everything
you just said. That's exactly right. Look, there's no stable organization. No organization can run
stably across time if its predicate of operation is raw power. And the reason for that at some
point is that the people who are being tyrannized are going to band together and say, no, we're
not going to do this. We're going to take you out. And so if you don't want to be taken out,
you can't exercise tyrannical power. It's, it's the intrinsic weakness of tyranny.
And to confuse functional and competent organizations with tyranny is also to make a mockery of the
fact that this cooperative ethos is actually the dominating principle if the, if the, if the
organization is functioning properly. Yeah. And as I pointed out, I actually lived through that.
And I lived through the other end of the spectrum too. When that platoon commander got fired,
the platoon that commander that took his place was very humble, listened, had an open mind,
gave us ownership, told us to come up with a plan. And we love that guy. And that's the guy
that I try and emulate to this day. And we would have followed that guy anywhere. And it's, it's
precise. Right. And so that's not power. It's not power. It's precisely because he didn't
use his tyrannical power to, to drive us to do what he, what he wanted us to do.
Look, whenever I've been in a situation and wanted to get the best out of the people that
are working under me or with me for that matter, I see as much responsibility and authority to them
as possible, partly because one of my predicates of operation is that if I'm going to engage in
an enterprise with you, and I have to tell you what to do, and, or if I told you what to do,
you would do a better job. I should find a different person. All that is is indication
that I chose the wrong person. If you're the right person, I'm going to grant you as much
autonomy as possible, partly because then you get to have your own domain, partly then because
you're self-sufficient, partly because you do better, but even more so because then you're
fully committed to the task. And I don't believe that anybody occupies a position of leadership
for long who doesn't know those things and that they're certainly not effective if they don't
know them. No, they're not. And I, I talk to leaders all day, every day in every, every possible
industry that you can think of. And it's, you know, one of the things that I end up saying a lot to
leaders is, you know, if you're working for me, Jordan, and you come to me with a plan of how
you want to execute a project or an operation or a task, my goal, my goal is that we're going to
use your idea. That's my goal. My goal is that whatever you present to me, if it's, if it's
going to get the job done, we're good, we're going with it. You know, then at least the person can
learn from what they're doing and be better the next time, right? If it's minimally viable,
why not let them run it? Sometimes it's an emergency and you can't do that. But yeah, yeah.
And by the way, if there's urgency and I can't do that, okay, by this time, you and I have built an
up enough trust that you know that if I say, Hey, we need to go over there right now, you go, yep,
got it. Right. Right. So, so we do get into situations like that happen. Right. And that's,
that's something you don't want to do too often, because just as we discussed earlier, you burn
up your leadership credibility by doing that. So you can use power if you're a leader, but,
but judiciously and seldom and you need a good rationale and people have to trust you. And so
that's the other issue is that we could, we could think about the preconditions for trust because
if the organization isn't running on trust, then everybody's at each other's throat constantly.
And all there is is backbiting and confusion. And so to trust means I, I have to, I have to,
I have to, what would I say? I have to have faith in your motives.
And I have to see that you're doing your best to align your motives with mine. And I have to
believe that that's genuine. Because otherwise the enterprise isn't going to succeed, given all the
other things that it's going to have to face. Yeah. It's a, it's another, you know, you bring up the
term alignment. And when I work with companies, sometimes, sometimes we'll start talking about
alignment and, and quite frankly, in most cases, vast majority of cases, if you and I are at a company,
if we go high enough, high enough up what I call the, the ladder of alignment, if we go high enough
up that ladder, we'll get to a point where we're going to be aligned because look, we're definitely,
we're trying to take care of our team. We're trying to provide a good service to our clients and
we're trying to be profitable. And if look, if that's what we're trying to do and 99.9% of the
times the companies that I work with, I have to talk them through this, but I can say we can get
to a point where we are aligned. Now what alignment has like a, like a, like a, like a cousin or,
or maybe a step cousin called agenda where, where you've got your agenda over here and I've got my
agenda over here and you're trying to get more funds for your department. I'm trying to get more
funds for my department. And so we can kind of, sometimes it can feel like our agendas, we're not
aligned. Now oftentimes I say, look, if, if Jordan's agenda is to get more funding for
his department so he can invest more and make more money for the team, his agenda is aligned.
And that's great. I have no problem with your agenda. It's when, you know, you're trying to
create your own fiefdom because you're going to leave the company and you're going to go do something
else. And I start to sense that. And, and whenever, yeah, no, that's going on underground and no
one's really talking about it. Right. Right. When I get a company where they can't come to a,
they can't come to an agreement about something. They can, they cannot. So we walk them up the,
the alignment ladder and all of a sudden you realize, oh, wait a second, this person's just
trying to make money. And this really wants to take care of the team. Now I'll tell you,
I'll take them further up the alignment ladder and say, listen, if you really want to make money
and you want to take care of the team, guess what? If you have a good team that you take care of,
you're going to make more money. So you can get aligned unless people are starting to take care
of themselves instead of take care of the team, which goes back to what we were just talking
about, which is also extremely short-sighted in my estimation. Because for a bunch of reasons,
I, I line at some of this out in, in this new book, this, I realized a long time ago that
there isn't much difference. There might be no difference actually, technically speaking in,
in taking care of yourself and in taking care of other people. And here's the reason. So you might
say, well, I'm one person and everyone else is a group of people. And so there's that competition
between me as one person and what this one person wants and the group. But that's not true because
I'm actually a group. And the reason I'm a group is, well, there's me today, but there's me over the
next week. And there's me over the next month. And then there's me over the next year and over
the next five years and over the next 10 years. And the me that exists right now can't betray the
me that's going to exist next week by doing something short-sighted and impulsive that will,
you know, produce a burst of impulsive pleasure, but will compromise the future. And so if I'm
taking myself into account seriously, which I'm an entity that has multiple incarnations,
let's say across very large spans of time, then I immediately have a community that I have to serve.
I have to serve the 80-year-old person that I'm going to become. And the difference between that
and serving 80-year-old people in the community is negligible. It's the same thing. So if I'm taking
care of someone in a senior's home, for example, the difference between that and how I'm going to
be taken care of when I'm 80 is negligible. And so there's no way out of the ethical demand
of serving the group, even if your selfishness is of the most enlightened kind.
Well, that's one of the most beautiful things about this whole thing, conceptually, is that
if I put the team before myself, if I put the mission and the team before myself and
by being a good team player, I lift up Jordan and I make you look good and I give you the support you
need, the beautiful thing about this is eventually I am going to win. I'm 100% going to win and people
get short-sighted as you're talking about, where I think, you know what, if I can pull this project
away from Jordan, I can raise my head up and get some credit for this, the boss is going to look at
me and he's probably going to give me a promotion. And that might work once. That might work once or
twice. And then my reputation is, oh, you don't want Jaco on your team because he's the one that's
going to be maneuvering around trying to make himself look good instead of trying to accomplish
the mission. So ultimately, if you take care of people, if you're a good seal, if you're a good
team player, you will win in the end. That's what's going to happen. Yes, and you'll win surrounded
by people who are thrilled to death that you won. And so that's a much better form of winning than to
be bitter and alone because you've snatched something else. Standing on the back of the fallen.
Right, absolutely. And the fact that you can only get away with that once or twice is dead
relevant because human beings are very sensitive to negative emotion. We remember. And one of the
things we really remember is betrayal. And so if you don't play the game straight and you have to
play the game over and over with the same people, then you're dead in the water. And then you're
going to be in your own little hell. You're going to think, well, why won't anybody play with me?
And the answer to that is, well, you don't play fair. And people gave you a chance a few times and
you demonstrated that. And like, there's no coming back. So. Yeah. And the reason I went off on this
tangent is because you asked me. Your mission now. What am I doing now? You bet. You bet. And I think
that along the way in my career in the Navy, I was so ingrained with the fact of trying to be a good
teammate. Yeah. That when I retired, I kept just trying to help people out and say, Hey, you know
what? I can teach you something about leadership. Do you want to know something about leadership? I
can maybe I can help you with this or I can at least talk you through. And maybe I can share
some stories of what I've learned about human nature. And that way you don't have to learn
those lessons by beating your head up against the wall. And then maybe I can help you out with
Hey, putting some stuff together that you can take as supplements. And that's going to make
you a little bit healthier and stronger. And by the way, we're trying to rebuild our community
in New England where we came from, where we used to have a bunch of factories making clothes. And
maybe we could rebuild that and that way. So great. So there's the question. And so so tell me
tell me about that. So because it's kind of a surprise, right? To you have a clothing line,
I think, Well, that's so that's so funny. And that that Jocko has a clothing line. It's so cool
that that's the case and not not expected. So I knew there was a backstory there. So I don't
imagine that it stems from an obsession with fashion. You called it do. Okay, so so what
happened? And why did you get interested in it? And what's going on? Okay, so I was, you know,
I started my podcast and I was interacting with people and I talk about jujitsu a lot,
Brazilian jujitsu, I'm a very big supporter of people training jujitsu and mixed martial arts
in general, but I am absolutely a jujitsu guy. So a lot of people started doing jujitsu and they
started training and and so they would ask me that the the uniform for jujitsu is called a gi.
And people would ask me, Hey, I'm starting jujitsu or I started jujitsu and I need to get a gi,
what kind should I get? And I knew from having geese over the years that geese were made in
China and whatever horrible slave labor scenarios are happening there. And I knew that there was
also one company up in Maine, and I'm from New England as well, one company up in Maine that
was actually making these jujitsu geese in America. And I had seen them online and and the story was
kind of presented online that this guy named Pete, he was a New England kid and saw the factories
get shut down and we all, you know, we all did that we all saw when I was growing up the factories
there was no there was no one in them. Yep. And he saw that. And he was also a jujitsu guy and so
he wanted to make geese jujitsu geese in America. As he started to go down that path,
he realized that the material that you would get to sew together a gi was not produced anywhere
in America. So he decided he was going to get a loom to weave this material. And he starts asking
around and poking around and eventually finds that in a 500,000 square foot abandoned factory in
Lewiston, Maine, there is one loom that hadn't been shipped overseas. And the woman that kind of
owned it was planning to one day put that loom in a museum. And he said, I'll buy it from you.
And so he bought this massive loom, you know, it's as big as a couple beds put together,
weighs 1000s and 1000s of pounds. And he gets some of his buddies and they go and drag this loom out
of this factory and they take it apart. What a cool find, eh? What a remarkable piece of equipment.
Completely remarkable. And he finds a guy, he finds people that knew about these things,
find some old timers. There was a guy named Lenny who's since died, but he used to work on looms.
And he hired him and said, why we, he says, what do you want to do? He said, we got to make this
thing work. So he starts making, he starts weaving this material, gets this thing up and running.
So one day, and I'm following the story, I've been following the, I've been following that
story for three or four years. And I'd actually reached out to him and said, Hey, man, I know
you're up in Maine. I'm from up there. What do you think? You know, can I get some of your geese?
I'd like to like to have some of your geese and how much are they or whatever. And I wouldn't
even hear back from him because he's in Maine. These guys, you know, I make fun of him because
he's up in Maine. He's in Farmington, Maine, population 7,000. So anyways, one day I'm doing
like a live social media interaction with people. And someone says, Hey, I'm just starting to get
to what kind of geek should I get? And I said, I'll tell you what, you should get an origin geek.
And by the way, I said, if anybody on here knows this guy named Pete Roberts,
that runs that company up there, if you could please tell him, I want to talk to him. That'd be
really cool. So a few days go by and I get like a message that says, Hey, I reached out through
my business connections and I found this guy, Pete Roberts. Here's his number or whatever. Here's his
email. So I say, all right, great. So we set up a Skype call. This was a few years ago and
we meet each other and we talk for four hours. And I come walking out of my office and my wife says,
it sounds like you were talking to yourself in there because we were just, you know, we were
on the same page. So I ended up flying up to Maine. We had a steak and we had a handshake
and we merged and started working together. And what was great was he had this great people up
there and was building these geese, but he didn't have a platform. He's in Farmington, Maine. So
there's not a bunch of jiu-jitsu studios in Farmington, Maine. Well, I had luckily a platform
to talk to people. Right. Well, no matter how good your product, man, and everyone needs to know
this, the world will not beat a pathway to your doorway for your damn product. You need to pay
attention to sales and marketing and you can't be contemptuous of it. It's like, who the hell is
going to buy something they don't know about? So we shook hands. We started working together and
once, so then we started making jiu-jitsu geese. And believe it or not, you know, now we had a
bunch of people that wanted these jiu-jitsu geese because they're the best in the world. They're
made in America. They're made by Americans with their American cotton and woven on American looms.
So it's just, it's a beautiful thing. It's a beautiful thing. And one day I was in the airport
and I'm sitting there in the airport as we're selling a bunch of jiu-jitsu geese and I'm
looking around and I called up Pete and I said, hey, Pete, I said, how many people do you actually
know that do jiu-jitsu? And he said, he's like, I don't know, like maybe 50 or a hundred. And I
said, how many people do you know that wear jeans? And he said, everybody. And I said,
why aren't we making jeans? And he said, let me, let me go. So the next thing we did was we started
making jeans because, because, because the iconic American jeans that you wear aren't made in America.
The iconic American jeans that people think represent America, they're not made in America.
And, and that's wrong. And the other crazy thing about this is, you know,
Do you make good jeans? We make the best jeans in the world. Do they have spandex in them?
They do. They do. They have their, they have a little bit of stretch in them. We've got a heavy pair
and a lighter pair. And yeah, they're, it's great. And where can people find these?
How do they look for them?
Origin USA.com. If you go to jaco.com, you can find all this stuff. And, and so we started
Everybody needs good jeans. Then we started making boots. And we're making everything. We're making,
you know, we started making a bunch of supplements. And that started from I drink tea,
another shocking thing you might want. It is, it is shocking.
I'm married to a Brit. And at some point I started drinking tea. And so I started making
tea. And then I started making other supplements. And, and again, it was like make high quality
stuff that works and people need it. They want it. And we're doing that thing of being a teammate
of helping people out. So
that I knew there was a good story in that clothing.
It's a great story. It's a great story. Absolutely. If you've ever seen a, I don't know,
maybe you could help me with my, with my personality. What I like about that too,
I've learned something in the last while, like I noticed very much that people allow a casual and
unconscious contempt to stop them from, well, to elevate the status of what they're doing,
I would say, but also to, to allow them the luxury of not having to consider the importance
of all the things they're not doing. Now, and that stops them from taking opportunities.
So, you know, well, it's, I was watching the show last night, it was the devil wears Prada,
and it was about fashion industry. And this girl who starts instantly thought of me.
Absolutely. I thought, that's right. The Jocco fashion special. But this girl,
she has contempt for the fashion industry, you know, and that's portrayed as a moral virtue.
And I wasn't on her side to begin with. I thought, no, you know, there's probably something to this.
And what you should do is shut up and learn about it before you criticize it. But it's more
comfortable in some sense to have contempt for things, you know, and it's so interesting to
talk to you about your clothing line. You know, you saw opportunity there in all sorts of ways,
and it fitted into this context of, let's say, of being a broader service. And because you didn't
have contempt for it at all, at any level, for the machinery, for the manufacturing, for the fact of
making clothing, for having your name associated with that, for all of that, then it enables you
to see an opportunity there and to do something immediately, and then to make an enterprise
grow and work. And so that's another thing is that that that casual contempt for what you can't do,
that's that's a real ethical mistake. Yeah, that one will definitely I see among academics,
you know, there's always contempt for businessmen. And and and and the immorality of the capitalist
enterprise. And then I see among businessmen, you know, contempt for intellectualism in the
ivory tower. And I think that's not doing either of you guys much good, you know, because you both
have something to bring to the table in a real sense. And some appreciation for what the other
one knows that you don't is well worth everyone's attempt. And then everybody gets to win too.
It's like, well, great, man, you've got this business enterprise, more power to you. And
and then you can say to well, you know, great, you teach all these people and you have this
advanced learning and isn't the world better because we can both bring that to the table.
No need for for that envy, not at all. Just it just contaminates things.
Yeah, unless you let your ego slide in there. And you start to think, well, I've been I studied
so hard and yet I'm only making whatever I'm making as a yeah, well, that's that's a huge
look, it's a huge part of the culture war, I believe is that there's a there's a tremendous
resentment in the university about the fact that high level intellectual endeavor doesn't
attract disproportionate salary when other occupations do, but it certainly has no shortage
of other rewards, you know, absolute job security being one of them and freedom for that matter.
So anyways, anyways, actually, I've been surprised that in all, you know, there's all this talk in
America right now about the divisiveness in America. And I'm yeah, I've been surprised that
the the the ego hasn't come up more often because you mean as a topic as a as a as a causal effect.
Yeah, yeah, okay, sure. Yeah, the fact that, well, I go to have a conversation with someone
and I just think that I'm right. I think that my viewpoints are right and your viewpoints
are wrong. And worse, worse, not just wrong, contemptible. That's like the ultimate expression
of wrong, right? They're beneath my consideration. Right. Yeah, and that's that's not good. That's
definitely not good. How do I how do I listen to anything that you say how do I how do I find any
common ground with you if I think that what you think is contemptible. And so therefore we can't
have a conversation if we don't have a conversation, we can't find any mutual ground. And that means
we can't find solutions to the problems that we're facing. And it means when push comes to shove,
we have to fight. Yes, it does. I'm here to tell you, that's not a good option.
You know, that's a good place to stop.
Fair enough. That was great, man. Thank you. Appreciate it. I loved it. Well, thank you.
Appreciate it. Yeah. So it's good to see you. It's good to see you too. And it's so it's so nice to
see that that all of what you're talking about is finding its audience. I like the kids books too.
We never talked about them. Oh, yeah, the kids books. I feel like there is no more there's no
better gratification for me than the handwritten letters, the emails that I get, but mostly the
handwritten letters from kids that are six, seven, eight, nine years old, just did my first pull-up,
got an A on my math test. Oh, isn't that cool? It's great. Yes. How could you have anything better
than that to know that you were part of that? So tell me about that. Maybe we'll stop with that.
Tell me about that. Tell me about the kids books. How many you've self-published them?
How many have sold? Well, I didn't self-publish all of them. Okay. The first two went through
normal publisher. And what happened was, so the first one is called Way the Warrior Kid.
And basically, I have four kids myself, three daughters, one son. As I was raising my kids,
I couldn't really find books that articulated the values that I might want my children to
be reading about. And so I wrote my own books. So the first one, Way the Warrior Kid, it's a kid,
he's bullied. He doesn't know his timetable. So he thinks he's stupid. He doesn't know how to swim.
So he can't do any of the fun stuff that the other kids are doing. And he's getting bullied.
These are common things that kids face. And he kind of breaks down last day of school.
Everything kind of hits him at once. And he goes home. And he remembers that his uncle is coming
to stay with him for the summer. And his uncle is in the SEAL teams. And he presents all these
problems that he's having to his uncle. And his uncle says, listen, we can solve these problems,
but you got to commit. It's going to take discipline. It's going to take hard work.
Teaches the kid how to study, teaches the kid how to make flashcards, teaches the kid how to eat,
right? Teaches the kid how to work out, brings the kid to jiu-jitsu classes. So he learns how to
defend himself. Kid goes back to school and he's in a much better place. And so then that series
carries on with different types of situations that kids get into. And so I wrote the first one,
Way the Warrior Kid, the second one, Mark's Mission. And then I had written a kid's book,
a kid's book called Mikey and the Dragons. And I had written it, I finished it in August.
And I talked to my publisher and I said, hey, you know, I wrote this kid's book. I'm sorry,
you know, I didn't let you know earlier, but I really want the book to come out for Christmas.
And my publisher said, yeah, well, you know, that's not really going to happen. And I said,
yeah, but I really want it to come out by Christmas. And by this time, I think I'd written
like three New York Times bestselling books for whatever that's worth. So
it wasn't like I was, you know, scrapping around trying to throw this together. I had a pretty
good vision of what to do here. And I said, yeah, so I said, please, can I, you know, get this thing
published by Christmas? And they said, they said there's no scenario where this book gets published
by Christmas. And I said, I said, are you sure? And they said, yeah, yeah. And I said,
watch this. And so I started publishing about a week. Yep, I started my own publishing company.
We finished the the art inside the book. And the book came out before Thanksgiving.
And that was the beginning of of jockel publishing. And so yes, I've published it. And then I just
wrote the latest Way the Warrior Kid book, Way the Warrior Kid four field manual. And again,
the most rewarding thing that that happens to me on a daily basis is I get to open up letters from
kids that are seven, eight, nine, 10, 11 years old, that just, you know, did their first pull up or
ran a mile in a certain amount of time. Or they so cool. They like it's so cool to see that because
I mean, it's an unbelievably deep instinct that makes that satisfying. Like, I have the same
experience. I don't ever see anything as satisfying as getting a message from someone who says,
I followed what you've been talking about. And here's what I've done that's improved my life
because of it. It's this is there's a, you know, when you read online comments, the negative ones
are salient, right? They've got potency. But and people are wired to feel more negative emotion
than positive emotion. It affects us more, more, we feel a loss more strongly than we feel an
equivalent gain. The one exception to that might be those kinds of letters. They're so salient.
And it's really curious. I mean, that must be the deep, that must be something like the deep
instinct of fatherhood, that, that pleasure that's intrinsic in watching someone who's younger,
younger, generally speaking, not always, but generally speaking thrive. It's so satisfying.
And yeah, I think that goes back to the, to the concept of being a good teammate.
Yes, definitely. It's the deepest part of it. And you're helping someone get on the correct path
when they're eight years old. And you know, when I read people say all me all the time,
the parents write me to the parents say, Hey, you know, thank you, I got more out of this book than
my kids did, right? They say as well, that the way that these books come together, it's like,
you're being a good teammate because you're putting someone on the right path at a young age. I
always people say, I wish I would have had this book when I was right, right? Yes, absolutely.
Me too. That's a father between pages that it is exactly that because the fundamental
role of a father, as far as I can tell is encouragement. And I mean that technically
is that you, your job is to instill courage in or to, or to, or to encourage courage,
I suppose, in, in, in your children to make them resilient in that manner, to make them
confident in their ability to face the world, but also able to face the world. And that warrior
kidbook, it's such a different approach to the problem of bullying. It reminded me when you were
talking about it, about the Simpsons, there's Nelson months is the bully in the Simpsons.
And he's quite a complex character actually. And if he bullies you, there's a pretty high
probability that the reason he's doing it is because you're doing something stupid and contemptible.
So he's got this kind of corrective function. And he's not a bad kid, even though he's a bully.
Some of his bully compatriots are bad kids, but he's not, he's from a
family that's not doing well. He has his reasons for, for what he's like, but he is kind of a
corrective, you know, and there's a scene too in the Simpsons where one of the teacher says to
Ralph, poor Ralph, the children are right to laugh at you, Ralph, which is a hilarious line,
but also absolutely terrible. But you know, in your warrior kidbook, the message there is
one way of dealing with your inadequacies is to rid yourself of them. And it isn't
self-evident that people who point out your inadequacies are your enemy.
Now that doesn't mean that bullies can't exploit and it doesn't mean that bullying
isn't reprehensible. But by the same token, you know, critics, a critic who points out a
weakness has actually offered you a pathway to development, a true pathway to development.
So, and your, your attitude to the kid was, look, kid, no one's going to laugh at you if
you're the best swimmer, or maybe you don't even have to be the best, but, but you could swim,
you could be stronger, you know, you could, you could elevate yourself.
Yeah, it's, it's, it's, it's so fun to write these books because I mean, I got, first of all,
I got to experience it. And you know, I always tell people, people say, oh, did you get bullied
because I'm, I'm a bigger guy now. I was like, oh, when you're 10, you get bullied by 11 year
olds. That's always going to be somebody that's bigger than you. In the second book, the bully
is like a psychological bully. His name is Nathan James. And Nathan, he's not physically threatening
you, but he's, he's making fun of you and he's picking on you. And he'll take it to the point
where he might, you know, feel some repercussions, but then he'd be quiet. And so, you know, this kid,
Mark says to his uncle, hey, I'm going to fight this kid. I'm going to fight him. And the uncle says,
well, okay, if it comes to that, but before you fight him.
So that's when you published yourself, I presume.
No, no, no. This was, this was still, this was still, this is book two.
Oh, really? Okay. Well, my mistake. I surprising. Well, that was a while ago.
Do you think you could get a book like that published now?
I'm not 100% sure. I've got another, I've got, I wrote a novel that's coming out,
which would you probably touch on, which, which went through like multiple screenings to make
sure that it wasn't offensive and whatever else. Nathan James, the bully, he picks on the kids,
but he talks and his uncle, you know, the kid, Mark says, hey, I want to fight this kid. And his
uncle says, okay, if it comes to that, but before you fight him, I want you to gather some intel.
He says, what do you mean gather some intel? I want you to collect some intelligence. I want to
know why he acts this way. And so he watches, Mark watches this kid, Nathan James, for a couple
days. And he says, goes back and reports to his uncle, this kid, he doesn't eat healthy,
he breeds potato chips, half a bag of potato chips. He's dirty. He doesn't change his clothes.
His socks don't match. He's got holes in his jeans. He's a slob totally lacks discipline.
I think I should fight him. And then he says, well, why do you think he's like that?
You need to do further intel. And I'm sure you can see where this is going. Eventually
follows him and realize the kid is kind of on his own. And the reason he has a bag of potato chips,
a half a bag of potato chips, because his mom's not home at night. And there's no dad to be found.
And, and we don't even know what's going on. But he lives in some, in some apartment building above
a auto repair shop. And, and maybe his jeans, where's the same jeans every day? Because that's
the only pair he's got. And so instead of fighting this kid, maybe you should try and help him.
And that's where that goes. So yeah, there's this other novel that I wrote, which is coming out in
the fall is, it's, it's, it's definitely going to be interesting what the critics say about it.
I'm looking forward to it. I'm looking forward to their, their assessment. It's about a, it's
about a two brothers. One brother is kind of a handsome kind of street smart kid, smart, good
looking. The other brother is got some kind of a unidentified disorder, mental disorder,
mental handicap. And basically is an autistic guy. And he's obsessed with washing machines.
And he works at a laundry mat. And well, the laundry mat is eventually going to be up for
sale. And the brother, the younger brother, who is a little bit more street smart decides,
if that happens, my, my older brother is never going to be happy again, because he's not going
to have this laundry mat. And he decides he's going to do something to get money to buy that
laundry mat. And the only way he can figure out to do that is by doing something that's not legal.
So he goes for it. And well, that's the story. But and that's coming out when comes out in the
fall. It's called final spin. How long have you been working on that?
Well, I write about probably I wrote an original draft of it probably 15 years ago.
And then just kind of set it aside. And then this is then I dusted it off because it never
left my mind. The story never left my mind because ultimately it's about a, you know,
it's about, can you be happy? And what kind of sacrifices are you willing to make to be happy?
And what about people that are stuck in a rut? You know, when I was growing up, there was all
these kids that were smarter than me and funnier than me and better athletes than me. And, and I
would look around and they would get stuck in a rut. Right. Right. And not really do anything.
And it would be a little bit sad. Yes, very. And, you know, I was lucky enough, like you said, I,
I joined the Navy and all of a sudden had a goal and had an aim and wanted to be a good seal. And
that was enough to kind of put me in the right direction. Yeah. So what, what's next? What do
you want? Where do you want to take this? What's your ambition? You're teaching people, you're
communicating with them on a very broad level. That's where do you see this going? If it went
where you want it to go? The ambition, the goal is to help more people, is to help more people,
help more kids become more confident, help more leaders do a better job of leading their teams.
Help people be on a better path in their life, healthier and, and doing productive things in
the world. That's, I think the best thing I can do right now at this point. Yeah. Well, that just
seems like generally speaking, that just seems like the best. I think, well, once it isn't clear
why you would be motivated to do anything else. It's like, that actually is the best thing. You
talked about these letters. It's like, well, what could you do that would be better than that?
I mean, if you were as greedy as you could possibly be, you can't get better than that.
So it's so rewarding. Yeah. And, and again, the biggest reward is, is when you, when you get
a letter from somebody that decided they weren't going to kill themselves. Yeah. Yeah, right.
Because they heard you talking on the podcast or they read, they read the book Discipline Equals
Freedom and they said, wait a second, I'm trapped. Why am I trapped? Trapped because I'm blaming
other people. I'm trapped because I'm not sticking to the things that I know I should do.
Right. And they get on the right path. And, you know, they always say you changed my life.
And I always say, I didn't change your life. You did. Which is the truth.
Thanks a lot. Thanks for having me, man. Good seeing you.
Good. See you too.
