Εντάξει, Εύπλε σ' Ερηäischenillo Wheels...
δε θα προ Morocco, καμιά καθήμων απαλληθISTINτος...
«Έγιω οι κυρυφές φόρτες minimum格οδεία αργτέρα».
Η Λάμπι finals, κυρεντάυται στحλησμ252.
Αλληłuσία US, είναι θεωρέτη...
στην dust, και βλέπουμε ότι η λεπτη έreaχ Core,
εφεντάλασμα Просто heaven...
Was it?
Σadaki βή дорог να τους amigos
και ε Came up with a proposal his wife hated me
Was very much in that case
walf can let's tan elections in bank
και πιστεύω ότι στην Ευρωπαϊκή Ινήνα,
μπορείς να έχεις μόνο δημοκρατία αν είσαι κρατία.
Αν είσαι δημοκρατία, δεν είσαι δημοκρατία.
Οι εξέσεις δεν μπορούν να μπορούν να αλλάξουν και να αλλάξουν,
γιατί έχουμε ένα σκοτσίδιο αγγρήματο.
Έχουμε ένα δημοκρατία.
Πάμε την Ελλάδα στην εργάωση.
Δεν είχα τέτοιες πράγματα,
αλλά εγώ είχα τέτοιες πράγματα για την Ελλάδα.
Και εγώ πω από την αγγραφή του.
Εγώ πιστεύω ότι αν δεν μπορείς να δημοκρατήσεις την οικονομία
σε ένας λαγκότητας που οι νέοι μπορούν να καταλαβαίνουν,
δημοκρατήσεις εσύ.
Αυτό από την αγγραφή του,
Γιάννος Βαρυφάκας,
ένας που μιλώνει, όχι να μιλώνει,
αλλά ένας που, δημοκρατήσει,
δημοκρατήσει την αγγραφή του,
στην Ελλάδα, σε 9 χρόνια.
Εγώ είχα δημοκρατήσει,
ο δημοκρατής της Καμμύτου,
να προσπαθεί σε να δημοκρατήσει
την κεφάλωση της Καταλισμίας
και να πιστεύω, Γιάννος,
να δημοκρατήσει με τα παιδιά που δημοκρατήσει τις ζωές μας,
εμείς είναι προσπαθείς να έχουμε το καλύτερο της δημοκρατής,
ένας φιλόσοφος και οικονομικός οικονομικής,
Βαρνος Βαρυφάκας.
Είμαι πολύ σημαντικός,
για την συμμεχή που θα είμαστε,
αλλά έχω δει να δώσω ένας προσπαθή.
Ήμουν, διότι εγώ,
ένας προσπαθής που θέλω να κάνω, as I'm told,
όχι πολύ ποτέ.
Ο καλύτερος,
που έχει been advertised and some of you
saw it outside
and walked in, so I might as well honour the title,
είναι ένας προσπαθής.
Είναι η καπιταλισμία που δημοκρατήσει τη δημοκρατή.
Αλλαμβείτε να ξεκινήσω
με ένας προσπαθής ελληνικής προσπαθή.
Έχετε δημοκρατήσει πώς,
στα τελευταία χρόνια,
η καλύτερα των πολιτικών έχει δημοκρατήσει,
όχι μόνο σε αυτήν την χώρα.
Στην Θεία,
δημοκρατήσω να είμαι ένας πολιτικός,
στο 2015.
Όχι, but seriously,
υπάρχει μια δημοκρατή δημοκρατή
στην δημοκρατή,
στην δημοκρατή
των πολιτικών να σημωθούν,
και επειδή,
στην δημοκρατή που έχουν.
Τώρα, δεν πιστεύω,
ότι αυτή είναι διότι
η δημιουργία της δημοκρατίας
ή από
οι που έχουν ανοίγει την πολιτική.
Τι έχουμε δημοκρατήσει
είναι το σχέδιο
της τι θα πρέπει να μιλήσω
ως την πολιτική σφίρα.
Υπήρχε να είναι έναν ώρα,
πριν οικογένειο,
όταν υπάρχει μια σφίρα,
η σφίρα της δημοκρατίας.
Είναι ευκολίγη να δημοκρατήσει
την οικονομική δημοκρατία
της πολιτικής δημοκρατίας.
Η Κύνης είχε μία μηλίτερη,
μηλίτερη δημοκρατή,
inger
συμβουλισμώνουμε τη πολιτική
και στη πολιτική και solutions
κάτι που έχουν μια και το ίδιο.
Δεν υπάρχειiele πραγματικάinho Moser
γιατί δεν υπάρχειatta οικονομική.
Πaway Tsv迍τες.
Σε την ρόδα Έχονταν ανοίγει
ή rese
thin
και οι κλώσεις της Ευρώπης που είχασαν μια μεγάλη τρανσφασία της κοινότητας,
αυτή η μεγάλη τρανσφασία.
Η σχέση από φιουδελισμού και καπιτελισμού.
Εφεκτικά, οι παιδιές ήταν ευκαιρές από το λαμπίδιο,
εξεκτικά από το σχεδί,
επειδή από τις δημιουργικές δημιουργικές που δημιουργούσαν
ένας δημιουργικές δημιουργικές για το λαμπίδιο,
και κάποιες δημιουργικές, like wool, like steel, like spices, and so on,
were emerging as international commodities with prices that were determined at the level of the international trade route system.
And all the other commodities were commodities, goods, were effectively sidelined.
So the lord of the land in Yorkshire or in Manchester had absolutely no incentive to retain those peasants planting idiotic little vegetables,
when they could just chuck them out of the land, replace them with fat sheep,
whose wool suddenly had an international value, exchange value.
But the enclosures created the working class.
It created the commodification of labour.
Up until then, people worked very hard, but they didn't sell their labour.
We had a very interesting reversal of the timing of economic production and distribution.
Under feudalism, we had work production first.
People actually toiled, they worked the land, they produced the harvest.
Production came first.
Then came distribution.
The lord of the land or the manor or whatever would send the sheriff in and take his cut from the harvest.
How much he would take and how much he would leave behind was a political issue.
It had to do with military power, it had to do even with the benevolence of the lord.
It had to do with the extent to which the lord needed to keep the peasants on side in case another lord tried to usurp his property rights over the land.
It was a political, diplomatic, ethical, religious, economic process that determined distribution after production.
Finally, the surplus that the lord amassed was sold in nearby markets and that created a financial surplus for the lord, which then he lent out.
We had production, distribution and then finally finance.
But with the enclosures and the eviction of the peasantry, we had the exact opposite.
Because suddenly the lord, the last thing that the lord wanted to do is to work or to be entrepreneurial.
The replacement of the peasants with a sheep meant that suddenly every acre of land had an economic value, an exchange value, a price that did not exist.
That was not the case before.
Why did it acquire this price?
Because you knew how many sheep you could raise on an acre, you know how much more or less wool you would produce.
The national markets were providing the equilibrium price of the wool, so you knew how much exchange value money you could gather per acre of your land.
And of course, then once that price was established, that exchange value per acre was established, suddenly land became a commodity.
To be rented out, to be sold, to be purchased.
There was no real estate market before that.
Land was either inherited land, in which case you had it, and if you never inherited land, you never got it.
And the only way of effectively getting land that you didn't have was through war, through conquest.
Or if the king decided to grant you a plot of land.
There was no such thing as a market for land.
And there was no such thing as a market of labor.
The closure, the eviction of the peasants created land as a commodity, and of course labor as a commodity, because the evicted peasants, effectively they were roaming around the country,
knocking on doors saying, I will do anything for work, for work, for a piece of bread.
That's the first labor market.
That had never happened before in the history of humanity.
People with nothing selling their labor time.
That's the beginning of capitalism.
But with this you have the separation of the economic from the political sphere for the first time in our history as a species.
Because suddenly you had merchants who acquired huge power through the accumulation of financial surpluses.
Because the internationalization of those trade routes, the emergence of these few commodities as international commodities that bestowed substantial financial surplus upon those who handled them,
whether they were the merchants, the ship owners, or the lords of the land whose land now was used in order to cultivate inverted commerce wool.
For the first time you had this separation.
You had lords whose political power and social power was now becoming increasingly disproportionate to their economic power.
You had those dirty merchants, as they consider them, the riffraff, the ugly dirty merchants, acquiring huge quantities of economic power that had nothing to do with their social status.
They were not allowed in the palace, they were not allowed in parliament, they were not allowed in the gentlemen's clubs in London.
And suddenly they had a lot more economic power than the lords.
So the economic and the political sphere separated.
And with industrialization you throw into this mix James Watts' great invention, the steam engine, and this process just goes berserk.
You have globalization which Karl Marx and Fritzrich Engels in the manifesto described in the most poetic language when they say that capital must nestle everywhere, it must settle everywhere, it must enter into relations everywhere.
And it was interesting because when Marx and Engels were writing that, it hadn't happened yet.
But they foresaw the process that we live in, globalization.
And with globalization now we have, well, with this process of globalization you have the establishment of these completely separate two spheres.
Now interestingly in the 19th century, you will recall this, well you live in a very historic town.
Liberalism was a philosophy, a political philosophy at odds with democracy.
To be a liberal, a genuine liberal, you must have been very skeptical about democracy if not completely and utterly anti-democratic.
The whole point about liberalism was how to preserve the right to track barter and exchange in Adam Smith's famous expression, which was a right that many of the liberals, including John Stuart Mill, a very liberal person, a very progressive person for his age,
he considered the idea of democracy, what is democracy, is the rule of the many to be a great impediment if not a great threat to liberalism.
So this, when we talk about liberal democracy today, we're talking about something that in the 19th century was a contradiction in terms to be a liberal meant that you did not believe in democracy.
Now what was it that brought about a change, a transformation, suddenly liberals started embracing the idea of democracy.
It was economic crisis, financial and economic crisis beginning especially in this country, but also in Europe in the 1840s.
Because the moment capitalism started turbocharging itself with the creation of what I will describe as networked companies with the advances in electromagnetism,
electric engines, the telegraph, all the communication technologies, electricity grids.
When electricity comes into production and we move beyond steam, that's the second industrial revolution, when Edison created his empire, he created a networked company.
Remember from the electric bulb to the power generating station, to the grid, everything was part of this.
We talk about Google now and Apple as being mega companies, what a mega company was invented with the second industrial revolution.
But think about it, to set up a company like Edison's or later Henry Ford's and so on, you needed a lot of financing, you needed a lot of money.
So suddenly the new reversed order becomes very significant because now ever since the peasants were thrown out of the land, ever since the enclosures in Britain,
the Lord rented out, leased out an acre or a few acres to an ex peasant and said, okay, I will charge you a rent, you raise the sheep here and you keep the difference, the residual payments.
So once you pay for the land, me, once you pay the workers, the ones that have been expelled and now are working for a piece of bread, subsistence wages,
once you pay for the sheep, for the shearing, scissors, whatever it is that you are using, your capital equipment, what you keep in the end is yours, is your profit.
So suddenly these proto-entrepreneurs were forced, they didn't choose to do it, they were forced to become entrepreneurs, but how do you become an entrepreneur?
So first you borrow and usually you borrow it from the landlord, the landlord lends you the money to pay him rent with interest.
So you see the reversal, instead of finance coming at the end, we used to have production then exchange or distribution and then finally finance, now we have finance first.
At the beginning there was the loan. Once the loan comes in, you hire the workers, you pay the rent, immediately you have distribution.
So you have finance first, distribution second, the last thing that happens is production.
So finance suddenly acquires a very special place in capitalism.
Now the beauty and ugliness of finance, of banking is that it is a magical process.
Because once we move from the landlord to Edison and Henry Ford, it is impossible to finance capitalism simply by the accumulated wealth of some rich person like the lord.
There was never enough money in the hands of any financier to provide Edison with the money he needed in order to set up his network firm.
So you needed banks to conjure up money from nothing.
And this is how finance has been working ever since the Second Industrial Revolution.
How? By creating money from thin air.
There is a common fallacy in the popular culture that we live in, that banks operate like volts whereby you and I put our savings in and somebody else goes to the bank
and borrows money that comes from our savings.
And that the banker makes a profit as a result of the difference between the interest rate that he pays us for depositing our money into his vault
and the interest rate that he charges the person that has borrowed money in order to invest in a shop, in a factory, whatever.
That is not what is going on.
Now, if you go to the bank tomorrow morning and you get a loan from the bank, the money is going to come out of thin air.
The bank will create it out of nothing.
It's really very simple.
You get $100,000 to buy a house, to buy whatever, to invest in a business.
What will happen is somebody is going to type $100,000, you know, $100,000 into your bank account.
So it's conjured up.
The ancient Greeks had a word for money, non-misma or coin, which comes from the verb νομίζω, which means to imagine.
So Aristotle defined the value of money as a common fiction since the ancient times.
This is exactly what it is.
So the banker simply types the money in there.
You put your card in the ATM and suddenly, oh, you have $100,000.
Somebody typed $100,000 on the system.
Then what you can do is you can use web banking, you can wire the money.
If you buy a car or a house, it goes to the bank account of the vendor.
If you invest in a shop, it goes to the landlord, to another bank account.
The same banking system.
It doesn't matter whether it's the same bank or not.
These digits that were typed into your account simply are transferred to another account.
That's all that happens.
Now, the hope of the banker is that you are going to use this money productively.
You're going to earn money from that and then you will give the banker the money that will effectively tie up that loose end with interest.
Now, to the extent that this works, and it really works magnificently,
in my book I relate this in the form of a science fiction metaphor.
It's a bit like a banker being the specially gifted magician who has a very long arm
and can push his arm, it's usually he, so allow me not to say she or he.
Through the timeline, he pushes his hand into the future, grabs value that has not been created yet,
snatches it from the future, brings it to the present and gives it to you.
Hopefully, you do productive things and you create a value that will repay the future.
This is my preferred metaphor for what bankers do.
But once they learn the beauty and the glory of doing this,
and they are privileged in a privileged spot because they can take value from the future, bring it to the present,
they don't do any work themselves.
And because they are the mediators between future and present value,
they are ultra-rich and not only ultra-rich, but central in societal processes, political processes.
So if you do this and it works, why not do more of it?
Keep snatching more value from the future and bringing it to the present and more and more.
At some point, the present can no longer produce the value that it needs to produce in order to repay the present.
And at that point, suddenly, those of us who have borrowed money or some of us have no capacity to repay it,
a recession begins, people that work for us lose their jobs, they cannot repay their own loans,
and then suddenly, the book of the bank is full of loans that are non-performing.
At that point, if you and I or those of us who have some money in the bank realize that this is happening,
we panic, we rush to the bank, this is a bank run, we ask for the cash, the cash is not there.
And then you have the financial crisis that we had in this country and in Europe from the 1840s onwards.
Now, to a very large extent, the United States of America, the way you understand your own country now,
is the product of this political response to a sequence of financial crisis beginning from the 1840s.
Even the creation of the Federal Reserve in the beginning of the 20th century was a result of,
you know, J.P. Morgan saying, I've had enough of bailing out my mates.
Let's create a Federal Reserve that is going to be doing their job.
And of course, he created it and it was all stitched up amongst the bankers.
Think of all the great institutions of this country, like, you know, social security, food stamps,
they are the result of 1929.
It's what brought this nation together, what created the United States of America, the way you understand it.
It's a sequence of financial collapses that puts together nations and polities and democratic processes.
So, let me go back to the beginning.
We used to have one sphere of power.
It was political, economic, cultural, military.
Power had many different facets, but it was one sphere in which it emerged from.
Then it separated into two spheres, the political sphere and the economic sphere.
And as it did, the political sphere was increasingly democratized.
Why?
Because all the important decisions were moving to the economic sphere.
So, political legitimacy and the capacity of the regime, of the system that we live in,
to maintain itself and to be sustainable through the common belief amongst the people that this is a legitimate system,
was based on democratization of giving people the idea that they had control over their communities,
the nation, their politics, but this democratization was only accepted by the proponents of liberalism
to the extent that all the important decisions were migrating from the political sphere
as the political sphere was democratized.
Women understand that.
It's like, you know, the feminization of certain professions.
When women moved into teaching, teaching lost its power.
When they moved into health, in Greece now, the majority of judges are women,
and you should see the judicial system collapsing.
So, it's a very, very similar process that we see.
Power is migrating from the economic sphere to the political sphere,
and the political sphere is democratized increasingly.
Now, something fundamental happened beginning in this country in the 1970s.
After the end of Bretton Woods, which was what?
What was Bretton Woods?
Let's not get complicated.
It was the globalization of the New Deal.
Roosevelt's New Deal in 1933, what was the basic idea?
To put the financial genie, the banking genie back into its bottle,
to make banking boring, effectively to ban bankers from doing things
that allow too much money to be created and too many bubbles to be built up,
mobilizing idle savings, the idle savings of the richer members of society,
and putting those idle savings, turning them into a force in the public interest,
infrastructural works, public works, education, social security, and so on.
That was the New Deal.
In 1944, towards the end of the war, the New Dealers extended that New Deal internationally,
as Europe was just a pile of ashes.
Japan, you don't need me to explain what happened to Japan in 1945.
So, Bretton Woods, it was a magnificent system.
Think about it.
The United States officialdom in DC effectively designed a global capitalist system
that was like a planned economy.
You have fixed exchange rates, 4% interest rates forever, 20 years of 4% interest rates,
no ups and downs.
It was maybe plus or minus 0.1%.
So, you knew what your mortgage rate would be in the next 20 years.
You knew if you wanted to change dollars for British pounds,
you knew how many pounds you would get.
You would get the same quantity year in, year out.
So, it was a world which was a nightmare for financiers,
and of course, that was by design.
Did you know that in the Bretton Woods Conference in New Hampshire in 1944,
Roosevelt imposed one single rule on his own.
The rest he left to his minions.
They were representatives from 100 different countries.
Most of them were not even liberated yet.
They were under occupation because it was 1944.
The Second World War had not ended.
Experts, diplomats, politicians and so on.
One species of humanity was banned from entering the Washington Hotel bankers.
A whole monetary global system was created on condition that bankers would not be part of it.
Interesting.
If anybody proposed this today, they would immediately be branded as raving communist lunatics.
This was Bretton Woods, 1944.
It's important to think back about possibilities when we think of what is possible.
Well, what happened in 1944 in Bretton Woods in 1930, 1931 in this country
would have been completely pie in the sky.
Anyway, but that system collapsed towards the end of the 1960s.
Officially, 15th of August, 1971, with Nixon's announcement that it's kaput, it's finished.
I'm not going to go into this, but what happened after that was a very interesting, fascinating reversal
in the flow of trade and money around the world.
Before the collapse of Bretton Woods, what was happening was this.
This is how Bretton Woods was designed.
America was a surplus country.
The country with surpluses, with profits, especially after the Second World War,
was the only credit of the country, the only country that had the surpluses, financial surpluses,
surpluses of goods and an export.
And what the United States Administration did as part of Bretton Woods was to say,
the only way of preventing a return of the Great Depression to this land by 1949,
they were very worried about 1949 because it was 1929 plus 20.
The only way of preventing it is to make sure that, okay, number one,
we convert all the factories from military production to civilian production,
producing white goods instead of tanks and bullets, producing cars instead of aircraft carriers.
Right, but that's not enough because those factories during the war economy were so productive in this country
that they were capable of producing so many washing machines, tractors and cars
that Americans would simply not have enough use for them.
The only way of preventing the Great Depression from returning was by selling them to the Europeans,
but the Europeans didn't have money.
So, new dealers being very practical, people said, we'll give them the money.
This is what's called the Marshall Aid Plan, surpluses and recycling.
For 20 years, the United States was recycling about 70% of American profits in Japan and in Europe
because this is what you do if you're a clever Higimon.
What you do is you make sure that the only way that you can continue to have surpluses
vis-à-vis somebody else is to finance them.
Because if you don't, then they won't be able to afford to buy your stuff.
Then you won't be able to have surpluses.
The problem was, however, that those surpluses disappeared by the late 60s.
America shifted from a surplus position to a deficit position.
Both the government went in deficit and the American economy developed a trade deficit.
It is fascinating that what happened after the collapse of Bretton Woods
had been imagined by some smart fellows in this country.
Remember Henry Kissinger?
Exactly my feelings, but he was a smart cookie, right?
In 1970, a year before the end of Bretton Woods, he was not yet Secretary of State.
He was still head of the National Security Council.
Of course, he's a Cold Warrior, geopolitical thinker,
things in terms of a bit like Metternich would have in the 19th century.
He comes from the same part of the world, has the same accent.
He asked all the people that were working for him that pertinent question.
Now that the United States is shifting into a deficit position,
we used to be a celebrity, now we're going to become a deficit country.
How can we maintain our global hegemony?
Because it has never happened in the past.
All empires, superpowers, fell once they became deficit countries or economic blocks.
He was worried about that. He didn't give a damn about economics, but he cared about power.
A young man wrote a memo.
Three quarters of a page in reply, it was the most brilliant reply,
and the one that really explains what happened between the 1970s and 2008 in the world,
and of course in the United States.
His answer was, it doesn't really matter whose surpluses are being recycled.
What really matters to maintain in control is to be the one who is recycling
other people's surpluses.
Get it?
We can maintain our superpower status, our hegemony,
as long as we do the recycling of surpluses, even if the surpluses are not ours.
Think about it. This is exactly the model that we have been living through
between the 1970s and 2008.
America turned into a deficit country, and Donald Trump is complaining,
we have a huge trade deficit with China, with Germany, we need to eliminate it.
Either he's completely unschooled, or he's lying, or both.
I added a third option.
Because globalization would not have happened without the American deficits.
The American trade deficit operated like a gigantic vacuum cleaner
that was sucking into this country the net exports of Germany, of Holland, of France,
of Japan, and later of course of China.
Keeping those factories going at full blast.
And this deficit kept increasing.
It is this increasing American trade deficit that kept globalized capitalism in rude health.
Now of course, the question then is, how was it being paid for?
Because Greece had a big deficit, and look at what happened to us.
Well, this is the exorbitant privilege of the United States of America.
At the very same time that the trade deficit was expanding,
the rest of the world was sending to this country 70% of all profits
the Germans made, the Dutch made, the Japanese made, and the Chinese are making.
70% of global profits were coming into Wall Street, seeking higher returns,
being used to purchase US Treasury bills, you know, American government debt,
and so you had a pure recycling loop.
So recycling was discovered by this young man, whose name by the way is Paul Volcker,
who then became the chairman of the Fed.
And just a week before he assumed the position of chairman of the Fed,
in a lecture he gave at the University of Oregon, England, he said,
this is the time when a controlled disintegration of the world economy
is in the interest of the United States of America,
Verbatim, I've learned this off by heart because it's so exciting.
The controlled disintegration of the world economy, so that's what he meant.
So you had this amazing system where you have increasing imbalances globally.
America growing its deficits.
Germany and Japan and then China growing its surpluses.
When we increase our deficit, we are creating an imbalance.
When somebody else is increasing their surplus, that's an imbalance.
And globalization was based on this.
Financialization, what's financialization?
Why did Wall Street, why was Wall Street allowed to go crazy?
Why were all the checks and balances that the new dealers introduced
and Bretton Woods introduced, why did they go to the dogs?
Why did Larry Summers, I believe he's got some connection with this place.
Why was he allowed to commit the crime against logic and humanity?
To unleash the Wall Street bankers from their shackles.
The result being 2008.
The answer is, because without unleashing the Wall Street bankers
it was impossible to close that loop.
The only way you could have this model of the world economy
where the United States deficit was keeping the rest of globalization going
with the rest of the world sending its surpluses into Wall Street
for Wall Street to close the loop and pay for the deficit
was to let the Wall Street bankers do as they pleased.
And when you do let the Wall Street bankers do as they please,
you know what they do?
You give a banker a few billion every day for five minutes.
Just park five billion with a banker for five minutes every day.
This is to invite them to create very sophisticated bets
using that five billion every day that they are always going to win.
If I were to give you five billion every day for five minutes
you would work out ways of making a load of money
and exponentially increasing load of money.
Anyway, the problem is that they built so many pyramids
of financialized derivatives on top of this tsunami of capital
that the rest of the world was saying that it combusted in 2008
but the result was what we're facing.
So the point I'm making is that first you had the joint sphere of power
then that bisected into the political and economic sphere
then after the 1970s, the end of Bretton Wood,
the economic sphere was also divided and multiplied
between the industrial sphere and the financial sphere.
And all power ended up with finance
and bankers to push their hand into the future
so majestically, frequently and without any kind of control
to bring value that has not been produced yet into the future
and effectively to appropriate themselves.
And then you also say to them that they are too big to fail
and when they fail then austerity for all is combined with socialism for the bankers.
Then they have no reason why not to keep undermining capitalism
and again and again.
So remember the question with which I started.
Why do politicians seem to be so much less talented today
than they were 40 years ago, 20 years ago, 30 years ago?
Well, the answer is because the political sphere is completely powerless.
The spheres that now have acquired power are the economic sphere
and magnificently the financial sphere.
So if you're a young, talented person who wants to change the world,
who wants to do things, who's not very ideological or historical,
historically minded, who wants power?
What do you want to be, President of the United States or CEO of Goldman Sachs?
CEO of Goldman Sachs.
I remember that one long conversation,
longish conversation I had with Barack Obama
when I was the finance minister of Greece.
The first thing he said to me was,
I feel solidarity for the Greek people and we are behind you,
but there's not much I can do to help.
And then he immediately, without me saying anything,
he went into a soliloquy justifying himself by saying,
you know, when I got elected I realized there was nothing I could do
because Wall Street had just imploded and I had to save them
and that was, he said, political poison for me.
Now, I don't know whether he believed it or not
and I can't see how he can explain the fact
that he appointed Larry Summers to sort out the mess,
unless of course, you know, you adopt the cynical view
that it takes a murderer to work out
how the criminal justice system should be reformed.
So, this is effectively the point I'm making.
So, is capitalism consistent
or sustainable within a democratic polity?
Can it coexist with democracy? Absolutely not.
Because capitalism is generating this shift of power
away from the political sphere.
And even if you have fantastically scripted constitutions,
beautiful congresses with wonderful procedures and so on,
power is going to shift away from those processes.
They are going to become fig leaves for a system
where power leaves somewhere else.
In my first meeting of finance ministers in Europe,
I was exposed to this harsh reality.
It was always new, but it's one thing to know it
as a radical lefty that theorizes
and puts forward various working hypotheses
in an academic environment, quite another,
to be told straight in your face.
That was the beauty of those few months I spent in government
was exactly that.
I didn't have to theorize anymore.
So, I took my first meeting of the Eurogroup.
The Eurogroup is the meeting of the European Union finance ministers
of the countries that share the same currency the year.
So, I walked in there and I tried to be as moderate
and as sensible and as friendly as anyone
who comes from a country that is bankrupt
and whose new government has a title
or the party that won coalition of the radical left.
So, there I was, the minister of finance
representing the coalition of the radical left
in that cesspool of conservatism.
And I tried to be, yeah, all I said was
that we are facing a challenge, colleagues.
There is the principle I said of continuity
in democracies, in liberal democracies.
In other words, we're not going to start at year zero
just because we're just elected.
We have obligations to you that previous governments,
Greek governments have assumed
and which of course we were against,
our party was against, but nevertheless,
our state because of the principle of continuity
still has these obligations to you
and therefore I cannot dismiss them.
I have to take them seriously.
I have to be charged by the principle of continuity.
At the same time, there is another principle,
the principle of democracy.
I could see that we didn't like that very much.
And the principle of democracy is very simple.
I have a mandate from the people of Greece
to challenge all these obligations
that we have this particular fiscal and monetary policy
that you've been imposing upon my country
which led to a great depression
which led me to be here
because if we didn't have a great depression
we wouldn't have become left wingers.
I mean, they didn't just become left wingers.
Our party went from 4% to 40% in two and a half years
because of the great depression.
I didn't put it in those very words, but you can imagine.
But more or less, this was my mandate.
I was trying to be extremely open to them
and moderate and conciliatory
with Wolfgang Schäuble, the finance minister of Germany.
Okay.
And I said, what happens in a democracy
when two principles clash,
the principle of continuity and the principle of democracy?
Well, we sit around the table like civilized people
and we find a compromise.
This is what democracies do.
Liberal democracy, yes?
I sit down, the French minister loved what I said.
Of course, you know.
Just complete hot air.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
I could see Wolfgang Schäuble, the German finance minister.
He was looking at me with, you know, eyes
that felt like laser beams.
And he gets the floor and he said, one sentence, one sentence,
which is the one that I'm going to leave you with.
Elections cannot be allowed to change economic policy.
Got it?
My response was, this is excellent news to the Chinese Communist Party
because they believe that too.
And I then came up with a proposal.
This is why they hated me, very moderate.
I said, in that case, Wolfgang, let's ban elections
in bankrupt countries.
Let's come out and declare that in the European Union
you can only have democracy if you are a creditor country.
If you are a debtor country, no democracy,
elections cannot be allowed to change anything
because we have a loan agreement.
We have a debtor's prison.
Let's put Greece in the workhouse.
I didn't say all these things, but I did say the thing
about the Chinese Communist Party.
And also the proposal that we suspend elections
while a country is in the red, in the European Union.
That would be more honest.
So the reason why I'm mentioning this is that
Shoibley was right.
In the capitalist, the globalized,
financialized capitalism that we have created,
elections cannot be allowed to change economic policy
because economic policy simply springs out
of the processes that I described
that leave absolutely no room for anything beyond
the semblance of a democratic process
that legitimizes the lack of democracy.
We live in pure ironclad oligarchies
which require for legitimation purposes
and for their reproduction
that we think that we live in democracies.
Now the tragedy is that capitalism is being overthrown.
Not by the left, we are useless.
Our progressive left-wingers are a catastrophe.
Has anybody seen The Life of Brian,
the Monty Python's movie?
Remember the opening scene when they all hate each other?
The Jews of the liberation front of Judea,
whose worst enemy is the liberation people's front of Judea.
That's the left.
We are sectarian.
We hate each other more than we hate anything else.
Of course, and when we did overthrow capitalism,
we created the gulag.
So we are a disaster.
It doesn't mean we shouldn't try again
to do it properly and democratically.
But let's face it, capitalism is overthrowing itself
with no help from us.
And it's doing it in two ways.
Firstly, think of 2008,
this financialization process that I described
imploded under the weight of its own hubris.
And the result is a never-ending crisis.
Don't believe anybody who tells you that the 2008 crisis ended.
It never ended. It is continuing.
It is mutating. It is stating different forms.
It migrates. It goes to different parts of the world.
For instance, in Germany, it takes the form of negative interest rates
that are eating into the pension funds
of the average middle-class person
who then turns against the political system
and votes for the fascists of the alternative for Deutschland.
They don't have an employment,
but they have this sense of deflation of their hard-earned savings
that creates the rise of xenophobia, racism and the ultra-right.
In my country, we have a Nazi party in parliament
because we have a great depression,
because we have an employment rate of 30%.
And we have no interest rates because nobody is lending to anyone.
Because everybody is bankrupt.
In China, you have an investment rate.
The proportion of GDP of national income that goes into investment is gigantic.
It's, you know, 48%.
48 cents to every dollar earned in China goes into investment.
Now, investment is a good thing,
but overinvestment simply means that the Chinese authorities
have given up on the West.
Because, let's face it, the only reason why you don't have a great depression
in this country today is because in 2008,
which was your version, our version of 1929,
two things happened differently to what happened in 1929.
One was that the Federal Reserve started printing money
as if there's no tomorrow, didn't happen in 1929.
And the second thing was China boosted its investment ratio so high
in order to rebalance global capitalism.
They did it very well, but it's not sustainable.
So Europe is not sustainable. China is not getting sustainable.
And the United States today, which is celebrating growth,
what growth? You have 2.5% growth.
All the things that shouldn't grow grow.
The things that should grow are not growing.
You do not have any serious investment in good quality jobs in this country.
You have wage stagnation. You have a situation.
People say, oh, it's, you know, this idiocy of the Democratic Party
that put in one the election against Hillary Clinton.
Come on, wake up. You cannot say to Trump voters
that they're idiots and put in dupe them.
I mean, you can say that, but then that's it.
You lose them forever. And it's also not true.
People say to me, well, how do you explain that Trump won?
I'm an economist, so I look at numbers.
The number that I think is most spectacular in this country
is that in 2016, more than half of the families
in this country could not afford the cheapest new car
which cost 14,000.
Either they didn't have the money, or they didn't have the money
and they did not have the credit ratings necessary to borrow 14,000.
More than half of the families cannot afford the cheapest car.
That's why Trump got elected.
Because Obama failed spectacularly to shift the burdens
of the crisis of the financial sector onto the 0.1%.
So, I've spoken far too long.
Let's end on a positive note, shall we?
Technically, it's really very simple how to solve the problem
or how to begin a process.
We need a new deal.
Except that this must be an international new deal.
Exactly as the new deal was in 1933.
But globally, that's not new.
Bretton Woods was an international new deal.
So, we need a new Bretton Woods.
We need progressives in this country,
progressives in Europe to get an act together
and start collaborating.
Because the bankers are very good at being internationalists.
They love each other and they work very closely together.
The fascists are fantastic.
Trump loves Le Pen, Orban, the alternative to Deutschland.
They love each other, they cooperate.
Only we progressives fail to get together.
And start believing that it is possible
to do that which has already been done before.
It's not buying the sky stuff.
Now, this, in order to ameliorate the effects
of the ongoing crisis after 2008.
Then, once we stabilize the world,
like Bretton Woods stabilized the world after the Second World War,
then we can start thinking about post-capitalism.
Because we must.
Capitalism is overturning itself,
not only through its crisis,
but also through the technologies that it is creating.
3D printing.
Artificial intelligence.
The internet will make sure that in a few years
there will be no need to have a corporation.
Corporations will lack their zone better.
The only reason why you have general models
is the economies of scale.
Economies of scale are dying because of the new technologies
that capitalism is creating.
So, you are going to have a situation in which
we are going to have magnificent productivity,
magnificent capacity to produce stuff,
but the large majority will not be able to buy any of it.
So, that will be a crisis of not just the poor,
and they have nots, but also the haves.
We must never believe that because there is going to be a crisis of capitalism,
because capitalism is going to undermine and overthrow itself,
good things will happen.
In the 1930s, capitalism imploded and Nazism happened.
So, we can have one certainty.
Capitalism cannot maintain itself.
Something else, another system of organizing,
economic and political life is going to follow.
Better make sure that the way in which we choose as a species,
as a humanity, that different way of doing things
is selected democratically.
Because even though democracy takes too long,
as Oscar Wilde said socialism would never happen
because it takes too many long evenings,
and it's tedious.
There's no doubt about that.
If you've been to a political meeting, you know how tedious it is.
It's the only choice we have.
Thankfully, we are creating the technologies
that will make these debates both more manageable
and more hopeful in terms of delivering
a future that resembles, as I say in the book,
Star Trek and not The Matrix.
Thank you.
So, Giannis you're a very interesting combination of idealism
and pragmatism.
You've identified the problem that we have here
which led to somehow Trump being elected,
yet that terrible income inequality,
which has gotten way worse in the last 12 months
iques 12 εφodes και Exposite
δεν εικόσ were trained.
Π heatingai Bally Sanders and I went to his rallies
and he said great things.
Do you think that this country just can't wrap its head around that word socialist
and that's my question.
Does it have to repackage the thinking?
Μαστιβεί το π媒τη επειδή Μιλή ακifica ένα αλλαία εμμurningο,
one was the socialist from the last elections,
though I was fooled from him for that.
το Νασιανικό Δημοκρατικό Μητέρα,
δεν έδωσε τον Ατμός να παρακολουθήσει την Κουδεία με τον ίδιο.
Και αυτό, πιστεύω, είναι έναν ακουσία.
Η Δημοκρατικό Μητέρα είναι το πιο σύνομα.
Από αυτό, αυτό είναι το σύνομα που πρέπει να δούμε,
πώς να αλλάξουμε τη στιγμή,
αν θέλουμε να δούμε τα πράγματα που αυτή η Ελλάδα προσπαθεί,
πώς να δούμε την ελεύθερη να αλλάξουμε τη στιγμή.
Γιατί έδωσε τη στιγμή για τον Κύριο, γιατί.
Από αυτό, πρώτα,
η αυστασία της στιγμής ήταν πιο δύσκολη,
πολλοδήποτε καλύτερα άνθρωποι
δεν μπορούσαν να παίρνουν τον ίδιο για τη στιγμή
και δεν έδωσε την στιγμή.
Και πολλές άλλες,
δεν είχα εδώ στις την ελεύθερης συμφωνία,
αλλά είχα στο Βρυντινό,
πριν το Βρυντινό Φαρένδρυμ,
και πιστεύω ότι υπάρχουν μεγάλο σημιλάνιδης μεταύσεις.
Και να remember,
ήταν εξεγραφή με το Βρυντινό Βρυντινό,
στην ίδια φορά που θα εξεγραφήσαμε με τον Κύριο,
και να remember asking people who were not racist,
who were not xenophobic, who were not right-wing,
who were not anti-European,
why are you voting for Brexit?
And the answer had nothing to do with Europe.
The answer was this.
If I vote to remain in the European Union,
those bastards that have been treating me like a discarded piece of rag,
a discarded rag, are going to be very happy.
So I'm going to cast my vote in a manner that maximizes the discomfort
of those who've been treating me as if I'm not a human.
Now, I don't know, you have to tell me whether this is
an appropriate comparison to what was going on here.
A lot of people who voted for Trump
simply wanted to punish the establishment.
And they wanted...
I think that there is quite a lot of supporting evidence.
Of course, there are racists and there are Nazis
and there are right-wingers and bigots and misogynists who voted for Trump.
But I don't think those were the ones who made the difference.
The ones who made the difference
were the ones who could not afford the car,
the ones who had believed in Obama and who voted for Obama in 2008,
from what I'm reading at the data,
and there seems to be a very large number of voters
who voted for Obama in 2008 and Trump in 2016.
Now, that cannot be explained on the basis of races.
It cannot be explained on the basis of misogyny.
It is simply, you know, to hell with you.
I am not going to vindicate, yet again,
a presidential candidate who goes into Wall Street
six months before the presidential election,
gives private speeches for hundreds of thousands of dollars
and, excuse the language,
shits on people like me in front of the bankers,
calling me names and promising to them
that they will be allowed to continue doing that
which has put us and our country in this position.
So, trying to be optimistic, here for a moment.
If we were trying to create some kind of apparatus,
I mean, in the 50s,
Roosevelt did the very thing that they said was impossible.
He put 90% tax on corporate America
to fund all these great schemes,
the social security system, you know, Medicare.
These things were made possible,
but the workers had unions then, quite strong unions.
Now, that's all been taken away.
How are people going to organize and overthrow the system?
As you say, I mean, it may implode,
but in the interim, people are just surviving
on $10 on our wages or not surviving.
So, where is the impetus for evolution?
You do not need punitive tax rates now.
You don't need 90%.
This was a gimmick anyway.
No, but it worked.
It worked.
Yeah, I mean, you know,
Yeah, I mean, it was more of a political stunt.
I don't believe that it is necessary to have such high tax rates,
but what you do need is you need to change the discourse
in a way that appeals not only to those who would have joined trade unions,
but to people who would never have imagined themselves to be radical
or even progressive.
So, let me give you an example. Take NAFTA.
There's a lot of discussion in this country now about NAFTA.
The liberal establishment says,
oh, you know, free trade is everything.
The pie is going to shrink if you do away with it.
But some people in the Rust Belt say,
well, that's your pie. That's not my pie.
My pie has disappeared a long time ago.
So, if I can manage to hold on to a few, you know,
still workers' jobs by means of tariffs,
let's do it because it's better than all of us being thrown into the dustbin.
Why not change the narrative and to say,
yes, we want to renegotiate NAFTA
along the following lines.
If Mexico wants to continue to have Mexican capitalists,
want to continue to have free access to the American market,
Mexico is going to have to introduce a minimum wage in Mexico
that provides a living wage by Mexican standards,
not by American standards,
to the workers who work in the factories
that produce stuff that are then transported over to the United States.
Now, that is a progressive renegotiation of NAFTA.
Not tariffs, but minimum living wages in the poorer countries.
You... Okay? So, that way...
Not building a wall.
Of course not building a wall, bring the wall.
But then you wouldn't need to bring it to build a wall.
Of course you wouldn't.
So, that is one example.
Take, for instance, the question about the health service here.
The health system.
Well, you don't have a health system.
The absence of a health system.
Obamacare was a complete disaster.
Obamacare is an affront against logic.
The idea of universal cover is absolutely essential.
But also the idea that the state is going to be subsidizing
private companies to provide public health
without any controls regarding the prices of the services and the pharmaceuticals
is a catastrophe.
It's like effectively subsidizing the private insurance.
This is why, of course, they contributed massively to Obama's campaign.
Without the so-called public option, it's ludicrous.
So, how about the following argument
about having a proper national health service,
a public health service system in the United States?
So that we can introduce tax cuts.
Think about that.
That would really throw the Republicans, wouldn't it?
Because your tax, your health system,
is the most expensive in the world.
You pay twice as much on health than the rest of the world
and you have far worse outcomes.
So, imagine that you created a proper public system.
You'd save a huge amount of money.
Public money.
And then you could give them away as tax cuts.
But why not also say that those tax cuts
will go to the lowest wage earners, not to the top?
So, that's how you change the debate.
You get out of the way, of the stereotype
that the Republicans are trying to create for you.
Huh?
And you subvert the dominant way of thinking.
So, I would like to hog the questioning, but I don't think it's fair,
because I'm sure there are lots of good questions
that are going to come from the audience.
So, I'm going to open up the questions.
Okay.
If you could confine it to one, I would be appreciative.
It may be one and a half.
I thought for a minute your talk was going to be almost entirely about Harvard.
Marshall, who announced it at Harvard Commencement, Kissinger,
and then Larry Summers.
I have this idea that maybe Obama was put in the White House
to bail out Harvard,
but who's endowment went from losing $11 billion to regaining it.
I think many people in this country are still not convinced
that Obama did have a choice.
Now, you said, I believe that he did,
but can you be a little more specific about,
and you sort of writ large, you talk about a new deal,
could you be more specific about what a person in the White House
could have done, what it would have looked like
that would have been more like bailing out Wall Street,
more like bailing out Main Street than bailing out Wall Street.
And can you explain why the social democratic politics
of building a politics where we control the government
and regulate capitalism is not the way to go,
but some other alternative politics is what you're implying,
but you haven't really, I don't think, spelled out.
Okay.
I'll start from the second part.
Look, the new deal that I am suggesting as a first step
is social democratic,
but in the good old-fashioned sense of it.
So you need social democratic measures
to stabilize the political economy
before we can have a genuine conversation about what comes next,
the more radical part,
creating, for instance, changing corporate law.
Corporate law is a political value judgment.
So when some corporation goes bust,
who gets paid first amongst the creditors?
It's a political decision.
So why not change it?
Why have the bankers to get paid first and the workers last?
Why allow people to own shares in a company in which they don't work?
This is very radical, I don't know.
But imagine having a situation where you can only have shares
in a company in which you actually provide labor.
No, then you have socialism, but without state control.
So that's the second part of the second question.
But let's go back to Obama.
Did he have a choice? Of course he had a choice.
He could have appointed, instead of appointing Tim Geithner
and Larry Summers,
he could have appointed Elizabeth Warren
with a mandate to save the banks, but to expropriate the bankers,
which is not a new idea.
In 1992, the Swedish banks,
actually all the Scandinavian banks, went bust.
What the governments did then was to say to the bankers,
they took over the banks, they nationalized them,
put in a new board of directors,
and within two years they had sold them back to the private sector.
But cleansed, the original bankers had gone with new regulations.
He didn't do that.
He left Jamie Diamond, Goldman Sachs intact,
all the structures of power.
In 2009, when he moved into the White House,
for about six to eight months, I grant you, not more than that,
he had a window of opportunity, he had the whole nation behind him,
he could have done that, even libertarians would have approved
of expropriating the bankers.
He didn't, instead he allowed Larry and Tim
to create a so-called Summers Geithner plan.
If you haven't studied that, go and study it.
It is a remarkable, ingenious way of conjuring up around 9 trillion dollars
and giving it to the bankers without anybody realizing it.
You remember, the bailout that Hank Paulson came up with
was 700 billion, and everybody went, ah, 700 billion.
Initially he was defeated in Congress,
and then he managed to push it through. 700 billion spinnets.
Geithner and Summers created 9 trillion
without anybody realizing it.
Okay, so Obama had a choice to do it, and he did it.
Okay, now we are paying for it, because Trump is president.
I've been very concerned lately about China and sort of there.
We have transferred so much money from our economy
over to China by buying all those things
and supporting their economy over there
so they could make more and more money.
They are now all over Africa buying things and investing over there
and getting those countries dependent on them
and supporting non-democratic people, and I'm just...
Like whom?
Well...
We are in a country that supports Saudi Arabia.
Yes, that's true. Right.
So suddenly we have a problem with superpowers
supporting non-democratic people?
Yes, I mean, yes I do, but I also am just concerned
that we've sort of created the economic power that China sort of has now
and they're using it...
I fear I'm going to be using it against us eventually
and against the better interests of a lot of people.
Allow me to put your mind to rest.
Okay, great.
You shouldn't worry about that.
Okay.
It's very simple.
And let me explain why you shouldn't worry about that.
But please continue.
Well, I mean, they're in Africa,
they're lending money to countries to build ports
and different infrastructure...
To build what?
Port...
And what's wrong with that?
And, well, because...
Countries that need ports, get ports.
But they're making people dependent on...
I mean, I know, it's the same thing that we've done,
which is...
No, it's not.
They are far more humanistic than the United States ever was.
Really?
Okay.
Great.
So...
Let me give you an example.
Of course they are peddling for influence.
Yeah.
But they are non-interventionists, absolutely non-interventionists
in a way that Europeans, the West, has never managed to fathom.
But I have a feeling they have a longer term thought process
that is more interventionist.
But anyway...
But let's judge what we see.
Let's judge what...
Let's start at the beginning.
The Chinese never asked Apple to go to Shenzhen
and produce all the iPhones.
It was Steve Jobs that decided that.
It was not China that went to Washington D.C.
and demanded that they buy a third of your national debt.
If they hadn't bought it, you would be in serious trouble.
Okay.
Number three.
I did allude to this in my talk.
If in 2008 China had not cranked up their credit bubble,
you would be in a new great depression now.
So, China, the United States and the European Union
are absolutely synergistic and they need one another
in a way that if we fail to acknowledge and nurture billions of people,
including the majority of the people in this country,
they are going to suffer.
Now, I am not going to sit here, stand here,
and defend China and the Chinese Communist Party.
I already made some negative remarks about the Chinese Communist Party
in referring to their attitudes as being compatible
with those of Afghanistan, surely.
My concern about China is the authoritarian manner
in which the Chinese regime is treating the Chinese people.
As a democrat, I have a problem with this.
Mind you, I have to tell you that.
From my understanding of China,
it's a very interesting social experiment
in the sense that at the local level, the regional level,
you now have a boisterous democracy at the local and regional level,
even with popular success stories in overthrowing local authorities,
local bureaucrats who have been corrupt,
who have been this, who have been that, who have been the other.
When it comes to the influence of China outside its borders,
I have to say firstly, it's quite remarkable
that they don't seem to have any military ambitions.
Secondly, Africa.
I'll give you an example, a specific example, Ethiopia.
2004, because it happened to be there,
and I have some first-person, first-hand experience of it.
They went into Ethiopia,
I'll tell you why they went into Ethiopia,
because they suspected it was oil,
because China is a major industrial power,
but it lacks primary resources.
Now, instead of going into Africa with troops,
colonially destroying the country,
killing people like the West has done for the last 100 years,
what they did was, they went to Addis Ababa,
and they said to the government,
we can see you have problems with your infrastructure,
we would like to build some new airports,
upgrade your railway system,
create a telephone system and rebuild your roads,
and we'll do this all for free.
No strings attached, we don't want anything from you.
And they did.
Why did they do it? Because it's soft power.
Because they knew that if oil is discovered,
and it was discovered later,
then, of course, the Ethiopian government
will be much more open to Chinese oil companies coming there.
They have never combined their investment with imperialistic view.
You know, when I was Minister of Finance,
I had a very interesting experience with Costco,
one of the Chinese national companies
that in the end bought the Port of Piraeus.
When I moved into the ministry,
I found a contract from the previous government
that had already sold the Port of Piraeus for a pittance
and other ridiculous conditions to the Chinese,
under the guidance, of course,
of the European Union and International Monetary Fund as well.
And in other words, I was, as the minister,
I was bound to a particular deal that was terrible for Greece.
And I went to the Chinese and discussed it with them.
And I was really astonished. I said to them,
look, you're paying too little,
you're not committing to a sufficient level of investment,
and you are treating our workers as fodder,
you are effectively subcontracting labor
to horrible companies that exploit the workers,
and I can't deal with this.
Εfectively, I proposed to them to renegotiate the contract,
so instead of getting 67% of the shares of the Port,
they would get with the same price, 51%.
The remaining shares would go into the Greek pension fund system
in order to bolster the capitalization of the public pensions.
Secondly, I want you to commit to 180 million euros of investment
within 12 months.
And thirdly, proper collective bargaining with the trade unions
and no subcontracting of labor.
And to my astonishment, they said, okay,
can you imagine if that was a German company or an American company?
That's what I'm saying, I don't think you should worry.
Okay, I won't.
Thank you.
Hi, hi.
Big fan Yanis, nice to see you in person.
And I hope you don't mind that I'll struggle to give you
a short question instead of an essay.
So basically, one angle that I kind of feel was missing
from tonight's talk is the angle of class formations.
So the new deal was born out of, I believe,
about easily 50, 60 years of left-wing organizing
among the industrial working classes who basically,
as we would always say on our slogans, had their hands on the wheels.
When they went on strike, they could stop production,
stop the flow of profits, and so on and so on.
And so by the time the Great Depression came, there was a crisis.
There was a place for labor and the left at the bargaining table.
I guess what I want to ask is,
let's take neoliberalism at a kind of good faith and say,
there really was a change in the class formation
that allowed them to just throw out Bretton Woods
and say, we don't want to commit to this deal anymore,
you don't have the power, effectively, your bargaining terms,
oh, laborers, are not so good anymore.
So then that leaves us today.
Where are we? Who does have their hands on the wheel?
You know, I mean, here we are, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Large portion of the population works in white-collar professions.
Many of them are homeowners.
There aren't a lot of traditional industrial workers in this room.
On the other hand, the traditional industrial workers in Ohio or wherever
are losing their jobs quite rapidly due to mechanization and offshoring.
So, who can put the workers' gun to the capitalist class's head anymore?
Good question.
But I have to disagree with you on one thing.
Και εσά, να δημιουργήσω λίγο για να βρεις.
Δεν, δεν, δεν, δεν, δεν.
Είναι η πιο εξηγή που πήρατε.
Δεν έχω ένα πιο εξηγή για να σας πω.
Αλλά ό,τι μου θέλω να δημιουργήσω, είναι ότι,
σε 1933 ή 1932,
ήταν η δημιουργία που αντιμετωπήσε την αυτοπλή της δημιουργίας.
Δεν υπάρχει δημιουργία.
Το 1929, το δημιουργία, και τότε η δημιουργία που μεταφέρθηκε,
Completely depleted trade unions of any bargaining power,
when you have a situation where you've got hordes of people outside the factory gates,
begging to be allowed into work at any wage
you don't have trade union power.
So it was a political process that led,
not a labor process that led to the New England and試payer union and let's not forget
that the FDR was not a revolutionary leader.
He was a patricion.
Yes', he was a bourgeois.
καίνες έχει συμφωνηθεί vielenATOR
Ταimated their unions!
Η ιδιαί Audient SDP,
ίαroyalis,
ηδιουζησή
και γεονομιχα,
φουυσικά εκποδίφοι
Πριν οικονομικής γ难 Democrat
κ λυσήδρηissä
Φυσικά γνωнозίν
και γνωλεονεί
great finding
Ε΄ΜΟΛΟ,
εεγκραύSir,
και β파 και ξ fatigue
ήρ examined
το free
Σήθνανε,
Αυτό είναι ένα πολύ μεγάλο χρόνο της αυτοπιστικής δημιουργίας του Ρουσβουλτ.
Δεν ήταν ότι ήταν να εμπιστεύω από την αυτοπιστική δημιουργία της δημιουργίας του Λαμβουλίου.
Λοιπόν, αυτό δημιουργεί ένα μονοδοκλή,
επειδή αυτό δεν έγινε,
πως δεν χρειαζόμαστε στις δημιουργίες σήμερα.
Σήμερα, νομίζω ότι από ένας πλανήκος της δημιουργίας της,
εγώ εγώ είμαι,
και το τιunya που νομίζω είναι πως αν είναι αυτό το πρόatoire.
Είναι αυτότε να οργανθεί τον προα verdia!
Για από εκεί να μι ανθρώ này ο καταλαβασ Bloomberg,
ανθρώ την αυτοπιστική κομfriendς!
Γιατίήσουν εκεί καθιλί Recovery,
ο οποίος είναι από ένας顶μονός επειδή ο αυτοπιστικός μου μιλά Charlotte Pav quelques θεωρήι.
Έχει one person who works 18 hours a day in an Uber.
It's not a person, it's a lost soul.
It's a moving monument to misanthropy.
That, for me, is a major question.
But allow me to shift towards something that may sound science fiction.
But I don't think it is.
We need to think innovatively about collective action.
I do not believe that the revolution is going to come through trade unions in industrial sites,
simply because they are fading, unless the robots are organized.
And they do the revolution on our behalf. You never know.
I've read a science fiction novel where the computer in the end organized the revolution.
No, but let me give you an example.
Today you have millions of people who are being exploited by public utility companies that have been privatized,
and which are financialized.
And they have already sold to financiers the next 20 years of the electricity bills that you will be paying.
And as a result of this financialization, your bill is going up and up and up,
completely disproportionately to the cost of producing electricity, water, whatever.
What if we could work out which financial derivatives, which CDOs,
are packaging the bills in a particular neighborhood, and another neighborhood, and another neighborhood,
and we organize through the internet, so that we can have an electricity bill payment strike
that is timed in such a way as to explode those CDOs and make them bankrupt.
Now, that's a form of collective action, which is using the financial instruments of this kind of network against it.
We need to think beyond the modern times Charlie Chaplin.
Thank you very much. Very interesting stuff.
Kelly Spetta.
Kelly Spetta.
That's all the Greek I know.
So I originally tried to do a PhD on the topic you talked a length about,
the separation between political power and economic power, specifically about the European Union
and how it sort of formalized this split between the political spheres,
no longer has to do anything with what the economic organization.
No one wanted to touch that one with the 10-foot pole, so I'm doing something else now, but it made my passion.
But to keep the question reasonably short, what is the one change,
one of the many changes you'd like to see in the structure of the European Union that could address this
if you could choose just one thing?
Right, well, I'll be very brief in my response.
We need to federate, because there are only two choices here.
Either we break it up, which many people want, even on the left,
thinking that recoiling into the bosom of the nation state is somehow going to allow them to create socialism in one country,
or we are going to have to create a democratic union.
Now, the problem is that with this crisis that we have, which is both economic and political,
and moral, if you want, we can't have a serious discussion about federation,
because we have centrifugal forces that are pulling us apart.
So this is why our movement, you may have heard of a movement that I'm part of, DM25,
we're proposing what we call a European New Deal, a new deal in order to stabilize and bring hope back
so that we can have a discussion on how to federate.
Thank you very much.
I'm also going to ask a question about the European Union and about Greece,
and about the immigration problem, which is all the more on everyone's minds because of what Trump has just done
with wiping out the agreement on the Iranian nuclear situation.
I recently read that on the island of Lesbos, I believe,
which is an island that receives a lot of the immigrants from the Middle East, Syria,
that Greeks were attacking the immigrants.
I have read for years now that conditions in the camps are terrible,
and something that I have wondered about for years is why is it the immigrants from the Middle East
and North Africa are coming to the south of Europe, the poorest part of Europe,
why is it that there is not some common effort, perhaps this is a very naive question,
but some common effort to subsidize countries like Greece, which is in terrible economic straits,
to deal more humanely with these people?
That's a fantastic question.
Okay, let me answer in three parts.
Firstly, inform you about what's going on in Lesbos, because Lesbos is very dear to us, as Greeks, to our hearts,
and we are devastated by what's going on.
Firstly, let me be fair to the people of Lesbos.
The vast majority of the people of Lesbos have been magnificent.
For years now, it's an island that is very depressed financially, economically,
it's a bit like Detroit, think of Detroit, and you have a million people,
and it's an island of 17,000 people, and a million people came, most of them passed through,
now we have 50,000 left, and they went on the shore, they picked them up,
they opened their houses, they opened their shops and gave them food,
of course for no money and so on, the vast majority.
Secondly, when you have a combination of the great depression that we have in Greece,
you have Nazis, and add to this the European Union's attitude,
which is effective to turn Lesbos into a concentration camp,
and the people of the Greeks who live there then become very susceptible to the toxic narrative of the Greek Nazis,
who say to them, ah, see, these bastards came here and now we are,
instead of being a beautiful Greek Aegean island and receiving tourists and doing well,
we are ourselves part of a concentration camp, so it's very, very difficult to fight against this narrative.
But to tell you what I think, so the situation on the ground, there are three camps,
one is called Moria, it is the most notorious one,
a camp that can hold under reasonable conditions, not good,
but there are 2,000 people, there are 10,000 people in there,
so they live in circumstances that do not be fit, a civilized part of the world,
but that's on purpose.
It is run by the European Union and the United Nations,
and it is a cesspool of misery on purpose to deter others from coming.
There are another 2 camps that local NGOs have created and they are magnificent,
they are absolutely magnificent.
If you look at the circumstances in there, the problem they have is that they don't have much capacity,
so there are 300 families in one and 110 families in the other.
But they live, it's actually quite heartwarming to see.
Of course the problem is that none of these people have any kind of guarantee of safety.
I was talking to activists in the good camps who educate them, teach them English,
their own language, because they have kids who speak Farsi, Persian,
and they teach them computer and they put a lot of effort in it and it's really heartwarming.
But they say to me, do you know the tragedy of not knowing what's going to happen tomorrow morning
because the police may come in, grab one of them, put them in chains, throw them on the boat, back to Turkey.
So you have no idea, is this kid, you have a 12 year old kid there and his or her parents,
are they going to be with us for a week, two weeks, six months, two years?
The refugees don't know, so they can't plan their lives.
The activists don't know, so what do you teach them?
You teach very differently if you teach somebody for two weeks,
compared to if you know you will be teaching them for two years.
The curriculum is different, right?
And the local community doesn't even know, is this camp here going to be permanent?
Are we going to assimilate them? Are we going to live with these people forever?
Because the local community will react differently if they knew that,
and with some support from them, they don't know.
And the worst part is that, you know, the reason why I left the ministry
was because my party and my Prime Minister capitulated to the loan agreement.
But immediately after that capitulation, that's what usually happens.
You capitulate on one big thing, then you capitulate on everything.
After that, he also capitulated and signed the European Union Treaty with Turkey,
which is an affront to civilization.
Because what we are doing is we are effectively the West, the civilized Europe.
We are bribing an increasingly dictatorial president of Turkey
to the tune of some like 7 billion dollars,
so that he allows us to violate international law on refugees.
You know, according to international law of refugees,
people coming to your country have the right, by international law,
to a hearing that will determine whether they are political refugees or not.
They don't have that right on Lesbos.
Because the EU-Turkey Treaty has deemed that Turkey is a safe country
so that when you arrive on Lesbos, you are not granted an interview
as to whether you have been persecuted by the Syrian regime,
by the Taliban, by, I don't know, whom.
And you are kept there for an indefinite period.
You are not allowed to go to the rest of Greece.
You can wander around like a lost soul in Lesbos,
but of course you live in the camp because there is nowhere else to live.
Where are you going to live on the beach?
It's purely horrible.
But let's just take a broader look at that situation.
You said the immigration problem.
I don't see that immigration is a problem.
I think that immigration is a great asset from a European perspective.
For a thousand years, we have been populating the earth with Europeans.
We've been sending our ships and our caravans to the Americas,
to Australia, to New Zealand.
We destroyed all the indigenous people in the world.
In Africa, colonized.
We created the new world.
That's what we did.
And we thought it was all right.
Now what's happening is we are aging.
We are becoming a sad aged lot.
And the demographic dynamics are reversing.
And we need these people.
We really need these people.
One is being depleted.
It's becoming another Japan.
Greece too.
We have an economic crisis as well.
We are in a process of desertification.
So we need these people.
Instead of treating immigration as an asset,
that we must collectively manage and find ways of making it work for us Europeans.
We are looking at it as a threat.
We are trying to imagine a huge wall,
Trump-like, going through the Mediterranean,
the North Pole, I don't know what they are going to do.
It's pathetic.
It's just a complete failure of the imagination.
It's misanthropy.
The result of course is that the builder,
the taller and more impenderable the wall that we create,
the only thing that changes is more deaths
and greater profits for the traffickers.
It doesn't stop immigration.
All it does, it creates insecurity both in the local population
and in the migrant population and profits for the traffickers.
So let them in and impose minimum wages,
living wages in the countries of their origin.
And if the countries cannot provide them, help them provide them.
That's the solution, not walls.
Hi.
I can't help but notice that we're talking about the continuum of capitalism
while we overlook a graveyard.
My understanding which might be wrong is that we're paying approximately
$8 trillion for the wars in interest.
For the wars?
For the wars, US.
How does an economy overcome that?
I mean, and how does that play out?
$8 trillion in interest per year, if that's...
No, it's not $8 trillion per year.
It's not?
No.
No.
But what is your general concern that we pay too much for what?
For the wars.
No, I'm talking about the wars, just the wars.
Alright, let me tell you.
Maybe it's $8 billion, but not $8 trillion.
Okay, then my figures are wrong.
Three means zero, this is okay.
Okay.
Well, look.
The United States of America, as Eisenhower told you in the 1950s and warned you,
is predicated upon, but a very interesting industrial policy.
You don't have a formal industrial policy,
you have something called the military industrial complex.
And the military industrial complex is essential for American capitalism
in the way that the American capitalism has been created.
So, the reason why Missouri and Massachusetts can be in the same union
and you don't have the same problems that we have between Greece and Germany,
is because you have what I call a surplus recycling mechanism.
You have food stamps, you have social security,
and that means that money that is taxed in the surplus states
is transferred to the deficit states,
and that keeps a degree of balance.
But the most important part of your surplus recycling mechanism
is in the military industrial complex.
So, when Boeing gets a contract to build the new generation of fighter jets,
quadrillions, yeah, the Pentagon says to them,
yeah, but you're going to have to build the engine in a new site in Missouri,
in the deficit places,
the spare parts of this and that over there and so on.
So, to keep this going, you need some wars.
I'm not proposing that this is how it should be,
I'm just describing it.
So, in 1991, the Pentagon and the Treasury Department in this country
had a major, major headache.
The Cold War had finished.
So, they could no longer pass through Congress on the basis of national security
the bills that were necessary in order to keep replenishing the cruise and pressing missiles.
So, they had to clear the stock,
so that you had the first war in Iraq.
Remember, the war had finished
and they were going into the middle of the desert
and fighting all the cruise and pressing missiles to get rid of them
so that they could order new ones.
So, capitalism is just a very rational system
because it's a very simple reason why it's so irrational
because it has a productive capacity,
a capacity to produce which far exceeds its capacity to consume.
So, something has to make up this difference
and war is a result, not just lack of democracy.
Hi, thank you for tonight's question for you.
If we, theoretically, go back to 2015,
you're now in charge instead of Cyprus, in charge of Greece,
faced with harsh austerity versus Grexit,
what political path would you have chosen?
Well, you know the answer.
That's why I'm here, I'm not in the ministry.
Why am I not in the ministry?
Why did I resign?
Because we had an agreement.
We had a very simple agreement
and this is the only reason why I accepted the finance ministry
and to run in the election.
We had an agreement that there were three possible outcomes.
I'll put it succinctly.
Three possible outcomes.
One was continuing debt bondage in the euro,
which is what has been happening since 2010.
For me, that was the worst possible outcome.
Another outcome was Grexit,
for Greece to be chucked out of the eurozone
or to choose to get out.
This came with substantial costs
and it was never my proposal.
But I always considered it to be better
than perpetual debt bondage in the euro.
When people say,
but the euro is a strong currency,
I say, if you're a pauper
and you live under a bridge in New York,
you have one dollar in your pocket,
it doesn't mean you have a strong currency,
you have one bloody dollar in your pocket.
It doesn't help much.
And then, the first best,
my ideal solution would be
a debt restructuring within the euro
that would allow us to stay in the euro
in a sustainable way
and to end the great depression.
So the point I was making was,
no bluffing.
We say to them,
we don't want to get out of the euro,
but we need a debt restructure
and we need the end of austerity
for Greece to remain sustainable within the euro.
And that's what we want.
And let's sit down and we will compromise.
I did say to Obama when he said to me,
but Yanis, you have to compromise.
I compromised.
I said, I dream of compromise,
but I'm never going to be compromised.
There is a fundamental difference between the two.
Okay?
And we say to them that,
we are not going to accept that,
that we are not putting our signature
on another loan agreement
that extends and pretends
our bankruptcy to the future.
So shoot us, kill us,
get us out of the euro.
We don't want to get out of the euro,
but we consider getting out of the euro
to be a lesser evil
than staying under the conditions of debt.
So Chipper supposedly agreed with me
and not only agreed with me,
but considered to be more right-wing than him
and more ready to compromise.
He had some reasons.
I don't think he was right,
but you'll be very interested to hear
that one of the people that worked with me
during this period
in creating the plan and the narrative
against the Troika and the international fund
was somebody called Larry Summers,
who was actually very good,
because he understood
that what was going to be happening in Greece
reflected very quickly and immediately
in the European macroeconomic stance,
which was detrimental to the interests of the United States.
So we worked together with Larry Summers
and when we met, I said,
I'm very glad you haven't read my last book.
And he said, why?
I said, because I referred to it
to you on a number of occasions in the same book
as the Prince of Darkness.
And he said, well, at least he called me Prince.
I've been called worse.
So it's clear.
The two organizations I like to follow
side by side, the DM25 movement
and Six Degrees of Citizen Space in Canada
with John Rouse and Saul.
And I just really enjoyed John Rouse and Saul's book,
The Collapse of Globalism,
and he describes this idea
of a positive form of nationalism
that we haven't explored.
We think of nationalism as negative
and we often only see negative forms
based on exclusion.
But our movements like DM25,
imagining and exploring,
possibly hijacking and displacing hate
with positive forms of nationalism
that are centered around inclusion
and sort of collective missions
like reducing inequality
that can capture a lot of the people
that are displaced in this country,
the Trump voters that might not be racist,
that just wanted a better deal
and they really fall in with the flag.
When someone waves the flag,
they're easy to be manipulated.
They just feel that they must go with it.
But now in this country,
when you see two American flags
being struck,
that's kind of a hate symbol.
The left progressive people
that enjoy inclusion
have maybe allowed the flag
to get stolen from them.
But then at the same time,
we need to integrate nationalism,
possibly a new form,
with ideas like a federation
to gain more power
back into the political sphere
or the national sphere.
Well, let me say that
I get your drift.
I grew up in a culture
where the left
answered this question of yours
a long time ago,
by making a distinction
not between positive and negative
nationalism, but between nationalism and patriotism.
Our line was always we're patriots
and the difference between a patriot and a nationalist,
the patriot loves his country
and the nationalist thinks that his country
has the right to steamroll over every other country.
And I think that is a good way
of resolving it.
But making this more contemporary,
I think we have to appropriate
the slogan,
I want my country back.
I think we should take this and say, yes,
I want my city back.
I want my neighborhood back.
I want control over my city, my municipality,
my state, my country.
The only way to get my country back
is if others get their countries back as well.
And if we all work together
and we understand that to get our countries back
we need to resolve problems such as
low quality jobs,
low levels of investments
in the green transition
that the planet needs, climate change and so on,
that we need to fight poverty
and it is impossible to fight poverty in one country
when it is rising in other countries.
If you think that you can do that
you are deluding yourself.
So in effect to embed patriotism
in a narrative which sees
the major problems that society faces
like poverty, low investment,
problems with the health service and so on
as we see climate change.
What I mean by that is climate change
requires local action,
that we do things here in Boston,
that we do things in Massachusetts in the United States
but we have to act globally as well
and we need to cooperate.
Because resolving poverty as I said
can only happen at...
The Bretton Woods system is a good example.
Poverty fell everywhere
throughout the global system of the Bretton Woods.
Inequality shrunk everywhere.
It couldn't rise in one place massively
and fall in another.
So we have to combine level of country,
of neighborhood, of community, patriotism
with transnationalism and internationalism
that allows us to claim our own countries back.
A funny multinational question
that I would love to hear answered from you.
In the book, John Roussensall describes this concept
where a lot of the trade that we have is fictitious.
It is multinationals trading with themselves.
Yeah, of course.
It's called limit pricing.
Well, now, you know, we were just creating these tariffs
that might not really get to the root of the issue.
We were punishing multinationals.
We weren't punishing another nation.
We were punishing multinationals that straddle two nations
and that not a lot of people in this country know
how to think of these concepts and think of...
Well, I have a better way of punishing the multinationals.
How about making the IRS do its job?
Because if you go to Venezuela,
or, by the example, if you go to Italy and make some money,
you get taxed here.
You are taxed by the IRS on your global income.
You cannot say, ah, I made $10,000 in Napoli
and therefore none of your business, taxman or woman.
No, you get taxed on your global income in the United States
unless you're a corporation.
And then you don't get taxed at all
for the money you stash away all over the world.
How about having the IRS do its job
instead of introducing tariffs
that, in the end, have a detrimental effect on all of us?
The IRS can't change that.
Yes, of course it can.
Of course you can.
No, no, no. They need their marching orders from Congress.
They need the politicians to say to them,
you're going to treat...
Look, the Supreme Court, in its infinite idiocy,
decided that corporations and human beings
and individuals will be treated the same
when it comes to super PACs and all that, right?
Well, why not treat...
also decide that corporations and individuals
will be treated the same tax-wise?
I remember a beautiful post that I saw in Texas saying that...
I like it.
I believe that corporations have human rights
when I see one of them being hanged.
Yeah.
That was Texas for you.
Yeah, in the briefest and broadest of strokes,
in the post-capitalistic world that you envision,
what does the credit system look like
and how does it achieve equilibrium with the sovereignty of states?
Okay, how long do we have?
No, but let me put it simply.
If we have a system where
private property is maintained over goods and services
and things that give you happiness,
but not over productive processes
and productive processes belong to those that work them,
that are part of it,
then you simply do not have a credit system.
You don't need one at all.
Your justification for that is?
That credit is only necessary
when you've got an asymmetrical distribution
of property rights over means of production.
So you wouldn't say...
If you and I have a cooperative,
if we own a business together,
we have a partnership,
then I'm never going to be in your debt or you in my debt.
We're going to be producing together
and we're going to be sharing the profits that we make,
the economic rents.
What about investors?
Well, there would be no investors.
What about the other person?
Because investors exist only because you have
asymmetrical distribution of wealth.
If you didn't have asymmetrical distribution...
But look, this is going to be the topic of my next book.
I have not written it yet.
So I'll see you in three years.
