Okay, so it's my understanding that was already a talk on conimentary teleportation this morning,
so I won't introduce it too thoroughly, but this is joint work with Affium and Edu and some of this
is published and more work will appear in my soon-to-come thesis, hopefully. Okay, so a review
of quantum energy teleportation. We have Alice and Bob. You supply energy to Alice. She makes
a local measurement on a field in its vacuum, and if you mess with the vacuum, you're going to
inject energy, hence you inject local energy density here. When you do this measurement,
you get an output bit, you send that bit to Bob, and then Bob does a local unitary in his
region, depending on that bit, and if he does the right unitary, on average, he's going to extract
energy at point B, and hence do a negative energy density over here. So how does, I'm just going
to go over again how this works intuitively in this talk a bit, and then show how this intuition
can lead us to developments. So right, an analogy for quantum field theory is a bunch of coupled
harmonic oscillators. If they're all in their ground state, then they wiggle around, and if
they're connected, then the wiggles are going to be correlated, right? And the further you are, the
less correlated you are. Right, so to explain how we can exploit these correlations to teleport
energy, I'm going to take a little detour to analogy land in quantum casino, where we play the
quantum roulette. And the quantum roulette has a color and a number observable, and usually it's a
maximally mixed state, and if you bet on a certain outcome, you know, you can't really win on average,
you know nothing. So, well, even the casino rigs it so that you lose on average. So let's say I have
a maximally mixed state of roulette, on average I wouldn't be able to win, but you know, if I bet on
something and I win, then my payoff is adjusted in terms of kind of the spread of the probability
distribution, or you know, depending on my amount of uncertainty, so the number observable has kind
of a bigger entropy, and I get a bigger payoff, because it's more rare for me to win. Right, but
what if this maximal mixedness arises from maximal entanglement with another neighboring roulette,
right? What would you be able to do, for example? Well, let's say Bob knows about this entanglement,
but Alice doesn't. So Alice just plays the usual game, she bets on an outcome, she loses on average,
but she collapses the state onto a certain outcome. If Bob's able to peer over to her table and say,
make out the color of the outcome, he could bet on the same thing, right, and then get paid pretty
much every time on average. If the correlations aren't 100%, then you know, it's in Stephen on
average. And of course, if he could peer over and see the numbers instead of the colors, then he
could bet on that and get bigger payoff, but the numbers is, it's more information he has to extract
from Alice's table. Right, so another thing, classically correlated roulette would work if you
tried the same exercise. So basically, what's the key here is if you have mutual information, right?
Mutual information is this quantity. Basically, if I know the result at A, so if I condition B on A,
then my entropy at B, my knowledge about B gets better when I know stuff about A, essentially.
And that's what we use in quantum field theory to teleport energy. So the analogies that the
roulettes are like, you know, quantum fluctuations in regions of the quantum field for Alice and Bob,
and instead of money, it's going to be energy. Right, so okay, so the usual QET protocol
with quantum fields, the information carrier is just a bit. And right, that has a certain
maximal amount of information content. So what if we use a qubit, you know, quantum is better often.
Well, that's also the same maximal amount of information. And what about a QDIT? That's a
higher dimensional Hilbert space, has a bigger possible entropy, more information content,
more possibility to be entangled or correlated with something else. So basically, that was our
work. We looked at, you know, qubits as the information carriers and the probes, and also QDITs
and what happens when you send more and more information per single shot of the protocol.
And we had to devise a way to do this. So basically, we were betting on the numbers instead of the
colors in my analogy. So now it's going to get more technical, just because this is a specialist
conference. Okay, so the ground state, you could represent it as a superposition of a bunch of
global field configurations, right, just, you know, functional expansion. And your two-point
correlations, depending on the dimension, they're going to decay with a distance to some power.
And these fluctuations have a certain variance. It's kind of gaussian in some sense.
You all know this. Okay, so what do I want to do? Well, let's say I have a bunch of possible
global configurations. Well, locally, that gives me a lot of uncertainty. I don't know which color
it is, right? So, you know, if I do a measurement, a local measurement at A, and I collapse it to
a certain palette of colors or whatever, then that could be useful. And if I inform B about
which subset of the possibilities I collapsed it on to, then I reduced
the local uncertainty at B, right? Entanglement, this quantity is negative, so the mutual information
is positive. So that's essentially what we're going to try to do. And now I'm going to get into
a bunch of under-reduced stuff. Not yet. All right. Okay, just my notation. So a coherent state,
basically, you don't really change the probability distribution. You just displace it, right, by some
bump, let's say. So it's the same probability distribution. So that wouldn't be
collapsing it onto a subset. So we can't just displace the field. We got to do something
slightly fancier. Okay, so the interaction we used in our paper, I'm going to run you through the
qubit stuff, and then I'll just tell you how we generalize the qubits. It's this interaction,
so instantaneous in time, spread out over space. And then you look at the unitary. It's a coupling
between a qubit and the field, obviously. It's unruly like. So essentially what you get is a
controlled unitary. You push the field up or down with this distribution, depending on the state
of the qubit in X. And then you get this entangled state when you apply it to a spin-up state and
the ground state, let's say. So you get this entangled state. So it's entangled, well, as this
plate here. And you could change that decomposition into a cat state and plus and minus z. You just
change the bases. So if you were to project in the z basis, you would collapse it onto one of these
cat states. But in our protocol, we just keep everything coherent and we don't necessarily
project. So these cat states are superpositions of coherent states. And what happens is in your
field expansion, some terms that were differing by just two lambda, you can make them interfere
with each other a bit like this, like the Wigner pseudo-probability distribution interferes.
And that kills off some possibilities. So you don't kill off a lot, but you kill off some
measure. And the probability, the amplitude of this cancellation is the interference term like
this. And it's a Gaussian. Well, you see that if I crank the energy up, I spread these coherent
states. I pump them bigger than the interference lowers. That's not good. We want to input more
energy and output more energy. We want to turn the crank on QET. So I'll see how we get around to
that. For now, we have the qubit as the probe and the information carrier. And we just send the
qubit to Bob as is. And then Bob does a control unitary in the z basis of the same type. He
displaces it. And because of the two-point correlations, you get an energy exchange term
that has the quantum interference they talked about. And then this is like a two-point correlator
weighted by the energy. And then, of course, you have switching costs for Bob of that counter.
You pay some energy, just a couple. So that's the energy extracted. But there's this interference
term that's a problem. So what we did, we generalized two Q-dits. So Q-dits, we used the
Heisenberg-Weil operator, which are like clock and shift operators. We expand the field operator.
And then we do kind of a counter-rotating wave approximation. And that has some non-localities,
but I'll get to that in a second. And then we use that. We use the same kind of couplings,
x and z, but Heisenberg, x and z. And then the coherence, basically, we want a better
measurement. So the more, let's say, I pump in more energy, I get a bigger radius for this kind
of polygon. But then I could pack in more of these coherence states to get more interference
when I pump in more energy. The non-locality, well, there is something called Flanagan's
theorem that if you have a purely local protocol for Q-d-t, you have an absolute bound on the
energy output. And the fact that our counter-rotating wave Hamiltonian introduces some degree of
non-locality that decays pretty sharply compared to our teleported energy. Well, on some limit,
far away, we're not cheating. We're recovering some degree of locality, and we still get a good
amount of teleported energy. And then we found a limit pushing a bunch of parameters in a bunch
of different ways. We go very far away. We could teleport as much energy as we want without really
cheating considerably. And that's all the time we got, I think. So thanks.
