Okay, so now we are glad to have one of the keynote speakers of this conference Professor Ali El-Katicha from the Department of Physics of the University of Albany.
So, he will speak about quantum mechanics as a Hamilton killing flow on a statistical manifold. Please go on Ariel.
I think perhaps you are muted.
Yeah, that's better.
Yes, yes, now we can hear you.
Perfect. Okay, okay, okay. Tell me if there are connectivity problems at some point because I'm always having problems here.
Okay, I would like to start by thanking the organizers for organizing all of this, which is not only a challenge but also has turned out very, very nice results we've heard some very, very good talks here.
And for being particularly accommodating with the fact that my health played a little trick with me earlier in the week and I managed to switch my talk to the end and now I'm okay, still under the influence of drugs.
But if you hear anything sort of weird in my talk, that's probably not the drugs is that the talk is a little bit weird. Anyway.
So let me see, let me start.
Let me start by discussing a little bit of a preview of where it is that this talk is going.
To, to, to give you a list or classify, I mean I'm sure you've seen this before, classify the various interpretations of quantum mechanics so so that you can see where the entropic dynamics approach with actually land.
If you if you try to put various interpretations of quantum mechanics and classify them according to be a realist or anti realist in the sense of are there.
The values of quantities have pre are predefined pre existing or whether they're created by the results of measurements.
Or whether the wave function itself is an epistemic construction or the way function is an antique real object.
Well, clearly, you would not find any theories over here because if nothing is actually real what the way function is well that's doesn't doesn't lead you to any possibilities here.
But here you can have it under epistemic size you can have interpretations such as Copenhagen cubism, maybe a model, whatever you can have quite a few there.
If you insist that the way function be real, you have things such as the early Schrodinger approach, or the woman interpretation or many worlds and so on.
And finally, if you if you're going to have an epistemic way function but assume that there are underlying real variables floating around statistical interpretations will will get you there.
One of the reasons I wanted to show this little table is that tables like this are very, very useful in sort of guiding your thought, but they're incredibly dangerous in that they sort of hint subliminally to the fact that these are all the possibilities.
Well, entropic dynamics, which is the version of the approach to quantum mechanics that I favor is something that lands somewhere in between here.
Entropic dynamics shares with the Copenhagen interpretation, for example, or even with Einstein the fact that the wave function is completely epistemic.
It shares with the bombing approach, the fact that the position of particles or the values of fields, for example, are completely on tick, the positions of particles are real.
They exist out there. On the other hand, it differs tremendously from the woman interpretation in that the way function is completely epistemic supposed to be in on.
So I'm going to end and land a little bit in here positions are real, but all other observables are actually the values of all other observables are actually created by the act of measurement so for example, energies or momentum or spin or all these
variables would land very much in the in the same box as the Copenhagen approach.
So let's see what are we doing.
The subject is quantum mechanics and unlike most of the interpretations that I had listed before the goal here is not to take the in the mathematical formalism and append an interpretation to it.
The goal is precisely the opposite. We start with a more or less clear interpretation of what's going on.
And then we derive a mathematical formalism that applies to it.
So we're reconstructing the theory in the traditional approach the Hilbert space comes first, which raises all sorts of questions why in determinism, why quantum probabilities where the rule come from.
Why do we have two modes of evolution of the wave function and the ultimate question, what's real, and what's epistemic.
Those are questions that are very, very relevant in a Hilbert space first approach.
What we're going to do is an alternative approach in which probabilities come first. So many of these questions are answered from the very beginning.
The theory is obviously deterministic because it's about probabilities, and so on, as we will see, but this raises all sorts of other questions, different questions.
How do you get where do you get the functions from, why are there complex numbers, why is there a linear unitary evolution, where do Hilbert spaces come from so that's going to be the thrust of the talk, providing answers, making assumptions, and on the basis of those assumptions,
providing answers to some of these questions.
Very good. The starting point is ontological clarity.
From the beginning, we have a clear idea of what's going to be real in this model, and what's going to be epistemic.
We're going to take the microstates of the theory to be on tick and for simplicity, because we can actually do it for in more general settings, we're going to assume that this on tick microstates are discrete.
We have n possible on tick microstates this could describe something like a die and n cyber quantum die.
We may not know what is the face of the die that came up.
At all times, there is a definite side face that is up. So, put in other words, we might not know which slit in a double slit experiment, the particle goes through, we do not know, but the particle goes through one or the other very much as seen
from the Bohmian approach, discrete on tick microstates.
The probabilities, however, are completely epistemic. We're going to write the probability of the face J as raw J because we're going to want these guys eventually to be coordinates on a manifold.
These are going to be completely Bayesian, but not personalistic. They're not, they're going to be they're not these probabilities do not reflect my own personal beliefs, they reflect the beliefs of some idealized rational agent.
So this is much more in the direction of the objective probabilities, similar to those of a James.
And definitely they're not quantum probabilities. I refrain from calling these probabilities classical probabilities, because in this kind of context there is no, there is only one type there are no quantum probabilities are all so it's just a single and neither classical
just probability field.
Very good. Our goal.
This talk is going to be to study curves on an n minus one dimensional simplex on the space of probability distributions.
So here is the simplex, the space of states with positive probabilities that are one, and I should emphasize that I'm only going to be discussing kinematical aspects today.
I'm going to discuss that while we I want to study curves.
But to do dynamics. It's not just a matter of studying curves on a space, you also have to study trajectories, which means that the, the parameter that labels points along these curves is supposed to be time.
The particular Hamiltonian that generates motion along these curves is supposed to be something that is connected with the actual clocks that you're using. So I'm going to just discuss a kinematical prelude to the through dynamics.
However, we're going to see that a lot of the mathematical structure of quantum mechanics. It emerges at just this point.
Very good. Some geometry. Here is the, the simplex the space of probability distributions, a point in this space is a probability distributions.
S is going to be the epistemic configuration space.
This, the space of J is here the microstates that's the ontic configuration space here we draw distinction between the two.
At that point, we're interested in curves curves have tangents to them. This is what eventually is going to describe velocities, the space of all possible vectors at that point is the tangent space at the point row, and the space may constructed with this base space s plus all the
spaces at all points is the tangent bundle. Very good.
We can also invent another bundle, which comes from looking at the basic simplex the base manifold and discussing functions on it instead of curves, and we can discuss what happens with those gradients or how do we describe the gradients of functions at that point.
These are co vectors. This is going to be the co tangent space at the point row. And the question that here arises is, how are these co vectors connected to vectors in the, in this space the tangent vectors the velocities in classical
mechanics we have a criterion for that we associate the momenta, which are the objects that populate the tangent co tangent spaces.
We obtained those from Lagrangian.
Here we do not have a Lagrangian.
That's the point of the arriving.
Here we do not have any practical considerations, and eventually even dynamics, purely from probabilistic considerations. Here we do not have a Lagrangian.
So what we're going to do is, we're going to decide right now that this problem has been solved that there is such a thing as a co vector here that is singled out the precise argument of how you single out this co vector is something
that comes from studying the dynamics and tropic dynamics is the one is the the framework that will allow you to do that. Here we're just doing the kinematics that corresponds to an eventual and tropic dynamics.
Let us assume we know then what are the privileged co vectors that are associated to the point row.
Just to tell you or give you an indication of where this is going.
This space, the core tangent bundle, which consists of the base manifold was all the core tangent spaces is going to be the epistemic phase space.
Phi is going to be the momentum that's canonically conjugate to row.
Again, to tell you more or less where this is going. Eventually, this fight here will be the phase of the wave function.
And this row, of course, is going to be give you the magnitude of the of the wave function. So, so this is, this is how it is that these various quantities are being set up.
And now we have no dynamics, we do not know that we don't know anything really it just, we have the geometry of this cotangent bundle.
As a matter of notation, we're going to say that the point in this phase space is given by two by n coordinates for for probabilities and another n coordinates for the files.
We're going to use a kind of composite index to the note.
To the note where you're talking about rows or files.
Alpha tells you file row j tells you which phase of the diet.
We can we're going to have vectors in this space and we're going to use Einstein summation to convention to to to describe them.
The velocities are going to be given vectors are going to be tangents to curves.
So we have the parameter along the curve.
And I call it towel, so that you see that eventually in some other, some other talk this towel would become time.
We also had gradients. I didn't use the till the to the note the gradient on this cotangent bundle, which includes components along the road, road, road direction and along the five direction.
We can also express it in this way.
Now there is an important technicality here it's going to turn out to be absolutely crucial in its consequences for quantum mechanics, namely that we're dealing with normalized probabilities.
What that means is that if you look at say partial derivatives, such as these, this will assume that you're taking derivatives with respect to row J, keeping all the other rows are constant.
But if you have a constraint like normalization, you cannot do that the rows are not independent. So this technical problem is going to be solved in a rather general way by embedding the simplex of normalized probabilities into a larger space,
which is like the positive cone of an normalized probability so I am really adding a degree of freedom when I do that.
And of course, when I add a degree of freedom for row, I'm also adding a degree of freedom for the corresponding five. So our space here is going to have two and dimensions, while we're really interested in a space of two and minus two dimensions.
So this extended simplex, the positive cone is this space here.
Very good. We're going to be discussing now more about the geometry of this cotangent one look.
We're going to first discuss the simplex geometry and see and see some of its consequences, and then we're going to describe its metric geometry and see what its consequences are.
Notice, I'm not doing physics here. This is just the geometry of these funny spaces of probabilities under cotangent spaces.
So we have a symplectic form, a privileged tensor, given row given files, we can always construct that. And if you apply this, this tensor to two vectors, we can write it in component form like this.
Einstein summation, these guys have been summed over, where the symplectic form takes this standard familiar form.
Very good. We are going to be interested in vector flows, vector fields, I use bars to denote a vector in the cotangent bundle.
We're going to be interested in these vectors, such that as you flow with them, the symplectic form remains fixed, is preserved by the flow.
I mentioned in a little while it will become clear why these are called Hamiltonian flows.
The derivative that appears here is the derivative. If you're familiar with it, great. If you, if you're not so familiar with the derivative, well, it's basically just a fancy version of taking directional derivatives in curve spaces and of general
tensors. So this, this just says that the directional derivative of the symplectic form along the direction defined by this vector is equal to zero.
So we're going to look at those vector fields that preserve the symplectic form, and these guys have an enormous significance for physics.
I don't know, we're not doing physics, it's just geometry. This is going to be one of the central equations in the whole thing.
By Poincare's lemma.
There is then a scalar function that I'm going, I'm going to call h tilde, this is a scalar function on the cotangent on the face space, such that, and here we have a formula the application of omega on that vector is the gradient of a scalar.
In English, this would look like or could be translated into if the curl of the vector h is zero, then the vector h must be the gradient of a scalar function h tilde.
Very good. This is a more general way to say it and and if we translate this into components, what we get is something truly remarkable because we have here that the road dot is the derivative of the H with respect to five and five dot is the derivative of h with respect to the coordinate with a minus sign these are Hamilton's
equations.
Why, we call the vector H, the vector H, we call that the Hamiltonian vector field, and H tilde is the corresponding Hamiltonian function.
So, if you impose, if you just restrict yourself to flows to Hamiltonian vector fields that preserve the symplectic form, the curves that will achieve that are such that there is a Hamiltonian, and you obey Hamilton's equations.
Furthermore, if you apply this symplectic form to do Hamiltonian vector fields. This is going to be equal to the Poisson bracket of the corresponding Hamilton functions.
And furthermore, I'm going to use this equation in a second, the time derivative, the tau derivative of any function in the phase space is going to be given by the Poisson bracket with the Hamiltonian.
And you can see how an incredible amount of the structure of physics, the structure of classical mechanics is coming from purely geometrical considerations.
This is central, because while these are purely geometrical considerations.
There is a reason that they might not be just limited to doing classical mechanics. And that's exactly one of the points I want to stress in this talk, this kind of formalism.
The classical Hamiltonian formalism applies to quantum mechanics as well. Let's go back to the normalization constraint. I'm going to write the normalization.
The fact that we're moving in a space of probabilities, right. So, probabilities are normalized we introduced, we embedded our probabilities in a larger space just because normalization is such a such a hassle, but we cannot ignore it.
So here's the normalization of row. We're going to write the normalization in terms of a scalar function. So of course, the constraint on normalization is that this scalar function until the vanishes.
Very good. That's going to be central, because it says that NX, the scalar function N, generates itself a Hamiltonian flow. So this is the Hamiltonian function for a Hamiltonian flow.
And if we write out what that is, we find that as you move along the vector N, the probabilities at nu is the parameter along this curve, the probabilities do not change.
But this momentum, these phases do change by the parameter nu, which is independent of J. So what we are seeing here is that if you change the phases via constant.
You generate an equivalent point in the space. In other words, we have by eliminating by introducing an additional probability degree of freedom.
By dealing with unnormalized probabilities, we have implicitly increased the degree of freedom by two, one probability and one momentum.
We eliminate the additional probability degree of freedom by imposing the constraint on N, and we eliminate the additional degree of freedom momentum by declaring that this phase here and that phase there are going to be completely equivalent.
Let's do that more formally. We would like to have Hamiltonians that preserve normalization.
But if NH is zero, then HN is zero. If N is conserved along H, then H is conserved along N, which we write like this DHD nu is zero, which means that N generates a symmetry.
In fact, it is like a gauge symmetry.
And in quantum mechanics, this is manifested as saying that if you change the phase of your system by a constant, then you have an equivalent state, an equivalent epistemic state.
And this is what is manifested in the language of quantum mechanics as saying the states of the system are represented by rays, as opposed to by vectors in the healer space.
The other thing that appears here, of course, is the fact that H itself is gauging variant, which is expressed in this equation here. This is going to be important towards the end of the talk.
Very good. Having dealt with the symplectic geometry and the normalization constraint, now we deal with the information geometry of this phase space.
So this is what is important here.
Manifolds in general do not come equipped with a geometry with a metric tensor.
The glorious exception is the statistical manifolds spaces of probabilities. These come automatically endowed with a metric tensor.
In the statistical manifold, there is a natural metric tensor, and it's rather unique. This is important. Well, without one qualification.
There is a metric tensor that comes from information geometry considerations and the metric tensor is going to be given by an expression of this form where a and B are almost arbitrary functions.
The tensor of the extended statistical manifold of unnormalized probabilities is rather, is rather general.
Rather, it's a general spherically symmetric space. This is an interesting hidden symmetry here, not at all apparent from the way I've written it here.
In this coordinates, it doesn't look that spherically symmetric.
The space of normalized probabilities is actually a sphere.
So when you put row equals one here, the normalization of row equals one, the object that appears is a nice sphere.
Very good.
So we do have a metric structure for the statistical manifold.
In this case, it's not itself a statistical manifold. There are all sorts of cotangent spaces floating around there too.
So we would like to extend the metric structure of the underlying space of probabilities to the full phase space.
We're going to require that the metric tensor of the full phase space be determined uniquely by the metric tensor of the underlying statistical manifold.
Here we go for the two n dimensional phase space, we are going to require that the metric tensor when restricted to vectors in the direction of the base base of rows, be exactly the same that we have here.
We're also going to require that when you restrict itself to the co vectors, these guys are co vectors on the on the statistical manifold that the scalar product also be exactly the same that you would have if you just were dealing with the statistical manifold.
There's an additional piece that you could add, which is determined by the constraint that you're just dealing with the same metric tensor, which is includes mixed terms, and they're putting principle be a constant there.
Very good. So this is the, the, the most general metric that one could write for the phase space implied by the condition that the metric of the phase space be determined purely from the fact that the underlying base space is a statistical manifold a space of probabilities.
Now I'm going to use, I'm going to, I'm going to use make an assumption that comes from physics. Okay.
The motivation is going to be the following. We're trying to study curves on this statistical manifold. We would like to have the situation such that if you have a curve that flows in a particular direction that you could also have a curve that flows in the opposite
direction you can traverse the curve one way or the other.
And which would be a kind of with the same velocities right, we would like to have a kind of flow reversal symmetry.
Since under flow reversal.
You have heard this under the name of time reversal symmetry. Right.
Under flow reversal, the changes in the coordinates and in the momenta go in opposite direction there is a minus sign for the momenta. So, if you impose flow reversal.
Then it's imposing flow reversal amounts to set in that coefficient equal to zero, in which case that disappears and this is going to be the metric tensor for the phase space.
I should remark very quickly here that the fact that I am imposing flow reversal symmetry for the phase space does not mean that I am imposing time reversal symmetry for the whole theory.
In some of these kinematics, one would like to describe systems that have different interactions.
Some of those interactions may violate time reversal symmetry. Some other interactions might preserve time reversal symmetry.
What we would like to do at this stage of the game is, we're going to want to have all those violations to be due to the particular choice of Hamiltonian, the Hamiltonian is going to have pieces that describe say electromagnetic
that preserve time reversal, and it's going to have other pieces that include, I don't know a Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix or something like that, that includes time reversal violations.
What we're allowing when we say the phase space allows for flow reversal symmetry is we're preparing the ground for having complicated Hamiltonians, some of each pieces will have pieces that preserve flow reversal and others will not.
So that's the justification for the beta equal to zero. Very good. We're almost done here, but famous last words, right? There is still plenty to go.
We're not interested so much in the geometry of the embedding space of non-normalized and normalized probabilities. We are really interested in the space of normalized probabilities.
So we want to figure out what the metric is for the space of the subspace, the sub-manifold of normalized probabilities. So we're going to impose that we're now on the on the simplex of normalized probabilities and we're going to consider the distance between two points
in phase space.
We just saw that if you were to displace these phases by a constant, you would have an equivalent point. So what we're really trying to figure out is the distance between two rays.
The distance between two rays is going to be given by, well, the metric tensor, where here in the place where you have the momenta, you have the possibility of changing the point sliding along a given ray.
You can define the distance between two neighboring rays as the minimum of this distance here when you allow nu to change. So if you see by hand, you have one point there and you have in one ray and you have another point and you allow that to slide over the ray and we're going
to try to find the minimum distance. And when you do that, you get an expression.
There are two, it's a messy expression, don't even try to read it carefully, but there are two features of this expression here for the distance that is induced on the phase space of normalized probabilities.
There are two features here that are really important. One of them is that this is an unusual way to write the Fubini study metric.
Nothing to do with quantum mechanics. Fubini study wrote down the metric in 1903-1904, way before anything, right?
What is new about all of this derivation is that the Fubini study metric here has been derived from considerations of information geometry.
Now, that's the new element in this derivation. The other amazing thing that's going on with this formula here for the Fubini study metric is that, remember there were two arbitrary functions here.
A has disappeared and B only appears on the normalization constrained surface. In other words, the particular embedding into the phase space of normalized probabilities does not matter at all.
There are curves that curves that we're really interested moving in the spaces of normalized probabilities do not depend on what the embedding, the larger spherically symmetric space.
We're going to make a very convenient choice. Just set A equal to zero and B equals to one.
Completely arbitrary, really. I mean, in some publications, I have written B as normalized the chosen, the function B as being h bar.
So it's just a matter of the units you want to use for your distances.
The thing about this choice is that it makes the embedding space, particularly simple. It's a choice. But if there is a simple choice, why not make it. After all, our quantum dynamics will never throw these regions outside of the normalized probability.
The fact that this is flat is very significant, because this is going to be the Hilbert space.
Here is our metric.
Then, for the embedding space with this particular choice, this happens to be a flat space.
And of course we can also go write it in terms of the components of the metric tensor we can write it in this form. And once we have the metric tensor we can do something that's pretty amazing.
Which is we can use the metric tensor to lower indices and raise indices. So suppose we take the symplectic form.
And we raise, take the inverse of this guy, raise the index, and we obtain there is a minus sign there that's convenient for conventional purposes.
We raise the first index here and we get a tensor.
That acts on vectors to produce other vectors.
And here's that tensor.
And this tensor has a remarkable property, namely, if you apply it twice, you get minus the identity.
So what this is saying is that once you have a symplectic structure.
Once you have a metric structure, you also have a complex structure.
So by imposing a symplectic structure on our face base, and then imposing geometrical structure coming from information geometry, we have automatically introduced a complex structure into the picture.
And this is the reason why we use complex numbers in quantum mechanics and not say quaternions or or or or or or whatever other field.
These spaces are called a killer killer manifolds. What we are doing here is dealing with a particularly simple type of killer manifold where the metric structure is coming from information geometry and we're dealing of course with statistical manifolds.
The reason that we have the study the symplectic structure and the geometric structure, the metric structure of the space. I'm going to do something that is necessary for quantum mechanics so this is the second installment of this set of assumptions that
is a bit of physics. You see, you see what happens with the theories of inference is that the same theory of inference ought to apply to the stock market, or to ecosystems, or to medical trials, and also to quantum mechanics.
At some point in the derivation of these theories, I have to tell my inference machinery that hey, we're not dealing with the stock market here, we are dealing with quantum mechanics.
So this is one place where we have to make an interesting redefinition of the choice of cotangent space. Here we have
the space manifold this tender simplex of unnormalized probabilities. That's a point, the tangent space, the cotangent space there is this flat space, and so that's the cotangent at the point row.
We now learned that there is a complex structure here so to see how we redefine our cotangent spaces. I'm going to introduce complex coordinates, and here you have the complex coordinates. This is the new coordinate, the wave function.
This is its canonically conjugate momentum, the transformation from row five to psi and this momentum is actually canonical. So that's what determines the form of the conjugate momentum. This is a canonical transformation.
A point in the face space now is going to be given by its coordinate components and its momentum components.
The complex structure is now given by this tensor that takes a very unique form, which amounts to saying when you apply this guy to something like this, you multiply the wave functions by I, as you might expect, and you are multiplying the complex conjugates by
as you might really expect. So complex coordinates appear to be very natural in this setting, but of course, the way the complex coordinates work is that if I take a phase here, and I add to pi, I end up describing exactly the same point on the face
space. In other words, Phi and Phi plus two pi are equivalent to each other, Phi is an angle. So what we are doing here is we are saying the cotangent space is flat.
But opposite phases that differ by two pi opposite versus of this square are identified. We have to do this in both directions. In fact, the cotangent spaces are hyper cubes of coordinate length edge to pi with the opposite faces identified.
This redefinition of the cotangent space is crucial for quantum mechanics. It's going to be saying something like if you have canonical momentum here, the Phi's, chronically conjugate to row, the phases can be multi valued.
You can increase always by two pi, four pi and so on, but the wave functions are going to be single valued. That's what's being introduced in this by this assumption, at least redefinition of the cotangent space.
Very good. We're almost there now.
The flows described by either the vector H or its associated Hamiltonian that preserve not only the symplectic form, but also the metric form.
These flows are such then that they're going to have the Hamilton flows and they're also going to be killing flows. This Hamilton killing flows when you impose both of those conditions together are such that second derivatives of H with respect to the size are zero,
the second derivatives of H with respect to size star are zero two. So this is what this means is that the Hamiltonian functions we seek are going to be bi linear in the H's in the size.
There could be linear terms also, but those are discarded by gauging variance so the gauging variance we talked about earlier is crucial to get to this form.
This is one of my final slide.
The flow, the killer coming from killing flows are given by Hamilton's equations.
We can write the Hamilton equation in the standard form just differentiate with respect to the momentum you get the side dot, or you can write it in the Poisson bracket form.
Anyway, when the Hamiltonian is by linear, the result is the just differentiate with respect to the side, and you get the rest right the result is the Schrodinger equation.
And it's linear, it's the linear Schrodinger equation so this derivation explains the linearity of the Schrodinger equation.
I would also say that, because this is a linear Schrodinger equation, if you were to transform back into the row, row side coordinates, you would see the emergence of quantum potential, which is what's responsible for all the non localities and everything that
is in quantum mechanics.
Very good to summarize and conclude.
The first and most crucial step is ontological clarity.
We have the dynamics, we decide on a set of ontic microstates, and then we try to fool around with the dynamics of probabilities, we never talk about the dynamics of the microstates we're just talking about the dynamics of probability.
The face space is a code tangent bundle.
The code tangent bundle is takes the form of a simplex plus all the code tangent hyper cubes. And this is what leads us to a definite symplectic structure.
The equation geometry leads us to a definite metric structure.
The two together lead to a complex structure, imposing Hamilton killing flows that preserve these things leads to the linear Schrodinger equation.
Quantum states the epistemic quantum states the way functions really that represent the state of the system are raised in a human space that's essentially optional it had to do with that embedding space that was introduced purely for
functional purposes. And they are very good. The bone rule.
In the sense that yes of course if the magnitude of the way function is the probability then the one who is automatic.
Thank you very much. I have not mentioned references.
Okay, I would like to start by thanking all the other people that have all the year over the years being involved in the development of this, this program.
I have not stated many references, but this particular presentation appears this in this paper and there you can find in the archive you can find all my papers and here in this paper here you can find all the
All sorts of reference to the work of other people.
Thank you very much.
Many thanks Ariel for this great presentation.
Did I go too much over time.
No, it's fine. I think it's fine.
I always, I always have this problem because you see I have to state like six or seven assumptions. And once I have the assumptions under control then I can give the whole talk in two minutes but
anyway,
I don't have to walk around this is demanding.
So okay, if there are any questions in the, in the public please let me know by chat.
In the meantime, I will ask you some questions because I perhaps I have too many questions about this. So one of them is, I'm puzzled about the geometry of, of this state space that you create because
it's not the simplex at that at the point, but then you say that when you particularize to quantum mechanics, then you obtain a complex structure.
So my question is, what is the shape of the object that you create because in quantum mechanics, we know the shape which is, it is the, the projective geometry associated to a complex Hilbert space which is a sort of color manifold
What you obtain is something which is isomorphic to a color manifold.
Actually, the embedding, when you choose this embedding space, the phase space of unnormalized probabilities, that's Hilbert space.
Okay.
It's, it's exactly Hilbert space.
It's exactly the same thing.
Well, it's the projective geometry or it's, it's
once you have the Hilbert space is a linear flat space, yes, yes, yes, all of that.
But then, when we do physics, we do not use the whole Hilbert space, we just talk about the rays on the Hilbert space.
No, I agree, yes.
And that's, that's, that's what's emerging here.
Okay, so yeah, so you, you, yeah, okay, so you embed it in the projective geometry of a Hilbert space.
Right, yes, but I would like to emphasize that the Hilbert space itself is just a convenient construction.
It's extremely convenient because once you have a linear Schrodinger equation.
If you could take advantage of that linearity that would be great for calculation purposes I mean the whole of physics is based on on calculation methods that take advantage of the linearity of this of the Schrodinger equation.
But, but if you if you take the Schrodinger equation, and you impose that the state be normalized at the level of the Schrodinger equation, then all the advantage of linearity go down the drain, because you take two states.
You can superpose them, but the superpose state is not going to be normalized. So you have to play all sorts of additional games there to to renormalize and do all sorts of weird things.
So, so the normalization constraint really spoils a lot of the beautiful simplicity simplification that comes from dealing with an normalized probabilities.
So, and, and regarding that, you mentioned at some point that you allow for the freedom of having a non non time reversal symmetric.
That's a revolution right. So my question is, okay, what's the meaning of that. Does it means that somehow you will be if you allow for, for a non remember, I mean, let us call it motion reversal right if you have because you have it predefined what what's
the meaning, once you define the, the phase space, you know how to to to reverse motion there, it is previous to specifying the dynamics right so, but if you allow for a non time reversal dynamics.
You get something like the measurement process something like something that can go here to something or something like that. What's the meaning of that. Well, for example, okay, actually, one of the weird things about this this kind of approach is that you get quantum mechanics.
So, for example, if I do the same I the same approach and I do the dynamics, everything for a particle with spin.
What do I get.
I get the Pauli equation.
It's very nice. Very nice. And of course, just the inference process does not just the inference process does not completely determine what the Hamiltonian is going to be.
So, the Hamiltonian could include electromagnetic interactions, and it's actually very easy to see how, how it is, you can introduce electromagnetic interactions, and it could be very well be that your, your particle has some magnetic like moment.
Perfect. That's what you want if you would like to describe the electron or you would like to describe the proton. Great, or even the neutral, you can do all of those.
But it also offers the possibility of giving the particle and an electric dipole moment, which violates time reversal invariance.
So, so it just, it's, it opens up the possibilities for any kind of interactions you might include there, including ones that violate time reversal, the face space is symmetric, but the actual Hamiltonian flows can be chosen to not to be.
I should say that one of the things that sometimes people feel a little bit disappointed in is the fact that when I do a theory of this type, I get exactly quantum mechanics.
And so, okay, there is nothing new. Well, I would claim that it better there better be nothing new when I do this theory at the non relativistic level, if you discover any deviations from quantum mechanics, you're in deep trouble because quantum mechanics has been tested so well.
You should only expect deviations from quantum mechanics. If you were to do something where our, our, our conceptual understanding of the physics is a little bit shake here.
So if you try to do quantum fields in current space time, then, okay, then you could find differences. And indeed, if we do the scalar fields, propagating in a background space time, we get quantum field theory, period.
That's it, we don't get any, it's just quantum field theory on a curve space time.
It's fully relativistic and all. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No big deal. But if you make this, if you make the space time dynamical.
In other words, if you have this quantum field theory, interacting with gravity fully with a dynamical gravity, then you get differences.
You get violations of quantum mechanics, you can you can you still have Hamilton killing flows you still have all of that. Yes.
The Schrodinger equation, the Schrodinger functional equation is no longer linear.
And so I would say that we have here a prediction of this type of theory, one to mechanics, and it's attending Hilbert spaces will no longer propagate in unitary, according to a unitary evolution.
So let's start including gravity into the picture.
Okay, yes. Okay, yes, thanks. I see that with this framework, you have a lot of more freedom to to the form the thing when you jump outside.
I mean, yeah, okay, please. But, but my my previous question about non reversibility has to do with this. At the beginning of the talk you mentioned that the trajectories or the positions are are are real or determined or like.
Yes, like the volume, but the rest of the observables are not.
So, what do you mean by that.
My question is, wouldn't, isn't it possible to use this non reversal non non time reversal symmetric evolutions to model what happens in standard quantum mechanics during the measurement process.
How do you cope with the measurement process. Okay.
The answer is absolutely yes, but the time irreversibility that matters in this context is not the time irreversibility that comes from the beta parameter setting beta equal to zero not that.
Not that it comes from deciding.
I would like to say two things here. It's first, how do you do a measurement of say momentum in this theory.
All that's really position.
How do you measure momentum. Well, you measure momentum by measuring position.
Very much in the spirit of how do you measure spin, you measure spin in a standard device by measuring position so in the end, all measurements are positions. That's the only thing that's on pic.
And this is what solves the measurement problem. You only have positions positions are definite at all times unknown definite.
So you just measure them like some girl like momentum. Well, you have a wave function coming at you. You put a magnetic field, different plane wave components are going to be scattered in different directions.
Then you measure, you measure the position of the particle and from there you infer what the momentum could have been earlier. Right, right. It's all a matter of inference.
It's not observables. One could call them inferrables.
Yeah, so it is, it has it is sort of point in common with model interpretations that have have somehow a preferred algebra that is actual and the rest is only potential like in Olympia's interpretation or any works and
when you when when my model, you say model with the whole quantitative set of instruments that come from information theory probabilistic theory, when you really put your probabilities to work, and you have statistical manifolds with
information geometry and the updating is going to be induced by using entropies and you really use all that machinery of probability theory.
Then, yes, you, you, you do, you do get models that solve the measurement problem. No problem.
I see.
I see, I know I understand better your move. Yeah, let's see.
Then there is, there is, you see, this is the first half of a talk. The first half is purely kinematics. The second half is about what do you mean by time in such a picture you see geometry probability theory tells you nothing about time.
The same probability theory can be used for the stock market or ecosystems or quantum mechanics, but it can also be used for things that are completely static you can predict the future you can predict the past or infer the future in further past, right.
It's completely a temporal a fully dynamical description requires that we care about time.
What we're talking about the nature of time is not something that should concern us only when we're dealing with special activity or general activity.
Actually, it should concern us in quantum mechanics as well right, and the the entropic dynamics part of this program is the one in which we care about what do you mean by time.
How do you define time, what do you mean by an instant at this instance ordered. What is the separation between successive instance.
How do you define duration that that part of the of the program is really what makes the theory dynamical as opposed to just the kinematics. This is the kinematics skeleton of the field.
In that approach, time ends up being there is an hour of time, because successive instance are induced by maximizing an entropy.
So, so, so there is an ocean of an entropic time for them but that's another topic, right.
Another in for the next conference and in the next one.
You can come back to Argentina. Okay, okay, Ariel, thanks.
Oh, yes, yes.
Thanks for being here. And so we, we close this morning section now, but don't forget that later in the afternoon at two o'clock, Argentina time we have the poster session.
So, you are all invited to come there will be separate rooms where each participant will be presenting their posters, and you can ask them and have some chat and ask for details of their business.
