Yes. Thank you, Marcelo.
I want to thank the organizer for inviting me to give this talk at this night conference. This is one of my favorite conferences where we can meet with friends and discuss in a please and atmosphere.
I would also like to thank the organization of this edition of the band, and in this context of pandemic, and I hope that we can meet in a face to face meeting next time.
I'm going to talk on an entropic characterization of one to stay with maximum evolution. This world was done in collaboration with Andrea van des Amandes, Cesar Marlene and Angel Platino.
And to begin with, I will try to interact to motivate introduction of a measure of the amount of evolution, which is the measure that we maximize in order to obtain these optimal states.
There are several questions one can ask when analyzing the intention associated with quantum evolution. An important question is for how long does one have to wait in order to see something happening.
And another question, which is related to this question, is how fast can a quantum system evolve to an orthogonal state.
And this is the basic question addressed by studies on the quantum speed limit.
But with alternative and complementary question is how much happened during a certain period of time. This second question is a question I will address in this talk.
But let me first comment some briefly some ideas behind the quantum speed limit.
The problem of optimal evolution has attracted a lot of interest. That is because besides intrinsic interest as a fundamental question, the time limitation associated with quantum evolution also have practical implications.
So we are all focused on the limits imposed by the basics laws of quantum mechanics in the speed of information processing and information transmission.
This is the basic scheme we have here the initial state size zero which evolves unitary to an orthogonal state in a time tau.
This is the orthogonality time and this time can be regarded in the context of quantum computation in the computational state needed to perform some quantum process.
And this orthogonality time is connected with several fundamental aspects of quantum of quantum physics with important quantum implications in the field of quantum information.
And the concept of distinguishability because it's the time to evolve from between two distinguishable state the concept of distinguishability appear here, and this concept will have a central role in the talk.
So the first answer to the question to this first question came with this war in 1945. The war was by Leonard Mandelstein who died before the article was published.
After his children I got time, they derive a kind of uncertainty relation between energy and time, and that bound the time of this speed of evolution in terms of the spread of energy.
And 53 years later, indeed 53 years later a second answer came with this war by normal Malvolos and Levitin.
They derive another bound which is independent from the Mandelstein town bound, in the sense that the Mandelstein town bound cannot be obtained in terms of these other bound, and they bound the speed of evolution in terms of the mean energy of the system relative to the ground state.
So the Mandelstein time limit was introduced as I said before as an uncertainty relation between energy and time, and even it is not crucial for this talk I prefer to distinguish here between bounce and uncertainty relations.
For completeness I want to mention this war, also in the 90s by Yananda and Aharonov, they rewrite the Mandelstein time limit on a geometric foundations, and according this war by Yananda and Aharonov, the Mandelstein time limit can be interpreted as a comparison between the past follow in the state of space with the
basic endpoint of that evolution.
Here are the two bounds, and more recently in 2009 Levitin Antofoli introduced a unified version of the bound that take this form and this bound is tight and this expression is one usually used in problems in this field.
So to address the second question I will try to explain why we think this is an interesting question and even more a necessary question to be answered.
So, when studying problem related to the speed of quantum evolution and measured by the orthogonality time in system evolving continuously in time.
These two point or two observation that we need be in mind.
One is that most of the initial state never evolved into an orthogonal state.
In fact, the subset of the initial state that evolved that do evolve into an orthogonal state is a subset of measure zero in the state of force base.
So for those days that do evolve from an orthogonal state, the number of time that the system reaches a state also wanted to the initial one in an interval of final duration is itself finite.
So from, from these two observation, we can conclude that how the bytes grid and conceptual value is not directly applicable many relevant physical situations.
An alternative procedure, because this tau cannot be used to characterize the speed of evolution of many states because, for example, this time is infinite for many states and then cannot be used to characterize the speed of evolution.
As an alternative procedure we can, one can study the time needed to reach a state having a different value of the overlap that is not the time to reach an orthogonal state, but the time to reach a state with a given different from zero value of the overlap.
But if in contrast with the K of zero overlap, there are not a mathematical or physical reason to choose one value of the overlap of the overlap as a more fundamental than another.
It's very difficult here to put some conditions, and maybe it makes sense to explore different, different possible value, an approach, an approach that taking into account different possible values of the overlap.
And this is what I'm going to tell you in this talk. So this is the outline of the talk, I will, I will introduce the amount of quantity of evolution.
I will discuss some properties of this measure and I will show the behavior of the measure for some typical simple quantum systems.
Then I will show you a relation of this measure with the timeless approach to quantum dynamics.
In this tropic approach, we will see the quantum system that optimize the quantum evolution under constraint given by a fixed mean energy.
And to finish, I will present some discussion and final remarks.
The concept of distinguishability between quantum state is of particular importance in quantum information and in quantum computation in this is this concept of distinguishability, which lead to the idea of a China forthborn or so onality.
This distinguishability can be quantified for between two pure state with the square overlap of the state, if the square overlap, the four modules of the overlap of the state is equal to zero, then the two state are perfectly distinguishable.
This corresponds to two also on a state. And on the other extreme situation if the square modules of the overlap is equal to one, the two states are totally indistinguishable from each other.
That is indeed that these states represent the same physical state of the system.
So, our approach is based in the idea that a pure state take different degrees of distinguishability.
And in short, we propose a measure, which is complete is a complement to the time towards our reality, and to the time associated to the number of computational steps to use a measure of the amount of the evolution of a system, even by the average
distinguishability of the system as the system evolved.
So we define a measure in terms of the average of the time average distinguishability of the system. So this is the quantity that we propose to quantify the amount of quantum evolution.
This quantity is defined in an interval t1, t2 of length capital T. And here, phi t and phi t prime represent two states of the system at different instants of time, t and t prime respectively.
And this average distinguishability provides a quantitative assessment of how diverse are the states that the system visits during this time interval.
So, high values of t, that is values close to one, means that these two states are highly distinguishable or can be perfectly distinguishable.
And on the other hand, low values of the close to zero means that the means a low variation between the state of the system at time t and at time t prime that is this overlap is close to one and then this measure is close to zero.
So if we now consider this measure and move the interval of time, that is we consider the measure D in the interval t1 plus delta and t2 plus delta, we re-obtain with some algebra that I don't show you here, we re-obtain the same measure.
So this measure D depends on the length on the interval only through the length of the interval.
So we can write the measure in this more simple way.
This capital T is the length of the interval and without the generality we can write this integral between zero and t.
So this measure D does not depend on which time window we are looking at, but only the size of the window.
So this has a time translational symmetry.
And this is a nice property of the measure.
So now to go deeper in the in the in the form of the measure, which we do is to write this state phi t in an appropriate configuration by basis x, we can represent this state in this way where here x represents some spatial coordinate or any other degree of freedom of the state.
And this is the way function which satisfies as usual the Schrodinger equation, and it can be expanded in terms of the also normal eigenfunction and the eigenvalues of this Hamiltonian h here.
And this coefficient satisfies a normalization condition as usual.
If you put it all together this expression here and this expression here, we can compute this amount of evolution with this form.
And we can integrate and we obtain this final expression from the amount of evolution that experience a system in a time interval of lens capital T.
Well, here we define this omega nm, the difference between two different energies in and in.
So this expression has two contribution.
And one one one here this first term, which only depends on the coefficient of the expansion that is only depend on the initial state.
And this other contribution which is an auxiliary term, which depend on the length of the interval.
We define an asymptotic limit for this measure which is the limit of this measure when this capital T goes to infinity.
We call this asymptotic value DL, and we can prove that this measure is always less than or equal to its asymptotic value.
And I will show you now with some examples because it's more.
Some illustrative example, the behavior of the measure in terms of this time T and how the measure quickly reaches its asymptotic value.
So we compare the time scale associated with the measure D with other relevant time scale of the system.
For instance, the dynamical of the system characterized by the behavior of the also correlation function.
So on this, this is the also correlation function, it is defined as this overlap.
And we compute here both functions, they also correlation function and the amount of evolution for a qubit system.
So here we have these two level system.
We can write in terms of the this also gone out again function for one and three zero with two again value is zero and one.
And with this coefficient I said on anyone which satisfies the normalization condition.
So we can compute the also correlation function and the amount of evolution and we see here that the amount of evolution quickly reaches these figures are in terms as a function of the capital T over T C where T C is the natural
value of the system. And we see that the amount of evolution quickly reaches in all cases these different cases correspond to different values of the this coefficient I said here.
And in all cases the asymptotic value the asymptotic value is represented by this dashed line here. So in a time which is close to the characteristic time of the system.
We can see that the measure reaches the asymptotic value for all cases.
So, we also consider an harmonic oscillator showing that in a period of the also correlation function, the amount of evolution again reaches its asymptotic value.
So we consider a T level system we consider different values of the equal to four, eight and 50.
And we see that this measure D we can see we can show that this measure D is maximal in the equally weight case that is when all the coefficient of the function and equal to one over a square D where the is the number of level of the system.
The number increases with the number of turning with the number of the turning expansion, or which is the same as information regarding the particular energy I can state decreases.
This cure correspond to two, two, four, sorry, eight and 50 levels in the expansion.
So we consider here a two qubit system, which is a four level system here we consider the general spectrum of energy, and we obtain a similar result the measure D reaches is or almost reaches the asymptotic value in a time related to the characteristic time of the system.
So to finish this part of the talk, we consider a weight package in an infinite one dimensional potential of lens with with L.
The initial state is has this phone is a Gaussian packet, we can analytically approximate the coefficient of the function.
And we can compute the also correlation function and the amount of evolution for this packet in that infinite well, and although the analysis of the time scale evolving this problem is more complicated or more related that in the previous example.
In our post we we show the behavior of the measure related to the classical period of the system, and we see that for a time, a close to the classical period of the system to measure the amount of evolution, almost reaches its asymptotic value as in the previous examples.
And I show you here this last few in which we can see that the system exhibit rich and interesting features in the dynamics, such as a revival here we have a revival of the system at a time scale, which is more, which is larger than the time scale in which the measure
of evolution reaches its asymptotic value. So we can safely say that with some relevance aspect of the dynamic of the system are happening, the measure of the amount of evolution is in its is or almost is in its asymptotic value.
And we will come back on these results for the last part of the talk.
So,
sorry, I will show here a relation with the timeless approach to the quantum dynamics.
The time problem is central to modern physics, it impacts quantum mechanics, cosmology, general relativity, we have in the afternoon session of yesterday some interesting talks about time, indeed about the timeless approach also.
In an attempt to incorporate time in a fully quantum context, patient would propose this timeless approach in 1993 in this work.
And according this approach or this proposal is based on three main assumptions.
We will have a clock and a system which is the rest of the universe and the clocks and the system do not interact.
The system, the clock provides the parameter to the system, and the system and the clock are entangled, and the clock and the system as a whole are in an eigenstem of the total Hamiltonian.
So, in this, according to this timeless approach, the evolution of the rest of the of the rest of the universe, which is this is the system we call are reflects the fact that for different state of the clock that correspond different
states of the system, the system of interest, which is all the rest of the universe, while the whole universe, which is the system are on the clock remain in a single static state.
So, according the timeless approach, both the dynamics and time emerge from the correlations between the clock and the system.
So this is a scheme I borrowed this figure for this nice recent paper.
And here we have a in this timeline proposed one consider the whole universe as a close quantum system.
Composed by the clock whose degrees of freedom will be denoted by T and the rest of the universe, which we call are with some coordinate x.
And while here is there is a representation of the clock as a quantum system, each of these subsystems C and R have its corresponding Hilbert space.
So, this whole system the universe stay is in a egg and saying of a total Hamiltonian with corresponding a game value equal to zero concede inconsistent consistently with the wheeler there with a question.
So, and we, we consider that the system is described by this function we can write this expression for the state of the universe, where again here X represent a special coordinate or any other degree of freedom of interest of the system or
which can be of one or many particles and a team represent the basic state of a clock.
And this is the I mean 10 of these are the Eigen state of a of a clock observer.
So, I don't go. I will, I won't go deeper with these approaches.
But one thing that one, I sometimes interested in is incomplete in in calculate entanglement between the clock and the rest of the system as as the universe is in a pure close quantum state entanglement can be quantified through the degree of degree of
thickness of the marginal reduced density matrix. So, which we do here is compute the reduced density matrix of the system of interest which is the rest of the universe, tracing over the degrees of freedom of the clock.
And we compute the entanglement using the linear entropy of course we can compute entanglement using the four normal entropy which is the standard measure of entanglement for pure state, but this is also a nice a quantifier of entanglement and if we obtain this for the entanglement
between the system and the clock, and if we compare this expression with the our expression of the amount of evolution.
We can say that the amount of evolution experience they went on system in a time interval, capital T correspond from the time and point point of view to the amount of correlation between the system and the clock.
And according with which we use our previous results, which we see in the few slides before.
At the length of the interval T increases the quantum correlation between the clock and the system, it has the value of DL which is the asymptotic value of the amount of evolution.
So just going into the last part, we assume that our measure D is well approximated by its asymptotic value, so we take D equal to its asymptotic value DL.
And under this assumption, we now investigate the state that maximize this amount of evolution under constraint of fixed mean energy.
So, this is now our measure. This is the asymptotic value of the measure. Remember that here we are taking only the first time in the whole of the whole expression of the amount of evolution, because we are approximating the amount of evolution which is the
asymptotic value because it's this asymptotic value is quickly reaching in the dynamic.
So, this expression here can be written because of the normalization condition that satisfies this coefficient can be written in this way, which can be a reading, writing again in this way, now in terms of energy.
We can identify this probability of getting the particular value of energy EI when measuring the system energy.
So, we can write this quantity here or this DL equal to the linear entropy of the energy distribution.
The linear entropy has a statistical clear statistical interpretation, if one measure them the energy of two identical prepared copies of the system the linear entropy equals the probability of getting a different result in this measurements.
So, in this sense, the linear entropy can be regarded as a measure of diversity, diversity in the way that the different energy energy eigenvalues are represented in the quantum state under consideration.
In fact, the linear entropy is used as a diversity as a diversity index and biology, for example, which is sometimes referred to as a Chinese Samsung index.
If we see here in the situation of zero energy diversity, the situation corresponds to energy eigenstay, which is when the system is in energy eigenstay, and this is a state that basically that I say that that does not give way.
So, we now investigate the state that optimize this measure, this linear entropy, and these are the steps that we follow we approximated the amount of evolution but it's a synthetic value and the synthetic value of the amount of evolution is equal to the linear entropy of the energy distribution.
So, we find the optimal state and this optimal state can be regarded as state that evolved, that evolved the most under even energy resources and have an energy distribution which is given by this expression.
And this is a problem of optimization with two constraints, the normalization and the fixed mean energy and can be usually solved using Lagrange multipliers, but we follow a different path and we directly prove that this optimal probability distribution that this is the optimal probability distribution of energy.
Well, here a is a constant of normalization a factor of normalization and B is a real a parameter with units of inverse of energy, and this is the heavy side step function.
And we prove that between all the probability distribution that certifies the normalization condition and the fixed mean energy sorry.
This is the optimal probability distribution which maximized the linear entropy.
And we, with this equation we obtain this relation for the optimal amount of evolution, which resembles this thermo dynamical relation between the end the standard entropy, the energy and the temperature here.
So, we can identify that these two AB plays a role of an inverse temperature like quantity, and this that this optimal measure of the amount of evolution, certifies a kind of semi statistical relation.
As the thermo dynamical relation as that a well known thermo dynamical relation between the entropy energy and beta associated with the canonical in some.
So, of course, this problem also can be solved using a branch multiplier and this is the variational problem that we need to solve when here we have one large multiple a play a pliers alpha, and then normalization condition the fixed energy condition as we solve this
variational problem we obtain of course the same probability optimal probability distribution here we obtained this expression and we can relate alpha zero with two a and alpha one with two AB and it.
With this method, the cutoff of the probability solution need to be analyzed it cannot be derived directly from the solution of the variational problem.
So, just let me show you the last result.
We explore the behavior of the this optimal measure of the amount of evolution as a function of the mean energy of the system.
And then the figures correspond to the examples we we see before we saw before sorry.
The cubic system the harmonic oscillator to give a system and the ocean by packet and the the dependence of the measure differ from system because they have different energy spectrum.
However, all exhibit a similar behavior all the measures are the cure exceeding a monotony monotony monotony, monotony, increasing behavior of the as a function of the mean energy which correspond to a positive value of the that a temperature like quantity.
And the cure also exhibit the definite concavity.
Which mean that the the optimal amount of evolution and energy resources obey relation of diminishing returns that is as the mean energy of the system increases.
The increments of the mean energy are less efficient to increment the optimal amount of evolution and this is more evident in this to figure figures here on the left, where we can see that increasing the the resources of the system the optimal amount of evolution,
increase in a smaller quantity.
To finish, I will show you some discussion we have introduced these quantitative measure of the amount of evolution.
And this measure is defined or as the time average of the distinguish ability between different a state of the state of the system at different time in a given interval.
And we show that the measure depend on interval only to the length of the interval, which is a kind of a translational variant property.
And we show that this measure is always sorry.
Forget this this measure is always a equal or less than its asymptotic value and this asymptotic value is equal to the linear entropy of the energy probability distribution and this asymptotic value is quickly rigid in the most of the those typical a quantum system.
I show you.
And using this approximation for the money of evolution we investigate the quantum state that evolved the most and they're given energy resources.
And we find that the relation between the optimal measure and the, and the state is related to the mean energy so at the most statistical life format.
So that's a, I think I will stop here and
Thanks for your attention.
Well now we have the work, the reference of the work.
Perfect.
We have time for questions.
We have a question for Martin music.
Martin.
Yeah, thanks for your nice talk.
I have a question short question.
When, when you calculate the entanglement between the clock and the system by using the linear entropy, you recover a relation between this entanglement mission and your, your mission of average distinguish this thing, which I did.
Well, what happened if you use another measure of entanglement, because for pure state or other or entropy are equally.
No.
Yes, you can define another well defined measure of average distinguish distinguishability.
Maybe, I don't know.
We don't go deeper in this in this line in that line. And I don't know what happened because, yes, we can, maybe we can define another measure of the amount of evolution.
It's a quite simple measure to them of the amount of evolution and this measure is related with the linear entropy of the energy probability distribution but it's just a proposal.
And, and the things can come naturally. Yeah, we, we define this measure in a very simple way as this time average of the distinguishability, just using this expression for distinguishability but maybe we can prove another form of distinguishability in turn of another quantifier of distinguishability
between the states. Yes, because my intuition is there is more fundamental structure between entanglement and distinguishability.
More, yes, fundamental relation only for this particular measure, maybe.
Okay, thanks.
Yes.
We have another question from Federico.
Thanks for this interesting talk. I have a question about the property of D, which is that it is only dependent on the length of the time interval, but that's this property only holds for close systems or if you have a system interacting with an environment.
Yeah, I don't know because we introduced this measure only for a pure system, which evolved continually in time and that is this and this variation and not restricted to a discrete system it could be any system of continuous variable but we consider only pure state and all derivation is in turn of pure state.
Maybe it could be an interesting question and we can work on that idea.
Yeah, because perhaps you can just check it by putting a model and see what happens right.
Okay, thanks. Thanks. Very interesting.
Thank you.
