Okay, welcome to the last session of the day. The next talk is in charge of Angelo
Plastino from the National University of La Plata, with the talk Pauli Principle and Inflation.
Good afternoon everybody. There is no doubt that Pauli Principle is one important piece of the
foundations of quantum mechanics. On the other hand, cosmic inflation is one phenomenon associated
to the big bank that helps to explain the large features of our universe that would be quite
a mystery without cosmic inflation. Cosmic inflation has been invented 40 years ago, exactly in
1991 by Alangus. Okay, so this talk will try to connect the Pauli Principle with cosmic inflation.
This work has two co-authors, which are Mario Roca from my University of La Plata
and Gustavo Ferri from the University of La Pampa, which is also in Argentina, some 800 kilometers
from La Plata. And it was published in the middle of the pandemics in July of last year.
And here is the reference.
Okay, let's first of all try to briefly say what all this is about.
We are trying to connect a basic concept of quantum mechanics that is the Pauli Principle
with a cosmic phenomenon which is in cosmic inflation and with elementary statistical
mechanics, very elementary statistical mechanics. And we begin with the number of microstates.
And the assertion that because of the Pauli Principles, a given number of fermions cannot
be accommodated into arbitrarily small volumes V. So a minimum volume
is needed to accommodate n fermions. That doesn't happen with motions. You can accommodate n motions
instead of volume, but this cannot happen with fermions. Why? Because of the Pauli Principle.
And in this talk, I will try to connect what I just said about volumes with cosmic inflation.
So the idea, the central idea is that to accommodate n fermions into a slightly determinant,
that's the way one works with fermions with slightly determinants. We need a minimum radius,
which is a consequence of the Pauli Principle. And we will extrapolate this ordinary simple
statistical feature. We will extrapolate it to a cosmological setting. And we will be able to
predict a special temperature value for the end of inflation, which agrees with the current estimates.
So again, cosmic inflation is a widely accepted phenomenon. We need it.
We thoroughly need it to understand the large features of the universe. But the
detailed particle physics mechanism responsible for inflation is unknown.
So the basic paradigm accepted by most people in physics
is that there was an exponential expansion of the universe very shortly after the singularity
generated in the big bang, from about 10 to the minus 36 seconds to 10 to the minus 32 seconds.
And we will appeal now to micro canonical statistical mechanics to link the Pauli
principle with the inflation, the cosmic inflation process. So in all this talk, I will be using
the micro canonical ensemble of Gibbs. There are three big ones, so three important ones,
the canonical, the grand canonical, the micro canonical. Most books deal with the canonical
and the grand canonical ensembles, but our arguments here belong to the micro canonical
treatment of statistical mechanics. And you can find the data relating to important data,
or most important data related to the big bang in this reference at the end of the page, from
to zero one four. Okay, I begin now with the most important relation of this paper, which is
the number of cells for the cell multiplicity for an n particle mono atomic ideal gas with energy
E and volume V in phase space. And this number is equation one, the number of cells is a function
of the volume, the energy and the number of fermions and some very well known constants.
As I told you, you probably won't find this equation in ordinary textbooks like one.
A whole textbook, which is devoted only to the micro canonical ensemble is given here from
2014. And the author is called Lemons, a student guide to entropy from Cambridge University Press.
In this book, you find all the whole of the statistical, the whole of elementary statistical
mechanics, treated, discussed, explained from the point of view of the micro canonical ensemble.
Okay, so this is our equation one is our fundamental equation,
which I repeat again as a question to
we deal with the number of particles, the volume and the energy, because those are the
thermal variables of the micro canonical ensemble. So we are forced to use them and no other ones,
for example, not the temperature. The temperature belongs to the canonical ensemble, for example,
but not to the micro canonical ensemble.
Okay, again, equation three is the same equation, the number of cells
for n fermions. And now we give the volume, the standard form in terms of a field of
a given radius and this radius will be important for our big bang
considerations. This is the radius we need to accommodate n fermions.
So in a statistical mechanics,
since the multiplicity allows us to express the entropy, remember that the Boltzmann entropy is
equal to the Boltzmann constant times the multiplicity omega. Now to accommodate in n small
cells, capital N fermions, you have the multiplicity of equation four, which is a simple combinatorial
expression that does not deserve much consideration.
Here we are dealing with very large numbers of course, so we can use a stealing principle
or stealing formula or stealing recipe and approximate the gamma function according to equation five.
And then express the multiplicity that we need is the essential quantity in
in a micro canonical description of anything, the main statistical mechanics
quantity is the multiplicity. And equation six, as you see, is an awful, very awful expression
because it has our number of cells, small n in the non exponential, we have it in a logarithm,
it's an awful expression. So to simplify this awful expression six, we change the scale of the
variable r of the radius in the in terms of a new variable s that eats a lot of our variables,
so they will allow us for a more
for a multiplicity omega, which is our equation eight, which follows below,
in which now you see clearly that at least we see, we can present where the distance indicator s
is no longer the radius r, I insist it is the variable s small, now we see it in appearing
in exponentials and logarithms, but at least it is there.
Okay, of course the multiplicity is a number which is larger than one, which entails
that its logarithm is larger than zero.
Now, we can take the logarithm of omega in equation eight to simplify things
and go to equation ten, which is the expression of its logarithm,
it's still an awful equation, but at least one gets an idea of what we are dealing
with and now comes our central point.
The universe began or shortly after it began, it consisted of radiation
and a gluon word plasma.
At some short time after the singularity, variants begin to emerge.
These variants that emerged shortly after the big bang out of the word gluon plasma
are the protagonists of our tale, of our story here and we happen in equation ten,
in an awful expression, but we like this question.
When variants just emerged, there were no variants and suddenly variants
started emerging, at the very beginning there will be just one slate of the determinant and
one, the multiplicity omega will be equal to one. So, which is the solution for the
variable, the radius indicator is to get that logarithm of omega is equal to one.
That is the central point of the talk, the whole talk revolves around the moment at which
the first variants emerge, the format slate of the determinant, there is no other way
and the multiplicity must be one, because there is just one slate of the determinant
and what is the radius indicator S that gets the logarithm of omega equal to unity,
which is that special value of S. So, we have here an equation equal to zero, which is equation 11
and equation 11 has just two solutions.
The radius indicator S can be zero or the radius indicator S can be one.
That solves the equation for getting multiplicity unity,
but S cannot be zero because then
the multiplicity omega would be negative, which is absurd.
So, the only possible solution to equation 11 is that the indicator of the radius indicator S
is equal to one and so suddenly our first slate of the determinant with N variants has a radius
which is not necessarily small, it's a kind of phase transition, it's not just zero point
something, it's one, there is a jump from S equal zero to S equal one instantaneously as soon as any
variants emerge. Let's go to equation seven, remember that S equal one implies a finite value for the
radius R of our N variants. And here we say, okay, this jump in radius
needed to accommodate the first N variants that emerged from the
quarter one plasma, this jump of radius from zero to one constitutes inflation.
So, we are here making the hypothesis that the mechanism behind cosmic inflation is just a simple
quantum statistical mechanics argument regarding multiplicity, but we have numbers because
if S is equal to one, we can then for example try to estimate how many fermions, how many variants
emerge at the beginning, this is the number of variants. Of course, we need to know what is
at the end of the inflationary period, but that is a known number, the radius of the universe
at the end of the inflationary period is 17 centimeters. So, if we take R equal to zero,
equal 17 centimeters, we get a number of variants emerging
from the big bang, from the quarter one plasma, excuse me, which is a large number.
They all appear at the very beginning and they are of the order of 10 to the 48.
So, when variants emerge, they emerge as a whole bunch of variants, 10 to the 48
variants suddenly emerge out of the workluon plasma and they occupy
a reasonable large radius of 17 centimeters. Note, however, that this number, which is big,
10 to the 48 is small compared to the number of variants that we have today at the universe.
Today at the universe, we have of the order of 10 to the 79 variants, so 10 to the 48 is just a
very, very, very tiny small fraction of the number of variants that we have today.
And now comes a very strong point, we believe, a strong point for us, for our argument,
not for us, but for our argument.
Okay, we use the celebrated equation for entropy
invented by Botsman that we find at his tomb at the cemetery of Vienna,
that the entropy is the Boltzmann constant, that's the logarithm of the multiplicity omega.
And we know that the temperature obeys the equation one over temperature
is equal to the derivative of the entropy with respect to the energy,
of course taken at the end is equal one. If we, it's a simple equation 14 is what we have,
and if you put the corresponding numbers there, we find that the temperature at the end
of the inflationary period is a temperature of the order of 10 to 18 Kelvin degrees.
And this agrees with what people know about the inflationary period.
They know a lot of things, which are in a reference that I put at the very beginning
of this talk. And one of the things that you will find is this kind of number,
that the inflation ended at the temperature of 10 to the 18 Kelvin degrees.
And we obtain this value out of the micro canonical ensemble.
So I reach here the conclusions. What we have done here is just a very, very envelope
calculation using a simple micro canonical and statistical argument
that shows that because of poly principle and fermions in our case and variance
need a finite volume to exist.
And when they arose out of the globe, blue and plasma,
they needed a volume of about the point 17 centimeters.
And the micro canonical considerations tell you immediately that the temperature has to be
of the order of 10 to the 18 degrees, which is what is needed to describe inflation.
So to end this short talk, what I have tried to show is that
based on the poly principle, that without any doubt is an important piece of the foundation
of quantum mechanics. Half of quantum mechanics is the poly principle.
That starting with the poly principle and with the micro canonical ensemble of GIFs,
you can immediately do a very simple calculation that gives you a number that agrees with what
people that work on the singularity on the big bang on inflation tell us that
the temperature at the end of inflation is of the order of 10 to the 18 Kelvin degrees.
So we see, and this is then, that the extremely simple micro canonical statistical argument
can say is able to predict something about the universe at large. From a very small piece
of statistical mechanics, we can say something about the whole universe at its beginning.
Thank you very much.
Okay, thank you for your talk. Now we have some minutes for questions or comments.
Thanks, Angel, for this interesting talk. The Pauli exclusion principle is
puzzling for me because any other quantum characteristic like entanglement or coherence
in general will be destroyed by heat and high temperatures that occur in cosmological events.
But it seems that the Pauli, I mean the coherence will destroy any quantum
property. But it seems to me that the Pauli exclusion principle is still valid even in a very
heated path surrounding the quantum system. So do you have a word on that or a clue to
understand better what's going on there? Well, I have done it in other contexts. I have done
calculations, statistical mechanical calculations. For example, with nuclear matter,
you know, when you have heavy ion collisions, which are done every day today,
temperatures get very high, but the Pauli exclusion principle works fine. I mean,
that's why I was emphasizing that it is a very basic piece of the foundations of
statistical mechanics. Although you are right, it is not clear why other quantum mechanical
features seem to vanish if you go to high temperatures because you go to the classical
limit at high temperatures. But it seems that not the Pauli principle, even with the high
temperatures that people get in accelerators today in heavy ion collisions, the Pauli principle
is respected. There is no way of violating. So it's something very strong that you are right.
From the philosophical point of view or epistemological point of view, it is not clear why
why it holds always.
Yeah, it's really, really puzzling. I think it's a very an open problem, an open problem. I
haven't found any explanation of that. No, no, from epistemology there is a big question.
Yeah, because there is no classical limit. Yeah, if the classical limit would affect
the Pauli principle, all matter would collapse, right? Exactly. So thanks to the Pauli principle,
we exist. And we are in this beautiful meeting. Thanks. Thanks, Sanchez. Thank you.
Well, we are in time. So thanks, Hannah. If we have some minutes, there is another question.
So, no. Now, yes, we thanks to Angela for the talk and the people who participate with questions.
