Yes.
Okay, great.
So, yeah, let me start by thanking the organizers for the opportunity to present my work.
It's actually the first time that I'm attending this conference and I must say that I really enjoyed it. I enjoyed a lot of talks for the past three days. So thank you for having me here.
My name is Bata Ziawin and I'm a PhD student at the International Center for Fury of Quantum Technologies at the University of Gdańsk in Poland.
And we have a Quantum Foundations group here.
The leader of the group is Anna Bell and Science. And as you can see, she's also a collaborator on this work, as well as David Schmidt and Mati Homan.
So today I will talk about quantifying EPR, the Resource Fury of Non-Classicality of Common Cause Assemblages.
We recently put this draft on our archive, so if you find what I'll be talking about interesting, you can of course ask me questions, but I also encourage you to look at the paper.
Okay, so let me start with a question.
Is quantum steering spooky action at a distance? Because it is sometimes called this way.
So the steering phenomena is a form of non-classical correlations that arise when one considers measurements performed on half of a bipartite system prepared on an entangled state.
So if we try to represent the situation graphically, we end up with a picture like this.
The double lines correspond to quantum systems and single lines correspond to classical systems.
So we have two parties, we have Alice and we have Bob, and they share entangled states.
Alice prepares measurement on it, so this represents a measurement device that takes a classical input X and outputs a classical variable A.
And now, depending on X and A on Alice's side, Bob's system can be described by this conditional quantum state, row A given X.
So why is it sometimes called spooky action at a distance?
Well, it is because Alice and Bob are two space-like separated parties, but it seems that Alice can somehow steer Bob's system into this conditional state.
The steering was actually given by Schrödinger himself, and he called it that because from this scenario it kind of seems that maybe Alice has an influence on what's happening in Bob's laboratory.
But this is not the only perspective that we can take when we talk about this scenario.
The second one was endorsed actually by EPR themselves, so by Einstein Podolski and Rosen in their original work.
And it is that simply Alice updates her knowledge of the state of Bob's system by performing a measurement on a system correlated with his.
And of course, it makes perfect sense that Alice and Bob share a correlated system, so when Alice learned something about it, she also updates her knowledge on what's happening in Bob's laboratory.
So is steering spooky action at a distance? Well, not really, it's neither spooky or action at a distance.
And because of this, throughout this presentation, I will not refer to this phenomenon as steering, but simply as EPR scenario, where again EPR stands for Einstein Podolski and Rosen.
So, well, we could say that it's just a change of name and maybe from a technical perspective, well, it doesn't make much difference, but from the foundational perspective, it actually makes a huge difference how we look at this scenario.
So let me just recap everything that I just said. So from Schrödinger point of view, he called this phenomenon quantum steering, in a sense that quantum, because he thought that quantum state is a physical property of a system.
And the fact that Alice steers Bob means that there is some kind of super luminaire causal influence.
So in the modern language, we would call a set of beliefs that see on to view, which basically means that this is quantum states describe distinct physical states of the world.
And in the final, what EPR interpreted it as, they said, well, spooky action at a distance is not really acceptable.
So quantum state, we can take it to be a representation of one's information about the system. And then in this scenario, Alice simply learns about true state of Bob system.
And at this point of view, could be described in the modern language as the C.
Which is basically that quantum states represent states of knowledge about the world.
Okay, so after this foundational motivation, let me go into the actual resource theory.
We'll talk about EPR scenarios. And what we take to be the defining features of an EPR scenario are the following. First, common cause causal structure. So as I said, we have two parties, Alice and Bob, and they share a common cause, which in this case is quantum.
And the second defining feature of this scenario are types of systems that parties have access to. So on Alice's side, it will be a classical input and a classical output, while on Bob's side, it will be a trivial input because he has no input at all, and a quantum output.
Very usual to describe EPR scenarios with quantum assemblages. So quantum assemblages assemblages is an object like this, where each conditional state contains information about what's going on on Alice's side.
So this probability distribution of obtaining an outcome a given an input x and what's happening on Bob's laboratory so this conditional state.
Okay, so we want to create a resource theory of assemblages resource theories allow one to formally quantify physical resources. So in our case, the resources are assemblages.
And what we want to quantify is their non classic quality.
The structure of a resource theory is completely determined by the set of free operations. So free operations are operations that cannot create a resourceful object. And because of this, they can also be applied to different resources for free.
Because if we apply a free operation to the resource, it will not increase the resourcefulness of it.
And now, for the case of assemblages, our upload follows the recent developments of resource theories for studying non classicality of common cost processes, where in the free operations are local operations and shared randomness.
So as I said, an EPR scenario is simply a common cost process.
And because of this, we take a lesson from some papers that were already published and common cost processes are studied with LOSR operations.
And in particular, there's this paper here that basically creates a new branch of entanglement LOSR entanglement in contrast to LOSC entanglement where CC stands for classical communication, and that people usually talk about.
And in this paper, it is shown that taking this LOSR perspective actually resolves some anomalies of entanglement.
And there is also this paper here, which treats common cost boxes so things like burst scenario where we have a common cost structure again.
But here both parties just have access to classical inputs and classical outputs.
And because we can study both entanglement and bell type scenarios using LOSR, it means that we can also study their interplay, which is really amazing because it means that we can have like one unified resource theory of common cost processes with different types of resources like entanglement bell boxes or assemblages.
And we can study their relative non classicality.
I also recommend this paper if you are interested in this stuff because it talks about a type independent resource theory, which considers even more types than just entanglement assemblages and bell boxes.
Because in the literature it was pretty well motivated to study LOSR for common cost processes, but even from simply looking at the DPR scenario, well we can see that it is a common cost process.
So we have two parties.
It's perfectly fine to allow local operations for each of the parties local operations can be classical quantum.
It will be quantum on both side. And because we want to study the non classicality of assemblages, we do allow classical common causes for free.
So what you can see on this picture here on the right is an assemblage where the common cause is classical.
It's a classical variable lambda and she performs measurement while Bob prepares a quantum state depending on the value of the classical variable.
And we call such assemblage a free assemblage because it can be created solely by free operations so LOSR operations, and it can be decomposed like this.
So on Alice's side, we just have this probability distribution where lambda is the short variable and on Bob's side, he prepares this quantum state.
So, I'll, for now I'll just mention that there are also different approaches to studying non classicality of assemblages.
So here is one resource theory that was developed a few years ago that the set of the free operations in this research theory was the hasty one way classical communication and local operations.
And after I'll introduce our approach the LOSR one, I will compare it to the previous one, but I'll do it later on in my presentation.
Here in black we have the original assemblage and now the most general LOSR operation that we can perform on it as first analysis site.
We have a classical preprocessing of this classical variable. We have a classical post processing of the output variable.
We have this post processing of his quantum state. So this will be just a CPTP map. And now the actions of local operations on Alice's side and the local operation on Bob's side can be correlated by shared randomness.
So classical common cause. So this will be the lambda that's distributed to Alice and to Bob.
Okay, so now that we have a resource theory and we have the set of three operations, we can study the properties of the preorder so we can study the relative non classicality of assemblages.
And what we showed is that a sample conversion under LOSR can be tested using a single instance of a semi definite program.
One assemblage is said to be more non classical than another, if it can be fully converted to the latter. So if we have the black assemblage, and we can convert it into a different one, the one with primes with free operations.
Well, it means that they can be used, for example, for the same task, because they have this one will be at least as non classical as this one.
So we showed that checking such conversions can be tested by checking if the following program is feasible. So I have the semi definite program here but maybe let me not go into details about it.
If any of you is interested in the details, I can just, we can talk about it later doing the questions. But the important lesson here is that how this program works is that you just input to assemblages.
It shows you what one can be converted into the other. And it works really fast. It's just a single instance. So it's really amazing because it's a great tool to study the relative non classicality of assemblages.
And we use this to study the structure of the preorder. And one interesting result that we found is an infinite family of incomparable resources. So resources that none of them can be converted into any other.
And this family goes like as follows. So what we checked is that we had in scenario where we have Alice and Bob, and they share this state here so they share a partially entangled state.
Now Alice performs Sigma Z and Sigma X measurements on it. So such an sampled would be described like this. So Alice performs this measurement Bob does nothing and they share this partially entangled state.
But now something else that we allow is mixing with noise. So there's something that we study is defined here.
So it's parameterized by these two parameters, theta and P, where theta corresponds to this theta here in the partially entangled states and P corresponds to the level of mixing with noise.
So you can see here that with some probability we create this element of the assemblage and then we mix it with noise.
And now the results of the program that I just showed you are presented in this graph here. So here each dot corresponds to one assemblage. So for example, this one is an assemblage created where Alice and Bob share a state with theta being equal to pi over four.
So it's a so called maximally entangled state. And they don't mix it with noise because P is equal to one.
And now the arrow from here to here means that under LOS operations we can convert this assemblage to this one where this one is when Alice and Bob share a state with theta being equal to pi over 12 and they mix it with noise with this P being equal to 0.9.
So as you can see, we can like using the SDP, we can check whether different converters are possible.
But one interesting property that we can see here is in this family here. So for P being equal one for different values of theta, no conversions are possible.
And we actually checked it analytically and we showed that this is the family of incomparable resources. So for all values of theta from zero to pi over four, so like up to a so called maximally entangled state.
All of these assemblages for P being equal to one are incomparable.
And yeah, we also developed some new EPR monotone scene order to confirm this result analytically.
Okay, as I promised, I'll now compare it to prior work, which was a resource theory of so called steering under statistical collaborations and one way classical communication from Bob to Alice.
So this set of free operations is of course a valid set of free operations for EPR scenarios, which means that it cannot create a resourceful object.
And it goes as here. So again in black we have the original assemblage and in green, we have the free operation. So here Bob has an instrument that he performs on his part of the state.
And as an output he gets first of all the classical variable that he sends to Alice, and also his quantum state. And now Alice has a classical pre processing of her variable that depends on the message that she received from Bob, and she also has a post processing.
So the motivation between behind the set of free operations was that the authors claim that is the most general set of free operation free operations that does not compromise the security of one sided device independent quantum key distribution protocols for them steering as a useful resource.
So the motivation here is a particular protocol in quantum information.
Okay, so if you want to compare it to our work to LOS approach, the first thing that we can show is a pretty big difference. So the two resource theories actually have different pre orders, which means that if we have a set of assemblages and we want to study it and we will study it with two different approaches.
So if we look at this one here, and with our LOS approach, we can actually get different results because the pre orders are different.
Now, our LOS approach has some conceptual advantages over over this one. And one is that it has a clear physical motivation.
The motivation for this approach here as one way LCC is this one sided device independent quantum key distribution protocol, while for our LOS are approach and the the conceptual underpinning is more foundational because it comes from the causal structure of this scenario.
And because of this, we have this unification of every type of non classical correlation in bill like scenarios. So we have a single LOS our resource theory for common cost scenarios.
And there are also some technical advantages. So for example, our LOS our approach is simpler to characterize and study this SDP this semi definite program is a good example that in our approaches, it's really easy to study the conversions.
And the other technical advantage is that our approach for them by apartheid scenario actually has some direct generalizations, for example, to multi apartheid epr scenarios but also to Bob with input and channel epr scenarios were by channel epr scenarios.
I mean something that's usually referred to as channel steering.
And we left Bob with input and channel for future work, but we did study the multi apartheid scenarios so let me just say a few words about this right now.
So let's go to a multi apartheid setup which means that we now have more analysis.
And as you can see everything just generalizes from the bipartite case so we still have a common cause so we have the short randomness that goes to each party.
And each party also can perform local operations. So we have local operations for Alice one Alice to and for Bob.
And what we showed in the multi party scenario is that a sandwich conversion can be tested using a tested using a single instance of a semi definite program.
So we generalize the program that I showed you before to work from the party scenarios.
And we also found a family of incomparable resources. So we have these two results that are very like they go in analogy to the bipartite case.
But one thing that's a little bit extra here is a clear definition of a multi apartheid free assembler.
So again free assembler is one that can be can be created using only three operations.
And since we studied on classicality, the free assembler will be a classical assembler or how people usually call it in the literature so an unstable assembler.
And actually, there are a lot of definitions of a free multi apartheid assembler in the literature.
The most general that you will find is this one. So it's that an assembler is free if it can be decomposed like this.
So we have this probability distribution for Alice's and we have the state for Bob.
And actually in the most general definition, there are no constraints on this probability distribution here.
For example, this probability distribution is allowed to be signaling for each lambda, as long as the signaling average is out when we sum over all numbers.
So such a thing is usually referred to as fine tuning that we have this kind of undesired effect for each lambda but then it's average is out.
And it can be seen as problematic from some perspectives.
And there are a few different problems that arise for this definition, maybe I will not really go into detail here.
But we don't have any of these problems in our LOSR approach.
So, if we look at the set of free operations, again, in our LOSR approach, well, it's pretty clear that a one prime depends only on X one prime and lambda.
And a two prime depends only on X two prime and lambda. So this probability distribution in our case will factorize.
So in our LOSR approach, every assembler is one that decomposes like this. So we don't really have any problems with signaling or any of the ones that appear for this more general definition.
Okay, so that's pretty much it. Let me just make some final remarks.
So what I just presented to you was a resource theory of common cost assemblages for bipartite and multi-partite EPR scenarios.
And it was motivated by a clear causal interpretation of an EPR scenario that is a common cause that Alice and Bob share.
Thanks to this causal interpretation, this notion is a unified notion of common cause resources.
And it works for example for EPR scenarios, but also for Bell scenarios and entanglement.
We showed that testing conversions is numerically tractable, which is very useful if you want to study the preorder of resources.
And we use this results to show some interesting properties of the preorder.
And finally, in the multi-partite case, we had a well motivated definition of a free multi-partite assembler.
So thank you for your attention. And I would be very glad to take any questions.
Okay, thank you for your talk.
Now, we'll have some minutes for questions or comments.
If somebody has a question, please take this.
Yes.
Thank you for the talk. I think it was very well presented.
And I am a little confused about the general picture of what you're doing.
So, okay, let me try to state what I think is your project and let me relate it to some issues that seem to be relevant.
Okay, so if I understand you correctly, you first presented the view of Schrodinger, according to which there seems to be some type of action matter distance in a typical EPR scenario.
And you said correctly that EPR themselves, in particular Einstein, had this view that, well, it might be that in reality quantum mechanics is not complete and that the quantum state somehow reveals is about the knowledge of Alice or Bob.
Okay, that perhaps there is something more to the quantum state.
And in your case, there seems to be a reference to a common cause in the past of Alice's and Bob's labs. Okay.
There seems to think that you can recover locality by this way of thinking. And the problem I see is that, well, that is precisely the starting point with Bell's work and with his theorem.
And this question was, well, can we recover locality by doing something like whatever Einstein thought, and his theorem is, no, you cannot do it.
You cannot have a local theory.
Yeah, because any theory that that is non local in the sense is going to make this inequalities is going to satisfy the same qualities we go, we check time and again we notice that the inequalities are violated.
And the consequence seems to be that, well, any non local theory is not going to work. So, so let me know, what am I missing on how
Yeah, so you're not really missing anything. So let me start with your bell comparison. So this is a bell type experiment right we have a common cause and we have two parties and they make measurements.
So now, if this common causes classical just by studying this causal structure so the fact that you have a common cause and you have inputs and outputs, you can derive bell inequalities.
If the common cause is classical, you can just like the upper bound on the CHSH inequalities to if the common causes quantum, it's two times the square root of two.
And if it is allowed to be anything more, but there is still no signalling between the parties we have the PR box right so it goes up to four.
Now, is the same with EPR scenarios so if this is a classical common cause, then the assemblages free and it's classical. So, as you said it kind of recovers the locality in in this sense, but if it's quantum we get assemblages that cannot be explained.
That's with classical physics.
But then you must somehow be violating one of the assumptions of those theorem. Right, you must be violating settings independence, either by postulating some sort of common cause between the state of lambda the common cause and the settings of Alice and what, or you're assuming something
like a retrocast theory in which Alice's settings somehow influence the state of the system, the common cause.
So for example here you can like put a box and you can make Bob make the measurement.
And then it will be just like a standard Bell scenario right. So one way of looking at an assemblage would be to see whether if Bob makes a measurement, we violate a belly inequality.
And like you could do so with the shared stereo status entangled trade.
But if it's classical then you cannot. So, you have to draw this line between what's classical and what's non classical and both for both scenarios and for EPR scenarios this line can be decided based on the nature of the common cause.
If the common cause is classical, then you will not violate a belly inequality, but if it's quantum so with the share entangled state, then you will get some some quantumness in this scenario.
Does it answer your question or perhaps we should let people make questions and perhaps another time we can continue.
Thank you.
There is another question from very good quality.
Thanks for this very nice talk. I wanted to ask you whether there is a simple explanation of why you have a preorder and not a partial order or even a lattice as it happens in other resource theories.
So one thing is where do I have it.
So the structure of the preorder here is very much inherent to the structure of the preorder for LOSR entanglement.
So for example, in LOSC entanglement what you have is that the conversions between states with an as the value of theta gets smaller you can actually convert the states into a different partially entangled states.
In the LOSR entanglement it's not the case so it's already in the LOSR entanglement that you have family of incomparable resources.
So for the case of assemblages this case is it just translates from the states to assemblages.
Okay, thanks.
Okay, there is another question or not.
If not, we thanks to Beata again for the talk and the people who participated.
