We're glad to have Diego Boussandri from the Institute of Physics La Plata and the National
University of La Plata, and he will speak about revisiting maximal fidelity of teleportation.
Please Diego, go on.
Thank you very much for the presentation, so let's talk.
Diego, wait, your sound is low.
You could speak like this, and it's good, but if you could...
Now?
Now it's much better.
Thanks.
Please, go on.
Thank you very much.
Sorry.
No problem, no problem.
Now, okay, let's talk about fidelity of teleportation.
This is a work we made with Madi Laportesi and Anna Masté.
And so what did we do?
We obtained the maximal average fidelity of teleportation, or the score of a given protocol,
for two situations, the standard quantum teleportation protocol characterized by a particular measurement.
So one second.
Now, we calculate, so the maximal average fidelity of teleportation for the...
The sound is again low.
I don't know if everyone is...
What happened?
Now?
Yeah, now it's better.
Yes.
Sorry.
Sorry.
No problem.
Then, we obtained the average identity in two situations, the standard quantum teleportation
protocol characterized by a particular measurement in which the...
It's a projection onto the bell bus.
And another protocol whose characteristics measurement is something in the middle between
the computational basis and the bell bus.
But our differential feature is that we calculate this for isotropic distribution of input states,
not only the heart measure.
And I mean not only your estates.
So we are going to talk about useful protocols, namely, a protocol is useful when its average
fidelity is greater than the classical one.
Another key point or our main result is that when you take an average of a more general
distribution than the heart measure, the quantum teleportation protocol can be useful when
your resource has no quantum correlation.
So even for a classical quantum estate.
Well, what is the meaning of fidelity of teleportation?
Let us suppose that we have a protocol P producing output estates given by Roy out with probability
PI for an input estate or a qubit estate given by Roy A. And Roy A is characterized by its
block vector t.
And so if you want to know how well the quantum teleportation was performed, you can quantify
the similarity between Roy A and the final output, calculating equation one.
But this measure depends basically on the input estates, I mean equation one.
So we should take the average of your initial distribution of estates.
But now let us suppose that we have the possibility to perform unitary operation over your final
estates in order to increase the fidelity.
So let us suppose we have a protocol P producing Roy A and then we perform unitary operation
over your conditional estates.
So the similarity, the fidelity between the average fidelity, sorry, the a priori fidelity
can be written as equation four and we can see that the red part of this measure does
not depend on your unitary operations, but the green one, yes.
So if we want to maximize this quantity over your unitary operation, we should optimize
only the green part.
So for convenience, we will take the fidelity given by number six, half fidelity, the green
part of the average fidelity.
And in the future, we will maximize equation number six.
So a simple question first before to continue is what is the best choice of the initial
ensemble estates if we want to study the capability or the ability or the ability of
P to teleport arbitrary states?
A simple answer is the most random one.
This problem was first addressed by Hall, Michael Hall, and well, there's no unique answer
to this, but a first approach is we should choose the probability measure induced by
the most symmetrical distance in the space of states.
So if we now are talking about uits, we could talk about distribution within the block
wall.
The most common one is the Hall measure that stands for the sphere of the block wall, but
also more general ensemble of initial estates can be taken as, for example, the random, completely
random mixed states within the block wall induced by the Hilbert Smith distance and
also the corresponding distribution to the Buddhist distance.
So we will compare our calculation in the quantum case with the classical case.
So we should review first the classical teleportation protocol, and it's a procedure that consists
of a measurement directly over the system that you want to teleport, and once you have
the result of your measurement, you prepare an estate according to a guessing strategy.
Then you have two estates, first measurement, then preparing an estate according to the
information that you have obtained with this measure.
This problem was already solved for the cubic case and isotropic distribution of input state,
a general one, by Vidal, and the solution is given by equation seven, that we have here
the maximum classical, the maximum average fidelity of teleportation in the classical
case.
So equation seven is the maximum over the measurements and the guessing strategies.
Two common examples that we could address is the Har measure, then you obtain this famous
result of two thirds, and for example, for completely mixed estate in the block wall
and you obtain a different result.
Now the quantum teleportation protocol consists of three qubits, A, B, and C. Our aim is to
teleport the estate of qubit E to the system C, and the first step consists in preparing
a joint estate in the systems B and C. The second one, we should measure jointly over
the systems A and B, obtaining conditional estates.
Once you have your result, you share your result to Bob, who applies the unitary confirmations
in order to increase the average fidelity or the score of the protocol.
A common famous example is when you prepare as a resource estates, as for the estate role,
you prepare one of the bail estates, and you measure the bail basis in your second step.
So if you do that, you can always find unitary transformation having fidelity one, having
the final output equal to the initial one.
And in general, if you take a general measurement, a general fundamental measurement, and you
prepare a random or unarbitrary resource estate role, you obtain as conditional estates of
your protocol raw CI, the following general expressions given by the marginal vectors
and the covariant matrices of your measurements, estates, your projections, and your resource
estates.
So the conditional block vectors are given by equation nine.
These vectors are before to apply the unitary confirmations, the unitary correction.
So before to continue, we should define first the fully entangling fraction that is measure
of quantum correlation in bipartite estates.
So for example, here, rho is a general bipartite estate, and equation 10 stands for the correlation
of this particular estate.
Why we define this, because the quantum teleportation protocol has associated a fidelity, a maximum
average fidelity, that is proportional to this fully entangled fraction.
So here we have the average fidelity for the measurement, the projection onto the bail
basis.
Here we have the half measure, only pure estates.
So there is a general rule in quantum teleportation that states that if you have separable, for
example, estates as a resource of the protocol, then your protocol is not useful, namely,
you cannot overcome the classical fidelity with this particular protocol.
So if you want to have a useful protocol, you should have entanglement in your resource.
But these results are always for the Hermitian, always for pure estates.
So now we will maximize the average fidelity in a more general situation considering an
ensemble of initial estates that could include mixed estates.
In order to do that, we should use the generalized pressure we saw before, and we should calculate
this scalar product between t, that is the block vector that we want to copy, with the
a priori final conditional block vector.
So the good news here is that the vector omega here in green does not depend on t, but the
matrix A does not depend on t also.
So we could use the inequalities given in equation 13 to obtain the average fidelity.
But if we want to maximize the equation 14, we should maximize the trace of A, because
A has the rotations corresponding to the unitary operations.
But here we have another good news that is our optimization problem depends only, does
not depend on the purity, because the purity of your ensemble is concentrated here in number
alpha given by equation 14.
So we can use the non-solution for input estates.
So this is the general solution for the standard quantum teleportation protocol and considering
a random distribution of input estates.
Let us take now a particular example, a particular resource estates in order to see what happened
with the average fidelity, comparing with the classical one.
Let us take now as a resource estates, a bell diagonal estates.
So the new expression we will have is this one, and if we take a burner estate as a resource
of the protocol, we have this average fidelity.
And the good news here is that if we take, for example, the random distribution of initial
estates, the completely random distribution in the block wall induced by the Hilbert-Smith
norm, we can obtain the analytical expression.
So the question now is, is the protocol is useful only when the resource is entangled?
So the quick answer is that no, and we have this picture, this figure.
Here we have the average fidelity, and this part corresponds to separable burner estates.
The horizontal line corresponds to the average, the classical average fidelity.
So we have an entire range of separable estates overcoming the classical fidelity.
So we have a resource without entanglement, and we are overcoming the classical, the classical
average fidelity for a completely random distribution in the block wall.
So now the question is, if the quantum-discord like correlation are responsible or not for
overcoming the classical average fidelity, because here we have this score, for example.
We have quantum correlation, we have separable estates, but there is quantum-discord.
And again, the answer is no, and in order to see this, we will take a classical quantum
bell diabrel estates, the expression of diabrel fidelity given by equation 17, and it corresponds
to this, to this curve.
We have again an entire range of resource estates, classical quantum resource estates
overcoming the classical, the classical fidelity.
So now the question is what's happened here, and in order to answer this, we consider another
protocol whose characteristic measurement is something, is a von Neumann measurement,
that it is in the middle between the computational basis and the bell basis.
So in this new protocol, we can take off the entanglement of the measurement and see what
happened.
The expression is this one, here we have the estates in which we will project the measurement.
We can quantify the entanglement only with one number, Cn, and what is the time?
And we can solve this problem only for bell diabrel resource.
And I said solve the problem is we could maximize the average fidelity, and if we consider the
hard measure, if we consider the hard measure, namely only pure estates as initial estates
of the protocol, here we have the estates, the bell diagonal estates that are not useful
depending on the measurement.
So when the measurement has no, when the measurement is the bell basis, sorry, here we should take
Cn equal to 1, in this situation we are in a standard quantum teleportation protocol.
We see that if you do not have entanglement, so you can do anything, because these estates
are corresponding to an unusual protocol, but we can see that if we take off the entanglement
of the measurement, this volume of this set increases, and if your measurement has no
quantum correlation, has no correlation at all, as for example for the computational
basis that is this case, so you have always your protocol will be not useful.
But when you consider, for example, an ensemble of a completely random initial estates, the
entire block ball, the situation change, and you have this picture in which we have here
the Eberner estates as a resource, and these codes correspond to take off the entanglement.
Here Cn is equal to 1, and here Cn is equal to 0, this horizontal line corresponds to
the classical protocol, so we have here a lot of situations in which you can overcome
the classical fidelity, and not always for the quantum, for the bell basics.
This is the same picture as before, but considering another resource, a classical quantum bell
diagonal estate, and we see the same because every line here corresponds to a protocol
with a measurement less correlated with a less correlated measurement, and we see that
the most important feature of a general protocol is the correlation in the measurement, because
if you do not have any correlation in your measurement, you cannot find a resource estate
in order to overcome the classical fidelity, and well, I think that's all, thanks for listening.
Thanks Diego, thanks Diego for this talk, now if there are some questions, please let
me know that right in the chat, or you can just jump in and do it.
