So, thank you for the invitation. It is a pleasure to be here. I have been presented in my works in this series of conference since 2017, I think, and it is a pleasure to continue to present my work here.
So,
first I want to present my collaborators that are part of the organizers in this conference.
Professor Gustavo Martin Bozic, and Mariela Portesi, that are from the University of La Plata, and Steve Sossor, that is from France.
And you can see our work that starts, this collaboration started in the first conference that attend in this series, and, well, it's in the archive, and this is the work.
So, I want to take the title of this conference that said that 10 irreversible years on Quantum Foundation in Argentina.
I want to give you a brief motivation of our work that is based on Quantum, sorry,
Quantum irreversible thermodynamics. In Quantum irreversible thermodynamics, the main goal that
the people want to achieve is how to describe in an arbitrary open Quantum evolution the rate of change of the von Neumann entropy, and
based on in thermodynamics
way of thinking, this rate of change is splitting in two parts. One is the rate of change of the production, and the other is the rate of change of the entropy flux.
The second law of thermodynamics is just the statement that the first part that is the rate of change of entropy production is always a positive or zero.
There is a big open question, which is the general way to do this is splitting in a general open Quantum evolution, but the problem is solved in several cases.
And this type of analysis gives a clue of how to analyze the stationary situation, equilibrium situations in open Quantum evolutions.
For example, the stationary situation is the balance between these two terms here.
And when the balance occurs, but also each of these terms is zero, this corresponds to thermal equilibrium. Okay.
But I want to present here an alternative way to, at least in a particular kind of open Quantum evolution, but very important.
And I will present another splitting of the rate of change of the von Neumann entropy that is associated with the notions of fluctuation and dissipation, and this new splitting
of the situation in a different way. Okay.
So this is the main motivation of our work.
So, first, I will, will introduce which is the notion of fluctuation and dissipation in classical Malcolm processes.
I will talk about the additive noisy Gaussian channel and how to generalize this very important channel in a classical information theory to a more general channel that the general Gaussian channel.
And then I will start to talk about quantum open quantum dynamics and how to describe a memory less quantum communication channels that are continuous in time.
And I will show that all of these kind of memory less quantum channels, continuous in time are described by a one parameter quantum dynamical semi groups.
Then I will present the main result of our work that is a new
the composition of the infinitesimal generator, a non unitary infinitesimal generator, as associated with this one parameter quantum nine parts semi groups.
And that verifies a link blood type of master equation.
Then I will show how this decomposition infinitesimal generator.
allows to write the rate of change of the monomer entropy in a particular way, where you can identify the fluctuation dissipation terms.
And this is the quantum analog of the classical a very well known, the breaching identity that appears here in classical Malcolm process.
Then I will compare our approach with the approach of the thermodynamics.
And I will give an example in a one parameter channel quantum Gaussian channels.
Well, so let's start with a noisy situation classical information theory.
The most important type of channel here is the additive noise Gaussian channel.
That corresponds appears in very natural random processes, and that has that are view as a large sum of noises sources of noises.
If you combine this with the central limit theorem.
You end up with this type of channels.
So the channel is is you have a random variable, and you combine with a noise that is described by a normal distribution random viable.
And this square root of t is the strength of this noise.
Okay, so the probability distribution of the random variable at the output of the channel verifies the very well known heat equation.
Okay.
The quantification of the of the fluctuation or noise in this channel is given by the original the classical debris debris identity that was approved for by stamp in 1959.
The rate of change of the Shannon entropy here.
And this rate of change is proportional to the fishing information.
This efficient information is the so called fishing information associated with displacement, where you can.
And this displacement depends like any any fishing information by a parameter, theta, but this parameter, because it's a displacement.
This appears and this type of fishing information is also known as an parameter fishing information.
And this quantity is always positive. So this classical debris identity only says that the fact that this random variable because becomes more random as time increase.
Okay.
The generalization of this type of channels in classical information theory is given by the so called a focal plant channels that correspond to multi dimensional channels that are modeled by lunch on forces that are described by a stochastic differential
equation.
And the more important type of these channels are the so called a general Gaussian classical channels that correspond to Einstein, you'll impact processes.
These processes are described by this stochastic equation. The first step is the drift vector.
Here, this x is a vector that is the multi dimensional random variables.
And the second term of the differential question is the standard binary process that is characterized by this matter here that is known as the matrix of financial forces.
The probability distribution of associative with this vector of random variables, verifies a linear focal point equation. Here is the linear focal point equation where the first time is the drift term, and the second one is the
diffusion term that is characterized by this matrix D that is written in this way with this matrix of lunch on forces.
In the case, for example, when this random variable x is just a phase space variable in a classical mechanical system.
The typical example of in this case is the description of their classical Brownian motion that is given by this focal point equation with this space space variables.
The quantification of fluctuation and dissipation associated with this focal point equation is given by this generalizing classical green entity that it was first written with this type of approach.
And this is the differential information theoretical approach in in 2017.
And this, the green entity, the first term is the contribution of the fluctuation here appears the diffusion matrix.
And also the matrix of efficient information.
And the second term is the contribution of dissipation.
The first time is always positive could not be zero.
And the second term could be a positive negative or.
In the case where you don't have a matrix in one dimension, you will recover the additional notes that we already see. Okay.
So, let's take a more deep loop at this structure of the generalize the classical the green identity. Okay, so the diffusion matrix is written in terms of this matrix of lunch on forces.
And because this matrix is a semi definite the finite positive.
You can write in this way.
Using the columns of the of the matrix of lunch event forces.
The composition is not unique, you can use any lunch on forces that are all described in this way.
If the columns of the of the matrix sigma here is a less than the nation of the of the random system, then the lunch on forces are linearly independent, and if you have more columns are the lunch on forces are not linearly independent.
But all this, if you fix the, you can, you can choose any description in terms of functional forces that for a given the.
So, using this the composition here, it is easy to see that this trace of this matrices here can be written in terms of the classical efficient information associated with the displacement probability distribution, and this placement is given by this lunch on forces.
Okay.
Yeah.
For the second time that is the drift matters here.
And you have a.
How can they compose this drift term here as a two type of forces, one is the anti symmetric part of the matrix that correspond to conservative forces and the symmetric part that do not conservative forces.
It is easy to see that the conservative forces don't give any contribution here, and because are anti symmetric.
And this trace here is just the average flux of the disability force that gives the total amount of change of the probability distribution in the direction of minus the disability force.
Okay.
So, here you have a, for example, a good explanation of how the stationing situation occurs, because in the situation this contribution of the situation mass a counterbalance this average of the disability force.
So, let's, now, we want to apply this ideas that appears in in classical modern processes.
And focus on a channel is in classical information theory in the quantum domain. So let's start talking about a channel.
What is a quantum channel quantum communication channel is just a map input output math that correspond to quantum mechanical operations.
This operation is showing a picture correspond to maps that are completely positive and specific serving that act on density matrix here, and are very specific serving.
So in the picture, this map can be described by a super operator that a present identity. So in the shirt has sent a picture, the preservation of the, of the density of the trace of the density matrix in the husband picture correspond to the preservation of the day.
Okay, this will be important.
Quantum channels, quantum communication channels are forms semi groups. If you compose a quantum channels you have another channel, and you have always a direction of time in this composition so it forms a semi group.
Quantum channels have an inverse only when I describe it but a unitary evolution. Okay, so the most common situation is always you have a situation where the environment affects the evolution.
So the most common situation is to have a non unitary quantum channels and this a non unitary quantum channels gives the gradation of information during during their use.
In order to describe this degradation, you need to include some information about your implementation of the channel, and this gives the necessity to use maps that are continuous in time.
And when you use this type of maps to describe the situation, the particular situation that you have, if you want to describe a memory less quantum channels, you end up with an evolution that is describing always by the time independent
master equation and whose solution are one parameter semi groups.
So let's use this type of open quantum evolution to apply our ideas.
And here you have the link blood master equation in general.
And these are L are the link blood operators, and the solution is given by this map here that is a dissolution.
And this in fit final dimension, always produce a type of type of evolution, and known as a one parameter quantum mechanics and groups.
And this is also the case for the very important channels in continuous viral system that are that correspond with to linear master equation that I that I will show you in a minute.
So the infinitesimal propagator of this link blood equation, it has two parts.
The first one is the infinitesimal propagation associated with the unit that evolution.
And the second is the associated with the non unit evolution.
So, we answer to this question that which is the general structure of the fluctuation dissipation of one parameter quantum dynamical same group in general.
So, our answer is the following, which we found that the infinitesimal generator of the non unitary evolution can be split in this way.
And here appears a three super operators here are written.
These super operators in terms of the link blood operators where we use for the link blood operators, the usual decomposition in this real and, and imagine a part of the, of the
unitary link blood operators.
So the first, the L one that appear here, all these super operators are real.
It means that maps are meeting operators in a meeting operators.
And that is also self adjoint with respect to the heritage meet a scalar product.
Okay.
So if you use this over self self adjoint operator, verify this, and this means that the map that if you use only this as a infinitesimal generator.
And the solution that you find here is a, are a possible.
One to the dynamic assembly build that this unit. Okay.
The other two.
And two here and three that combining in this way.
And two is self adjoint L three is anti symmetric.
And the combinations of both also gives a possible infinitesimal generator one to the dynamic assembly loop in itself.
Okay.
And the solution is very well known that the link blood operators verifies some symmetries.
The first symmetry that must be verified by the link blood operators is this one, where you can apply any unitary matrix here to the operators to obtain another link blood operators that describe the same system.
And under this symmetry.
This, the composition are invariant. Okay, so it's not affected by this type of the other symmetry that the link blood operators must verify is this one, where you change the link blood operators in this way.
And also the unitary part in this way. Okay, well, the link blood operators appears in this Hamiltonian here.
If you apply this symmetry to our composition you see that L one and two are invariant and a three only a change but in a, in a unitary way.
And that appears only a contribution that is unitary. Okay.
A society with this Hamiltonian age.
Line here. Okay.
H, H prime.
I will show you that the first part of this composition is associated with the fluctuation contribution to the Gaussian dynamic and semi loop.
And the other two to dissipation.
So let's see this. Okay.
Here we have the unitary part, the non unitary. Okay, and these are our decomposition. Okay.
So, to see how this is associated with fluctuation and dissipation.
Let us calculate this.
The rate of change of the monomer entropy that can be split in this way, you were the first time is associated with the S this L one.
And so this delta T is minus the trace of the, of the density operator that involves here. And here, you must put the self shown of L one, but because it's a, that's shown of L one, but because it's self shown appears.
So from here, using this.
Well, the other time is you must put the other part.
Okay.
This is the first part here can be a
written using this relative entropy that is written here on the second derivative with respect to this parameter theta.
When you use this type of evolution here, it is easy to see that have this structure here with respect to this double commutator that is the generator of this unitary evolution here.
You see that this type of structure appears here, and appear here.
So, it is easy to see that the first term, it can be written in this way.
And this displacement of the quantum state is can be associated with the quantum luncheon forces.
It's very interesting to see that this a
sorry.
This diversion basis quantum fishing information. Okay.
This is related with the relative entropy in this way. So the sum of a fish quantum fishing information, a relative, a relative entropy basis measures the noise that this unit evolution do associated with the luncheon forces and testing the evolution.
There is a microphone that is open.
So,
if we compare this expression here with the pressure that appears in the classical action channels that we found, we see a very similar structure here. Okay.
But also this is for the Shannon entropy, and this is for the one moment. Okay, but you have also this part here that is the measure of the noise.
This is the in the dynamic but the luncheon forces here. Okay.
This is for classical action channels, and but this is for any one parameter quantum dynamics. So, this is the quantum debris identity for any quantum dynamics.
Okay, this is our main result of our work.
Let's compare how the
equilibrium appears in our description.
So we can use this quantum debris identity for one parameter quantum dynamics and it looks, I use, you see that the stationer situation arrives
to terms balance because the first time is always positive.
It cannot be zero.
And in this situation situation, it must balance the second one. Okay.
So this is not the same of the composition that appears in in irreversible quantum dynamics, it looks similar, but it's different. So this is not the same as this.
And the rate of real enterprise production, and the second term is not this. Okay.
And the problem with this description here is that, for example, for one, in general, you, you, the, the, the splitting the
the expression that you have for this first time, for example, it depends on things of the environment.
You can avoid this problem and have an expression only with with ingredients from from the system, and not from the environment.
This can be done in quantum dynamic assembly group, then this was a performance by the spawn.
And the expression is this one. Okay.
And in this case, but this only can be done. This only can be done when the quantum dynamical semi group has an stationary situation.
However, the composition is always true. You have this the composition, even if the quantum dynamical semi group do not have any stationary situation.
In this description, as I said, the stationary situation, distinguish between the stationary situation and the equilibrium thermal situation.
And we will see that in our description, this is possible.
So, let's apply our approach to the so called linear linear in master equation in one in continuous water systems.
These are known as Gaussian dynamical semi groups in this type of open quantum evolution. The Hamiltonian of the system is a quadratic in in the canonical conjugate operators and the limbo operators are linear in this
canonical conjugate operators. Okay.
These are questions.
Yes, you have around five minutes, including the question.
Okay.
So, I will go quickly.
So, in this case, in for this type of a system, the description for the bigger function of the system is verify the same a poker plan equation that the classical a case, but in this case, the bigger fashion could be a probability distribution or not.
So, when the, this a bigger function correspond to Gaussian states. This is the, that are probability distribution, you have a description or the same description and the classical case.
In this case,
this channels preserve the guarantee, if you start with a Russian state, then you end up with a Russian state.
And in the stationary situation, if you, if the system has a situation situation, the station, the state is Gaussian, and all initial states and apps in that, if you start with any state, you end up in this question state.
So, let's, I want to show the quantum energy identity that we found in this case, you correspond if you apply this.
This is for any quantum dynamic assembly group, and to use the equation.
You end up with this quantum degree identity from Gaussian dynamic assembly groups.
And if you compare a for a with a classical case, you see a very similar structure.
But here's appear, for example, the, the matrix for the quantum division basis, quantum information, and here appears the classical case.
Okay.
Well, let me.
But if you, if you apply a, if you start with a Gaussian state, that is, and in this quantum identity.
You can calculate the quantum division basis, a fishing information and gives this special here.
And if you compare this with the Shannon entropy, you see a very similar structure also, but in this case, this matter that appear here and this matter that appear here are connected.
And you can prove this relation.
So, there is a relation of the quantum division identity and the classical division entity.
When you start with Gaussian states in quantum dynamic Gaussian dynamic assembly groups.
In the case, if you analyze the situation when when you go to the equilibrium.
The equilibrium.
You go to the equilibrium in a way that this difference here goes to zero. Okay.
So, in the equilibrium, the monomer entropy, the rate of change of the monomer entropy goes to the rate of change of the Shannon entropy, and goes both goes to zero.
Okay.
Let me show a, I will.
Okay, to, to, to distinguish equilibrium from a situation, I don't enter in this here I don't have time, but I want to show this last transparency that shows that our decomposition.
The unitary infinitesimum proprietor of quantum dynamic assembly group is related with the coherence.
And here we have the Gaussian dynamic assembly group in continuous system, but I want to show a numerical simulation.
But the, the, here, the simulation is not associated with a quadratic Hamilton because I don't.
I use this from an old world, and this.
The non unitary part is the same as the Gaussian dynamic assembly group, but the unitary part is not quadratic is a non linear evolution.
And here you will see the following if you start with, for example, with a Gaussian state that this is a coherent state without this part here.
The Gaussian state evolves here with a non linear kick harmonic oscillator. Okay.
And you see that the bigger function start to shows interference pattern.
And here you, we have the.
The two, the sum of the two evolution the unit plus the unit that corresponds to the new unitary part of a Gaussian dynamic assembly group.
And here in the at the bottom, you have the classical evolution of not a quantum evolution, and you see that are almost identical.
So, in this case, we use a limit where these dissipative part is zero.
We only have this diffusion part. So this shows that the fusion of this is associated with the go here.
I'm sorry, but we are on time. We need to make a break before the session.
