Perfecto.
Welcome, everyone, to the third, to the fourth day
of the 10 Conference of Quantum Foundations.
We are glad to start this morning's session with Professor
Marta Reboiro from the Department of Physics
of the University of La Plata and the Institute of Physics
of La Plata-Ponisette.
She will speak about exceptional points
from a hybrid physical system.
Please, go on, Marta.
OK.
Good morning to everybody.
First of all, I want to thank the organizers
for letting us share our work in this nice and interesting
conference on Quantum Foundations.
This work has been done in collaboration
with Romina Ramírez and Diego Tielas
from the University of La Plata.
The focus of my talk is the existence
of the sectional points in hybrid physical systems.
I shall highlight some connections
to the time evolution of the given initial prepared
state and, in particular, its behavior
at long intervals of time.
Hybrid models are a system consisting
of two or more components, intending
to harness the advantages and strengths of each of these
components.
As an example, we can think of the model proposed
10 years ago by Sue et al.
Consistent of a superconductive flux
COVID coupled to a system of NBs,
a nitrogen vacancy system, nitrogen vacancies in diamond.
This system is interesting because the superconductive
flux COVID can be used to model two-level systems
and to make COVID operations.
And due to the long coherence time of the NBs,
the NBs can be used as a memory of the system.
Here is the experimental device.
This is the diamond sample.
And here on the top is the superconductive circuit.
From the theoretical point of view,
this hybrid model can be represented
by Hamiltonian consisting of three terms, a COVID term,
a term associated with the nitrogen vacancy system,
and interaction term.
The superconductive flux COVID consists
of an aluminum superconducting loop
with three chasps on junctions.
And a magnetic field, and when a magnetic field
is applied through the loop, the system
can be modeled by two-level Hamiltonian,
where E is the energy bias.
Delta is the tunneling splitting.
X, the operator S are related.
Here should be Xeta.
The operator S is related to the half-poly matrices.
And through a suitable transformation,
it can be mapped to a tool, can be devonalized,
and the energies of the systems are
given in terms of the energy bias and the gap tunnel splitting.
The nitrogen vacancy center is defect in the lattice of the diamond,
where a carbon atom is replaced by a nitrogen atom,
and its neighbor is a vacancy.
This system can be modeled by the ground state of the system,
is a triplet.
When there is no external magnetic field applied,
the two excited states of the template are degenerate
and separated from the ground state
an energy of 2.88 GHz.
This separation energy makes this system
adequate to be coupled to a superconductive class COVID.
The interaction temp is usually taken as a sigma,
sorry, the component set down of the spin of the COVID
times the X component of the spin of the NBs.
We have modified the X component of the spins
to take into account the effect of other impurities in the diamond.
The more relevant are neutral nitrogen vacancy centers
called P1 centers, which are responsible for the loss
of coherence of the NBs.
So we have introduced this term that is non-admission.
If the interaction is not present and we take a system of two NBs,
we have the two levels of the COVIDs and three levels
for the quality coupling of the NBs.
When the interaction term is turned on,
there is a splitting of the levels.
And due to the fact that this term is non-admission,
some of the levels can acquire a wish.
That is, the eigenvalues of the system can be complex.
To understand the spectrum of the system,
we can see that the adjoined Hamiltonian
is the transpose of H. That means that these both
Hamiltonian-adhesive spectral operators
and in consequence, the eigenvalues are other real
or complex conflict pairs.
The basis can be labelled by the stage of the COVIDs
and the collective stage of the NBs.
Let us first describe what happens with the system
of one superconductive pluscube, COVID, coupled to two NBs.
These are the typical constants of the sector of the NBs.
And we shall assume that the tunneling splitting
of the superconductive pluscube can be set at the value of 2D.
And this dimensional coupling is the strength of the interaction
in terms of the coupling E. If we plot the eigenvalues
in terms of this dimensional coupling
and in terms of the asymmetric parameter,
we realize that there is a sector in the parameter model
space where the eigenvalues are complex configurations.
This limiting curve is the curve where exceptional points occurs.
An essential point is a point in the parameter model space
where the eigenvalues are coalescent and also the eigenfunctions.
That is, the matrix of the system is no longer diagonalizable.
This pattern that I have plot before for the case of delta equal 2D,
which is small d equals 0, is this line up here.
And if we now vary the value of delta over d,
we found that there is a regular pattern for exceptional points in the system.
To look at the time evolution of the system,
we shall use the formalities of the green function.
If we have the Hamiltonian, the green matter
is related to the Hamiltonian in this way.
And the time evolution of the system
can be expressed in terms of the Fourier transform
of the green matrix.
The transition matrix shall be defined in terms of the Fourier transform
in this way and give us the information of the transition
between these states as a function of time.
Here I have fixed the value of g to 0.02 GHz.
And then this is the typical plot for an exceptional point.
In this region, the energy is real.
In this region and this region, the energy is completely correct.
If we look at the transition probability,
that is the entries of the matrix that I have defined before,
for a long interval of time in terms of alpha,
we see that the transition probabilities of sun states
tend to value different from zero as the time
for long interval times.
This is the of diagonal terms and this is the diagonal terms.
And in this region where the spectrum is real,
here we have performed a promedium.
We have promedied on two periods of time
the results. This is where the spectrum is complex.
This is the steady value of the probability.
Well, what is interesting is what happened at this point
where the eigenvalues coalesce. As I have said before,
for these points we observe non-exponential k because
the matrix related to the transform of the
dream function has a block which corresponds to a
Sherman form because the Hamiltonian at this point is no longer
diagonalizable and then the consequence of this
is that the decay is no longer exponential but we have
some potential of t in the spectrum.
If we study the
survival probability for a coherent state, for an initial
state, prepare as a coherent state with
azimuthal axis p over 4 times of the system of the qubits in the
ground state, we see that the probability
survival probability can be written in an analytical form
this way. We observe that we have a factor t
t square in the numerator and the denominator so that
as a function of time this will evolve to a constant.
For a given initial state, prepare as
an initial state of the qubits and an initial state of the
mbs, the evolved state is given in this way
and as I have said before the probability survival probability
has this expression as usual and here we show for different values of
alpha not the exceptional point, the exceptional point
is this and this, how the survival probability behaves
for a long interval of time as a function of alpha.
We see that depending on theta, this corresponds to theta equal 0,
p over 2, p over 4 and p, the survival probability
of the initial state is close to 1 near the
exceptional point or goes to 0 and the opposed behavior in the
other exceptional point. In this branch of parameters
where the values are real, these are the
promedio in two period of times.
What we learn from this is that depending on the initial state
the survival probability in terms of the
coupling of the asymmetric parameter
is better or not.
Well let us look at the squeezing parameter.
The squeezing parameter is defined as if we have a system
of spins that is the mbs for instance and we look
at the mean value of the spin and define this
and the zeta prime direction. Then we look in the perpendicular plane
to this direction where for the small component
of the deviation of xx prime
that defines the parameter of the squeezing of the system
and if this is reduced in the direction of x prime,
sorry, this is because
in the perpendicular direction it is increased.
When we look at this parameter we observe that for the real
regime of the spectrum when the spectrum is real
the system can be squeezed but for the points
where the spectrum is complex the system is anti-squicks.
In particular there is a point here where the mean value of the spins
adopt the value zero and for this point here
of course this parameter diverges and perhaps it is not well
defined at this point but for this particular point
we observe the following thing. We observe that if we have an initial
strain prepared as a coherent state for instance with
theta equal to p over two it evolves in time
to this particular state which is composed of the superposition
of two coherent states and this state was identified as
a ruling cat state by other world and co-workers
sometime ago so the what happened is that if we prepare an initial state
in this particular with this particular component with this
particular asymmetry in the in the state
the coupled interaction will end with a
ruling jarcat. These are the plots obtained by computing the
beginner discrete function for the isu2 model.
Then we can think what happens is we compute this for a larger number of
mb's. For two mb's we have for instance to
with a value delta equal to two times d
this this cure which corresponds to the appearance of the sectional points
and this cure will correspond to the appearance
of cat states as steady states of the system.
When we increase the number of mb's in the in the system
and we
redefine the parameter alphas alpha over square root of m
this is a collective model that's why the alpha should be
rewritten as alpha over square root of m of m we also found
a regular pattern of exceptional points
and a regular pattern of a ruling jarcat states
as steady states.
Well in conclusion we have shown that in this type of hybrid systems
we can show the appearance of exceptional points.
This is an aspect related to the non-hormitian dynamic of the system.
Non-exceptional at non at exceptional points we love the
the financial decay the states which are no the matrix
which is no longer diagonalizable
admit a normal short-term form and then the
survival probability related to an initially even state at this point
will show a polynomial behavior the order of the polynomial corresponds to the
order of the pole in the in the green matrix at the exceptional point
and we also show that in this type of systems we can
create as steady states a ruling jarcat.
If we now couple the system of m base to more
superconducting COVID we can expect that the
the structure or the coexistence of exceptional points will show a more
rich behavior and perhaps we have exceptional points
of not only one pair of state coalescing to the same
estate but more estate coalescing to the same
estates and what is an open question
some people working on this is what happened with non-hormitian systems
at finite temperature we have a recently began to work in this work
but I hope next year we can give some insight on this.
Well thank you very much for your attention
thanks thanks Marta thanks for this great talk
now if there are some questions please write them down in the chat and I will
pick them up
Sebastian please go ahead you can open your mic if you want.
Hello Marta thank you for your talk I think that I know what you think but I
want to hear from you. Do you have some
interpretation or conceptual interpretation of the the meaning of the
imaginary part of the energy and the second part of the question is
in this is in this formalism change the interpretation
of the energy that we know even in the real part of the
energy or not it is the same.
What I have learned till now is that in generally the real
wonder the parameters leading to real spectrum
when you have real spectrum generally you can make
similarly transformation to an Hermitonian at least at a system with
finite number of degrees with finite dimension so
the part of real spectrum I think that is almost the same that
mission Hermitonian through a similar transformation.
The other sector of the model
the complex
energies while in finite systems I will think of the usual concept of
loss and gain and you say well
the eigenvalues have a negative part of the energy of the complex energy
you have you are modeling a loss system and if you in some way
can add things to the system then you have to have
the positive part of the energy
of the complex energy that is for finite systems and this was
nice there are a lot of experiments in
particularly optical physics I can give you some recent results
by mail the reference. Now the problem is with
in the with infinite dimension and systems
there we have worked out the model I don't know if you are
familiar the model of swans and that is a very simple model
that has is a quadratic model of bosons and once after interaction
it has an stress different than the other and it has
a broken symmetric space that has a complex pair and values
and we we have learned that with proper choice
of the parameters and with adequate
transformation we can also make a
some relation between the Hamiltonian is a joint
but now the eigenvalue the eigenfunctions
does not belong to the Hilbert space because they are not a square
integral so you have to use the the formalings
of the elven template and then when you look at the time
evolution in this case you have to be carefully
you have to do it carefully because it is not
a resonant and anti-resonant state as stated the other day Manuel
Gadella they are the time rebels are
one of the other and then you have to make the evolution with the
resonant states for t greater than zero and with the
anti-resonant state with t less than zero
and it is as Manuel said it is tricky because you have to deal with
sometimes with metric operation that with similar operators that are
not definitely positive define and so you have to look at the good metric
so on
there is a few too much to do a lot of things to do
okay thank you Martin okay we are on time so we thank Marta
for this great talk so we put some internet claps
thanks and
