So good morning in this second day of the conference of Quantum Foundations.
So we have today the pleasure of the first talk by Omar Asenda, who is from Universidad
Nacional de Córdoba in Argentina. He will speak about the use of optimization methods for quantum
mechanics problems. So for one, please, Omar. Okay, thank you. Mariela, welcome. Congratulations
to all the organizers for, well, finally, that the 10th edition of this conference
finally has, well, it's taking place. And thank you for the opportunity to address some colleagues
in these times. Actually, I usually prepare too much material for the talk. So I have planned
this talk in two parts. I don't know how I will use exactly the time, but depending on how much
time and how fast I can go, well, I will cover the transmission of quantum states and maybe
something about a few body problems, but mainly the talk is about the transmission
of quantum states. Usually, what this work is actually is not published yet. You can find it
in the archive, but it's an ongoing collaboration with Paulo Serra and Alessandro Ferron.
And, well, we can start thinking what is exactly a quantum state transfer, what we can think
a quantum channel is made of. 15 years ago, talking about a change of
quantum systems, replicas of quantum systems that are interacting between them and, well,
that can be used as a wire to transmit information. Well, 15 years ago, this was a major dream.
It was the realm of theoretical physics. Today, there are a lot of technical advances that
made the transmission of quantum state possible. In solar state, implementation that is
the setting that many people think about. In quantum state, implementations, for example,
the wire that will transmit the quantum state could be, for example, a chain of quantum dots or
a chain of superconducting qubits, etc. Ideally, the wire is used to
transmit quantum information from a sender to a receiver. The sender ideally will
prepare some quantum state that is the information that one to send. The channel
should be initialized to a simple state, and the receiver will perform some
measurements to retrieve the information that the sender sent to him. Obviously, this is
a quite complicated problem if the Hamiltonian of the system is a many-bodied Hamiltonian and
the interaction are, well, long-range, etc. Most people think, usually, in very simple systems,
in particular, many times the problem is not solved in the whole human space. Usually, the
Hamiltonian has some symmetries that allow to restrict the dynamic of the problem to
reduce a sub-space of the whole human space. There are many protocols. A protocol is
a recipe to prepare the state, how the system evolves in time, and finally, how the information is
retrieved at the other stream of the chain. Many people is familiarized with the X-axis Hamiltonian
that is a spin Hamiltonian that has only interaction, for example, in the plane,
is an isotropic Hamiltonian. To fix idea, many people think that the initial state is prepared
in the first side of the channel. The rest of the chain is initialized in a simple state
that, depending on the physics of the problem, is maybe the ground state of the system.
The time evolution, obviously, is produced with some unitary time evolution operator,
because, at least in principle, the simplest way to analyze this problem is using unitary
time evolution. Obviously, it is possible to consider an open chain, an open quantum system,
but the problem becomes almost integral. At least if the length of the chain
will be around the tens of spins or things like that. This is just to fix ideas. There are many
forms, many protocols, but this is the simplest. An initial state, and in the simplest protocol,
the time evolution is given by the autonomous Hamiltonian of the chain. There is no external
enforcing, so actually the time evolution is the simplest time evolution operator,
is the exponential of the Hamiltonian. It is possible to use the spectral composition
of the operator. A lot of things are easy to calculate. Even more, if this is the initial
state and the Hamiltonian is ferromagnetic and the zero state is the random state,
this Hamiltonian commutes with the total magnetization, so the dynamics keeps
restricted to the one excitation subspace, so the dimension of the actual
hillar space is basically the size of the chain. If the chain has n spins, then the dimension of
the hillar space in the one excitation subspace, the dimension of the hillar space,
the subspace is just n. Many times, the quantity that is used to quantify how good, how successful
is the protocol, is called the fidelity, the transmission fidelity that can be calculated
very easily using the amplitude probability that an excitation is
transferred from the first side of the chain to the last side of the chain. This quantity is
quite easy to calculate in the sense that it is just an expectation value of the
time evolution on the operator. This particular formula can be deduced because
to quantify the channel, usually what is used is an average over all the initial states that can be
prepared. Just to fix some ideas, many times, well, it is interesting to consider that the chain
could be in a disorder state. The couplings maybe cannot be fixed to some
desired value. Maybe there are defects in the fabrication process or
just like every nanostructure system. It is quite difficult to fix all the couplings, etc.
And this is, for example, how it is possible, for example, to control the time evolution of the
problem. Sometimes it is useful just to consider that the transmission process is forced or controlled
by applying some external control factions. Why? Because many times the natural time evolution,
the autonomous time evolution, is not sufficient to achieve a good transmission. Obviously,
the idea is that if the fidelity reaches the unity, well, the transmission is perfect,
all values of Ft superior to 0.999 are considered interesting. But obviously,
depending on the Hamiltonian, how these chain coupling coefficients are chosen, etc.,
this fidelity could be a fiber that is lower, rather lower than the unit. So,
it is useful sometimes to consider a forced evolution. But the problem of the forced evolution
is, obviously, controlling a nanoscopic, a microscopic quantum system is quite difficult.
Many times it is impossible to control the system with smooth functions. There are a lot of
considerations that can be made, advising against using a control evolution. Many times
it is the only option, because the interactions cannot be chosen, but are fixed for some
fundamental interaction. But the forced or the control evolution of a quantum system
is quite difficult. In particular, if the system doesn't have a lot of symmetries or the dynamics
cannot be kept in a sub-space, it is quite difficult to calculate this control evolution,
because, obviously, the control functions shall be obtained using an optimization method.
So, anyway, for the exact Hamiltonian, people have been working in this area for many years.
So, there are a lot of interesting results, like the perfect quantum state transmission is
achievable. Choosing particular values for the quantities JI or these quantities,
choosing some very particular values, it is possible to achieve using autonomous
time evolution, it is possible to achieve perfect quantum state transmission, basically for any
or any initial state. Even more, it can be proved that the dynamics behaves like a
inversion, a specular inversion in the quantum chain. So, the thing that you prepare in the
half of the chain will be reflected at some time in the other half of the chain. It is very
interesting. There are regimes where a almost perfect quantum state transmission can be achieved
just choosing or just using an almost homogeneous quantum state, all the coefficients, all the
same coefficients are equal, except a pair or maybe for coupling, exchange coupling coefficients
will be chosen different and a very good quantum state transmission can be achieved.
So, why the XX Hamiltonian was studied so intensely, why there are so many
results, basically because of this fundamental fact, it's quite easy to go in the XX Hamiltonian
from a given, I can choose the couplings and, well, I can calculate the,
it is possible to calculate the spectrum of the system or it is possible to prescribe
the spectrum that I want to have for some Hamiltonian and there is a unique way to calculate
the exchange coupling distribution, all the exchange coupling distribution.
In this case, at least in the case where we are dealing with the one excitation
subspace, it's a one-to-one relationship. I can prescribe, for example, a very simple
spectrum, for example, I can choose that the spectrum of the system consists in
eigenvalues that can be chosen, they are equi-spaces between them, that sounds like a system that
is quite possible, that the whole contribution from the eigenvalues cannot be constructed at some
time, so I can choose this spectrum and the coefficients can be calculated one by one
in a unique way. Obviously, most quantum spinchase doesn't have this property,
in particular, the case in Hamiltonian doesn't have this property. It is impossible to prescribe
a spectrum and, in that way, obtain the coefficients that produce that spectrum.
Okay, well, as anybody that has found sometimes the better answer, the relationship between the
spectrum in the case in Hamiltonian is right, the obscure. Anyway, well, or more precisely,
because of this, many words focus in the control transmission in the case in Hamiltonian,
because a lot of people thought that it was easier to control a quantum chain,
a homogeneous quantum chain, obeying the case in Hamiltonian and, well, controlling,
designing very sophisticated control courses can be found that maybe the transmission time,
the transmission time in which the receiver can retrieve the information sent by the sender,
well, that time is around. Obviously, if J is equal to one, there are most not no energy units,
so it is natural to make sure the transmission time in units of the length of the chain,
that is the only, okay, if J is exactly equal to one, this is a very good unit to measure the
time. I didn't say it, but another interesting quantity or another interesting feature of the
of the change with the excess Hamiltonian is that here it is very easy to show that the transmission
time, the time that the receiver should weigh to measure and obtain a very good fidelity of
transmission, that time is bounded, is bounded, but by the time that is consistent with the
quantum speed limit, so it is really easy to think that this Hamiltonian has a sound velocity
for the spin waves and that velocity is related to the quantum spinning. In the case in the Hamiltonian,
there is no simple way to assess which is the time scale in which it is convenient to measure or to
try to produce a very good transmission. So, what can be done with all this? Well,
actually, we said that this quantity, the probability that an excitation can be transmitted
from the first side to the last side, is a quantity that depends on the spectrum and
on the some coefficients of the eigenvalue, sorry, of the eigenvector, so this quantity can be
optimized, okay? I can think that this is a complicated function that depends, obviously,
on all the coefficients, all the same coefficients that determine the Hamiltonian,
so maybe I can choose somehow the exchange couplings and using that exchange coupling,
I can calculate the spectrum, the eigenvalues and calculate this. So, if I can device a method
to explore all the large number of values of the z-coefficient, maybe I can find the largest value
for this quantity for some time that I can choose somehow, okay? So, it is obvious that
this function, the amplitude of probability that an excitation goes from the first side to the
last side, is a quantity that depends on all the coefficients. In a general change, there will be
mj coefficients, m exchange coefficients, so for a change, for example, of 50 spins,
it is a rather large space, a parameter space, to explore. So,
it is hopeless to try to investigate the whole space in a completely random way,
a space of 50 dimensions is to be explored, so maybe the exploration can be done using some
kind of random walk, but it must be a directed random walk in the parameter space, okay?
Well, fortunately, there are a lot of many, but the people in the statistical mechanics area
have devised a lot of methods to explore a rather large parameter space, and one of these
methods are the pivot methods that are used for global optimization. So, pivot methods are
basically a good way to generate a random walk that explores, in an intelligent way,
a given parameter space. Obviously, this is an example, an abstract example of a search
conducted over a two-dimensional parameter space. This is a typical
chart flow that can be found in, well, all the papers in pivot methods are paper from the 90s,
so instead of using some colorful cartoons, it is most common to find chart flows like this,
because chart flows are the way to express an algorithm, okay? I don't want to enter,
but I mean, any pivot method, any method can be used that is useful to search in a large
parameter space, it can be used to perform, except the same that we did. So, for example,
you have 10 more minutes, so we'll finish everything. Thank you, thank you. Well,
this is, for example, how can a search for the coefficient can be done? This is a short
a short chain, but it is useful because the chains that are used are termed well centrosymmetric,
because there are symmetry between the first exchange coefficient and the last,
and the optimization method proceeds, the pivot method proceeds like by looking in a
particular hyper queue that contains all the possible values of the exchange coefficients.
The problem with the Heisenberg Hamiltonian has, there is not a simple way to bound the
values of the chain coefficient that I need to use to achieve the transmission for some time,
because, again, the spectrum is quite complicated. We proceeded by looking at the
best possible values of J that provided a very good, the best fidelity of transmission in a small
hyper queue, but then we will, we proceed to enlarge the hyper queue, and we go from
some exchange capital distributions that are obtained using some particular
transmission time, and this is what we founded after a lot of numerical effort,
that effectively we can found a very good, near perfect quantum state transmission
for the spin chains of basically the length that we wanted, and for the arrival times of our
chosen. So the pivot method is able to find the necessary exchange couplings to produce
very good or near perfect quantum state transmission in the Heisenberg Hamiltonian.
That is a result that was not known previously, but obviously it is
the way to look for this exchange coupling is clearly the result of a random walk
that is performed, it's a random walk, but maybe we can think that, well, the probability of
transmission is quite high, it's quite interesting. If you look at this inset, all the transmission
probabilities can be made, well, basically are bigger than 0.999 if we want to
that kind, that quality of transmission, but obviously once we get the exchange
coupling distribution, we wanted to understand if the solutions, this solution has some physics
or are just results that the only thing that can be said about them is that they provide a very good
quantum state transmission. So we looked for the probability of having a good transmission,
this is a typical time evolution, near the transmission time, these are the peaks of the
probability for different settings, we can design or use different arrival times.
So, for example, these are very short arrival times, the black curves, the red curves correspond
to a larger arrival time, the blue one a more larger arrival time, but
each one of these was calculated with a different exchange coupling distribution, but, well,
some of us have a strong background in scaling and that kind of property, so we
scale the time evolution of the probability and we found that basically it doesn't matter
what is the time, the arrival time, basically the behavior around the arrival time is basically the
same, which is a quite neat result because the exchange coefficients that are used to
calculate the probability of the arrival probability for a given time has nothing to do
with another exchange coupling distribution. So, for example, it is possible to
after some normal experiments are done, it is possible to study what is the minimum size of
their per queue necessary to find where this exchange coupling can be found, this is that size,
for example, we can say that if we choose a larger arrival times, the strength of the
exchange coupling distribution, the maximum value of the exchange coupling distribution
basically decays in an exponential way. So, in a sense, we can say that for very large exchange,
sorry, for very large arrival time, basically the chain will be, well, basically almost
homogeneous, but not exactly homogeneous. There is no need to have very different values
between the exchange coupling distribution. Another way to qualify how good are these
exchange coupling distributions, for example, consider what the set of exchange couplings
have been obtained. Well, what about adding some disorder if, well, looking at this fiber is quite
obvious that the probability, the transmission, the transfer, the probability that is related
to fidelity can be made as large as close to the unity as wanted, but these values are stable if
some disorder is produced, everything, maybe this transmission under some disorder is completely
destroyed or not. Well, we consider some static disorder applied to the chain and we found that
the chain was able to sustain some disorder. So, in some sense, the maximum found by the
pyramid is rated well because applying some disorder can be thought like, well,
making another stochastic search, another stochastic search around the values that the
people met found, but basically we can say that the spin distribution are, well,
produced a very good, very, very good transmission and that they are quite stable against
this all. So, as I said, I prepare a lot of material, but the conclusion of this part is
that we are almost in time. Yeah, the conclusion, well, this, the physics near this new configuration,
this new change is quite inspired. We want to study the physics, how the transmission is produced
in this change that has, that have the couplings, tylories specifically to produce, well, a large
transmission. Well, as a stochastic search, everything works fine, but we don't know why.
Well, in that moment, when we wrote the manuscript, we didn't have clues why everything works so
fine. I think that we now have some clues that we are exploring them.
This procedure will be successfully translated to another Hamiltonian's way of looking for that.
Maybe there are other procedures to determine these couplings in another way. Maybe there are,
because looking at the exchange couplings that are calculated, it is not obvious that they can be
translated in a simple formula. We're discussing also if some experimental implementation can be
made, well, and that's it. Well, half a minute, one minute and a half. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Omar. So if someone has a short question, we can put it here.
So you studied, I mean, the
of elements in mind. You studied the left chain. You did a search, you
touched with the left chain, depending on N. Sorry, the communication was interrupted,
but I couldn't hear the question. Can you repeat, sorry, Mariela.
You did a search with the left length of the chain, depending on the number N,
just to short something. But you mean the size of the system?
No, we can study the chains from 10 spins to 100. There is not an actual limit.
We stopped in 100 because we didn't want to wait for the results, but there is not
a practical limit. Anyway, a chain of 100 sites is beyond, clearly it's beyond any
practical implementation at least for the next few years. But there is no
an upper bound. We stopped around 100, but for some new experiments, for some new results,
we are maybe looking at 120. Yeah. Thank you. So we don't have any comments. So
we thank again, Omar, with a virtual clap. So we can change the sticker. Thank you.
Thank you, organizers. I want to thank you again. Congratulations to achieve the 10th
conference and well, for a very good acronym.
