Okay, then the next speaker is Tim Mowlin
from New York University, who is going to talk
about the emergence of Euclidean and Gomesky structure
from this great space time.
Please, Tim, when you want, you can start.
Okay, everybody can see that.
Yes, thank you, Tim.
Okay, well, I don't have much time.
This is all results that I figured out in the last month,
and this is the first time I'm presenting them.
So I don't know quite how long this is going to take.
I'll try and go quickly.
Everything is conceptually kind of really trivial.
The results, to me, were a little bit astonishing.
Okay, so I've been playing around with, for some years,
trying to think about how to do space time geometry
with a discrete foundation rather than a continuum.
And so this is some recent results.
So here are some things just to kind of contextualize this
or motivate it a bit.
So we start, of course, when we learn physics,
we start with classical physics, Newtonian mechanics.
I'm including special and general relativity
as the kind of ultimate flourishing of a classical picture.
But we know that all of that is wrong at some level.
All of Newtonian mechanics, right?
Newtonian mechanics is not on the correct physical foundations.
Maxwellian electrodynamics
is not on correct physical foundations.
General relativity, it's a little bit harder
to know exactly what has to give.
We know that something's gonna have to give
in putting together a theory of gravity
with the rest of quantum mechanics.
The failure in a certain sense of classical physics
is kind of radical, the stability,
that matter is stable, can't be obviously recovered
from a Maxwellian picture of electromagnetic interactions.
But right now I just wanna point to two
actual physical phenomena that we know we need to account for.
And one is the Aronov-Bohm effect,
which doesn't have any natural understanding
in terms of a classical picture of electromagnetics.
It somehow has been taken to suggest,
and I think this is correct,
but I have to be careful about what it means
that the fields, the electric or magnetic fields
are not really physically fundamental, something else is.
And then the big one, of course,
is violations of Bell's inequality
for experiments done at space like separation.
We know that you can't get that
out of classical electromagnetic theory
or general relativity or special relativity
because they're local theories
and they just won't allow for those phenomena.
So we have to do something.
Now, how do we deal with the non-locality?
And this is actually also having to do with Aronov-Bohm,
although I won't go into that now.
How do we deal with that?
How do we actually make that tractable
in a mathematically clear way?
Well, there's an obvious way to do it,
a kind of very simple-minded way to do it,
which is just to add a preferred foliation to the spacetime.
That would give us the resources
to define various sorts of instantaneous physical connections
between space-like separated events
where instantaneous is defined
in terms of this preferred foliation.
And if we do that, then we, of course,
we just have this preferred foliation
and we do the fundamental dynamics
in terms of things succeeding states,
succeeding states in this foliation,
then we have no problems about causal loops
or temporal paradoxes or anything like that, right?
Because everything, all the temporal structure
is gonna be kept straight
and straight forward by this foliation.
Now, one way that you can do this,
which is you could say the cheap way
is just to add the foliation in.
That is, you start with a standard Lorenzian metric
that you'd get out of general relativity
and throw a metric on, throw a foliation on top of it
and use that foliation in the course
of formulating your dynamical laws.
They're kind of easy to do a Bohmian kind of theory.
In that setting, it's kind of easy to do a GRW-like theory
in that setting where you make use of the foliation
in a very straightforward way.
But just throwing a foliation down
on otherwise arbitrary Lorenzian structure
seems kind of brute force and a bit unmotivated.
So one thing I've been looking at is something
that is much more radical, but much less arbitrary.
That is, I'm gonna start from a new foundation
where this foliation is naturally gonna be there
from the beginning, okay?
And so what's the conceptual basis?
Well, the other thing that I wanted to do
is to reject the relatives account of space-time
at the very first step.
That is, you do not start
with a four-dimensional differentiable manifold.
You don't start with a continuum.
You start with a discrete structure, right?
You start with a discrete geometry.
Now, if you do that, and again, I could argue this,
but kind of easy to see that it's actually now
gonna be very hard to avoid there being a preferred foliation.
Certainly, if you have a discrete underpinning like this,
you can't have anything like a continuous symmetry,
like a symmetry under Lorenz's boosts.
And more or less, because each geometrical object
has immediately neighboring adjacent objects,
those adjacency relations are gonna tend to pick out
a preferred foliation automatically, okay?
So where do we hope might come from this?
Well, obviously, I'm rejecting any kind of classical
or relativistic picture of space-time
at a foundational level,
but the tremendous empirical success of classical physics
and the tremendous empirical success of relativity,
both special and general,
means that you would need to explain
why theories based on a continuum
or based on a four-dimensional manifold
with a Lorenz metric, why do they do so well, right?
Why are they so empirically successful,
given that I'm saying at a fundamental level, they're wrong.
Now, we've done this before, right?
It means somehow showing that something like
the relativistic structure that we use emerges
in a natural way from this quite different foundation.
And emerges usually by some kind of statistical considerations,
considerations of coarse-graining or something like that, right?
Now, we know that this kind of thing can happen.
You might say, isn't it surprising
that an emergent physics can be so very different
in its character from the underlying physics
from which it emerges, but we know that happens, right?
Because we know that in some sense,
Newtonian mechanics approximately emerges
from quantum mechanics.
We know that Newtonian gravitational theory
in some sense approximately emerges
from the general theory of relativity.
And in each of those cases,
the underlying theory is of quite a different character
than the one that emerges,
but I think you have a perfectly good understanding
at the end of the day,
from the perspective of the underlying theory,
why these other theories that were actually quite wrong,
nonetheless, were very empirically successful.
Okay, so that's the kind of prologue.
Let me just get down into the nitty-gritty details,
because that's what most of this talk is.
So I'm gonna start, let me just start with space,
spatial structure.
Well, we're gonna put in time a little later,
but the point is that both of these starting points
are pretty much as non-relativistic
as you can possibly imagine, okay?
That is, I guarantee there's no attempt
to make this look relativistic at a foundational level,
and just, you might say just the opposite.
What was the motivation?
Well, the motivation was,
let's see if we can do discrete geometry
and do that in the kind of the simplest, most natural way
and see what happens.
And I can only give you my word
that when I started developing this whole thing,
I was not even vaguely considering
what might emerge from it.
I was just trying to write some stuff down
that seemed to make sense.
There are choice points when you do this,
when you say, all right,
what kind of discrete geometry am I gonna use?
I'll indicate some of those choice points,
but the choices that I made are, again,
pretty simple and pretty straightforward.
They don't look arbitrary,
they don't look artificial because they're really not.
And from this foundation that is,
as it were, completely non-relativistic
in almost every sense, surprisingly to me,
something very relativistic emerges naturally
at a mathematical level, and that's what I wanna go through.
So how do we do discrete geometry?
Again, all of this is just the way I do it.
I didn't get this from anybody.
I made all this stuff up.
It'll all be completely unfamiliar to you,
but it's very simple and straightforward.
So if I have an n-dimensional space,
and I wanna think of it as fundamentally native
as it were, geometrically atomic objects,
I'm going to have different dimensional atomic objects.
And so I just indicate these as n elements
where n is the dimensionality.
There'll be zero elements,
which you can think of as points.
One elements, which are one-dimensional atomic objects,
you can think of them as little lines.
Two elements, which are surfaces, atomic surfaces.
Three elements, which are atomic volumes,
you could continue up.
We have no need to go beyond three spatial dimensions.
And these various elements are related to one another
as boundary to bounded.
Every one element has a pair of zero elements
as their boundary, for example.
So you just would indicate the whole thing
by incidence matrices that tells you
which n elements bound which n plus one elements.
That'll give you the whole structure.
So the zero elements bound, the one elements,
the one element, and every one element
is bounded by a pair of zero elements.
That's just the relation between points and lines.
Once you get up to two dimensions,
the surface elements, the two-dimensional ones,
you have a choice, an infinite number of choices.
One thing, so essentially you're asking,
what's the shape of an atomic surface?
Now, there's a standard choice here made,
which is to make them triangles,
because that's the simplest two-dimensional polygon.
And then when you go up to three dimensions
to make the three-dimensional things tetrahedra,
because those are the simplest polyhedra.
And that route, that particular choice of a path
leads you to the theory of simplexes,
which is probably pretty well-known.
My guess is many people have heard about simplexes
one way or another.
That's not the way I went.
That's not the way we're gonna go.
If you go that other way, as far as I can tell,
and I haven't looked into this in a great detail,
you won't get any of the results,
anything like the results I'm gonna show you.
So I think this is actually quite an important decision.
I'm not gonna go points, lines, triangles, tetrahedra, okay?
Well, what's the obvious thing, other thing to do?
Well, make the two elements quadrilaterals,
or if you will, squares that have not three,
but four bounding one elements,
and make the volume elements prisms,
or if you will, cubes that have six bounding two elements.
And the scare quotes are there
because of course I haven't done anything
to introduce any notion of angle or distance here.
This is all, as it were, at a purely topological level.
So I can't literally say they're cubes or they're squares,
but they are quadrilaterals or volume elements
that have six quadrilaterals as their bounding surfaces.
Good, so we're gonna build it up that way,
but just a small historical note,
that's the way Euclid does it, right?
So he says you start with a point.
If you move a point, you get a line, right?
That's your one-dimensional element.
If you move a line in an orthogonal direction,
you get a rectangle, that's your two-dimensional element.
If you move a rectangle in an orthogonal direction,
you get a prism, that's your three-dimensional element.
So we're doing that instead of simplexes.
And I'm gonna depict them just using squares and cubic grids,
because that's the easy thing to think about,
but obviously the actual angle relations
and so on are not there.
Good, so here's a prototypical two-space,
each of the squares would be a two-element,
they're bounded, each one is bounded by four one elements
and each one element is bounded by a pair of zero elements,
which you can think of as the corners of the squares.
And here's a prototypical discrete three-space,
we now have the three elements, which are the cubes,
and they're bounded by the two elements and so on.
So I take it everybody's following this,
it's kind of trivial, it's not the only thing you could do,
but it's a pretty straightforward trivial thing to do.
Good, first point, this is not Euclidean,
if you treat these elements as atomic, which we're doing,
so we don't think of the one elements
as composed out of an infinite number of points,
they're not, right?
They're bounded by a pair of points,
but they don't have any points inside them.
This is just not any kind of Euclidean geometry.
If we wanted, there's a kind of metric
that naturally comes along because it's discrete
and we can count things,
there's a kind of counting metric that comes along.
And if you use that to define lengths and distances,
then you get, in the two-dimensional case,
you get what's commonly referred to as taxicab geometry, right?
So you just count how far is it from this point to this point,
well, you have all of these continuous paths
that can take you from here to here,
which go via connecting one elements
and you take the shortest such path
and call that the distance, right?
And if you do that, then the circles,
I mean, the things you would define as circles
just don't look circular, right?
They look like squares.
So the point C, what I've indicated on there
are all of the points that are three units away from C
in the taxicab geometry.
You can go straight up or straight to the side,
three units, or you can go over two and up one
or up one and over two, you know?
And you get this thing that looks like a square
and if you did the same thing centered it at point D,
you would get another square.
And the thing to notice is that those two squares
meet each other and overlap along an entire side, right?
They don't meet each other at a point,
whereas in a Euclidean geometry,
if we were drawing circles,
the first point where a circle centered at C
could meet a circle centered at D,
they would meet at a point, right?
And then as they got larger,
they would share a pair of points.
So this is a non-Euclidean kind of structure
even at a topological level,
even without bringing in metrical information
in a certain way, this is very non-Euclidean.
Obviously it has preferred directionality in it,
which a Euclidean two space does not have, right?
You have kind of the vertical direction
and the horizontal direction,
and these are in a way completely different.
Every one element is either oriented this way
or oriented this way,
and you could define that in a perfectly rigorous way.
Good.
So I don't know of any sense.
If you just looked at this discrete structure
and it's taxicab geometry,
I don't know of any sense
in which you would be inclined to say
that anything Euclidean emerges,
even if you go to very high scale, right?
Even if you imagine kind of zooming out
and having one of these grids
with billions and billions of elements in it,
the intrinsic geometry would still be non-Euclidean.
Even at large scale,
the things that you would define as circles
would still be as it were quadrilaterals,
and they would meet along edges and things like that.
So just going to larger scale
or just taking in any straightforward way,
statistical considerations, whatever that might mean,
I at least don't see anything Euclidean emerging from this.
Good.
The preferred directionality also at large scale,
even if you were far away
and you as it were couldn't see the microscopic details,
still it seems like these two directions
would be preferred geometrically
and that maintains even at very high scale.
It doesn't wash out.
Good.
So that's the spatial structure.
So that's for two dimensions,
for three dimensions, we would use a cubic grid.
We want to make a space time.
So we want to add in some temporal structure.
We want to add in time.
And the whole point of a discrete geometry
is that there is an adjacency relation.
You can ask of any point,
what are the immediately neighboring points,
meaning points that are the other boundary
of a single line, a single one element.
Those are the nearest ones
and then the next nearest ones and so on.
Similarly, you can say that two elements,
two of these surface elements are adjacent to each other
if they have a common one element as a boundary.
So there is a kind of adjacency relation
which just doesn't exist in a continuum.
In a continuum, no point is next to another point,
no surface is, I mean, certainly no point
is next to another point.
You could have two surfaces that share a boundary.
So we're gonna do the same thing with time.
We're gonna make it discrete,
which means for any event,
there will be the immediately preceding ones
and the immediately succeeding ones in time.
And following that model, okay,
we're gonna introduce arrows and the arrows are arrows
and they have a directionality
because time has a directionality,
connecting different layers of this spatial structure
so that by following the arrows,
they'll take you from any n element
to its immediate successors in time.
Good.
And therefore, it's already easy to see what we're building
before we've done anything else,
there's gonna be an intrinsic foliage, right?
Because we're gonna build up the space time in these layers.
We're gonna take a spatial layer,
put another spatial layer above it
and draw arrows one way or another
from the one below to the next one
and then from that one to the next one
and from that one to the next one and so on.
And so again, at a foundational level,
this is as non-relativistic as you could imagine,
it has a foliation built into it from the beginning,
not added arbitrarily to something else, all right?
And the only question really left to us,
if we've settled on the spatial structure
of each of these layers,
is how do we run these connections,
these temporal connections between one layer
and the next one?
And here, again, there are different choices you could make,
I'm gonna talk about three of them.
And I'm gonna do this for the two spaces
because they're easier to draw,
but everything sort of goes through the same way
for the three spaces.
How am I doing?
Okay, okay.
All right, so you can sort of think,
take a layer, put another layer directly above it
and draw arrows only up to the immediate ones above
and you get something that would correspond
to absolute Newtonian discrete spacetime.
Why?
Because Newton thought of absolute space
as persisting through time.
So each spatial point identically remains through time
and can be re-identified at later times.
And that unique relation would be indicated
by having only a single arrow here from each point
to the succeeding point,
to the succeeding point, to the succeeding point.
Now, however, that structure would be
a complete disaster physically
if we wanna use this the way I wanna use it.
What do I mean?
I mean, first of all,
this would support a notion of absolute rest
as there is in Newtonian absolute space
and object would remain at absolute rest
if it always stays in the same,
as it were, the same persisting point of space.
But the problem is what I wanna do
is use these arrows to give me continuous paths
through spacetime, continuous temporal paths.
That is the paths that say a particle could follow.
And if I only have these vertical paths,
it means nothing can move, right?
The points of space can't move,
but also particles couldn't move either.
The only place they could go at the next temporal moment,
would be directly above
and everything would be frozen, okay?
So everything would have,
you not only have a notion of absolute rest,
but everything would have to remain at absolute rest.
So that would be a disaster.
All right, so that's one thing we could do bad idea.
Here's, we could go the other direction and say,
look, let's connect up every n element on one layer
with every n element on the next one, right?
So there's no preferred relation at all
between the spatial elements at one moment
and the spatial elements at another.
That, of course, gets extremely messy.
I didn't even draw them all in, but you get the idea.
Okay, this would be sort of corresponding to what we think
of as a Galilean spacetime,
where there is no preferred relationship
between an event at one time
and any event at any other time.
But that's equally a disaster
because now there's no restriction on these
what you count as a continuous temporal path.
Sort of any selection of any n element,
say point from every one of the layers
will count as a continuous path
because there'll be an arrow that goes from this one
to that one, then to this one, then to that one, okay?
So you kind of lose
any interesting spacetime structure at all.
That's a bad idea.
So what's the solution?
Well, one doesn't work and infinitely many don't work.
So let's just look at finitely many.
And there are different ways that you could do that.
And instead of trying to walk you through them,
I'm just gonna go to the one that turns out
to give you really nice results.
So this is what I call a simple,
discrete three-dimensional spacetime.
We're not gonna have any absolute rest
at the fundamental level
because each zero element, right, for example,
or two element has four immediate temporal successors.
So from this point, I can immediately go
at the next layer to four different points,
none of which counts any more than any of the others
as staying in the same place, right?
And the key to this is you don't stack the layers
vertically above each other, but you just place them
so that as it were in this diagram,
directly above a point in this layer
will be the center of a square on the next layer, okay?
So you displace them from each other in that way.
And then you go back and above that,
you're then back to the original.
And then you put arrows from each point
to the four corners of the square above it, yeah?
It's easier to understand by seeing it.
So there's what this thing looks like.
And maybe it's even easier to see it from above.
If you kind of look down on it,
you would see that we have this one square grid
and then the second square grid with the solid points
is displaced from it so that the points
in the original grid fall at the centers
of the squares of the next layer up.
And then you put four arrows going out
as it were Northeast, Northwest, Southeast, and Southwest.
So there are four ways you can go, good.
Now, there will now be, you obviously do not have,
if particles could follow these arrows,
they're not now stuck the way they were originally
and can only go up.
And there's a kind of light cone structure.
So there's something that looks a little bit relativistic
here because from this point,
there are only four points I can get to in the next layer
and then a limited number I can get to in the next.
I mean, the thing becomes larger as you go up.
So there's something that kind of looks like a light cone.
There's no state of absolute rest because, you know,
one way to think about this is like the fundamental
connections are all light like, they're all null.
And from any point, there are four ways you can go.
And so you can't stay at rest, right?
If a particle had to do that, if a particle wanted to,
as it were, try to go straight up this diagram,
it could only do it by something we might think
of as zitto bevegel, right?
It's got to be kind of oscillating around as it goes up.
There is a kind of emergent notion of absolute rest here
because if I take not this layer and the one right above it,
but the one above that,
then a point here will be preferentially related
to a particular point two layers up
by there being the maximum number of connections to it, right?
So if I go from here to the one as it were straight above it,
there are four ways I can get there.
I can go this way, that way, that way, that way.
I can get to other points up here,
but there are fewer roots, right?
So if I look at, if I ask what is,
which point above this one is maximally connected to it
by continuous paths,
that does pick out something like an emergent state
that you could call absolute rest.
So again, you might say extremely non-relativistic.
And the other thing that's very still non-relativistic here
is if we call the light cone,
if I take any event, any zero element,
and I just follow the arrows
and see where could you get from there,
I get this growing structure,
but it's a square-based pyramid, right?
It's not, it doesn't look like a cone, right?
It just looks like a bigger and bigger pyramid.
And if I take a horizontal cross-section through it,
those will be squares.
So just as with the taxi cab geometry,
I don't seem to have anything
that looks at all relativistic, okay?
So again, it's seen from above, I mean,
so if I started at some point,
you can go out to the next four points,
and if I cut through that, I get a square.
And then if you think of all the places
I could go from those four points,
those are gonna make a bigger square
and a bigger square and a bigger square.
Good.
So where are we now?
I'm sorry, I'm rushing so fast,
but I know I don't have much time.
So we have a discrete spacetime,
has a light cone structure,
otherwise has a completely different character
than Minkowski spacetime in many different ways.
There's a preferred affiliation.
Spatial geometry has preferred directions in it.
There's an emergent state of absolute rest.
None of this occurs in Minkowski spacetime,
and they retain at arbitrary large scales.
They don't, in any obvious sense,
wash out just because you go to high scales.
However, and this is kind of a shock,
something very close to a Minkowski structure
naturally emerges.
How is that?
Well, let's think about degrees
of temporal connectability.
I already did that when I talked about
this emergent state of absolute rest.
I said, from this point,
what point above it has the most distinct paths
that lead to it, right?
So I can count, because this is all discrete,
I can just count these paths.
And so between any pair of these one elements,
I can count the number of distinct continuous temporal paths
that will take you from there to there.
Could be zero, then we'd say they're space-like separated.
That count is directly connected mathematically
to Pascal's Triangle and the binomial distribution
in ways that are probably familiar if you think about it.
But the key here is that you don't actually use
Pascal's Triangle, but you use this thing,
Pascal's square-based pyramid,
which is something I only learned about
in the last couple months,
but it's very simple.
It's like Pascal's Triangle,
except taken up to three dimensions.
So here's Pascal's square-based pyramid.
Imagine stacking cubes up like this in a kind of ziggurat.
And then again, just like with Pascal's Triangle,
put a one in the top and then in every lower layer,
just add the numbers that connect to it.
So the next one's down, I'll get a one.
And then the next layer down,
you get ones in the corners and then twos
and then a four in the middle.
That's again, the middle one there has the most connections.
And it's easy to see, again, just counting distinct paths
that you could take through this structure
from the top down to any of these parts, okay?
So that's Pascal's square-based pyramid.
There's a Pascal's Triangle-based pyramid,
which does different things.
We're not using that.
We're using this stuff.
If we cut through this at, say, the fifth level,
here are the numbers that you would get.
And so these would be, again,
the number of distinct continuous paths from that top
down to any of these cells.
And you notice two things.
Well, there are really three important features
that this set of numbers have.
I'll just mention what they are,
and then you can go back and look and see that they're there.
The first feature is that if we look along each edge,
we just get the numbers from Pascal's Triangle.
That is, we get the normal binomial distribution.
So you get 14641 along the edges.
The second really important fact is that in the interior...
You have already reached the 30 minutes.
You can continue using the time for question if you want.
Yeah, I have to.
I mean, I'm just getting to the payoff, okay?
I'm sorry, but I've never done this before.
Okay, the interior you get by a multiplication table, okay?
So you'll notice all the numbers in the middle
are just the product of the corresponding numbers
along the edges, yeah?
And that you can prove is always true.
And then the third fact we're gonna use
is that as these numbers get large,
we know the binomial distribution is well approximated
by the Gaussian, which we have there, okay?
Now that's just an approximation.
It only kicks in when the numbers get large
and you have to stay away from the tails
and stuff like that.
It's a good approximation.
So let's use those three facts.
So if we introduce coordinates along the edges
so that the center of the edge is zero of the x-axis, right?
The center of the edge is the zero of the y-axis,
then we get the interior numbers
by multiplying together these two Gaussians.
This is gonna be a good approximation.
And if you just look at the final result there,
it means the degree of connectivity,
you'll notice goes as e to the minus two over sigma squared
x squared plus y squared.
That means any cells, if we now number these cells
by integers, which is what we're doing,
any pair of cells on a given layer
where x squared plus y squared are about the same number
have the same degree of connectivity, right?
They have about the same degree
of temporal connectivity to the top.
So in a very strict sense, a circular kind of structure
emerges as low side of equal temporal connectivity
to the top, right?
And that emerges in a pretty strict sense,
although you do have to stay away from the tails,
you don't get too close to the edges.
It emerges in those conditions where the Gaussian
is a good approximation to the binomial distribution.
So that's part of what we wanted to do, all right?
Those are my caveats.
Here's some actual numbers, right?
If we go up to the thousandth level
and we compare the connectivity of these two points,
200, zero and 141, 141,
you'll see the connectivities are almost exactly the same.
And if we square those and add them,
those numbers are almost exactly the same, right?
So if we just look at low side
of almost the same connectivity,
they look more and more like circles.
What if we cut vertically and look over time
to low side of vertical cross sections?
Well, we know in Minkowski geometry,
if we take a cross section like that
and we look for points of equal proper time
from the origin, that'll be a hyperbola, right?
And the thing would be delta T squared
minus delta X squared equals a constant.
What if we cut through Pascal's pyramid?
Well, the solid line, that's our hyperbola.
That's what we're aiming at.
And these lines at the top are regions
of approximately the same connectivity through time.
This is using Sterling's formula for an approximation.
So if you just look at that hyperbola
and you look at these things above,
that looks really, really close.
Let me just give you an exact calculation.
Let's suppose we know that a hyperbola is fixed
once we have the symmetry, it's fixed by two data points.
So I'm gonna give you two data points and then,
so I'm gonna go up to the 800 level.
I'm sorry, I'm doing this so quickly,
but this is the last thing I'm doing.
Go up to the 800th level, right?
And look at the central point.
We can exactly calculate the degree of connectivity.
It's this 3.5 times 10 to the 478th, okay?
That's at the center.
Now go up 10 levels, go up to the 810th layer
and look for the point that has the nearest degree
of connectivity.
That turns along what we can think of as the x-axis.
That turns out to be 75 cells along off to the side.
And there's the calculation.
You'll see it's almost exactly the same connectivity.
So now I have two points.
Now I'm gonna fit those to a hyperbola,
which the best fit is this number here that I'm giving you.
And I'm gonna use that hyperbola to make a prediction
for a thousand layers, right?
To go up another 190 layers.
And so if I use the hyperbola,
the prediction would be 354.60,
which we need to round it to an integer.
So we'll round it to 355.
And now let's do the exact calculation.
Again, something times 10 to the 478th.
So this hyperbola is a really good approximation
that's giving you equal degrees
of temporal connectivity in this discrete structure.
Now in a four-dimensional space time,
we do the same thing.
We just use cubes and now I'm at my conclusion.
So what's the conclusion?
Even though the foundation is profoundly non-relativistic
in every possible way, right?
Within restricted bounds where these approximations
like the Gaussian or good,
we get something very close to a Minkowski in structure
as a purely mathematical fact.
Now, in order for that to have physical significance,
we would need the physical laws to be sensitive
to degrees of temporal connectivity,
which is just counting the number of different paths
through this structure.
And my last comment is one approached understanding
quantum theory is sum over paths, right?
Which was pushed by Feynman,
which at least gives you a suggestion
that looking at temporal connectivity via paths
is not a physically irrelevant thing to be looking at.
And now I'm done.
Well, thanks, Tim, for the talk.
We have time for a question.
Anyone have a question?
Okay, Elias, you can ask.
Hi, Tim.
Thanks for the dogs, really, really nice.
Yeah, actually, my question was,
it's related to the last things that you mentioned
about this connectivity.
I mean, one would have thought that
that you would need to relate a proper time,
like in the analogy, proper time
to the length of the path, right?
Like how many steps you need to take.
But instead, you need to use this connectivity,
which is related to the number of ways you can...
That's right.
So I don't know if there's anything else
you can say about it.
And I mean, I think it is counter-intuitive.
Hey, look, I agree it's...
I mean, there are two points here.
There's a purely mathematical fact
that the damn count of connectivity
does what you want it to do.
And then you're absolutely right.
What I need is now a physics
where degree of connectivity matters, right?
Where, now, of course, counting
is not a particularly good idea
because we know that as it were,
proper time acts oppositely than the way
a Rumanian distance does, right?
We know as we go out to the light cone, it goes to zero.
We know it does the anti...
If you do counting,
then you would expect the triangle inequality
and we get an anti-triangle inequality.
So the counting idea never was right.
But whether connect...
How to bring connectivity in, you're absolutely right.
This is the remaining piece.
My only point is that
in a sum-overs paths kind of approach,
you might imagine that points with equal degrees
of connectivity have physically interesting
shared characteristics,
depending upon the rules of how things propagate here, right?
I mean, the basic picture is that
it is, of course, nothing naturally wants to go...
As I said, something going straight up
is gonna be jiggling a lot, right?
It's like Zitterbewegel.
And it sort of, as it goes off to the side,
it kind of jiggles less.
I mean, so you need to think...
You might think in a kind of Bohmian setting
where what you're doing is doing a kind of pilot wave.
And all of these paths are interfering with each other
that equal degrees of connectivity
would give you equal sorts of interference phenomena
or something like that.
That's very vague, but you're right.
That's exactly what would be left.
Yeah, no, no, it's suggestive, I agree.
Very nice, thanks.
Well, we thank Tim for your talk.
And now we have finished the first part of this session.
We are going to have a 10-minute break
and we return at 15.30.
Thanks all for the participations.
Well, Tim, are you still there?
Yeah, I'm here.
Yeah, I just want to ask you a question.
Because I know it's...
Because have you tried on obtaining some curvature
in space time, like some approximation
to genera relativity or something like that?
I mean, the interesting thing about this is that
if you think about what I was saying emerged
when I said these circles, kind of circular things emerge,
yeah, they only emerge away from the edges.
As you get, you know, the sort of actual light cone structure
has this square-based pyramidal structure.
And as you approach those edges,
the connectivity doesn't do what you want at all.
And that's exactly where this Gaussian approximation
breaks down.
So the circles kind of emerge in toward the center.
So the story here would be that, say, light,
if you want light to really produce something
that looks like light cones,
they're not going out along the edges.
They're somehow in the interior.
Now, if they're in the interior,
then even if the bounding light cone is fixed,
you could imagine effects that would shift, you know,
narrow or widen or distort the effective light cone
staying within those bounds.
And that could give you similar effects to curvature, right?
So it would amount to an approach,
like when they approach general relativity
by having a flat background
and then doing deviations off the flat background.
And that, I think, is probably more the way you would go
than literally trying to get curvature into the geometry.
You'd kind of get the curvature.
You'd have this fixed geometry,
which is really only defined at a kind of topological level.
And that doesn't change at all.
What changes is how things propagate through it.
And then, again, what you'd like to do is show
that that approximately gives you the same results
in terms of changing light cones
and showing them in whatever
that you would get out of general relativity.
I see, I see.
Thanks, thanks.
Thanks.
Very interesting.
Can I ask something else related to this question?
Sure.
And what about changing the rules for combining three elements
to form these three structures?
Couldn't there you introduce some sort of curvature
or something related?
You know, you're welcome to try.
Yeah, I can see that like an infinite number of options.
Of course.
I mean, one thing is there are an infinite number of ways to do this.
Yeah.
And I, you know, I, it took me a long time to settle
between triangles and squares to tell you the truth.
Right.
I did that a long time ago, but I had to struggle with that.
Obviously, and when it comes to adding these arrows in,
there are other things you could do, right?
You could, you could add in fewer, you could add in more.
Sure.
So, you know, all power to you.
If you want to explore the possibilities,
what I kind of tried to do, I think is do pretty much the simplest
thing that didn't immediately collapse into nonsense.
And amazingly out of that falls into my lap,
something I'd not even been aiming at.
Right.
Which is something that looks very Minkowski.
And I'm just kind of astounded by it.
Now, you know, maybe it's just a coincidence, but.
It seems a kind of pregnant thing, right?
This is astonishing the result.
My question is this, if you are thinking about defining the points,
the very bottom, at the very bottom level,
in terms of something like events and,
and interactions in, at the quantum level, perhaps this may be the,
at the normal relativistic quantum level.
I mean, very, very normal relativistic framework,
but it's something to give some physical content to points
from the very, very bottom.
Perhaps it can be interesting.
I don't know if you are thinking about that.
I mean, what, what I'm doing right now,
I mean, there are two things to say here.
One is, as I say, kind of one obvious way to bring quantum theory
into this is, is a kind of Bohmian picture where this is the underlying
space time geometry, you point particles that are traveling along
continuous trajectories in it.
And then the quantum part comes in in the guiding equation.
Right.
And you need that.
And the dynamics of the wave function is related to this connectivity
stuff, which is exactly what this kind of Feynman integral path
integral formalism at least suggests.
Right.
So then the, you know, the real physical stuff is just kind of point
particles moving around in a discrete space time.
The other thing you can try to do, which I'm working on now is to,
is to put something like Maxwellian electrodynamics,
which turns out to be really interesting.
It turns out the natural kind of natural way to do that.
And this is connected to this Aronov-Bohm stuff is first,
it's not even that what's really physically real or the vector and
scalar potentials, but what's physically real is something that lies
underneath even those.
Okay.
So there's this, this, it's a, what I call a two field you single two field.
It gives rise to the vector potential necessarily in Coulomb gauge.
And of course in Coulomb gauge,
the vector potential changes instantaneously.
Right.
So again, you get resources for non locality.
And this is just looking at Maxwellian electrodynamics.
Okay.
You know, how you quantize all that, I have no idea.
Thanks.
