We're going to start.
Come on in.
Welcome.
Hello.
Oh, there it is working.
Someone's to join.
Test one, two, admit.
There we go.
Guys, just leave room over here.
So, squeeze in that way to the right.
I hear a lot.
You're right.
Sorry.
Is it working?
Yeah.
Guys, come on.
This guy's...
Give me a space over here.
Give me a space.
Give me a space.
Don't be shy.
Say hello to your neighbor.
Do you guys want to...
No?
Anyone else?
It's okay.
Well, first off,
thank you guys all for coming.
How many of you know why you're here?
How many of you know what decentralized science is at all?
Yes?
Some people?
Some people?
Okay, yeah.
This is decentralized science in this vicinity here.
How many of you have been to a Deci NYC event before?
Oh, wow.
So many people.
We have a lot of return desires.
We're going to issue a token at some point,
which will be cool.
Like a Deci NYC token,
so you can memorialize your being on the blockchain.
Cool.
Well, without further ado,
let's just do a quick picture.
We'll do a panorama of one.
Wow.
Oh.
Same.
Okay, smile, smile, smile.
Smile, smile, smile.
This one's on the Twitter and such.
Okay.
I think this might be one of our largest ones.
And let me just do one more.
Okay, so we're going to do it slightly differently this time.
So Michael Levin is going to speak first.
How many of you have seen Michael Levin on one of his talks already?
Like when we were...
Wow, that's a lot of people.
Okay, one more.
When I was promoting this event,
we got a lot of DMs who said like,
he's my favorite speaker.
Can you hear us, Michael?
Yeah, I can.
Okay, good.
And he said like...
He was one of...
This is one of his favorite...
A couple of people messaged me saying like,
Michael Levin is one of our favorite tech speakers
that they've ever seen.
So that was just totally cool.
Can you see the audience here, Michael?
Yeah.
Really?
80 people?
Yeah.
And then what else did I want to say?
There's less...
Yeah.
If you guys like post us on Twitter or on Instagram,
we'd be forever grateful.
It helps to spread the word.
It helps to decentralize science.
It helps to get the word out.
So I'm going to let Michael speak.
I was just going to say one thing.
If you like decentralize science,
we started a decentralize science company.
I'll talk more about it in a second,
but I know some people are going to go.
But I just want to say,
if you're looking for a job,
we're hiring to do like a decentralize science platform.
So if this is interesting to you,
we have an in-person office in New York City.
We're looking to hire community managers,
developers, business people.
We pay really, really well.
And we have a great office and a great team.
And we're looking to grow.
So if you're interested in this
and you're interested in decentralize science,
maybe you're an angry academic.
Maybe you're looking to change the world.
Maybe you're looking to see something better.
We'll do this.
But I just want to get that before...
I'll do a little talk on what is decentralize science
after Professor Levin speaks.
So without further ado,
Professor Levin is a professor at Tufts University,
super renowned in his field for his work on bioelectricity,
which is when I first heard about it.
I was amazed.
And I'll let you take it from here.
Yeah, thanks so much.
Let's give him a round of applause.
Thank you so much for the invitation
and that very kind introduction.
And thanks for letting me share some ideas with you.
So let me...
Let's see, I'm going to figure out a share screen here.
All right.
So I'm going to turn on my slides.
And when I do, I will not be able to see you.
So if anything goes wrong, just please somebody speak up.
Realize...
All right, here we go.
Okay, so what I'd like to talk about today
is the field of diverse intelligence
and specifically the kind of cognitive processes
that go on in your body
and what this means for various other issues.
You can find all the primary work,
like the primary papers, data sets, software,
everything at this site.
And you can sign up for announcements
and get some thoughts
beyond what I can say in peer-reviewed publications.
You can get that in my blog here.
So there's four things I'd like to talk about today.
First of all,
I'm going to talk a little bit about what I mean
by diverse or unconventional intelligence.
I will give you some examples of such,
looking at bioelectricity
and how it functions as a kind of cognitive glue
that binds the cells in your body
into a kind of collective intelligence.
And this collective intelligence
solves problems in anatomical space,
also known as morpheus space.
We'll talk about some biomedical applications
that result from thinking in these kinds of ways.
And towards the end,
we're going to touch on some issues about the future
and what I think it means for all of us.
So this is a well-known classic painting.
It's called,
Adam is naming the animals in the Garden of Eden.
And I find this very interesting
because I think there's one profoundly wrong aspect
of this old story.
And also there's one very deep aspect
that I think is really right on the money
that we have to absorb.
The part that I think is wrong here
is that this gives you the idea
that these animals are discrete natural kinds.
You look at this and you say,
okay, I know what all these animals are.
I mean, a discrete set of individual animals
with specific shapes and specific behaviors.
And Adam is actually different
than all of them.
He's special.
And so I think those two things
were going to have to blow up
in the next couple of decades.
I think that's going to disappear.
The part that I think that's really deep here
is that in this old biblical story,
it was actually Adam's job to name the animals.
The angels couldn't do it.
God couldn't do it.
Adam was the one who was supposed
to name the animals.
And I think that's for two reasons.
One is that he's the one that's going to have to live with them.
And the other is that in these old kind of mystical traditions,
naming something or knowing the name
of the real name of something
means that you've understood its true nature.
And that understanding is supposed to give you power
over that thing, right?
So knowing the name of something is really deep.
And I think this is important
because we are all going to have to name
in this kind of meaning.
We're going to have to name a whole
large set of novel beings
that have never been here before
with whom we are going to share our world.
And I think that's really important.
So you no doubt have read all kinds of
works of philosophy
and other more modern maybe stories
about the difference between humans
and maybe machines and other things.
And what people typically have in mind
when they say those things is this,
kind of this typical adult modern human
that has this like a gentle special glow about them.
But we've known now for a really long time
that both on an evolutionary time scale
and also a developmental time scale,
there is actually a continuum of bodies
and we'll get back to this towards the end of the talk.
But actually this form has very slowly
and gradually evolved from all these other forms
and originally a unicellular microbial ancestor.
And the same thing is true during your lifetime.
So whatever properties this kind of being has,
and so memory, true goals, preferences,
understanding, moral worth, responsibility and so on,
we really as scientists and philosophers
we really owe some story about how that arises.
Where in this continuum does that actually show up?
And is it better to think about that as a kind of discrete thing?
You have it or you don't have it?
Or what I think is that it's actually a continuum.
The right question is what kind and how much?
And so I've been working on a framework to enable us
to recognize, create and ethically relate to
a really diverse set of intelligences
that are very different from the kinds of things
that we usually recognize as intelligences.
So apes, birds, maybe an octopus or a whale or something.
But all kinds of other creatures,
colonial organisms and swarms like beehives and ant colonies.
Synthetic biology engineered new life forms,
AIs, whether robotic or purely software,
and maybe at some point aliens,
at some point maybe we find some exobiological life.
So we need to be able to talk about
all of these things simultaneously.
What do they all have in common?
And I'm not the first person to try for a framework like this.
This is 1943, Wiener, Rosenbluth and Bigelow
tried for a scale that goes all the way from passive matter,
basically simple passive materials,
all the way up through these kinds of different stages
to the kind of complex second order metacognition
that humans have where they can think about themselves
and they know that they know things and so on.
So what we need is a story of scaling.
How do very simple information processing
kinds of acts become minds?
And whatever framework that we come up with,
it has to move experimental work forward.
It can't just be philosophy.
It needs to actually give us new capabilities,
for example, new biomedicine.
And it also has to enhance ethics.
It has to enhance our ability to understand our world
and relate to it with the appropriate kind of compassion.
So the fundamental fact is that all of us take this journey.
We've all made this journey from what people call just physics,
and I really hate that term, but people use it.
As an unfertilized oocyte, all of us were once a little blob
of chemicals, and when people look at that blob,
they say, okay, well, this is just a physical chemical system.
It obeys the laws of chemistry.
There is no mind.
There's just a bunch of chemicals.
But at some point, slowly and gradually,
it turns into one of these amazing kinds of creatures
or even something like this.
Here's Rene Descartes, who was fond of saying
that he was not a machine
and had special properties.
And so that's fine, but we need to really then tell a story
of where does that happen?
And developmental biology offers absolutely no place
where you can draw a bright line and say,
okay, before that, it was just a bunch of chemicals
doing the things that chemicals do, but now, bang,
now it's a real being with a real mind
and preferences and goals and so on.
There is no spot like that in developmental biology.
So we really need to understand the scaling of this.
Well, at least, okay, so that's a little,
that should be, if you take that on,
to really understand that it should be a little disturbing,
but at least we're a true unified intelligence, right?
We're not like an ant colony,
which people do describe ants and termites
as a kind of collective intelligence,
but we're not like that, right?
We are a centralized unified mind.
We have a brain and everything.
Well, Rene Descartes thought so,
and in particular, he was fond of the pineal gland
because there's only one of them in the brain,
and he felt that our unified human intelligence
should have one spot in the brain
that isn't duplicated the way that other structures are.
But if he had access to microscopes,
he would have discovered that actually,
there isn't one of anything,
because in the pineal gland, this is what it looks like.
There are huge numbers of individual cells,
and if he had really good microscopy
inside each one of those cells, he would see this.
This is what's actually inside.
All of this stuff is inside every cell.
So actually, all of us are collective intelligences.
Even we know no less than ant colonies
and beehives and flocks of birds,
we are all made of parts.
And in fact, I think all intelligence
is collective intelligence.
In fact, for us, this is the sort of thing we're made of.
Now, this happens to be a free-living organism
known as a lacrimaria, but it's a single cell,
and you can see the amazing competency
it has at its local scale.
So with respect to single cell events,
it handles all of its anatomical needs,
its metabolic needs, its physiological needs.
No brain, no nervous system, no stem cells.
Everything is handled by this amazing little organism.
And we are a large collective of cells
that have enormous competencies in different spaces.
And so if you look at our structure,
not only are we a set of nested dolls
consisting of various chemicals
and subcellular components and then tissues
and organs and organisms and then, of course,
societies and swarms, not only structurally
are we a collection of these hierarchical levels,
but actually each of these has its own competency,
its own intelligence, its own problem-solving capacity.
So in other kinds of spaces,
not just in three-dimensional space that we're used to,
such as, for example, when mice run mazes and so on,
but in other spaces, the space of physiological states,
the space of all possible types of gene expression,
the space of all possible anatomical configurations.
In all of these spaces, the different levels
of your body structure are solving problems,
pursuing goals, storing and utilizing memories
and navigating those spaces with great ingenuity.
That amazing architecture,
this multi-scale competency architecture,
which currently our technology in robotics
and our typical AIs don't use anything like that.
No reason why we couldn't, but no one's done it yet.
But biology uses this amazing multi-scale architecture
and it allows some truly astounding capabilities
for living forms.
I'm going to show you a couple of interesting examples.
One of the things that biology can do
is have a kind of, you can almost call it
a kind of beginner's mind concept
where it doesn't really make,
evolution doesn't just make organisms
that are solutions to specific problems.
It actually makes problem-solving machines
that come into the world with massive plasticity
ready to take on novel configurations.
So what you're looking at here is a tadpole.
Here's the mouth, here are the nostrils,
here's the brain, here's the tail, this thing is the gut.
And what you'll notice here is that,
what's happening here is that there are no eyes
in the primary location where the eyes go,
but there is an eye that we induced on the tail.
And what you see is that these animals,
when we built this machine to train these tadpoles
in a visual task, and what you find out
is that they can see perfectly well.
And this eye, which is now located on their tails,
doesn't connect to the brain.
Here's the optic nerve.
Sometimes it connects to the spinal cord like this,
sometimes to nothing at all,
and they do very well in visual assays.
So just think about what this means.
For millions of years, this brain was perfectly adapted
to take visual input right here from the eyes next to it.
And now you've got this weird itchy patch of tissue on your back
that's providing some sort of electrical signal
onto your spinal cord.
Why doesn't it take many rounds of evolutionary adaptation,
mutation, selection for this to work?
It works right out of the box,
first time you do it.
It doesn't require any more evolutionary cycles.
And that's because this kind of creature, as all of us,
has massive plasticity.
There are lots of other interesting features.
For example, these are planaria.
These are flatworms.
And what's interesting about these guys
is that they are incredibly regenerative.
So you can cut them into many pieces.
Each piece will regenerate and become a perfect tiny little worm.
Now, one thing that James McConnell discovered in the 60s,
and he got a lot of flak for it, but he was actually right.
We repeated his work using modern automated methods in 2013,
and he was completely right,
that if you train a planarian, for example,
to feed on these little bumpy circles,
and then you amputate their head, including their brain,
and you get this tail left here.
The tail sits there.
It doesn't do much of anything for the next eight days.
It doesn't have any behavior.
But what it does do is it grows back a new brain.
And as it grows back a new brain, you then can test these animals
and you find out that they've remembered the original information.
So not only is the anatomy regenerated, but so are the memories.
And actually, whatever, I mean, presumably they're stored in a tail somewhere.
We don't know where.
They're kind of distributed throughout the body.
And then they are imprinted onto the new brain as the brain develops
so that they can demonstrate behavior.
So the movement of information through the body, right?
You're seeing here simultaneously the ability to restore anatomical structures,
so anatomical memories, but also behavioral memories.
And these things are linked.
And one of the most remarkable examples is this.
These are caterpillars and they have a particular brain suitable for crawling around
using the soft body architecture in a two-dimensional world.
And they need to turn into this.
This is a flying, hard-body kind of being that has a completely different life
and it has a different brain because of that.
In order to do this, it basically destroys most of the brain during metamorphosis,
many of the cells are killed, the connections are broken,
and it refactors into a new brain.
But what has been found is that if you train these caterpillars on a particular task,
the butterflies or moths that result still remember.
So there are two fascinating things here.
Not only is it amazing to ask,
where is the information that it's robust to this incredible refactoring of the memory medium?
We don't have any technology like that.
If you start shuffling around the pieces of your memory chips inside your computer,
nothing's going to work.
But not only is the memory robust,
if you think about it, you realize that you actually can't just store the information.
You have to completely reinterpret it for a new context.
For example, if you teach these caterpillars to eat leaves when you provide a certain color stimulus,
those specific memories are totally useless to the butterfly because butterflies don't eat leaves.
And they don't move around the way the caterpillars do.
They have to reinterpret those memories in a brand new way suitable for this creature
and its three-dimensional new life.
So during these kind of transformations, you see that biological memory isn't just stored.
It's actually actively, creatively reinterpreted.
These memory engrams that are made are reinterpreted for their new lifetime.
So lots of fascinating things to be said about behavioral memories and so on.
In a few minutes talking about what we study, which is primarily anatomical memories.
So let's think about this.
This is a cross-section through the human body.
So look at this incredible complexity of all the organs in the torso.
So everything is where it needs to be in the right place, the right direction, next to the right thing.
Almost all of the time, where does this pattern come from?
Because we start life as a collection of blastomeres and eventually these cells build something like this.
Where is that pattern?
People might be tempted to say DNA, but we can read genomes now and we know that is not what is in the genome.
What's in the genome are specifications of proteins, the tiny molecular hardware that every cell gets to have.
But this structure is the outcome of the physiological software that these cells are executing.
This information is no more in the genome than is the actual structure of the colony of ants and termites
or the specific structure of a spider web in the DNA of the spider.
So we have to really understand how do the cells know what to make?
How do they know when to stop?
If something is damaged, how do we convince them to repair it?
And actually, which I'll show you a little bit towards the end, what else is that hardware willing to do?
What else can it build?
What can we make from the exact same cells with the exact same DNA?
And I like to think of kind of the end game of our field here as this.
Someday, you're going to be able to sit down in front of a computer and use something called an anatomical compiler.
What's going to happen here is that you will draw the animal, plant, or biobot, organoid, whatever that you want at the level of anatomy.
Not at the level of genetic circuits or anything like that, but the actual anatomy.
And what the system ought to be able to do is to compile down that anatomical description into a specific set of stimuli
that have to be given to cells to build exactly what you want to build.
Now, the practical reason we need something like this is because imagine if you had the ability to tell groups of cells what to build,
you would do away with birth defects.
You would be able to heal and regenerate after traumatic injury.
You could reprogram cancer, you could stop and reverse aging even, stop degenerative disease.
All of these things, all of these major problems of biomedicine would go away.
If we understood how to get a group of cells to build exactly what we want them to build.
Now, the key here is that this device is not a 3D printer.
This is not about micromanaging cells and trying to print body structures.
It's a communications device.
It's a way to translate your anatomical specification, what it is that you're looking for,
into the gold states that these cells are accessing when they build some particular structure.
Now, I'll tell you that we don't have anything remotely like this and we can only do this in a few individual cases.
And the reason is that here's where current state of the art is.
We're very good at manipulating cells and molecules, processing information like this about which genes interact with which other genes,
which proteins attach together and so on.
But we're really a long way away from what we really want, which is complete control of large scale form and function.
Somebody is missing a limb.
We ought to be able to tell those cells to rebuild.
So why is that?
And I think it's because molecular medicine has been largely stuck where computer science was in the 1940s and 50s.
This is what it looks like, that programming a computer used to look like.
You can see what she's doing.
She's interacting with the hardware.
She's rewiring the machine to get it to do something.
And you would all laugh if I told you that on your laptops, nowadays, if you wanted to go from Microsoft Word to Photoshop,
you would have to get out to soldering iron and start rewiring.
The whole point of what we've learned in computer science and information technology over the years is that if your hardware is good enough
and the biological hardware is definitely good enough, what you have here is a reprogrammable medium that is much better off controlled by communication,
by signals, by stimuli.
And this is what we're still missing out to a large degree in biomedicine.
We understand the hardware more or less.
We really have only begun to scratch the surface of the software, the software of life, the intelligence that's inherent in every layer of our body systems.
I'm going to show you a couple of examples of this.
Well, first of all, we all know that development is reliable.
So most of the time the egg will give rise to a bunch of cells that build the correct human target morphology.
But it's not just about emergent complexity or reliability.
It's actually much more interesting than that.
Because if you start cutting early embryos into pieces, this is naturally how you get twins and triplets and quadruplets.
You don't get half bodies, you get perfectly normal monozygotic twins and various multiples.
And this means that in this anatomical space where you go from different starting states,
here's one, here's one, from different starting states, all of them can navigate that space to a particular ensemble of goal states corresponding to valid human anatomies.
And sometimes they can actually avoid all kinds of local minimum, meaning perturbations that you give them along the way.
They can solve problems and get where they need to go.
This is William James' definition of intelligence, the ability to get to the same end by different means.
This is what I mean by different types of intelligence, by navigating these problem spaces.
Now, some animals can do this throughout their lifespan.
So here is an axolotl, and these amphibians can regenerate their eyes, their jaws, their tails, their limbs, portions of the heart and brain.
And what that looks like is when they bite each other's legs off, no matter where that occurs, whatever the piece is remaining,
these cells will build exactly what's needed, no more, no less, to make a perfect salamander limb, and then they stop.
And that's the most amazing thing about regeneration is that it knows when to stop.
And so this idea that you have a particular structure, and when you deviate from that structure, the cells work really hard to get back to that same region of anatomical space,
and then they know that they've got there, and they know that that's their goal, and then they stop.
So that is a kind of anatomical homeostasis.
It's the same thing that your thermostat does at home, where you set a set point, and when the temperature goes off,
the system will work hard to get you back to that goal state, and then it stops.
And by the way, this is not just this kind of regeneration.
It's not just for amphibians.
The human liver is highly regenerative.
Even the ancient Greeks knew that.
I have no idea how they knew that, but they did.
Deer every year will regenerate huge amounts of bone and vasculature and innervation when they regrow their antlers up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day they grow.
And even human children can regenerate their fingertips.
So if you just keep it clean, these kind of amputations and kids end up with a very nice cosmetic outcome.
But we're, of course, not as good as salamanders or plenarium.
So I want to show you just kind of one of my favorite examples to really try to bring home just how much amazing creative problem solving these systems have.
This is a schematic of a cross section through a kidney tubule of a salamander.
And what you see here is that about 8 to 10 cells work together to build the structure and then they leave a lumen in the middle through which the fluid has to go.
One thing you can do is you can force these cells early on to have way more genetic material than they should.
And when that happens, the nuclei get bigger and the cells get bigger to accommodate.
When that happens, the resulting newt is actually exactly the same size because the cells adjust.
Fewer of these larger cells are now getting together to make exactly the same lumen.
The most amazing thing happens when you make these cells truly gigantic.
Then it uses a completely different molecular mechanism such that only one cell wraps around itself leaving a hole in the middle and still gives you the exact same structure.
So think of what this means.
If you're a newt coming into the world, you don't know how many copies of your genetic material you're going to have.
You don't know how big your cells are going to be.
You don't know how many cells you're going to have.
You have to figure out, you have to use all the tools that you're disposed of, all the molecular mechanisms that you have to solve this problem.
How do I get from being an egg to being an adult despite all these nullities?
You can't count on anything.
You can't assume that your evolutionary history has prepared you for knowing what to do.
And the same thing happens in the transition from tadpole to frog.
They have to rearrange their whole face.
But these Picasso tadpoles which have the organs in abnormal locations.
So the eyes on the back of the head, the mouth is off to the side.
These guys still make quite normal frogs because all of these organs will move in unnatural paths to get to where they need to go to look like a good frog and then they stop.
So this means that genetics does not actually give you some kind of hardwired automatic process that just goes in the same direction.
What it does in code is a machine that can do an error minimization scheme.
It can actually get to where it needs to go despite all sorts of things going wrong.
So now this raises an obvious question, how does it know what's right?
How do these things know what a correct frog face looks like?
So we've been studying this and the sort of uncontroversial example of collections of cells storing a goal state for behavior is what happens in the brain.
So the way it works in the brain is that you have these electrical networks of cells that communicate electrically via ions that go in and out of these little ion channels and then they pass through these electrical synapses.
And the computations that are processed by that network result in the software that we see as behavior.
So basically here, this is a living zebrafish brain that the commitment of neuroscience is that if we knew how to decode all of this electrophysiological activity, we could read out the thoughts, the memories, the goal states, the competencies of this animal.
Well, it turns out that this is not anything special or unique to brains.
Every cell in your body has these ion channels.
Most cells have electrical connections to their neighbors.
And evolution discovered that these electrical networks were good for processing information.
A really long time ago back around the beginning of bacterial biofilms actually long before multicellularity or brains or nerves or anything like that.
So then one can ask, well, if the electrical networks of the brain think about moving you through three dimensional space, what do the electrical networks of the body think about?
What were these cells thinking about before there were brains?
And what we've been studying is this idea that what they're thinking about is how to navigate anatomical space.
They're thinking about how to get from whatever situation they happen to be in, whether a normal egg or some kind of perturbed system into the right kind of body for the environment in which they find themselves.
So in order to do this, we've developed some interesting techniques using voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes to really literally read the mind of the body to see all the electrical conversations that cells are having with each other.
These are not computer models. These are real. These are some cells. And this is an early frog embryo and the colors are signals from a voltage reporter dye that enables us to see what all the electrical states are.
We are reading it. We then have all these computer models that we use to try to understand and try to decode what are the memories here.
And I'm going to show you some examples. This is an early frog embryo putting its face together. It's quite dynamic.
But here's one frame from that video. And you can see the the bioelectric pattern here. We call this the electric face because it basically looks like a face.
Here's where it knows the eye needs to go. Here's where the mouth needs to go. Some other organs out here. This is where the organs are going to be in the future.
This is a pre pattern that it uses to figure out where to put all the craniofacial organs.
Now, it's not just cells within an embryo that communicate, but actually individual embryos communicate with each other.
So you can see what's happening here in the group that when this guy sets off a wave, they all feel it.
And here are a bunch of cells where you can see there's some neural firing here.
But there are also some lots of activity in these non-neural cells.
So these are pretty ubiquitous. These electrical networks are pretty ubiquitous.
Now, observing these amazing bioelectrical signals is fun in a reading, but you don't know that the patterns mean anything unless you can functionally alter them.
You alter them and you see what happens. So we've developed tools mostly borrowed from neuroscience.
And I think one of the lessons we're learning is that neuroscience is really not about neurons at all.
The deep lessons of neuroscience tell us about all cells and about intelligence more broadly.
And what we do is we change these bioelectrical patterns.
There are no electrodes. There are no magnets, no waves, no frequencies, no electromagnetic radiation.
What we do is we hack the normal interface that cells are using to hack each other's behavior,
which is the ion channels on their surface and the gap junctions that they used to exchange electrical signals.
This is what we target. So we control how cells communicate with each other electrically.
And when you do this, you can do some really cool things.
For example, by injecting some RNA and coding a potassium channel, which changes the voltage of the cells,
we can induce a little spot in the embryo that looks just like that eye spot in that electric face.
When you do that somewhere else, for example, in cells that are going to become gut,
what you've just done is tell these cells, build an eye here.
You have not said anything about how the eye should form, what are the components of an eye.
You haven't said anything to the stem cells or to the specific genes inside of each one.
You're talking to the collective intelligence of cells that are trying to navigate more for space.
And what you've said is go to the region that corresponds to making an eye.
And they know how to do this. Here are all the internal tissues of these eyes,
so lens, retina, optic nerve, all that.
And they even have some other cool properties that you find in other collective intelligences like ANS,
which is that, so here's a lens sitting out in the flank of a tadpole somewhere.
If you inject just a few cells, not enough to really make a whole eye,
so the blue ones are the ones we injected, what they will do is recruit their neighbors.
They tell their neighbors that, hey, you need to participate with us in making this eye and they instruct them.
So we instruct these cells, you should make an eye, they then instruct their neighbors.
So all of these competencies, knowing how to make an eye,
knowing how many cells there are in recruiting new cells if they need to,
all of this is built in as part of the competency of the material that we're dealing with.
And we have extended this towards some regenerative applications.
There are huge numbers of people living with limb and organ loss every day.
We need therapeutics that are not just going to be for wound healing,
but actually to regenerate whole organs.
And we can see here that what happens here normally frogs,
unlike salamanders, do not regenerate their legs.
But we've come up with a cocktail that triggers not only pro-regenerative gene expression here,
but actually within 45 days, you've already got some toes in the toenail.
But in our latest experiments, what happens is that the treatment itself,
the bioelectric cocktail is applied for about 24 hours.
After that, you get a year and a half of leg growth in the adult frog.
You don't touch it at all during that time.
This is not about micromanaging, this is not about controlling the stem cells
or 3D printing anything.
This is about telling the cells very early on,
go down the leg regeneration path, not the scarring path.
And so eventually you get a quite nice leg that is touch sensitive and motile.
We are in the process of moving this to mammals now.
I should say that I have to do disclosure here because Dave Kaplan and I have a company
whose job it is to try to move this into mammalian models and hopefully patients.
And David's group makes these wearable bioreactors that apply the ion channel drug payload.
And I'll come back to the plan area for a moment because there's something really interesting here
about how we reprogram these pattern memories.
I want to again show you the plasticity of the material that we're dealing with.
So here are the plan area that I was telling you about.
Some amazing properties that we can talk about if people have questions
as far as cancer resistance, immortality, I mean these guys literally don't seem to age and so on.
But one of the things that we need to understand is if they were to be chopped into three pieces,
so you got this middle fragment here, 100% of the time it grows one head and one tail
and you get a normal plan area.
So now the question is how does it know?
How does this thing know how many heads it's supposed to have
and where the heads are supposed to be?
So it turns out that there's an electrical circuit that controls this.
We've characterized that circuit and we've learned to rewrite it.
So what happens here is that this bioelectrical pattern, so this is the memory.
This is literally the memory of the collective intelligence of the body
as far as how many heads it's supposed to have in here, one head.
So what we can do is we can change that pattern to say two heads
and when you do that in this animal after you amputate,
then it goes ahead and makes a two-headed animal.
This isn't Photoshop or AI or anything like that, these are real animals.
And this bioelectric pattern is not a map of this two-headed guy.
This pattern is the pattern that we incepted into this one-headed normal worm.
It's anatomically normal, the molecular gene expression is normal.
Here's where the head genes are.
But it has a different internal representation of what a correct plan area should look like.
We've rewritten the goal, the target state.
So this is not micromanaging the cells.
This is changing the mind of this collective intelligence as far as what I should do
if I get injured in the future.
So it's really a counterfactual memory.
And one planarian body can store, a normal planarian body can store
at least one of two possible representations of what a normal worm should look like.
And in fact, one of the most remarkable things is that once you do that, the memory stays.
Two-headed worms cut again and again in plain water will continue to regenerate as two-headed animals.
It's permanent even though there's nothing wrong with the genetics of this animal.
We have not touched the genome, there are no trans genes.
This is purely bioelectrical.
I showed you exactly where the electrical memory is stored and how we can see it.
And here are these two-headed worms.
And not only can we change the number of heads, but we can actually change the shape of the head to that of other species.
So the shape of the head of this triangle species can become flat like a Pifelina.
It can become round like an S-Mediterrania.
The shape of the brain changes like these other species.
The shape of the position of the stem cells does.
So in this anatomical morphospace where you have attractors, you have these deep attractors corresponding to other species.
They live there naturally.
But you can get a different species such as this guy to visit these other attractors because it's so reprogrammable.
Not only that, you can take it further and find regions of morphospace where machine learning folks will call this a latent morphospace
where you can build things that are not normal plenaria at all, things that are spiky or cylindrical or combinations like this.
So what I'm showing you is that the body is incredibly plastic.
It's reprogrammable at the level of physiology, not necessarily the genetically specified hardware.
But we are not the only bioengineers that can hack this kind of morphogenetic navigation.
This is what you normally see.
Acorns make something like this.
And you kind of get that this is extremely reliable.
This happens so often that you get the idea that, OK, well, the oak genome just knows how to do this.
This is what the oak genome knows how to do.
That is what they do every single time.
But there's this amazing bioengineer, this WASP, and it's a parasite.
And what the parasite does is using some kind of chemicals that are still poorly understood,
it basically hacks the surrounding plant cells to build something completely different.
Would you have any idea that these flat, nice, flat green leaves with a normal genome, a completely normal genome,
were capable of building something as crazy as this?
We'd have no idea.
And people talk about developmental constraints.
There's a lot of constraints in our thinking about the process,
but I'm not sure we understand morphogenetic constraints at all.
I think they're much broader than people think.
And this kind of hacking is ubiquitous in biology, and we are just learning to do it.
And with this notion of what lies beyond the normal morphology,
repair of the typical anatomy, but what's beyond that?
I want to show you basically this last example, which is this.
If I showed you this little organism and I would ask you to guess what this is,
you might say we've found this at the bottom of a pond somewhere.
It's some kind of primitive microorganism.
If you were to sequence the genome of this, what you would get is 100% homo sapiens.
We call these anthrobots.
They are made of adult patient tracheal epithelium.
So adult often, elderly patients donate their tracheal cells.
We have a protocol that lets these cells reboot their multicellularity
and live an entirely new life that has new shapes and behaviors.
They look nothing like any stage of human development.
And one of the unique things that they know how to do,
which is really shocking and surprising,
is that they know how to heal neural wounds.
So if you put down some human neurons in addition,
you put a big scratch through them,
these anthrobots will sit down in this kind of like super bot cluster.
And what you'll see when you lift them up four days later,
what they've done is they've taken the two sides of the neural wound
and they knit them together.
Who would have ever thought that your tracheal cells,
which sit there quietly for decades in your airway,
actually have given the opportunity to make a multi little creature
that runs around on its own
and has lots of interesting abilities,
such as, for example, healing neural wounds.
And so this one of the biomedical aspects of this
is that this is a personalized medicine
where cells from your own body, not genetically modified,
there's no reason to genetically modify them,
can be used to heal your own body and no need for, for example,
immune suppression because they're your own cells.
They're not some sort of heterologous cell type.
So this kind of agential biomedical intervention,
these kind of biobots made from your own cells to heal
are, I think, a huge potential application for the future.
So the last thing I'll just say is that, you know,
not only do we have these two continuum that remind us
that we are on an unbroken, slow continuum
with all kinds of other unusual forms, including cells,
and whatever you say about adult humans,
what can you say about some of these other intermediate forms?
But also there's another continuum here,
which consists of now rational changes that are made
for various kinds of modifications and augmentations.
So both technological and purely biological,
I think that the future belongs to a kind of freedom of embodiment.
I think that this standard form,
that evolution just sort of happened to drop us off in,
that is susceptible to degenerative brain disease
and limited IQ and limited lifespan
and susceptible to all kinds of dumb bacterial infections
and lower back pain and bad vision and all these things.
You know, I don't think we have any particular commitment
or allegiance to any of that.
We are going to be improving some of the bad hardware
and some of the bad firmware that evolution has left us with.
And at every level of organization,
you can think about augmenting these systems
that were designed by basically a random walk with selection
with rationally designed materials.
So I think that in the future, all of you, young people,
and I think even I will get to see a bunch of this, I think,
will be living with a huge number of alien bodies and minds.
We already have some people that are some degree of cyborg.
We will have hybrids and chimeras and synthetic life forms.
And because of that kind of plasticity of life that I showed you,
that interoperability is huge.
So pretty much any combination of evolved material,
engineered material and software is some kind of living agent.
And all of these things are going to have diverse bodies
and diverse minds.
And we really better step up and go well beyond very ancient
and crumbling rules of thumb about how we deal with each other
in terms of what are you made of and how did you get here?
Those are the kinds of things that we ask when we try to understand
is something a quote unquote machine
that we can do whatever we want with or is it a living organism
to whom we owe certain kinds of moral stances.
Those categories are going to go out the window
because there are going to be all sorts of forms
that challenge those superficial categories.
And what I think we're looking for is a kind of ethical synthbiosis
with a bunch of life forms that are nowhere on the tree of life with us.
So I'm going to stop here and just say that if anybody's interested
in diving more into this stuff,
here are some kind of academic papers.
There's much more sort of general purpose writings
on this kind of thing at my blog.
I want to thank the people who did all the work.
So these are all the postdocs and the grad students
who did the biology that I showed you today.
We have lots of amazing collaborators.
None of this is possible without our technical support personnel,
our funders.
Again, I have to do a disclosure.
These are the companies that support our work
and most of all the model systems,
the animals and the microbes and so on,
because they teach us everything here.
So yeah, thanks very much.
Thank you.
Okay, I think we have time for some questions.
So we will start here.
Thank you.
This was very interesting.
If I understood correctly,
you state that these morphological plasticity
generative plasticity is not really encoded in our genome,
but more in the bioelectrical properties
and activity of the cells or the organism.
However, the bioelectrical properties of an organism
or of a cell depend on the channels,
voltage dependent or independent channels
that are expressed by a given cell,
which are encoded in our genome.
So in a way, the bioelectrical properties
and therefore all the morphological plasticity
and regenerative capacity is encoded in our genome.
Well, let's think about it.
So certainly you need the hardware for any of it to work.
So without the hardware, without the channels,
none of this is going to work.
But encoded is a funny word.
Imagine, I don't know if you've ever seen this thing.
It's called a Galton board.
You can get it on Amazon for about 20 bucks.
It's a toy.
What it is, it's just imagine a board
and you bang a bunch of nails into it, right?
And then you take a bucket of marbles
and you dump it into the top of the board.
So the marbles go bang, bang, bang, bang, bang, bang, you know,
and they all land on the bottom.
What's the shape of the resulting marbles?
What you always get is this lovely bell curve.
It has a very particular shape to it.
And so you can ask yourself,
where is the shape of that bell curve encoded?
And so you can, certainly it's not going to appear
if you don't have the wood and the nails and the marbles,
but you can study the material of the wood and the nails
and everything else all day long.
What you're not going to find is a direct encoding
of that bell curve.
So the real question in all of this
is to go beyond the terminology.
I mean, I'm much less interested in terminology
and more interested in what kind of conceptual framework
lets us do better experiments
in order to get new capabilities.
So if you want to make changes,
if you want to induce repair,
you'll fix birth defects, normalize cancer,
which are all things we've done
that I didn't get a chance to talk about,
the question is that you're better off thinking
about the material, the hardware,
or are you better off understanding the software
that happens there and targeting that?
And that's exactly what I was trying to argue,
that all of modern molecular medicine
has done some amazing things with respect to hardware,
but most of what we are not able to do currently
is precisely because we've stayed at that level,
which computer science and information technology
left behind in the 40s.
So yes, the hardware is important,
but we don't all program with a soldering iron,
and that's exactly what I'm saying as far as these.
The reason we were able to do some of the things
that we've done, which had never been done before,
is precisely because we were able to adopt conceptual frameworks
from neuroscience and from other fields
that really take very seriously the guidance
of the final outcome, not by the hardware itself,
but by the software components
that are not actually directly encoded by the hardware,
but of course require it to function in the physical world.
Thank you.
Thank you for a very interesting talk.
My question was in relation to,
I guess you said it's not genetic,
it's more about the stimuli that you use
to change how the cells function
and turn into what they're supposed to be.
I'm wondering, like with those frogs
where you were able to reproduce most of a leg,
if you made generation one of the frogs,
which were able to, using the stimuli,
create this new leg,
would generation two of the offspring,
if you cut the leg, grow a new leg
because you've reprogrammed those cells
and at this point it is the genetic,
I know we're trying to understand the difference
between genetics and the stimuli,
but would generation two have the capability
and the cell memory to regrow that leg?
Yeah, great question.
We haven't done the experiment.
I don't really predict that it would
because I could sort of make up a mechanism
by which that would happen,
but I doubt it would be actually
that this would be transmitted to the next generation
through the egg and sperm and so on,
but there is an interesting example
of what you're talking about,
which is in these planaria,
so we make these two-headed animals,
again, perfectly normal genetics.
That's another reason why the genome is insufficient
for all this, because if you just sequence
the genome of the two-headed and the one-headed form,
they're identical.
You have no idea that you're looking at a two-headed worm.
It's simply not in the genetics for that reason.
Those two-headed worms, when they reproduce,
so the way these worms reproduce
is they tear themselves in half, right?
So they just tear themselves in half
and they regenerate.
Now you've got two worms.
So that's their mode of reproduction
and under that mode of reproduction,
the offspring do in fact inherit the two-headed ones.
So two-headed worms fission
and they create more two-headed worms permanently.
So you've made a permanent line of animals
that have a different anatomical structure
and you can imagine,
we could throw it in the Charles River, we wouldn't,
but you could imagine throwing it
in the Charles River here in Boston
in a hundred years from now,
so the scientists come along
and they scoop up some samples and they go,
oh cool, two-headed form and a one-headed form
must be a speciation event.
Let's sequence the genome
and see where the speciation event happened
and there's no difference between it.
That is not where it is.
And so that kind of a thing does propagate
because the animals are not squeezing through a single,
kind of a bottleneck of a single egg cell.
So there's a chunk of the planarian
which now remembers that it's two-headed
and that chunk regrows into a new animal.
Can that pass through a single egg cell?
I don't know.
We have no evidence that it can.
I could sort of imagine how it would happen,
but we haven't shown anything like that yet.
Hi, thank you for your talk.
My question is how you propose that this bio
or this electrical information is integrated
in these organisms.
For context, I work on the PAC-6 regulatory genome,
so seeing these eyes kind of generate
just solely from electrical stimulus
kind of makes me think it's,
not the genes themselves,
but the DNA outside these genes.
But I would love to hear your thoughts on that.
Yeah, great.
Great question.
So a couple things.
So first, just kind of a little inside baseball
about PAC-6.
So in frog, and pardon me if you know all this,
but in frog, PAC-6 will only induce eyes
in the anterior rectoderm, right?
Just in the front of the head.
And if you actually look at the developmental biology textbook,
what they tell you is that,
well, the anterior and rectoderm are the only cells
competent to become eyes,
because they probed it with the master I.G. PAC-6.
If you use PAC-6 as your stimulus,
it's true only the anterior and rectoderm can form eyes.
But if you probe the cells
with a much more meaningful stimulus to them,
which is these bioelectrical states,
actually you find out that pretty much,
I mean, we haven't found a region in the body
that can't do it yet.
So these competencies,
what we think of as competencies
are really relative to how much we've understood
the material we're working with
and the limitations of the material
are often limitations of our understanding,
not the actual competency of the material.
So now, how does it work?
So what we do know for all of these cases
is the molecular steps on a single cell level.
So we know that when we change the voltage,
we know the transduction machinery,
we know how that voltage is converted
to second messenger pathways,
how those turn various genes on and off.
Some of them have to do with other kinds
of chromatin modifications.
We have all those steps.
All of that stuff, while it's important to know,
is really extremely unsatisfying
because the phenomenon itself
is not a single cell phenomenon.
So what I'm truly interested in
is not tracking down how one cell's voltage
turns on specific genes.
That's just part of that.
I mean, it's an important part,
but it's just part of the story
because what you really want to understand is,
okay, but why is the whole thing scaled correctly?
What's the difference between the hand and the foot?
Why the shape of a particular structure?
And so what we're doing now
is we're using computational models
of network computation,
so not single cells, but networks of cells,
that try to understand how the collective
makes decisions about its size and shape
and things like that.
So there are, for sure, molecular stories
to be told about how the voltage turns genes on and off,
but what you really want is an understanding
of why a particular voltage kicks off,
eyes versus legs versus...
And that whole conversation,
like what happens when we induce these eye spots?
There's a whole conversation that happens
between those cells and their neighbors
because those cells are saying to their neighbors,
help us make an eye,
and so we also need to understand it's not enough
to know why those cells turn on various genes.
We need to know what are they saying to their neighbors
and how many and how do they know how many of them there are,
but those cells are actually saying back,
no, no, you should not be an eye.
You need to be normal skin,
and that's a cancer suppression mechanism.
The cells that have weird voltages get told
by their neighbors through the gap junctions.
They get communicated to try and try to normalize.
So there's a whole battle that's going on of identities,
and it's not an identity on a cell level.
It's not stem cells trying to decide
what cell type they should be.
It's large regions saying we are going to be an eye
versus we are going to be a leg or skin or whatever.
So it's a very multi-scale problem.
The same way that neuroscience is multi-scale,
where yeah, there are people who study synaptic proteins,
but there are also people who study psychiatric diseases
and psychoanalysis and so on,
and every step in between, all the network science
and in between those two levels.
This is going to be that kind of science, I think.
Thank you for your talk.
I have two questions.
One is what is the most frustrating thing for you
for this field to move forward if it's not a secret?
And the other thing, maybe I missed it,
but did you mention how this electrical pathways
are programmed in the beginning, like initially,
because you changed them,
so there was something that gave them at birth?
Yeah, good question.
So in the frog, Embryo, for example,
we can watch them form from the moment of fertilization.
So what happens is that the process of fertilization
breaks symmetry,
and we've characterized this from the very earliest stages,
how the various ion channels that are present
set up different kinds of electrical states
that start to perform different computations
and end up breaking symmetry,
amplifying that symmetry and then making decisions
who's going to be left, who's going to be right,
anterior, posterior, and so on.
So it's a combination of...
So where do these patterns come from?
Well, it's a combination of emergence
in the same way that Turing patterns, right?
So people who study chemical signals
have this formalism of Turing patterns,
which break symmetry and create order
out of well-mixed chemical media.
Some of it is emergent.
Some of it is, of course, constrained by the hardware.
So you need to have the appropriate,
as somebody was saying there,
you need to have the right hardware
that's sufficiently powerful to do it,
which means voltage-gated ion channels
and voltage-gated gap junctions and things like that.
And part of it comes from wherever it is
that mathematics comes from.
I mean, this is really a philosophical question,
but think about it.
If evolution...
This covers a voltage-gated ion channel.
What you have there is a voltage-gated ion conductance,
which is basically a transistor.
If you have a couple of transistors,
you can make a logic gate.
Once you make a logic gate, you end up with a truth table
that tells you how information is processed
by that logic gate.
You didn't have to evolve that truth table.
The truth table is given to you for free,
including things like the fact that the NAND gate
is universal and various other cool computational properties.
All of that you get for free,
and you don't have to evolve it.
You get it from wherever it is that the laws of
computation, the laws of mathematics.
The same way that if evolution
discovers two angles of the correct triangle,
it doesn't need to look for the third.
It can save all that time.
You know what the third is going to be.
So there are all of these interesting
free lunches, in a sense,
that evolution gets to exploit.
And I don't know where they come from.
Plato and Pythagoras
thought that they come from this platonic space
of universal facts
that exist separately from the physical world.
That's as good an answer
as any at this point.
Okay, we have many questions.
So let's just keep the answers a little
so we can get everyone here.
Hi, my name is Angeline.
I'm currently studying neuroscience
at Columbia, and
I want to know
I'd like to know what you think
about evolution as a mechanism
of design.
For example, evolving
a bot
like a bio-bot instead of
designing it
or both designing
and evolving it
and
would you edit
hox genes? Would you take
advantage of epigenetics?
And also
you
sort of preempted this with your last
answer.
What do you think
how do you think
we can take advantage of the vast
computing potential embodied
in biological components like membranes
like
as you just remarked
logic gates
and ion voltage control
ion channels
are basically the same thing and
there is a potential to program that.
Yeah.
Okay, so there was a lot there
to keep my answer short, so I'll do my best
and just pick one of the things you said.
So
we are doing a lot of work in programming
both our Xenobots, which are the frog
version and the enthrobots, which are the human
version. We are not touching the hox
genes. We are not touching
any of that stuff.
We are learning to give them
stimuli and take advantage of the cells
natural problem-solving capacities.
We are training cells
with rewards and punishments. We are trying
to understand how they interpret various signals
that cause them to
acquire different shapes
and functions and we are trying to communicate
that to the cells and let them
figure out all the downstream
molecular steps that need to happen
to make it come
through. I mean, the thing with evolution
I'll just say one quick thing about evolution
which is that I think evolution
works completely differently
within a genital medium like this that is able
to solve problems than it does
with the standard story of
evolution like
over a passive medium where
the genotype determines the phenotype.
That middle software layer
that morphogenetic plasticity that allows
it to solve problems makes evolution
and dynamics completely different because
selection has a hard time
seeing actual genomes than what it sees
is the outcome of that competency
process and so you end up selecting
for competency not for actually
better genomes and that's an intelligence
ratchet that goes all the way from
developmental mechanisms all the way up
I think to behavioral intelligence.
Thank you for the talk. I was
wondering if you consider
like moving the eye of the tadpole
from where it normally is to the leg
as a deviation from the norm
is there a number of deviations that can be handled
before the mechanism
just break down and what's that threshold
look like if there is one?
We've never reached
a threshold I think that
I don't think
there's any kind of a threshold in that sense
I mean you can certainly overwhelm
metabolically
you can overwhelm the system it needs
a certain amount of energy just to undergo
morphogenesis and of course
that plasticity is not
unlimited I mean there are many things
you can do to screw it up so that it cannot fix
itself so birth defects are a thing
and that's because these are not infallible pathways
they adapt to
a huge number of interventions but of course
it's not unlimited
I think the limitation
is
it's not the number of things you change
it's the kind of things and whether or not
you've broken the system's ability to
remember what the right shape is
and then act on it
Hi Michael fascinating
thank you so much
so what I would like to better understand
is how do you think that
such complex information
as the performance of a task
can be encoded
outside of the nervous system
since in the nervous system
we have synapses and
the fundamentals of
learning and memory it's
synaptic plasticity
potentiation and depression of synapses
so how do you think that such
complex information can be
encoded and modulated
through simply ion channels
that don't have synapses
between them to communicate information
well okay a few things
so first of all I'm not suggesting
that behavioral information it relies
entirely on ion channels that's not
what I've said but they do actually
cells non neural cells do have
electrical synapses between them
gap junctions which do store
state and things like that but
overall the story and I know this is
this kind of the standard story of
neuroscience that it's this you know
synaptic plasticity and LTP and so on
that story not from my work but from
lots of other people's work that story
is significantly cracking at this point
and I would recommend the work
of Sam Gershman Randy Gallo still
David Glansman
to look at some alternatives
because I don't think
that's I mean well many people
no longer think that that's the entire story
and overall if I had to guess
I think that the vast majority
of that machinery that you're talking about
is not actually for storing memories
I think it's for interpreting them
and I think that there are numerous
substrates within cells
neural and non neural that basically act
like a kind of like almost like a
reservoir computing scenario but
a lot of the actual
degrees of freedom are in chemical systems
they're not necessarily
synaptic
and the neural networks are actually
there to try to interpret it on the fly
so that's a you know
it's a long conversation to have but look up
some of those papers and you'll see this is not
my idea this has been around
for some decades now
just keep your questions and answers
like we have like 10 more questions so
thank you so much for the talk
I'm curious on your thoughts
about whether this
electrical information can be
accessible in higher order cognition
and humans that might be in conscious
perception and other organisms
that might look a little different
yeah I mean
if I understood correctly I mean that's the
project of neural decoding so lots of
neuroscientists work on this this idea
of reading out electrical information
out of mammalian
brains or including human brains
to try and understand what the person is thinking
Hi
thanks for the talk
I'm Kazra
I'm wondering when you say
all intelligence is collective intelligence
is there sort of a principled argument for that
like can we imagine
intelligences that we haven't discovered
that could not be collective like why
are all intelligences
collective
well as far as we know
certainly on earth
every intelligence
is made of parts
I cannot
I mean maybe somebody has better imagination than me
but I cannot imagine
a truly
sort of
homogenous monadic
single object
that is not made of parts that can change
and that function relative to each other and so on
that could then learn
and do the kinds of things
we expect of intelligence
if it doesn't have internal parts that can change state
how is it learning anything
I just can't imagine how you could possibly
have an intelligence
that is one indivisible
thing that does not have internal states that can change
every intelligence that we've ever seen
every piece of active matter
and intelligent
living thing that we've ever seen
is composed of parts
composed of parts
I just don't see how it would be otherwise
just
just
good
sorry
great talk
I was curious about
have you done RNA seek
before and after for example
in that frog example
I'm curious if there are any transcriptomic changes
that you were able to see
and if so
what are your thoughts on oncogenesis
or oncogene activation
absolutely we've done tons of RNA seek
there are massive transcriptional
remodeling events that happen
after the kinds of things that we do
also naturally so xenobots have a very different transcriptome
from frog embryos
anthropots have an extremely different
transcriptome from normal
from the tissue that they came from
even though there are no genetic changes
no weird nanomaterials
no drugs, no trans genes
no synthetic circuits
massive changes
and as far as oncogenes
the story that I didn't tell you is that
there's a whole
way to look at cancer
as a kind of dissociative identity disorder
of this collective intelligence
and what that means is that you can actually address it
not by trying to kill the cells
but by trying to reconnect them back
into the electrical
networks and so what we do is we inject
human oncogenes like KRAS mutations
and so on into these embryos
normally they make tumors
but if we then manage the electrical
connectivity correctly even though
the oncoprotein is blazingly expressed
you don't get tumors, you get perfectly healthy tissue
with cells that are participating in
the network activity and doing what they're supposed to do
so there is a cancer
therapeutic story here as well
Hello Michael
great talk, thank you very much
so I'm a neurosurgeon, I have an
interesting observation that you might
find cool too
cool too
so we have had patients that we
operate on
say lose some function
speech and then rehabilitate
after six months they are back, they
regain their speech back
and when we operate on the same patient
again the same spot
where we lost speech last time
is completely
rejectable and
no function change occurs
so this is
very rare, I
saw this kind of phenomenon
happen three or four times
and I'm
not familiar with your field
but is there
a paper you can direct us
something that
describes what you are describing here
the morpho memory
and the regular memory
how do they work
in human brains?
Well, okay there are lots of papers
how they work in human brains
is very unclear
because obviously experiments are really hard
for ethical reasons you can't do this
in regular humans
there is some clinical data
drop me an email
michael.levin at tufts.edu
send me an email and I will shoot you some
reprints of what we have
Hi professor
what do you see is the biggest problem we need
to solve before using this
to program organisms?
The biggest problem
is conceptual
the biggest problem is developing
an understanding
of how we are going
to recognize
and communicate
with a collective intelligence
in the sense that
even, I mean we've done experiments
with gene, even gene regulatory networks
without
the rest of the cell
changing promoters without any of that
just by their dynamical properties
have six different kinds of memory
that they can do including pavlovian conditioning
just gRNAs on their own
and so the ability to recognize
that kind of property
and to learn to engineer
with an agential material
not the way we've engineered with passive materials
which we've done for millennia
but a material with an agenda
a material with a multi-scale set of goals
and competencies and problem solving skills
it's a completely different way of engineering
it's a communication and a collaboration
with your material it's not the kind of
micromanaging that we've been doing
since the beginning of the scientific enterprise
so those issues
are the biggest barrier
Thanks
I noticed you guys mostly use
endothelial or epithelial tissues
for like the xenobots, anthropots
and from different species as well
is that just sort of purely methodological opportunism
or is there like a relationship
between behavioral plasticity
and the characteristic time scale
at which they divide and die and so on?
Yeah interesting
we've done everything
we've done mesodermendoderm
we've done human mesenchymal stem cells
the reason the bots are epithelial
is because
those are the tissues that are ciliated
and they have a little motile cilia
and that behavior
and to be visibly to have visible behavior
now I also think that
there are many interesting behaviors
that happen in physiological and transcriptional spaces
but for our first kind of
outing of this stuff it was important to have
behaviors that people can see and really
recognize as behaviors so for that
you need them to be motile which means cilia
which means the epithelium
Thanks
Hi thanks for the talk
I really enjoyed it
I had a sort of question about the role of
you mentioned membranes were used
to sort of predict the next downstream series of events
and intercellular events
that contribute to the growth development
what do you think of epigenetics
and how you would sort of encode that
in the computational model
and sort of what those next steps are
like methylation, alkylation
all those different types of things
because you accounted for membranes
but not I guess those types of changes
to encode those
as next steps that
a computational model might predict
or even downstream
Yeah we have them in our model
so we know there are acetylation and methylation events
that are downstream of the things we do
it's there
by itself it doesn't really
it doesn't really add much
all of the kind of
high level decisions about what's going to happen
are made at least as far
as we've been able to see now
that they're made at that
electrophysiological level
all the gene expression changes
direct or indirect through chromatin
modification or downstream
yeah they're there, you can model them
but they're not
they're not a great
target for modification
if you want
there's certain things that you can do that way
but typically if you want to make these large scale changes
you're much better off doing it as high
on that control hierarchy
as you can
by the time you get down to the chromatin modification
you are having to micromanage a lot of things
to get what you want
Hi
thank you for your talk
I was really interested in the conditions
of this kind of initial bioelectrical
field
you showed several examples
of for example cells
creating
like sending bioelectrical signals
amongst each other
in order to stimulate growth in a certain way
I'm wondering
when it came to maybe like the first organisms
or organisms in a vacuum
are we kind of sending out
certain frequencies
or electrical
stimuli in order to
simulate that
or what were those types of kind of
initial field conditions
good question
we are
living cells put out all kinds of things
across the electromagnetic spectrum
ultra weak photon emission
all kinds of AC
weak magnetic
kinds of things
I don't study any of that
so I have no idea
really what the implications that would be
everything that I've shown you
was purely electrical
there's no magnetic component really here
these are the waves
this is purely electrical and it propagates through water
so
the stuff that I showed you doesn't really work through air
but having said that
it is true that living things
do emit electromagnetic radiation
but I don't think we know what it does
thanks
alright
last question
yeah so thank you
so much for this talk
just a quick question about like
I guess you can kind of call it
like
a programming type of question
how would you
describe the type of bugs that you encounter
so to speak in this situation
so let's say you want to create a worm with two heads
and the outcome is just different
than what you expect
first of all I'm guessing you've seen that
and second how do you deal with
debugging that
yeah great
the biggest issue here is that
you have to think completely differently
than you do with regular programming
because in regular programming
at least most of the time
you're dealing with an obedient passive medium
so
when you have a command whatever that command may be
you are pretty much guaranteed
that the hardware is going to carry it out
it may be the right command maybe the wrong command
but when you say
add these two numbers
if your hardware is not actually going to do it
then you really don't have a good computer
the whole point of
hardware is to isolate those layers
so that at the higher level you don't need to
worry about where the electrons are going
you can assume that the chip is doing what it needs to do
and it's going to get carried out
biology isn't like that at all so what's happening here
is that every level has its own agenda
so when you are providing certain signals
what you end up with are targets
that
either aren't paying attention
or they are paying attention and they refuse
or they actually fight you on it because they're going to do something different
or they have some other
thing that they want to do
and this happens at every level
it's not just behavioral scientists
know about this because
it's really hard to do experiments because of individuality
cells do this too
so you are dealing with a material that is not a passive material
that has
well separated levels of abstraction
where each level can depend
on the bottom level to be perfectly obedient
they are all pursuing their own agendas
they are cooperating, competing
and communicating with each other
interpreting each other
the computational paradigm that Josh
and I have come up with is called polycomputing
and it's simply the idea that
you have a huge number of
coexisting
interpenetrating agents
which are all interpreting and hacking each other in different ways
so there's not a single
interpretation of what an event is actually
computing
in our computing architectures we all agree
when there's an AND gate we all agree
that's an AND gate it's computing it
in biology you have
lots of little observers inside
the cells and the tissues that are all
interpreting these
events as completely different computations
and we as a third person
a third party observer often have absolutely
no clue what they're doing and that's
really hard it's a very different way of programming
amazing
well what an amazing talk
and thank you so much
thank you everybody
another round of applause
thank you so much great questions I really enjoyed the discussion
awesome
now we will also talk a little bit
about decentralized science
and I'll follow up
you're welcome to say or whatever
is good
so
let me share this tab here
thanks everybody I've got to run in the long day
thank you
thank you so much
great discussion
ok
so
let me switch over here
so
oh yeah so first off
decentralized science is important
so the first part of decentralized science
is attracting more people
so if you enjoyed this event or you
wanted to share with another person
make sure to
make sure to post it it really helps us
you can take out your phone I know it
can be annoying about it but I want you to take out your phone
and take a picture and send it out to other people
even if it seems
weird now but
like just help it helps
we have information about
I'm going to give you information on our neco
first the
we want to thank the people who
gave us this space today which is alchemy
and they are
the most reliable way
to build web 3 apps
specifically nakeel
college friend who is very kind
to generate
give us the space
so this is the desi
nyc community
we have lots and lots of speakers
this is the 14th one we've done
we've had
people on mushrooms and
blinded studies and v's and ai
and nft's all sorts of things
and we have another one
oh we have a community if you want to
join
we have a telegram group
so you can like stay in touch
after the event with each other
just
giving another hint here
you have your phone out now
okay
we have a website so desi.nyc
we have all our
previous events there
we have the videos we record everything
we post online
we have swag you can get
like that
oh yeah
cool
okay
this is our next event on august 1st
it's going to be amazing
there is going to be
it's on this guy who's like doing this
like
he's like supersize me
he's going to be doing
supersize me
but with wearables
it's going to be really cool
I spoke with him a few times
and he's an interesting fellow
and he's developing a new type of wearable
for your toilet
and he's trying to destroy his gut
right now and then heal it
and then track the process
and we're going to be the first ones to
hear about his poo
oh
I think we're trying to do more of
having like a volunteer group
right now it's sort of
like a skeleton group
that's doing this
oh thank you Brian for helping
thank you
I'm glad as well
on the video
and Brian on the code also
if you're interested in volunteering
for the next event
here we'll get dinner
we'll assign roles and you can help out
the more part of the crew
and pick speakers
what was it
I forgot to update
this slide
okay
so now I'm going to talk about
like why is this
what is decentralization
I wanted to do this talk before
but he had a tight constraint
so we'll do this talk after
and I wanted to say like
why is it important as a society
and as a humanity
that we like decentralize science
so
imagine like right now
universities or the public
science is like hugely beneficial to
humankind right so like
that's probably one of the best metrics
of progress
and right now like a lot of it's done
in like research and development labs
and it's done in
like universities
but the quality of the research
and these things is all very tightly kept
it's a secret and also
that
sometimes the quality of like
academic research is really bad
and it's like not reproducible
and imagine a world in which like
the internet was like a giant lab
where people could like
contribute data to it and get rewarded
for it and I think
this is not too far off
I think like universities are
not as important as they were
30 years ago and where is that science
and innovation going to happen
it's going to happen on the internet
and this is like extremely valuable
and the people that participate in it
should get rewarded for it
so with this sort of premise
if you have this as your goal
what would be the easiest way to do it
is you would use this blockchain
instead of just for like
swapping tokens
and like you swap some Bitcoin
for some Ethereum on Uniswap which is cool
but like the underlying value attached
to each of the tokens is like sort of arbitrary
whereas if you would like instead use
the blockchain to assign
each token were assigned to a research
project or to intellectual property
or to a new drug or to
bio electricity and then
you allow people to like swap those
types of tokens for the IP
that's attached to those or contribute to
a research project this could be really cool
and make new sorts of projects
happen and maybe fund
things and I want to emphasize that
like this isn't far off I don't think
we're that far off from this sort of thing
existing in the world I think it could be within the next
like 2 to 5 years I think it's very
possible and then the other big thing
that's changing around like why this is
possible now is
like AI
is like going to be a scientist very
shortly so the idea that you're a PhD
and then you have about 6 years of knowledge
and 4 years of undergraduate
in this very specific domain
is like passe and now
anyone can be a research scientist
with just like access
to chat GBT and you can get up to speed very
quickly so in this like
new decentralized science
thing I think it's possible to have
like a thousand times the number of
scientists that exist today
because there's a lot of people
who aren't part of a university
who want to become like a
scientist people will be incentivized
so that you don't have to do it
through like
like you get a crappy
salary at a university like no one wants that
like people want to be like incentivized
to do really great work and
so I think that this is very
possible to have like wealthy
scientists and a lot more of them
and like similar to how like maybe
like 30 years ago or 40 years ago like
there's only a couple computer programmers
and like computers became cheaper
GitHub became available
tools became easier to use and then there's like
everyone is a programmer today
and I think the same thing is sort of
we're on the cusp of that for science
so
it's like
it's like like D-Science
is going to do for science like it's going to
decentralize science but how many people know what
DeFi is just in general?
DeFi is like decentralizing finance
so that's like the idea that
instead of like opening a bank account
at Wells Fargo there's probably a lot
of people who can't open a bank account
who would like to be banked and so
having like an Ethereum wallet
a Bitcoin wallet address or an Ethereum address
and allowing them to swap different tokens
opening this up to a lot more people and also
remove a lot of the middlemen
so
here's a little table I made
we call this traditional
science on the right
and decentralized science on the left
and I start off
this is just sort of
the process of
a typical science application
so the first thing is
funding so I hate funding
because like normally if you're not getting funded
as a scientist it means like
I've never seen like a really talented scientist
complain about funding so it means
like something else is wrong but it's
the first thing here so we'll start with it
so the funding is like a lot of
funding happens because governments
are doing a lot of research so like
the National Science Foundation
or the National Institute of Help
and the problem with that is like
they just fund very specific things
and they don't go abroad and they only fund
things that they know they don't fund moonshot ideas
but in Deci
you have access to a lot more people
so you can crowd fund ideas and you can
do a lot more crazy stuff
publications
are very broken in traditional science
so publications
in traditional science they go through a peer review
but the peer reviewers don't actually read the papers
they just sort of look at it and
we want
in Deci anyone can be a peer reviewer
and you can like bet on individual contributions
then data sharing so in
traditional science data is very locked
in Deci the data sets
are like open and you can pay and
reproduce experiments very easily
community
like in a traditional
science setting like you only sort of
do research within the lab setting
but in Deci
you have a global access
you can access a lot more people
which is cool
IP can be shared
governance is instead of just like
the lab manager doing all the research
and directing things
everything can go up to a token vote
so if there's a question around
should we do experiment A or experiment B
instead of just relying on one person
you can issue
you can have like a vote on
snapshot and decide on what does
they use the collective intelligence to figure out what the next step should be
and then the reproducible
I think is one of the most important ones
I think in a lot of research today
like most of the papers
are not reproducible because
they're either too complex they don't reveal enough
about how their methodology
or it's
they p-value hack and there's all sorts of issues
but in Deci all the
process everything is
disintermediated between physical entities
everything is sort of logged on chain
so you can easily just like replay back
everything and see which sort of
science which science is valid
and which science is invalid
okay
um
so the way it works is like
if you want to create a Deci project
you first create you have an idea
and you say I want to create an idea around
sleep and
maybe you contribute to that project is issued
a token so maybe you
contribute through
giving sleep data maybe you contribute
through
developing some sort of algorithm
maybe you contribute
through recruiting people
and for each of these different things
you get tokens
and we have big data pools
so people can sort of contribute
to a data pool so if for example
for sleep you can use like the aura ring
and contribute to a data pool
and that data pool will then be accessible
to anyone who's interested in
sleep
other types of data pools that I think are really
interesting are like blueprint is very popular
these days so like longevity
like how do you determine
these types of things these interventions were
is you're going to need like very very
um like broad data sets
so things around like
food, things around aura ring
and things around like genomic data
are all going to be really really interesting
to determine like
these are prime data sets
to figure out like what's working
and what's not working
you can do a lot more
with like data quality so right now
in a research project
people just sort of like
put in things like maybe the phd scene
will like look for outliers
and remove those and then sort of move on
but when you have like
a decentralized science
system people can like
stake on data
so when you submit data to
a research project you can submit
like $5 along with it
and why that's important is because
if you then if you contributed bad
data like you can get slashed
so you won't get your $5 back
so you sort of like spam the system
and then your data will be removed
and so it's incentivizing you
to produce like high quality data
that can be verified
and that's like these are the types of things
that you can do with like
these side but not with like traditional science
people can just like
you can have like a
an exchange sort of like coin based
you can have like oh I want to invest in
or I want to invest but I want to participate
in like
Bitcoin or crypto or like Ethereum
and similarly it could be like
oh I want to participate in
an HRV study or a sleep study
or a CO2 study
so it sort of opens it up to a lot more people
and then this is one of the more
interesting things you can like
instead of like how many people know
what a prediction market is
okay so imagine a prediction market
it's just like a
a betting market or like
you predict what's going to happen in the future
and if you're right you win tokens
and if you're wrong you lose tokens
and imagine like a prediction market
or like scientific experiments
so you're incentivized to
think about like what types of experiments
are going to work and what type of experiments
are not going to work
and this is like
this is very different from peer review
so peer review is like I have no skin in the game
I don't care if this paper is accepted or rejected
now let's like flip that around
if I'm correct this paper is correct
I'm not going to spend a little more time reviewing it
because it's like you want to do
really good diligence on it
so the upshot
of this is like you're trying to align incentives
between like high quality scientific
research and
like
the outcome for the individual person
okay so basically like
we're trying to build a platform
that will like enable people to participate
in decentralized projects or just spin up one
we've started it already
it's called Water Bear Got Science
and we're hiring
so if people here are interested
in decentralizing science
and
like
specific roles we need are like
we need like a BD and a community manager for instance
it's a little we're
we have like a lot of people inbound
and we can't really respond
so we're trying to grow
we're VC backed
by like some of the best investors
in crypto so if you're interested
we're hiring
here's our application it's very short
we're in person
we work
like normal hours but it's all in person
which I think is good and
I think this is like a great community to pull from
so if you enjoyed this event and you want to participate
more definitely apply
and then
oh that's it
do you have any questions
oh
I have a question
so normally
the government
some of the biggest sources of funding for science
and government comes from
DOD, defense, energy
and medical
and a lot of times they put
the science right into applications
which generates return for them
what do you see as the biggest
the biggest drivers for
design in terms of funding
yeah I think there's a lot of people that are just passionate about things
like I would find
Michael Levin researchers because I think it's cool
like I would much rather give him money than like
some other like random
like charity
so I think that's one, I think people that
have a specific need for it some like a rare disease
like people
who are much more interested in participating in that sort of thing
and if you give them like a pathway to
back credible people
and participate in that type of research
I think that's another one
and then people who are just interested in science as well
like
I think there's a lot of people that want to continue education
maybe have knowledge
and they enjoy doing it in their free time
and also I think the costs are decreasing
so like previously it used to be a lot harder to do a science project
but there's a lot of like clinical research
organizations
like animation and a lot of AI that's happening
that's I think bringing down some of the costs associated with
like traditional research
I mean I guess
I guess kind of like a follow up
but there's usually a lot of
IP coming out of research too
and spin-offs and stuff and so on
I assume that that could be also
a framework where
incentives could be aligned
if you get part of that, is that part of the
education or yeah
so that's
how it works is you have an idea around
like let's just take an example
of like mental health
like so you create a mental health now around a specific topic
and then everyone who participates
that sort of wraps, that's the IP
any IP that's created as part of that group
is tokenized sort of
and everyone who participates and does work
earns tokens
based on their participation so if you contribute data
if you contribute analysis, if you recruit patients
if you publish it
you become, you get these tokens
commiserate with your, how much you contributed
yeah and so that's
one of the things that's nice about this site is like
it solves the IP issue
so in like a traditional setting
you'd work with the university's tech transfer office
and they take a third and a third and a third
and it becomes impossible and a lot of people
a lot of research dies there for
partially that reason but here it's much easier
like all the data is tokenized
and all the liquidity around it
so you can exit or enter back in
if you choose
you can also like
vest some of the IP
so it keeps people invested in the project
like one of the projects, one of the problems now
with like university research
is people graduate and then they leave
but if they vest it over maybe a longer vesting period
they might have more and some advice to stick around
thanks Michael
does someone spam the system with incorrect data
that that could be removed
how would that happen if it's on the blockchain
yeah it would just be Mark
there's a couple different ways of doing it
one is to allow any data
and allow like some agent to
just, it depends on the research project
the simplest thing is allow all data
and then use some sort of AI or human
to judge which is good quality data
the second one is to
do it like a community voting
like a jury
and they vote on each piece of data
to see if it should be accepted or rejected
or maybe you could use something like a liquid democracy approach
where you can assign your voting
power to another person
and Dave can vote on your behalf
if this data is good or not and you just trust this person
and then the crypto economic
way of doing it is to
have people stake
money on their data so
before you contribute the data to the data set
you have to, you contribute it along with the $5 bill
if your data is accepted by the community
you get your $5 back
you get your data accepted into the community
and your tokens in return
and whatever benefits are
associated with those tokens
but if your data is considered bad by some standard
then the $5 is removed
it's kept by the community
and
the data is thrown away
and the next question
you'd ask is like
what prevents like, why would you contribute to
what if there's a bad community
and they just kept all the money
associated with the data that's come in
and the answer to that is like
all transactions that
have been submitted to the DAO
to accept the data
are on chain so you could review
the previous connections, the previous submissions
and say like, they've submitted
100 people have submitted great quality
data and it's all been rejected
this DAO is
is terrible, I'm not going to participate in it
yeah
yeah
anybody else?
cool
well, thank you all for coming
it's amazing to see all of you here
and
I'd like to see you
on August 1st, we might do one in between
and we haven't scheduled it yet but
but August 1st is the next one and if you're interested
in decentralized science or you know someone that is
share with a friend and
I'd recommend them, alright thank you guys
applause
