Hi, I'm Glenn Wipp with the Los Angeles Times, joining us today from Better Call Saul, Michael
McKeon.
Welcome.
Good afternoon.
Well, let's first start with a quote from your co-star, I assume friend, Bob Odenkirk,
saying, as much as I love Michael McKeon, Chuckson, would you agree or disagree?
I say, write on Bob, you know?
I think Bob and I are sort of agreed on it.
It's just that I know what it's made of inside there.
I know that level of antagonism is a very deep thing, and I know some stuff from the
writers and some stuff from the actual scripts, but you want to really examine what makes
a person the way he is or she is.
So I've done a lot of speculative stuff on there, and I have found, as we go along, that
I was pretty accurate when something comes up in the scripts where they say, well, he's
actually this.
I say, yeah, I figured that.
You know?
What's an example?
It's nice.
Well, his duplicity has been kind of manifest all through the series, but the very specific
pain at the center of it, which has a lot to do with one simple fact, which is, I made
my mom proud, but Jimmy made her laugh, and that's like magic to me.
It's like watching someone do something that you have no, I watched my wife knitting.
She's a big knitter, and she's, you know, it's like watching close-up magic to me.
And I think that's how Chuck feels about Jimmy's ease with people.
Chuck is a very, very smart man.
He's a very, very good lawyer.
He's respected.
He's very well respected.
And deservedly so, as far as his facility with the job that he has, but there is something
missing in Chuck, and it drives him crazy.
So I had kind of figured that out very specifically about the mother, because there are some back
story that we did hear about what happened to Dad, what Dad's story was, but it was
nice to know that I was kind of on target about that.
And I didn't tell anybody.
I kept it to myself, and I said, well, this is something I can play, and then it turned
out that that's really kind of, there really was a pivotal moment there.
