It is the requirement of locality. Notice, right? Not causality, which is the determinism part.
It is the requirement of locality. Bell couldn't be clearer than this.
Where does Copenhagen fall into this?
Copenhagen falls into this as not being a clear theory.
They're just not clear enough about what they're doing.
Despite it being textbook quantum mechanics.
Welcome everyone to the Cartesian Cafe. I am your host Tim Wynn.
Today we're very lucky to have Tim Modlin here with us.
Tim is a philosopher of science specializing in the foundations of physics, metaphysics,
and logic. He is a professor at New York University, a member of the Foundational Questions Institute,
and the founder and director of the John Bell Institute for the Foundations of Physics.
Welcome Tim, how are you doing today?
I'm fine. I'm glad to see you again.
Likewise, I thought we could start out by you telling us a little bit about your career trajectory.
For myself, when I was growing up, I always knew I wanted to do some
combination of mathematics, physics, and philosophy.
Mathematics ended up being the more dominant of those three, but I feel that if
circumstances or opportunities have been different, I could have easily done
some other combination of the three. You ended up doing a combination of philosophy and physics.
How did that come about?
Well, this was just, I was one of those undergraduates who was interested in everything.
So I took a lot of different courses. When I started out, actually my intention was to become
an architect. My freshman year, I took courses in civil engineering. I took a course on Bach.
I mean, I took all kinds of stuff, but there's a kind of asked of mind that naturally
leads you into physics and into philosophy and into mathematics actually to an extent as well,
which is a kind of foundational interest in a certain sense of foundational.
So like to say, there's a sense in which it's not quite what many people think it is,
but there is a sense in which people say, well, biology, that's just really fancy
cellular stuff and cellular stuff. That's just fancy chemistry and chemistry chemistry
is just fancy physics. And once you get down to physics, that's not fancy anything else.
That's the bottom level. And that the laws of physics, for example, are supposed to be completely
universal and exceptionalists, whereas the principles of biology or economics or
chemistry or whatever are not. And so, in a way, physical law is more rigorous or more
objective than the principles that are used in other sciences. So there's a certain push downward
in a certain sense of downward that leads you into into physics. That same push downward on any
topic leads you into philosophy, sort of, well, what is this after all at base? What are beliefs
after all or what is the good after all, where you're not so much interested in the particular
cases as in the fundamental principles. And that will also lead you and lead Plato into mathematics,
because mathematics seems to have rigor in its proofs. It's a place where you can actually demonstrate
things where you can get at the truth and know you've gotten to the truth. So certain epistemological
issues come up there. So I think math, physics and philosophy, certain parts of philosophy form a
natural group. In the John Bell Institute that I founded by charter, and I wrote the charter,
there are six governors, and two have to be philosophers, two have to be physicists, and two
have to be mathematicians, because all of these fields give you expertise that's relevant for
doing foundations of physics. So it wasn't too much of a surprise that I was interested in both
physics and philosophy, lots of philosophers of science, their background is either in math or
sometimes in logic. And of course, if you're doing physics and you're interested in a foundational
way, you get interested in math, because math is the language in which physics is written,
and then you need to think about how that works, and how you can use mathematical objects to
represent physical reality. It's a very subtle question. So yeah, I can imagine going off in
any of these directions and being pushed a little bit about what you're just naturally best at.
I mean, I was a pretty good physics student, but there were ones that were better, and there
were certainly much better math students than me. So I ended up getting my PhD actually in
History and Philosophy of Science, which makes sense and specializing in physics.
That's great. In terms of going further along in your career, now you're a professor, and
you work at the, I guess, intersection of philosophy and physics. My experience with academia has been
that it can be very, let's say, compartmentalized. To be in academia, you need to be squarely in
one department. You're in the physics department or the philosophy department, and there can be
very little interaction between the two, if at all, and it can be quite dangerous even to work at
the intersection of the fields. If you're, you know, the physicist might think you're a philosopher,
the philosophers might think you're a physicist, so you can kind of easily fall through the cracks
if you try to do interdisciplinary work. Is that at all mitigated by being a philosopher of science?
Yeah. I mean, it's certainly mitigated in the philosophy department. I mean,
it's certainly the case that physicists will look down, not just on philosophers,
but pretty much anybody who doesn't have a degree in physics. I mean, that's the stereotype,
and there's more than a smidgen of truth in it, so you have to overcome a certain attitude
that physicists often have for somebody who doesn't have an official degree in the subject.
Not the other way, really. That is, philosophers are quite welcoming, and they appreciate technical
background. They understand that if you're going to do philosophy of science, sure, it's a
really good thing that you understand the science, and you've studied it. So, it's not as if I've
ever come across anybody in philosophy who said, oh, you know too much physics to be
doing philosophy. This sort of just doesn't make any sense. And historically, of course, many
philosophers were also physicists and mathematicians. I mean, Descartes and Leibniz, and I mean,
Newton was doing natural philosophy, and he's somebody we discuss. So, there wasn't a historical
division there, and contemporary philosophy departments are, if anything, very welcoming
to people who have technical backgrounds that seem relevant to philosophical questions.
Much more than physics departments are welcoming to people who have been trained to do a certain
kind of conceptual analysis and clarity of argumentation, which is really what you get out of
out of a philosophy training is very self-consciousness about arguments and argument forms and where
arguments can go wrong, and what tacit presuppositions there are, and what follows from what.
That's what a training, a good training in philosophy will make you very sensitive to.
And I think that's why Einstein complained about the physicists of his time, that they
didn't have enough philosophical background. Einstein, when he was young, they had reading
groups, reading humor, and he appreciated philosophy, and he appreciated the kind of rigor
that good philosophers bring to their arguments. Of course, bad philosophers, it's the opposite.
Yeah, lingering on that interplay between physics and philosophy a little bit longer,
do you think in today's climate, the current interaction or lack thereof between physics
and philosophy, do you feel that there should be more interaction? It seems that Einstein,
his philosophical thinking very much informed his formulation of general relativity and maybe
his view of physics at large. Do you think the next breakthrough, conceptual breakthrough in physics
will require maybe some philosophical considerations? I mean, there are two parts to that. There's the
kind of plain vanilla part that nobody should disagree with, which is that any such breakthrough
requires really rigorous thinking, clarity of thought. And unfortunately, that is sadly lacking
in many physicists, even about things that aren't controversial. I mean, sometimes I feel like if
by the time I give this up, if I can manage to just explain how the twin's paradox works
correctly so people don't make mistakes about it, that would be an accomplishment. And there's
nothing controversial about it. Nothing really that hard about it. But physicists get it wrong
all the time. I mean, Feynman got it wrong in his lectures, explaining what's going on in that case.
Why? Not because there's anything really hard there, but they're just not carefully enough.
And they kind of repeat what they've been told. This is the way most people work is they don't
really work out things and understand them. They kind of, if they hear it 10 times,
then they'll repeat it the 11th time and think they understand it. And that happens all the time.
Now, in relativity, the real experts in relativity understand all this. It's not news to them. In
quantum theory, it's a mess. And even the people who would be considered to be the greatest experts
are often completely confused and just conceptually confused. And that needs to get cleared up.
So it's much more that rigor of method that's needed here than philosophical insights in the sense of
some big, I don't know, Kantian or Hegelian or whatever system that's going to clear all this
up. That's not going to be it. But you certainly need to be more careful in argumentation and in
understanding the fundamental principles of the theories that you're using. And that has not been
encouraged in physics departments for over a century largely because of quantum mechanics.
Actually, in a separate conversation we had, you actually thought that maybe
current physicists were working on some of the wrong problems. I don't know, you mentioned the
black hole information paradox, things like that. I don't know if you wanted to comment on that as
maybe a specific example that is a wrong direction. That's a case. What's going on? Everybody
realizes correctly that there's a difficulty bringing together relativity and quantum theory.
I mean, there's difficulties just at a mathematical level and there's difficulties at a conceptual
level and kind of grasping at straws for some way to make progress. And they hit on this idea
more or less quasi accidentally that, oh, I can describe black holes that the laws that govern
black holes look kind of analogous to thermodynamic laws. So that was noticed by Hawking and so on.
And then that got pushed further. Oh, well, once you do quantum field theory on a curved manifold,
you get this Hawking radiation. So really, there is a thermodynamic entropy to black holes and then
we can somehow have to think hard about black hole thermodynamics that that's going to help us
put together quantum mechanics and relativity. And I think that's just pure desperation to begin
with because we have exactly zero empirical evidence about black hole thermodynamics and
zero empirical evidence there even is Hawking radiation. And very little, in my opinion,
understanding of how the calculations that give you Hawking radiation work and what the principles
from which it is derived are. And then you just kind of get this mess that's jammed together and all
these people think, oh, if I can just calculate the number of possible interior states of a black
hole and then calculate the black hole entropy, and if I can get that number to come out right,
that shows I'm on the right track. I mean, string theorists have been saying this kind of stuff for
quite a long time. And then doing calculations that everybody admits nobody can follow from
beginning to end and kind of wheel in all these different weird principles and nobody can give
you an intuitive explanation for how they work. And they say, but look, we got the right number at
the end. It shows what that string theory must be correct because it's giving us black hole entropy.
I mean, this is just, I mean, it's the kind of thing that doesn't stand up to scrutiny. It's just
the kind of thing that picked up steam because it was something you could do. There were kind of
rules of the game, sort of quasi rules of the game. But if you really step back and say,
is the right way to understand how to put together relativity in so far as they can be
put together, relativity and quantum theory, going to run through the root of black hole
thermodynamics, that's just, that's just so off the wall and unconstrained certainly by anything
empirical. And you can't, I literally can't understand it. On the other hand, I mean, to give
you the contrast, what do we know? We know we have experimental confirmation of violations of
Bell's inequality. The Nobel Prize was just given for that experimental confirmation.
That's a fact. That's an established experimental fact. And if you understand the significance
of Bell's theorem, you're going to say, man, that gives me a real conflict with relativity right
there. And a conflict that doesn't come out on relativity side, because general relativity
could not predict violations like that. General relativity is a local theory in Bell's sense.
And general relativity taken as it was written down, could not possibly explain or account for
or predict what you see in the lab with respect to violations of Bell's inequality.
That's real hard stuff. I mean, that's not fantasy. That's out of the lab. And with some very simple
argumentation. So I think it would be much more fruitful for people to be thinking hard
about getting nonlocality into a theory that's still
from which relativistic constraints emerge in some natural way. So you, of course,
you need to understand why relativity works as well as it does and why various relativistic
principles have led to good predictions. Even though there's every indication that
the fundamental picture of relativity can't really be right.
Oh, very interesting. And I think that's maybe a good segue for us to get to the
main part of our discussion today. So today, we'll be talking about Bell's theorem,
which is quite a remarkable theorem in that it's both profound and overlooked at the same time,
profound because it's a surprising and central result in the foundations of physics, but also
overlooked because it's not something you're taught in any standard physics course. I've never
seen it advertised on a physics syllabus. And so many physicists can go through their entire
career without ever needing to think about Bell's theorem. But it's also kind of funny because
mathematically, it's quite a simple theorem. It's not at all difficult to prove. But the really
difficult part is really getting the conceptual understanding correct. What are the actual
assumptions? What are the different tradeoffs? If you try to vary the assumptions and maybe want
to hold certain things to be true, getting the terminology straight, and that's really where
the difficulty lies. And in fact, the difficulty is sufficient that even the Nobel Prize Committee,
when they wrote the description for the 2022 Prize for the work of Espe,
Klauser, and Zeilinger, when they described the significance of the Prize, they also
messed it up, and we'll get into that later. So yeah, Bell's theorem is quite funny for all
these reasons. Maybe before we dive in and give an outline of what we're going to talk about,
I guess you sort of already alluded to it, but maybe can you just give us a summary of how to
think about Bell's theorem, what it is, and why anyone should care. Sure. So the topic of Bell's
theorem is locality. And you have to just stop there and say that's what it's about. It's about,
in particular, local causality in a certain sense that Bell makes clear. Sometimes people call it
Bell causality. It's not about just as far as the misattributions of the Nobel Prize Committee.
It's not about so-called hidden variables theories of quantum mechanics. That's what many people
think. It's somehow, they mistakenly believe that the net effect of Bell was to rule out
so-called hidden variables in quantum theory. And the problem, I mean, there are many problems
with that, but for anybody who doesn't believe there's a problem, here's an observation. The most
famous hidden variables understanding approach to quantum theory is the De Broglie-Bohm pilot
wave theory. And John Bell wrote a very nice paper called On the Impossible Pilot Wave,
Advertising the Theory, and he claimed elsewhere it's the best constructed theory. It shows the
best craftsmanship of all the approaches to quantum mechanics. He says that in quantum mechanics for
cosmologists or in six possible worlds of quantum theory, one of those he says, of these different
approaches, Bohm shows the best craftsmanship. So people somehow managed to convince themselves
that Bell had ruled out a theory that he himself, long after his proof, was advertising and supporting
and promoting. And that should tell you right off the bat, you don't understand what Bell did.
You know, he wouldn't be out advertising a hidden variables theory if he thought he had ruled
out hidden variables theories, right? That just makes no sense. And it wasn't his point. In fact,
the point of the theorem has nothing to do with quantum mechanics, and it has nothing to do because
even the term hidden variables only makes sense in the context of quantum mechanics. And the
theorem's not about quantum mechanics. It's about any theory that is locally causal. And by that,
essentially, we can just say this, if you're if you're familiar with relativity, any theory in which
all of the causes of an event lie in or on its past life cone. Okay, so let's just take that,
I mean, we could get go into maybe much finer detail, but just take that. So take a theory where
anything that could have a causal effect on a certain event is in or on its past life cone,
which means that light at least would have would be able to get from the cause to the effect,
right? So cause as it were causation can't go faster than light in the context of relativity.
That's a causally local theory. And and, of course, in that sense, for example, Maxwell
and electro dynamics is a causally local theory. And if all you had was Maxwell and electro dynamics,
you would never predict violations of bells in a column. That's not a quantum theory, and that
has nothing to do with hidden variables. Newtonian mechanics is going to be causally local as long as
causes only influence their effects by some process that doesn't go faster than light.
Then it will be causally local. And what Bell shows is that there are constraints
on the sorts of phenomena that a causally local theory can predict or account for.
And then what you notice is that two things. The first is that quantum theory predicts violations
of those constraints. That's very interesting. But more interesting and much more important is
that you go into the lab and do some experiments and irrespective quantum theory, the experiments
violate those constraints, the outcomes, the data from those experiments violate the inequality.
And so that tells you we've quantum mechanics aside entirely that physics cannot be locally
causing. And to that extent, yes, something as it were goes faster than light. It has to.
That brings immediately the tension with relativity into sharp focus. If you think that
relativity forbids that, now you've got an absolutely clear tension there. Now you can
argue, no, relativity doesn't really forbid it. Well, what really does relativity forbid,
what really are the principles of relativity? What does really relativity say?
You can then get into a lot of detailed questions that are very interesting and very important.
My first book, quantum non locality and relativity was just saying, okay, if you think
relativity forbids something from going faster than light, just what is it that it forbids going
faster than light? And then finally, maybe you don't think it forbids anything from going faster
than light. Then what does it do? What are the fundamental principles of relativity? And these
are questions which can be asked and answered and investigated, but you have to have a very high
premium on clarity and making distinctions and so on to do that kind of work. And often people don't.
All right. And on that note, that's why we're making this episode so that we can try to get the
story straight. I mean, I'll say one more word maybe that'll help people. It is often, again, a
mistake, commonly repeated mistake. It's well known that Einstein didn't like quantum theory as
developed by Bohr and the so-called Copenhagen School. He really didn't like it. It is often
mistakenly said that what he really didn't like was the indeterminism, the God plays dice stuff.
But that's not what he really, really didn't like. What he really didn't like was the spooky
action at a distance stuff. What he called telepathy, that the Copenhagenists had to use telepathy
to get their predictions. And he said he couldn't accept that. That's nonlocality.
That was really the issue from the beginning for Einstein, was that he saw quantum theory as
exposited by Bohr and Heisenberg was nonlocal. It had this spooky action at a distance and he
couldn't accept that. So it's worthwhile to see that the nub of the whole thing from the beginning
was nonlocality and that what Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen were focused on in their paper in 1935
was nonlocality. And what Bell is addressing is nonlocality. Only Bell's consequence is that you
have to accept it. You can't avoid it. So his conclusion is anti-Einstein, but it's on the
topic Einstein was worried about. So as you mentioned, we talked about Bell's theorem, but of course to
properly understand Bell's theorem, we have to understand it in the context of the work of Einstein,
Podolsky and Rosen. In fact, Bell's paper was called on the Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen paradox.
Of course, we have to look at that first. So anyways, let me write down what I think is going
to be a suitable outline for us and let's just see how it goes. So the first thing we're going to
talk about is, as you mentioned, the prelude to this whole business, which is the EPR paradox
coming from Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen. So that will set the stage for, therefore, Bell's theorem.
So we're going to look at it, I think from, you know, try to try to follow Bell's paper,
first of all, because, well, that's the source of the theorem. And, well, we'll go from there.
And we've been talking about Bell's theorem, but Bell's theorem produces an inequality.
There have been several versions of this inequality going by various names, but they're
all kind of collectively referred to as Bell's inequality. And so that we'll get there when
we talk about Bell's theorem. But the thing with Bell's theorem is that the kind of inequality
that you get from that paper is maybe not so easy to understand. It's not that intuitive.
And what's really nice, as I learned from talking to you in the book that you wrote,
there's a simplification that one can implement. I'll call it the G-H-Z version named after
Greenberger, Horn, and Zeilinger. And what's nice about this version is that we can get a much
more tangible feel for how Bell's inequality is violated in a way that the original paper doesn't
make so clear. So it'll be very instructive, I think, to kind of do that. And it also separates a
lot of sort of the extraneous kind of assumptions and, you know, kind of thoughts around Bell's
theorem. It just disentangles things very, very cleanly. So it's nice to do that.
I thought what we could do after that is then maybe now that we've kind of put all the technical
details out there, maybe you could maybe state what exactly the 22 Nobel Prize significance was.
Yeah, you know, what they did in terms of the actual experiment or inequality that they showed
was violated. And then after maybe we do that, we can kind of clean up a few things and talk about
misconceptions. You've already alluded to those pertaining to Bell's theorem. And there's a lot
of them and they're persistent. So I think it's good to really kind of make it clear what those
misconceptions are. And then sort of on a related note, there are also, well, once we've kind of
explained things mathematically, we can also talk about what are really the necessary assumptions
behind Bell's theorem. So Bell's theorem's necessary assumptions as opposed to maybe the
happenstance assumptions that people often describe Bell's theorem. And then we can therefore
talk about, you know, and once we actually have the necessary assumptions, we can talk about,
say, loopholes, things like super determinism and whatnot. And then just to round things out,
we can maybe finish with, say, talking about interpretations of quantum mechanics.
So, yeah, a lot of fascinating topics, a lot on our plate today. How does this look?
Yeah, let me just make one correction.
Okay, sure, of course.
Here, hold on, let me get my 10. Here, where you've written paradox. It's an argument.
And this is, you know, again, a point that Bell makes. They didn't regard that paper as producing
a paradox. A paradox is something that you kind of don't know, you don't know what to make of it,
right? They thought, no, there's a very clear question before their mind when they write the
paper. And it's the title of the paper is quantum mechanical description of reality complete.
So that's just a quite, you have a thing, a mathematical gadget called a wave function.
And when you do quantum mechanics, you ascribe to any system a wave function.
And the question they asked was, it does that give me a complete description of the system?
That is, if I know the wave function, does it somehow represent either directly or indirectly
all of the physical characteristics of that system? There are many ways to phrase this.
One way to phrase it is, take any pair of systems that are given the same wave function.
Are they physically identical? Can there be any physical differences between them?
That question either is yes or no. The whole paper is arguing, no, it's not complete, that
quantum mechanics, that description, whatever it is, cannot be a complete description.
It's got to have left stuff out. In the same way that, I mean, maybe this would be an analogy,
if I have a box of gas, okay, it has a temperature, let's say, classically.
But that's not a complete description of it, because lots of boxes of gas that are different
in their microscopic details can have the same temperature. That's, you know, the temperature
gets at something, but it sure doesn't get at everything, because you have, you know,
avagadro's numbers of particles with particular positions in momenta and a complete description
of that system would specify all of that. And if all I do is say, well, it's a 38 degree centigrade,
I sure haven't done that. So there are various ways in which a description can fail to be complete.
If it's complete, then you're saying physics is done, right? Somehow all the physics there is,
I've represented. There's nothing more to find. And what they were doing was arguing
that quantum mechanics hasn't done that, right? And unfortunately, Bohr and so on were arguing
that it had. I mean, it was, they're only making this argument in the context of the Copenhagen
insistence that you can't go beyond what they'd done, that they'd reached the end of the road.
They'd gotten to the very bottom of things. And the very bottom of things was, first of all,
not deterministic. And second of all, had various other characteristics of complementarity and so on
that Einstein thought, no, I mean, why should I believe that? Why should I think that what you've
done is the end of the story? And they were giving an argument that it isn't. So that's what I want
to say. If you say it's a paradox, you would think at the end of the day, Einstein scratching his head
and saying, Oh, I don't know what to make of this, but it's just the opposite. I know exactly what
to make of it. Quantum mechanics is not pretty. Let's say, in contrast, I don't know, Zeno's
paradox were because they didn't have calculus. They didn't know how to think about it. Is that
right? Yeah, I mean, Zeno's paradox, exactly. You hear Zeno's paradox say about Achilles and the
tortoise. And you say, well, gee, this argument seems to suggest that Achilles can't catch the
tortoise. But of course, Achilles can catch the tortoise. At the end of the day, you can say,
yeah, now I understand Zeno that the fastest runner can't catch the slowest animal, right?
So you're just, you know, something's gone wrong somewhere. But you don't quite know where. I mean,
Einstein's not saying something's going wrong somewhere here. He's saying, I'll tell you where
it's going. Okay, all right. Well, the name stuck. So I don't know. I mean, it is called hyper. And
I'm not blaming you for that. But it is quite honestly. And I think this is why again, I'm just
channeling Bell here when he said they didn't think it was a paradox. I think calling it a paradox
already puts you on the wrong foot about what exactly it is, right? And then if you're on the
wrong foot at stage one, it's not going to get better going forward. I think, you know, what Bell
saw was that, was that from their premises, EPR provide a perfectly good argument. And he saw
that one of their premises, although this one's a little buried, it's a little bit hidden, is a
locality assumption. And so what he saw was that if you accept the locality assumption that's implicit
in EPR, you better, you have to accept their conclusion, which is that quantum mechanics is
incomplete. Sure. Okay, why don't we dive into the what the EPR pair argument is. So now we're
going to start unfurling with these with these terms we've been talking about. I mean, so yeah,
why don't we go to the next slide and maybe you can give your, your formulation of the EPR argument.
I know we've talked about this before that EPR sort of, well, they have the formulation in their
paper. I know you like to think about in terms of a simpler setup, I would agree with you because
it's going to make things simpler later. So yeah, go ahead, feel free to describe it in the way that
you think is most helpful. The place where locality is going to be buried is in what EPR write down
as a criterion of reality. Okay. And they're very careful also about their terminology here. So
I'll just write and I'm sorry again about my handwriting. They're very careful about what
about their words. Okay, then they say a criterion is not a definition. A criterion is a sufficient
condition, but it doesn't have to be a necessary condition. Right. That is, I'm not, it would be
a much bigger task to say I'm going to, as it were, give you a complete definition of physical
reality or of what it takes to know that something's physically real. I mean, they're not attempting
such a thing. They wouldn't know what to do. But they're doing something much, much, much milder,
but they think completely uncontroversial. And I think it is what they say is completely
uncontroversial. So what do they say? They say, look, how do I tell that there's some
real physical characteristic or feature of a system? Well, suppose I'm in the following situation.
Suppose they say without in any way disturbing the system. So let's just put that, that's going
to be important. Right. So without disturbing the system, I can do what without disturbing the
system, I can predict with certainty how it will behave. Right. So then you get can predict with
certainty. So my predictions are never wrong. Right. It's not a guess. This is with complete
accuracy. Suppose the system is such that in this situation, I can predict with complete
accuracy what it's going to do in some circumstance, say, if you, you know, subject it to some experiment.
Then there must be some element of reality in the system that makes it do that. I mean,
there has to be something in the system that that is going to be responsible for producing
that behavior. Yes. I mean, if I can know what it's going to do and I'm not disturbing it,
something in the system there is making it do that. That's the criterion. Right. So I can predict
with certainty. Then the conclusion is there exists an element of reality.
Can I just get a clarification here because we know, for example, that we have indeterminism
and quantum mechanics, but more generally, if you have a situation which of indeterminism,
could you state with this criterion? It's the same criterion. I mean, look, it might be that
you're in a situation where you can't predict anything and therefore the criterion just doesn't
apply. That doesn't mean the criterion's wrong. It just means it's not useful. Okay. Okay. In order
to apply it, I have to be able to make a perfect prediction. This means it's a very, it's a very
narrow criterion. I mean, it's a very, it doesn't apply in many, many, many cases. Interestingly
enough, it applies in the, of course, it applies in the case that EPR analogs. Right. They can apply
it because they are in a situation where you can make perfect predictions under certain well-defined
circumstances according to quantum mechanics. So all your, all your accepting here about
quantum mechanics is its predictive accuracy. And that's something that even Bohr is not going to
want to throw overboard. Right. Everybody's going to agree that the quantum, everybody,
for this argument, it's taken for granted that these predictions of quantum mechanics are correct.
Yes. So you're right. If, if, if I were to say, gosh, in my theory, I can't predict anything
with certainty, then you'd say, well, then this argument will not get any purchase. So let's talk
about the, now, now what, what happens to understand the history here is that when Einstein,
Podolski and Rosen write this paper, they're doing a couple of things as far as I know for the very
first time or anybody, any, in any case, anybody paying attention. They're first of all looking
at a system that involves a pair of particles that can be separated arbitrarily far apart. So as we
now say, you create a pair of particles, your system is a pair of particles. One is sent to Alice
way over there. Another is sent to Bob way over there in their separate laboratories.
And that's something you can do. Certainly, according, you know, you just can do it. And
of course, according to quantum mechanics, you can do it. So it's not really an issue.
But you've got this pair of particles. And the only experiments that they're interested in are
ones we call, you have to be careful about this terminology, but we would call position
measurements and momentum measurements. That's all they discuss. That is, the only degrees of
freedom in the system are position and momentum, not spin, not polarization. And the reason I'm
saying that is that part of the history is EPR formulate their experiment with position and
momentum. Later, David Bohm reformulates the argument for spin or polarization.
And then Bell picks up the spin and polarization example, because he can do things with it,
that have clear physical significance that you couldn't do at all with just position and momentum.
I mean, it wouldn't work. You wouldn't know experimentally what you're talking about.
So the transition to the spin example or the polarization examples that everybody uses now
is important conceptually. Now, the next point to make is that even though Einstein,
Podolsky and Rosen make their argument separately for position and for momentum,
given the state they write down, it's really unnecessary for the argument. You can make the
argument just looking at either just looking at position or just looking at momentum. And I think
that's often a mistake that people make is they think it's really important that you can do both.
It isn't. Rhetorically, it's useful that you can do both because it gives you
something to shoot at Heisenberg uncertainty relations. But the conclusion that the quantum
state is incomplete, which is the main conclusion, follows just from thinking about either momentum
or position. So let me do it just for momentum. So if we're all on the same page, we're going to
simplify this down. So what do we have? We have two particles. They're prepared in a certain
quantum state, which they write down the EPR state. Particles are sent off to two different
labs arbitrarily far apart. Now, what is the characteristic of this quantum state? It's what
we would now call an entangled state, although that terminology didn't exist at the time.
And it's a state of net total, we would say total momentum zero. So the momentum of the pair of
particles, for sure, if you check both particles, if you, as we say, measure their momentum,
the total momentum will be zero, which means whatever momentum one shows up with the other
will show up with the opposite. If Alice is going at a certain velocity in this direction,
Bob's is going, I mean, they're equally massive, Bob's is going at the same velocity in exactly
the opposite direction. That's the important thing, is that there will be, according to
quantum theory, a perfect correlation, or in this case, anti-correlation between the outcome of Alice's
momentum experiment and the outcome of Bob's momentum experiment. And they know that.
They know that because they know how it was been prepared. Now, it turns out, and again, this is
just on the side, it's also true for position measurements. That is, if at a certain time
Alice makes a position measurement on the basis of her outcome, she can predict perfectly the
outcome of Bob's if he's making the same kind of position measurement. So you can make the same
argument either just for position or just for momentum. I'm just going to use momentum because
it's easier. It's actually mathematically simple. Sure. And I think math, just to write a formula
to ground what you just said, I think basically what you want to write is something like this. So
your wave function psi will basically be a superposition of states that look like the following.
You have say, I'm just going to use, you know, ket notation, because that's just easy to write
instead of all the variables that you don't really need to write down. But there's like
basically P of Alice, and let's say tensed with minus P of Bob's say, and then you could just
take a, you know, a superposition, a sum or an integral of them depending on how you
want to think about it. But that's basically for all the different fees, right? For all these
different, right? So, so if you ask quantum mechanically, given how this pair of particles was
prepared, can I predict with certainty what Bob will see, what result he'll get answered? No.
There's a whole range of different results he could get. And quantum theory will give you
probabilities for each thing in that range. There's a whole range, an equal range,
but in the opposite direction for what Alice could see.
Right. So it's represented by the sum here. The sum here tells you what that range is, right?
Yeah. And the theory does not make a strict prediction for either what Bob will see or
what Alice will see. But the curious thing is it does make with certainty a prediction that
whatever Alice sees, Bob will see the opposite and vice versa, right? This is the, this is the
source of the puzzle. Because what we get these, so let me just write down what you get. And again,
you don't need this for, for a bell inequality, but it makes the argument simpler if you have it.
You have perfect correlations, right? You have predicted, sorry, let's write that down,
perfect correlations. So here's something, here's something absolutely nobody can possibly
object to. If the predictions of quantum theory are correct, then if, if Bob makes a,
does a momentum experiment in his lab, once he sees the outcome of his experiment,
he is now in a position to, with perfect accuracy, predict what the outcome of Alice's
similar experiment will be. Whatever he sees, he knows she's going to see the opposite. He
doesn't know before he does this experiment what he's going to see, but he knows whatever it is,
it's going to, you know, she's going to see the opposite. That's right. So if we look up at,
at, at the criterion of reality, we've got the can predict with certainty part, right?
Bob can, once he's done his experiment, he can predict with certainty what Alice will see.
Yes? Now the only other part of that criterion of reality is without disturbing
the system. That is, did Bob, by doing his experiment in his lab, in any way disturb the
actual physical state of Alice's particle? Yes? Now Alice can be a hundred billion, billion miles away.
It's here that, that in a kind of tacit way, they think it's so obvious they don't even say it.
This is where locality comes into the EPR argument. They just thought, it's obvious that if Alice and
Bob are, are, are in their labs and they're sufficiently isolated from each other, far apart,
and maybe even light doesn't have time to get from Alice to Bob or Bob to Alice in doing these
experiments, then clearly, whatever Bob does, he's not disturbing Alice's particle.
That's the locality assumption. Yes? So let me just write one more thing. So basically what's
going on here is that, let's say Alice is going to make a measurement of momentum, right? And then
she's going to get, let's say some value p star. And as soon as you do that, you're going to collapse
you're going to collapse the wave function onto now this vector, which is just p star
tensored minus p star. And since Alice and Bob are very far away, they could not have
disturbed each other. Nevertheless, there's now this perfect correlation between the,
the measurements that they've gotten. Yeah. I mean, I, I mean, what you say is perfectly
correct. And people who understand that will follow it. The main question, and this was the
question Einstein had from the beginning, from the 1920s, was when you talk about collapse of
the wave function, is that a physical thing? Or is that merely an epistemic thing?
Right. When you collapse the wave function, do you think that that is literally a physical
change in something? Or is that merely getting information? Now, what, what bothered Einstein
was that he thought they had to treat it as a physical effect. And if it's a physical effect,
then Bob, by doing some experiment in his lab, has a physical effect on Alice's particle,
because Alice's particle goes from being in a state of indefinite momentum to a state of
definite momentum. That's a physical change. Right. And that would be spooky action at a
distance. That would be telepathy. That would be the, the very thing Einstein couldn't believe in,
that, that Bob, by doing something in his lab, has any physical effect at all on Alice's particle.
But if you take the collapse as a physical event, it does. Because the normal thing would be to say,
oh, Bob does his experiment, then I collapse the wave function. The collapse wave function is now
different with respect to Alice's particle. Right. So you've changed Alice's particle state.
And Einstein thought that's crazy. Right. That's spooky action at a distance. That's telepathy.
That's non-locality. So their assumption is no, no, no, no, no. All, all Bob does is find out about
his particle. And on the basis of what he finds out, he now knows something new about Alice's,
but nothing has physically changed. Now, Bell uses this example of Bertelman's socks
to get this across. So let me just talk about the example for people who haven't read this.
It's a wonderful paper, Bertelman's Socks and the Nature of Reality, which is a funny title.
And it's a funny paper. But, you know, the physicist Bertelman, who was a friend of Bell's,
apparently, actually as a matter of fact, for whatever reason decided he would always wear
socks of different colors. So he gets up in the morning and he puts on a pair of socks and you
can't really predict what color any sock will be, but you can predict if you know Bertelman,
they'll be different. So if you see one sock and it's pink, now you know something you didn't know
about the other sock, namely it's not pink. Right. Because there's a perfect correlation there.
But again, there's nothing spooky about that. There's no action at a distance. There's nothing
like seeing one sock suddenly changes the color of the other sock. No, no, no. They had their colors
all along. Right. They had their colors since he put them on in the morning. And all you're doing
is finding out something you didn't know, which is what color is on the right foot. And when you
find that out and you know also about Bertelman, you now know something new about the color of the
sock on the left foot. But you didn't disturb the left sock. Right. You're looking at the right sock
did not change the state of the left side. And Bell's point is that that's the way Einstein
thought about all this. He thought there's nothing at all puzzling about these correlations.
If you think they have their momentum all along, if you think Bob's particle and Alice's particle
already had the momentum when they were created, one P and one minus P. And maybe, you know,
if you do the experiment many times, you'll get a range because the experiment doesn't prepare
exactly the same. Right. State every time, but it always prepares a state where one is the opposite
of the other. Then all of this is very easy to explain and there's no spooky action at a distance.
But suppose you deny that. Suppose you say, no, no, no. When the particles were created,
they had neither of them had any particular momentum at all. Then you have two puzzles.
One puzzle is why, when I do what I call a momentum measurement, I get any result because
you're telling me it didn't have any momentum coming in. And maybe there you even say, oh,
it's really indeterministic. Right. There's nothing that explains why you got this result
rather than another. Any of these results could have come out. But then you have the much deeper
puzzle. How does the other particle know what the first one did? And this is what, you know,
Bell says in this paper, he says it's as if a child had asked. But when you look at, you know,
suppose you think the socks don't have any color at all until you look, says how does the second
sock know what the first sock did when I looked at it? Right. So there's a connection between
the indeterminism and the nonlocality. If you have this perfect correlation, and there's anything
indeterministic on one side, then you need telepathy or action at a distance to communicate that
result or to restrict the result on the other side. So it always comes out different for the
sock. What you're saying is that basically, if you have indeterminism, which is what we have in
quantum mechanics, and you have perfect correlation, then that requires spooky action at a distance.
Okay, right. And then we can just turn that around and say, if you have perfect correlations with
you, which you do, and you don't want spooky action at distance, then you can't have indeterminism,
right? Then you infer it has to be a deterministic theory. Sorry, if there was any residual
indeterminism, it would just spoil the perfect correlations. Sorry, I was busy writing, could
you repeat that last part? Sorry. So yeah, so you've got indeterminism plus perfect correlations
implies spooky action at a distance. Logically, that's equivalent to giving you correlations
plus no spooky action at a distance, right? Okay. Gives you no indeterminism, that is,
gives you determinism. Sorry. It's modus ponens modus ponens. Yeah, sorry. Perfect
correlations. I'm just being dense here. Perfect correlations. Yeah, plus. Plus no spooky action
at a distance. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. Okay, so let's just say, okay, so locality. Yeah, no
action at a distance. Yeah.
Yeah.
Implies determinism, I believe you said. Implies determinism. Yeah, okay. And that's where,
I mean, I have this quote in Berlman's socks, because I think it's very important,
you have to hear Bell's own personal frustration here, right? So he says,
this is on page 143 if anybody has this version. It's important to note that to the limited degree
to which determinism plays a role in the EPR argument, it is not assumed but inferred,
right? It's not an axiom, it's a theorem, right? It's not something he starts with,
it's something he arrives at. What is held sacred, right? What really is the fundamental
axiom or the fundamental principle held? Is the principle of local causality or no action at a
distance? Of course, mere correlation between distant events does not by itself imply action
at a distance, but only correlation between the signals reaching the two places. So if you
can imagine setting up these cases where, yeah, you have a signal that's sent out to Alice on one
side and Bob on the other, and when Alice gets hers, she knows what Bob's going to get, or people
say, you know, tarot dollar bill in half and send one half out to Alice and one half out to Bob,
they don't know which one's coming. But once one sees theirs, they know what the other one is,
right? There's no spooky action at a distance in that. He says the signals in the idealized
example of foam must be sufficient to determine whether the particles go up or down, now we're
going to repeat this for spins, where any residual indeterminism could only spoil the perfect correlation.
Right? If whenever the particle gets to Alice, something really indeterministic happens,
and that result cannot be communicated to Bob, then Bob can't always get the opposite result.
Right? I mean, that whole paragraph is it. If you read that paragraph carefully, you see,
first of all, the main thing is EPR do not assume determinism, they derive it.
They, what do they derive it from? They derive it from the perfect correlations which were
predicted by quantum mechanics and a principle of locality. Right? And that's what you have to
understand. Bell, Bell understood, and he kind of assumed that anyone who read the EPR paper would
understand that is a good inference. Now, how do you get out of it? Well, it's easy to get out of
it if you don't like action at a distance. You just have to deny the completeness of quantum
mechanics because you say, no, no, no. In this experiment, when Bob got this particular value
and Alice got that particular opposite value, those were determined from the beginning.
And in the next experiment, when Bob got this different value and Alice got this different
opposite value, that was also determined from the beginning. But the quantum mechanical states
that you use in both cases are the same. But that means the quantum mechanical states were not
complete. There was more information. There was more stuff going on. And that stuff, extra stuff,
was what determines the outcomes. Right? That was already determined at the source,
what the outcomes would be. And, but the quantum state used to make these predictions
does not give you that. So it's incomplete. That was their total conclusion. They said,
well, quantum mechanics is not giving you the whole story. The only way to maintain it is,
is to buy this spooky action at a distance and take this wave collapse seriously as a physical
event rather than just conditionalization on new information. I mean, one way to put it is,
the only way you can conditionalize on new information is if there's new information you
didn't know from the beginning, right? If you already knew everything, you can't get new information.
You knew the wave function of this pair of particles. If that's all there was to them,
then you can't get new information about them because there is no new information about them.
Let me make a few comments just to kind of maybe summarize and state where we are right now. So
the first thing we observed in terms of what we talked about in the previous slide which
can be thought of in terms of wave collapse was this first thing that I'll start right here,
indeterminism plus perfect correlation equals nonlocality. And then this is logically equivalent
to this reformulation down here. And this reformulation is the EPR argument, right? That is
the conclusion of the paper that perfect correlation and locality which they want to keep leads to
determinism. And well, they don't say it in those words. What they, what we mean here by
determinism in the language of EPR is that the wave function is incomplete, right? The quantum
wave function. That's right. So that's the way EPR formula. Again, the title of the paper is
quantum mechanical description of reality complete. And the answer they offer is no.
And furthermore that the only way out of that conclusion is to embrace this spooky action
at a distance which they just regard as being insane. I mean, they certainly think
if you're going to embrace that, you better have a better reason
than has been offered here, right? Because this is a huge thing you're taking on. And I can easily
give you a local theory that will make all these predictions, right? I can easily give you a local
theory where Alice and Bob always get opposite momenta and Alice and Bob also if they do position
measurements can now predict the other one's position measurements without any spooky action
at a distance. I just predetermined both what the momentum and the positions will be. Now at that
point, you know, you run into the Heisenberg uncertainty relations and you can make a kind
of slightly sharper point and say the quantum mechanical formalism doesn't even contain a
state of definite position and definite momentum, right? I mean, there's no such even mathematically.
The formalism of the theory doesn't allow for such a thing, a state that has a perfectly
well-defined momentum and a perfectly well-defined position. So of course, if you say, well, the
way to get out of this nonlocality is to pre-assign a momentum and to predetermine the positions,
then you're just going to have to go beyond quantum formalism. But that's okay. That's just
because quantum formalism is incomplete. I mean, Einstein always thought that quantum formalism
was more like a statistical description of a system, which is an incomplete description or
say a thermodynamic description. As I said, if I give you the, if I give you the temperature of a
box of gas, I'm telling you something about it, but I'm certainly not telling you everything about it.
Yeah, let me, let me just say what maybe another thing here, because I know it took, it's also,
you know, it's taken me a while to kind of get used to this language, but in terms of maybe another
way to illustrate this last point here at the bottom, right? If we think about it in terms of
coin flips, right? This is the thing about determinism versus indeterminism. If every
time I flip a coin, let's say I get heads, you get tails, or if I get tails, you get heads,
there can't be any indeterminism, because if there was still some randomness left in your
coin flip result, then there's no way we could always get opposites, right? So the only way
for us to get opposite coin flips is if there's a deterministic connection that always guarantees
the opposite results. Exactly. Exactly. So let's just think about this case. I mean, this is a
perfect case. I give you a coin, I take a coin. We just go separately in our labs and flip our
coins, and we record the results, and we see no pattern, right? It just looks random. Each of
us is getting heads half the time, and each of us is getting tails half the time, and we,
there is no algorithmic pattern to H, the H's and T's. So both of us say, well, maybe this is really
a random coin. I mean, really, really an indeterministic random coin. Every time you flip it, there's
just a 50% chance it comes up heads, and a 50% chance it comes up tails, and nothing is determining
that. But then when we get back together, we notice that whenever you got H, I got T, and
whenever I got, you know, you got T, I got H, that there's this perfect anti-correlation.
Then the natural is, let's say, well, they can't be completely random in that way.
Now, there are two things that could happen. It could be that from the beginning,
your coin was programmed to come up T, T, H, you know, blah, blah, blah, and mine was programmed
to come up with the opposites. That would do it. Or maybe one of the coins really is random,
but somehow when yours comes up heads, it can communicate telepathically to my coin, even though
my coin is very far away, and instantaneously, hey, I came up heads, you come up tails. That would
do it too, right? Then you would, as it were, have a little bit of indeterminism
together with a causal connection that's keeping them tall, right? Those would work. But once you
notice that the streams on the two sides are perfectly correlated, that's something you need
to explain. Sure. Let's just pause here. In the way that EPR are thinking about it,
if this were the coin flips in our, they would reject the communication between the coins and
say, wait, these coins are actually determined, right? Exactly. They would say, all right, we have
one hypothesis. They would say, yeah, this is a hypothesis that they're communicating with each
other. How can we rule that out? Well, let's just take them further and further apart. Let's put
them in rooms further and further apart. First of all, even if they were communicating by, I don't
know, radio waves or whatever, the signal should get weaker and weaker, right? Because I'm separated.
But also, now, if you really want to be sure, flip them at the same time, or as we would say,
it's space-like separation. So even if they were jam-packed with radio transmitters and radio
receptors, there wouldn't be enough time for a signal to get from Alice to Bob or Bob to Alice.
Then it's hopeless, right? They would say, I mean, then you need to violate relativity. You
have to have the information get there faster than light. So they would say, of course, even if you
can't quite figure out how these things are being predetermined. Now, it's not, of course, not so
bad because in the case they have, it's not like there's just, I give you one coin and give me
one coin and we keep flipping the same coin. We do it every time on a fresh pair of particles.
So all you need is to say, okay, this pair of particles is prepared, so this one will come
tails and that one will come heads. The next one is prepared, so this one will come heads and that
one will come tails, right? I don't need, but in each case, you say, look, the preparation
procedure just predetermined what they were going to yield and predetermined them to be opposite.
And nothing spooky is going on at all, right? It's just the particles bring that information
with them when they get there. But it has to be deterministic, right? They have to bring
enough information so each one knows what to do. Sure, sure. Maybe just as an aside, and I think
we probably stated the EPR argument by now, but let me just kind of linger on this determinism
for a second here because I think there's something interesting maybe going on here in the sense that
so we all learn at the very beginning when we learn about quantum mechanics that the results
are not deterministic. When I measure the momentum or position, I'm going to get some distribution
of values. Now, it's interesting that that in and of itself is not something that Einstein
was upset about or wanted to counteract, but in the end, he does get this conclusion of determinism,
not from vanilla quantum mechanics, but from this coupling of the two particles experiment that we
just did where there's now a potential non-locality. And it's by sort of opposing that that you end
up getting determinism, but it's not a posing determinism in and of itself when you first
introduce the axioms and the wave collapse. It's the outcome of this. So it's actually kind of,
I think that's worth noting. It's very indirect. The thing that EPR bring into this discussion,
which is novel, is this entanglement between distant particles. That's right. It's standard
quantum mechanics. It's just nobody had thought about how standard quantum mechanics applies
to a pair of particles where each of the particles have been well separated from each other.
Yeah. Right. And what Einstein realizes is, wait, just standard quantum mechanical
technique allows you to write down what we now call these entangled states,
where you can predict these correlations out of these entangled states, even though you can't
predict the particular values. Now, the word correlation gets so abused here. Many people
will say the following thing, which is kind of incoherent. They would say in the state that they
write down EPR, neither particle has a momentum, but the two momenta are correlated or anti-correlated.
And this is just kind of syntactically doesn't make sense. If something doesn't have a value
for its momentum, you can't say it is correlated or anti-correlated with something else that doesn't
have a value. I mean, you can say correctly that the physics is such that if I do a momentum
experiment on both sides, the outcomes will certainly be correlated or anti-correlated.
But you can't say that a system that doesn't have a value for some quantity, also that value
was correlated or anti-correlated with something else that doesn't have a value, right? It just,
it makes no sense. I mean, it's just literally gibberish to say that. But people say that all
the time. They say, oh, it's not so puzzling because the entangled state is correlated. No,
it's not correlated, right? It's entangled and it predicts correlations. But if you say the state
doesn't actually have a momentum, you can't say the momentum is correlated with anything.
Yeah, I mean, I mean, it's just a wording issue. But of course, what they really mean,
I'm just back on the second slide now. It's a superposition of these
perfectly correlated states. Yeah, yeah. Anyways, let's not get boggled with the semantics. We're
going to maybe have many more opportunities for that, which will be more meaningful. But
yeah, so I guess just to wrap this up, I think the point I was trying to make and I guess you
agree is that if you were only dealing with the quantum mechanics of a single particle, no entanglement,
then there would be no argument against determinism. And you would just have indeterministic
quantum mechanics for a single particle state. It's only when you bring in the second particle,
use entanglement, you get this non locality phenomenon. And then you, if you're EPR, you say,
no, we don't allow that. And though we have to get determinism. Absolutely. Because if you have
only a single particle, I'll just say a word for people understand this. The only condition where
I can make a prediction with certainty if it's already in an eigenstate, right? But if it's in
an eigenstate, then I can read that off of the quantum state, right? So I don't have to say the
quantum state is incomplete, because the quantum state just is an eigenstate. You say, oh, yeah,
that gives me the information already. So you wouldn't have any latitude to argue for the
incompleteness of the quantum state if you only had a single particle. Okay, great. All right.
I think this now sets the stage for Bell's response to this EPR argument, right? So the EPR
argument, just to again summarize, that's basically kind of this box here that we've sort of discussed
at length now. Okay, why don't we pick up with now how Bell enters into the story?
Good. So, and let me do an intermediate step. I mentioned this before. EPR paper, the discussion
is only a position in momentum measurements. So kind of the only experimental setups you would
even discuss in that paper are, you know, what we call a position measurement, what we call a
momentum measurement, whatever they are. As I said, you could really just do it with one set.
Between that, when David Bohm writes his textbook on quantum theory, he takes the same setup but
rewrites it for spin for the quantum mechanical property of spin.
What year is this, by the way? So EPR was 35, what was?
Yeah, well, his textbook came out in 51, I think. Okay, okay. Because Bohm produces this
textbook called Quantum Theory. He's an assistant professor at Princeton. He would like to discuss
with Einstein. I mean, there's this famous story. He really would be interested in discussions.
He's kind of scared he doesn't know Einstein. He's trying to find somebody who can ask Einstein
and he gets a letter from Einstein just out of the blue and says, I read your book. It's a really
interesting book. Come talk to me about it. And that must be 1952, I think, because 1951, 1952.
Because after that conversation, and again, Bohm writes this book, which is very much in the
Copenhagen style. It's an exposition of quantum theory from the point of view of Copenhagen.
And Einstein says, this is the clearest exposition I've ever read. I think you've done a really good
job of clearing out a lot of the obscurities, right, of what Bohr was trying to say.
But I still have problems. And Bohm goes to talk to him for an afternoon, not more than a couple
hours. And he famously comes back. I think actually his roommate was Gell Mann, or anyway,
he was talking to Gell Mann, who was also young. And he comes back after that. And he says,
after this, he says, I'm back to square one. Einstein has completely convinced me this is
on the wrong track. And I assume that it was exactly the discussion of nonlocality. Anyway,
with then by 1952, he's already written this paper, quantum mechanics in terms of hidden variables
of the pilot wave theory, which is a deterministic theory, deterministic non-local theory.
That's what wakes up Bell. That's what awakened him from his dogmatic slumbers was,
you know, he was told when he learned quantum mechanics Bell, well, yeah, it's kind of weird,
but you might think there's a deterministic theory that could give you these results,
but there isn't. And that was supposedly proven by von Neumann. And Bell at the time didn't read
German. And he couldn't check what von Neumann had written. And he says he just put it out of his
mind. He said, well, that's strange. I don't, you know, he says, I guess, you know, the normal
thought would be a kind of Einstein's thought, maybe quantum mechanics is more like just a
statistical theory, because it deals in incomplete descriptions. And it's only giving you statistical
predictions, because it's not taking everything into account. Yeah. And, and Bell raises this with
his professors and the professors assure him that von Neumann has proven no such theory could give the
same predictions. And then Bell says he one fine day in 1952, he wakes up and reads Bohm's paper.
And he says, Bohm has just done what I was told was impossible. I mean, I can see in this paper,
he has produced a deterministic theory that makes exactly the same predictions as standard quantum
mechanics. Right. So he immediately knows that what he was told as an undergraduate was untrue,
or as a graduate, it was just untrue. It's just false. It takes him a while to get hold of a
English translation of von Neumann when he does, he very quickly puts his finger on
the assumption that von Neumann makes that he says is unphysical and kind of a silly assumption to
make. Who was she says, who was. What, what, what is that assumption? The assumption is that
so you have these operators, right. So in quantum mechanics, you have these Hermitian operators
that are associated with what are called observables like position and momentum or spin in different
directions. And those operators mathematically are related to each other by certain mathematical
operations. Okay. They're linear combinations of each other. And what von Neumann assumes is that
if there is an additional quantity that's determining the actual outcomes that those
quantities have to be related to one another in the same way that these operators are related
to one another mathematically. And it's easy to see that can't work. And Bell says, you know,
you see immediately off the, but there's no reason for that to be true. There's just no reason to
believe that these additional quantities that you're going to introduce have to have the same
mathematical relations among them as these Hermitian operators have among them. So you can see
it's a very clear assumption, right? Mathematically, it's a clear assumption. It's just physically,
it makes no sense. It's not a natural assumption physically. If, for example, if two, if two Hermitian
operators are some linear combination, right, if a third operator can be written as a linear
combination of two of these Hermitian operators, then the associated underlying values that determine
the outcomes of the experiments, these new things I'm introducing, they have to be mathematically
related to each other in exactly the same way. The other things are these additional variables
that go beyond the quantum description that actually determine the outcomes.
Oh, I see. Okay. I think they're just not in the normal part of quantum mechanics that I'm trying.
These are the things that people mistakenly called hidden variables. They're two additional variables.
I mean, go again, go back to EPR. EPR says, look, the quantum state is incomplete. Okay,
then to complete it, I need additional variables, right? I see. Okay. I need to add some stuff,
and I'm going to add stuff that actually determines the outcomes of these experiments,
right? The experiments are already associated with these Hermitian operators,
but that doesn't predict exactly what will happen. That only gives me statistical predictions. Yes?
Now I'm going to add some variables that determine the actual outcome,
but they don't have to be mathematically related to each other in the same way that the
Hermitian operators are mathematically related to one another. So anyway, I mean,
whatever it was, you know, Bell says, look, I just have a counter example. I mean,
von Neumann can't have proven that a so-called hidden variables theory is impossible,
a deterministic, in fact, a deterministic hidden variables theory is impossible,
because I have one in front of me. Here it is. You know, it makes the same predictions.
Bohm proves it in this paper. So von Neumann made a mistake, or at least,
I mean, some people try to defend von Neumann. Certainly everybody understood that's what
von Neumann had proved, and this was just a counter example. Now the thing about the theory
that Bohm writes down, which was already De Bruy had the idea back in 1925, so this is not a new
theory. Einstein himself had been fooling around with theories like this in the interim, we know,
but he never accepted them. Why not? On its face, this thing is non-local. I mean, there is explicit
in your face, spooky action at a distance in the dynamics of this theory. So of course,
if Einstein looked at that theory, he would see the theory, but he would say that's not the kind
of theory I'm looking for. I'm looking for a local theory. This is a manifestly non-local theory.
But it is a deterministic theory. It's a theory where there's no fundamental randomness at all.
The outcomes of all the experiments are already determined from the initial state and the dynamics.
So Bell asks himself the question, huh, I wonder if I can do what Bohm did only get rid of the
non-locality, right? I know I can have a deterministic theory that gives me all the right predictions.
The one I've got in front of me is also non-local. Can I actually eliminate the non-locality in the
way that Einstein wanted? Yeah, so basically Bohm, he eliminated
indeterminism, but still has non-locality. And now Bell comes along and says, oh,
can I get rid of non-locality? Can I have a theory like Bohm's in the sense
it's deterministic? I mean, look, Einstein had already proven in the EPR paper, if you want
locality, you need determinism, right? Well, Bohm gave him determinism, but he didn't,
he didn't get rid of the non-locality, right? It's a deterministic but non-local theory.
There's still non-locality. And so, of course, it's going to occur to you. But wait, if it's a
deterministic theory, at least in principle, I can get the EPR correlations without any non-locality.
That's kind of trivial. That's like Bertleman's socks. Just pre-determine the outcomes and
pre-determine them so they're always the opposite. Yes? Yes. So Bell says, but now, can I, as it were,
do something like what Bohm did? Give me a deterministic theory. There's no longer the EPR
argument that you need non-locality. So can I do a full theory that gives me all the quantum
mechanical predictions but is local and therefore local and deterministic, right? That's the problem
that he has in front of him. But notice it's not, again, it's not because you care about determinism.
It's because you care about locality and you already knew if you wanted to hang on to locality,
you had to go to determinism, right? That's the part where EPR infer determinism. They don't
presuppose it. They infer it from locality. So he says, I wonder if you can do this and get all
the quantum mechanical predictions. Now, the advantage that Bell had that Einstein didn't have,
certainly at the time of EPR, was because Bohm has reformulated this in terms of spins,
he's got a whole bunch of new experimental conditions to think about. So
the way to put it is this. In the EPR case, the only experiments you talked about,
even in principle, were momentum and position. And the whole point that Bohr makes is that
if you set up your lab to do a momentum experiment, you can't simultaneously do a position
experiment because the experimental conditions exclude each other. If you do one, you can't
do the other, right? You can't check both for position and momentum at the same time.
This is the basis of complementarity. So as far as Einstein, Podolski, and Rosen are thinking,
Alice and Bob each have only two choices. They either put position or they check momentum,
and so either they're both checking the same thing or one's checking one, one's checking the other.
Those are the only conditions they could think about. But now you've got spin. Now, the thing
about the spin experiment is that to measure spin of a particle, you measure it in a certain
direction in space. And there's a continuum of directions you can choose. There are infinitely
many directions you can choose. So in terms of the experimental condition between Alice and Bob,
you not only have that they could measure spin in the same direction and say measure in
orthogonal directions, one z and one x, but they can measure offset by 45 degrees or 30 degrees
or 60 degrees or 10 degrees or five degrees. There's a continuum of different experimental
situations and quantum mechanics makes predictions about the correlations you want to see between
these results for all of these offsets. Now, in the case of spin, and we can go into the physics
of a spin measurement if you want or not. I mean, it would take a little to describe Stern-Garach
magnets. But anyway, you've got an apparatus. It creates a magnetic field that's pointed in a
certain direction and you can adjust the direction. That's really all you need to know. And you need
to know that you set up a state where if Alice and Bob measure in the same direction, whatever it
is, this way, this way, this way, if they set their devices in exactly the same direction,
they always get opposite results. If one particle will be deflected up and the other one's particle
will be deflected down. You can't predict from the quantum state which one will go up and which
one will go down. Half the time it'll do this and half the time it'll do that. But all the time they'll
do something different. So you get these perfect correlations. That sets up a situation exactly
like EPR. Bob, if he knows Alice is measuring in the same direction, Bob, when he sees his outcome,
can now predict with certainty Alice's. Let me just write down sort of what you just said.
So now we're in the setting of Bell's theorem and sort of let's just call it setup right now.
And we have Alice and Bob. We now have our entangled wave function. And it's such that,
let's see how do I want to write this, but so let's just write psi as the sort of the
entangled wave function. And I guess following the notation of Bell's paper,
Alice and Bob can each perform a measurement. Let's say Alice will
say measure spin in the A direction and Bob in the little B direction. So these are arbitrary
vectors in R3, unit vectors. And the point is that whenever B is set equals to A,
right. So let's call, let's call the, let's see, they're going to measure spin. Actually,
let me back up here. So this is what they, this is the outcome of a spin measurement
for Alice in the direction A and then likewise for Bob. And the point is that whenever B is equal to A,
then there's this perfect correlation that happens, anti-correlation. They always get
the opposite, sort of like our heads and tails example earlier, right? Yeah. So now there's
basically an infinite family of perfect correlations for every unit vector A.
Whenever you choose B, also that same unit vector, you get the exact opposite result.
Right. And so by the same argument that EPR gave, if it's a local theory, right, if Alice's
laboratory operation has no influence at all on Bob's particle or the outcome of Bob's experiment,
then the outcomes have to be predetermined for all directions at the source because you get
the perfect correlations in A direction. If we look at Bell's paper, right? Okay, let's do that.
Let me, let me pull it up now. On the Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen paradox.
Yep. Just read the, let's just read paragraph one. Introduction. The paradox of Einstein-Pedolsky
and Rosen was advanced as an argument that quantum mechanics could not be a complete theory,
but should be supplemented by additional variables, right? That's just, if it's not complete, then
there are additional variables. That's just by definition. These additional variables were to
restore to the theory causality and locality. Now causality is determinism, but as Bell later
said, the main point was to restore locality. And the only way you could restore locality,
if you have these perfect correlations, is also causality, that is determinism.
In this note, that idea will be formulated mathematically, right? So the, the, the, what
they were trying to do to restore locality will be formulated mathematically and shown to be
incompatible with the statistical predictions of quantum mechanics. It is the requirement of
locality. Notice, right? Not causality, which is the determinism part. It is the requirement of
locality or more precisely that the result of a measurement on one system, it be unaffected
by operations on a distance system with which it has interacted in the past that creates the
essential difficulty. I mean, he, Bell couldn't be clearer than this. But the problem is, if you
don't know EPR paper and you've even thought about it, this goes by too quickly, right? He's
taking for granted what EPR have already proven. And now he's going a step further.
There have been attempts to show that even without such a separability or locality requirement, no
quote hidden variable interpretation of quantum mechanics is possible, right? This is von Neumann
and elsewhere. These, these attempts have been examined elsewhere. That's his earlier paper,
which is called On the Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics. That one was published,
that one he wrote before this one. And this is because he was thinking about this. Can I
supplement, can I do what Einstein Podolsky and Rosen wanted? Can I actually carry that out?
And found wanting, that is, he says the, there have been these things claimed to be no additional
variables proofs, they don't work. And read the earlier paper to find out why they don't work.
There are different ones, none of them work. Von Neumann's doesn't work, right? All the other
ones, they don't work. Moreover, a hidden variable interpretation of elementary quantum theory has
been explicitly constructed. That's bone. So he knows they don't work because there's a counter
example, right? That particular interpretation has indeed a grossly non-local structure.
This is, this is characteristic according to the result to be proved here of any such theory,
which reproduces exactly the quantum mechanical predictions. Now, everything of what Bell is
doing, what's been done before, how this relates to what's been done before is in that paragraph,
everything. It's there, it's clear, it's unambiguous. You just have to read it carefully.
What I'm going to do is show you that the attempt to restore locality, which EPR had already proven,
gives you the necessity of determinism, cannot be carried through. No local theory
can reproduce these predictions. Quantum theory was obviously to Einstein non-local. That's what
he always complained of. I mean, quantum theory as exposited by Bohr, he always complained it
was non-local. He said it has spooky action at a distance. It has telepathy. It has this weird
thing. I can't believe it, right? To Einstein, it was obvious that standard quantum theory was
non-local. I'm going to, you know, Bell says, I'm going to prove every theory has to be non-local
if it's going to reproduce the prediction, statistical predictions of quantum mechanics.
He says, this is characteristic, according to the results we've proved here, of any such theory
which reproduces exactly the quantum mechanical predictions, right, in all cases, including in
these new cases that Einstein never thought about and Bohm never thought about. I mean, everybody,
you know, they were thinking about these perfect correlation cases where Bob and Alice are measuring
in the same direction. And you might think, well, let me look at the furthest they can get apart.
Let Alice measure in X and Bob at right angles in Z. But that doesn't give you anything because then
there's no correlations. Then they're completely, the results are random and uncorrelated, right?
It would really be like you and me flipping coins, right? A fourth of the time we both get
heads and a fourth of the time we both get tails. There's no, the real trick is to look at the
correlations in the in-between thing where these are offset by an amount but not by 90 degrees.
Now, in fact, for Bell's case, all you need to do is imagine a situation where Alice, let's call
this zero. Alice and Bob have a device. Each of them can set their device in one of two orientations.
They can both set it at zero, in which case they're certainly going to get opposite results.
Alice can offset 30 degrees this way. Bob can offset 30 degrees the other way.
So either they're measuring in the same direction, they're off by 30 or they're off by 60.
Just that is enough to set up the situation. If you want to do it the way Bell did it,
with an entangled pair of particles in a singlet state. I mean, we can go through that proof.
That's given in many books. It's a kind of statistical proof. And what he shows is that
unless what Alice does affects Bob's result or what Bob does affects Alice's result,
you cannot get the predictions of quantum mechanics.
Let me write down a few things here because I think we said a lot of things and it might be
hard for people to absorb all that. What is Bell's that I'm going to arrive at? We're going to get
a Bell inequality, which is a constraint on local theories. Here's the key thing. This has nothing
to do with quantum mechanics. It's just a very general mathematical result. Now, you can apply
it to quantum mechanics because quantum mechanics does make certain predictions, but that's an
application of it. That's not part of the inequality. The theorem is not about quantum
mechanics. The theorem is about any local theory. The fact that we're using spins and working with
certain numbers, that's the application of the inequality, but it's not central to its formulation.
All this talk about spins and so on, which again, we could go into more details, but as far as
anybody needs to know, all you need to know is Alice and Bob each have, it's actually a magnet,
we're imagining they can orient it in one of two ways. Whenever they do an experiment,
they get one of two outcomes, which we call spin up or spin down. It essentially means the particle
is either deflected up or down relative to this magnet, or you get a dot on the screen that's
either here or here. How that works doesn't matter. All that matters is Alice and Bob have
two choices, one choice out of two to make, and whatever they do, there'll be a definite outcome,
which we can call either up or down, and that when they happen to set their devices in the same
direction, they always get opposite outcomes. Then you get a perfect anti-correlation.
I can say all that without mentioning quantum mechanics. You could throw quantum mechanics away
tomorrow, it would still be the case that you can build these magnets and do this stuff and get these
dots. That's just a description of the experiment. It's not a theoretical description at all,
it's just a description of the experimental condition and the experimental outcome.
So it bears no theoretical weight, except that you think, well, yeah, magnets, you can put
them this way or put them that way. And dots, they either occur here or they occur here, that's it.
Sure. Let me just write down Bell's inequality. We're not going to go deep into it, but let's just
finally write it down because we've been verbalizing things a lot. So Bell's inequality, let me just
write it down, and the algebraic steps are in the paper, they're not that enlightening,
we're not going to go into the details, but if you just, well, let me just write it down.
So now here A, E, and C are these arbitrary unit vectors
and R3. And the only assumption was essentially this thing I had, I didn't write down what P was,
so P of A and B are just exactly these correlations. I'll just write it as an expectation,
because essentially all that's going on are that you have Alice and Bob, you can think of them as
just random variables. They're random variables that depend on the detector settings. So you
pick a setting A or a setting B, and what Alice and Bob each get are random variables,
and P is the correlation between those random variables. And essentially the only constraint
that we have is, let's say P of A equals minus one, because as we noted earlier,
whenever Alice and Bob choose the same direction with which to do a spin measurement,
they have perfect anti-correlation, so that expectation is minus one. So unless I'm missing
any other implicit assumptions, that basically, as long as you have random variables that are
valued in plus or minus one, the outcome of, which you can think of as the outcome of spin
experiments, but they don't have to be interpreted that way, but as long as you have plus or minus one
of random variables that have this perfect anti-correlation, whenever the two measurements
are aligned, then you have this inequality that I've written here, and this is this is Bell's
inequality. And the point is that if you reason about this, even though it's not
that clean mathematically, we'll look at a cleaner example in a moment, if you reason about this in
the instantiation of the case in which A and B happen to be quantum mechanical experiments,
then with some effort, you can derive a contradiction, thus showing that quantum
mechanics cannot be local. But that's a separate issue than formulating the inequality itself.
Yeah, I mean, we've gone right, we've gone so far in the direction of doing this for a
pair of particles in the spin state, that if you don't mind, let me just take five minutes
and say what you just said in a concrete example. Sure. I think anybody can follow very easily.
So, so again, we're going to imagine this situation, we create a pair of particles in this
quantum mechanical state, it's called the singlet state, we don't really care what it's called,
well, all we care is what it predicts. Alice either sets her device at zero or 30 degrees,
Bob sets his device at either zero or minus 30 degrees. Okay, so at the end of the day,
either they're in the same direction, they're off by off by 30 or they're off by 60. So
the top part of this grid, this is going to be, this is going to be Alice, this is going to be
Bob, okay, on the bottom, we're going to have these entries, the entry here for zero degrees
is going to mean, remember, we already know because Alice and Bob get always the opposite results
at zero degrees, those have to be predetermined, right, that was the whole point that, you know,
it can't be anything random or how would the other one, each one know, so we've Alice and Bob
at zero degrees, they always get opposite results, right, now it turns out, we'll call these results
up and down, it turns out it's not really important here that they actually on each side just look
random, they each get up and down half the time, but they're always, they're always opposite. So
you say, I want to, I want to pre-program particles to do this, so this is what I have here is this
is pair of particles, sorry, one, two, three, I'm sending out these pair of particles,
and so for pair number one, let's say, I'm going to say, well, Alice, if she measures the zero,
it's going to be up, that means Bob has to be down, her next one will be up, that means Bob
has to be down, then her next one will be sorry, down, so Bob's has to be up, and so on, right,
I just randomly put in a row for Alice, and then the opposite row for Bob, right, however I
all right, up, down is now plus or minus one, but okay, yeah, that corresponds to plus or minus
one, that could be the perfect anti-correlation, the only way to get the perfect anti-correlation
when they measure in the same direction. Now, suppose Alice happens to set hers not at zero,
but at 30 degrees, okay, and Bob sets his, happens to set his at zero, so now we're comparing this
row to this row, the prediction is, they'll again get opposite results, not all the time,
but most of the time, in fact, 75% of the time, okay, so what I want to do is put in here things
for Alice, such that if I compare 30 to zero, they agree 75% of the time, so that means there are only
25% of these can be changed, right, so in other words, I'll just put same, meaning it's the same
as for zero degrees, so this would be up, same, same, then change, then change, then same, then
same, then same, right, whatever it is, I can only change, I need to change exactly 25%,
because I want to go from 100% anti-correlation to 75%, yes, and then the same thing, if Bob goes
at minus 30, analysis at zero, I want 75% anti-correlation, so again, I can only change,
I need to change exactly 25% of these, randomly distribute it, doesn't matter, right, so change,
same, same, same, change, so if it's same, then that means this would be a D, D here,
this would be a U here, and so on, now here's the key, if everybody's following me so far,
I've only changed 25% going up, and I've only changed 25% going down,
so no matter how I did that, at least 50% of the time, I didn't change either of them, yes,
so at least 50% of the time, they have to disagree, but when you check, when Alice is
at 30 and Bob is at minus 30 and you have a 60 degree difference, they only disagree 25% of the
time, in fact, what quantum mechanics predicts and what happens is they agree now 75% of the time,
they disagree only 25% of the time, so yeah, I think they, let's see, the exact formula is
cosine squared, this is the disagreement rate, right,
right, so when it's zero, it's one, that's right, and then when it's 30 degrees, that's
right, cosine squared of, okay, so when this is 30, right, this will end up being three quarters,
right, so it disagrees 75% of the time, yep, yep, and when it's 60 degrees, it's 140,
that's all, that's the problem, now you can just see, you can't put us and ds down on this,
so that they always disagree when you compare zero Alice to zero Bob, they disagree 75% of
the time when you compare Alice zero to Bob minus 30 or Bob zero to Alice 30 and they disagree
25% of the time when you compare minus 30 to 30, it just can't be done, right, if you only change
25% going up and you only change 25% going down, you still have 50% that have to be the way they
were originally, it can't be done, so in a way the math is that simple, now in this case you have
to look at these long-term averages and you have to assume you're making random selections whenever
Bob and on every run what essentially Alice and Bob are doing are taking a random selection out of
this graph and you're just saying you can't set up this graph, I don't care what you do, put us and
ds however you want, you can't set up this graph to give me those statistics, this is an instance of
Bell's inequality. Bell's inequality would say the implementation of what you wrote down as the
general principle would be because the zero 30 correlation is 75% is as it were, anti-correlation
is 75% and the zero minus 30 is the one for 30 minus 30 has to be at least 50%, right, that's where
the, that's where the inequality is. Let's pause here because I think people who haven't thought
about this for maybe aren't so clear about the significance of what we just did, so basically
if you look at this setup in terms of spin, the statistics that you described were encapsulated
by this formula I had here, this cosine squared formula, right, the point is that by simulating
trials of ups and downs or plus or minus ones that are attempting to be consistent with these
statistics, you will end up getting inconsistencies as we did with the 60 degree separation and that
inconsistency, it was very subtle but that inconsistency was due to the fact that we did not allow
communication between the results of A and B, we tried to do it sort of independently so to speak
without any communication and then we just saw that it failed. What we assumed is that Alice's
result cannot depend on what Bob measures, that's exactly right, that's right, can't depend on Bob's
decision to either do zero or 30 and Bob's result can't depend on Alice's decision to either do
zero or 30. Let me just make this, so basically this is this is bright red line here that says
Bob has a trial, Alice has a trial at zero degrees and then the 30 degrees
the plus and minus 30 degree outcomes only can refer to what Alice or Bob are doing respectively
because again Alice and Bob can't communicate and when you are constrained by that then when you
compare Alice and Bob again at the 30 and minus 30 you get a contradiction. Right, the assumption
is just that what happens in Alice's lab is independent, causally independent of Bob's decision
and what happens in Bob's lab, causally independent. Now of course they could be correlated because
the correlations were already set up at the source, I mean it's not, again it's just silly to think
it's not as if Einstein thought oh you've got a correlation, you must have a spooky action at
distance, of course not, his whole point was no I can get correlations without spooky action at
distance but only by predetermining the outcomes. Right, so let's just, so the correlations are this
these two zero zero rows here, that was the perfect anti-correlation and then from going to zero and
30 that was essentially using the blue formula and the fact that A and B don't communicate.
That's right, that's right, that's right, beautiful. Obviously if what Alice's particle does can be
sensitive to what Bob, how Bob sets his device, then we can't even write in a row like we can't
write for a row, well what will Bob do at minus 30, we would have to divide that and say well if
Alice measures zero then say he'll get up and if Alice measures 30 then he'll get down. Right,
but then you just make his outcome explicitly dependent on Alice's measurement choice,
that's spooky action at a distance, that's telepathy, that's the very thing that Einstein doesn't like.
You know I hadn't thought about these statistics, I knew it was like you know very simple fractions in
mathematics but I just never wrote it down in this kind of nice table. I think this presentation I
learned out of Nick Herbert's book, Quantum Reality, I think it's in there, I mean this is not original to
me and this is because what Bell was actually thinking about was these correlated pairs in
singlet state, this is what he first comes up with in the examples. Now eventually Greenberger,
Horn and Zeiling are realized that if you look at triples of particles you can do something even
niftier, right, so what we're going to do now is look at an even cleaner example of statistical
results you cannot recover from any local theory, that's the deal. We're going to instead of looking
at a case where we have two particles that we start off in a state and send to Alice and Bob,
we're going to have three particles that we send to Alice, Bob and Charlie so we're just going to
put them on our in space time in labs that are separated and again as far as the theory goes
they can be separated as far as you like, the experiments can be done at space like separation
so that even light couldn't get from any one of these experimenters to any other before they do
their experiment. At the center of all this we have a little device that's producing
triples of particles in a certain entangled state, it doesn't matter what it is and sends them off
to Alice, Bob and Charlie and then Alice, Bob and Charlie again each one is going to do a spin
experiment which means they've got a magnet and this time instead of it being zero and 30 and 60
or something like that it's really either say z direction or x direction it's some direction or
direction at right angles to it we'll call them z and x so Alice you know she's going to choose to
either measure in z or measure in x, Bob is going to choose either to measure in z or measure in x
and Charlie is going to choose either z or z or x these choices can be made by them in any way you
like they can flip coins they can use lotto balls they can use as as Bell says the parody of digits
of pi starting at the millionth digit so plus any string of plus ones and minus ones that are random
in any way you like they can use they need none of them knows what the other one's doing okay
so under those circumstances since there's a binary choice made by Alice a binary choice by
Bob a binary choice by Charlie there are eight possible global conditions when the three particles
come in right which are obviously they could all measure x which we would represent x a x b x c
Alice could measure x and Bob could measure x and Charlie could measure z
or just Bob could measure z or just Alice could measure z
I mean this is going to get a little boring but okay it's just combinatorics or let's say
Alice measures x and both Bob and Charlie measures z and so on I'm not going to really bore you by
writing all eight there are obviously eight possible global configurations that can occur
and the nice thing about this case is we don't even have to say well 75 percent of the time
you'll get this and 25 percent of the time you'll get that we don't have to use anything like that
we can only say things that happen 100 percent of the time right so these are perfect predictions
and they involve the kinds of perfect correlations that allow you to say what's going to happen
given any now any two of the outcomes you can say what the third one is going to be okay now the
only cases we really care about are where all three measure x or where two measure z and the
other measures x so really down here the case where Alice measures x and the other two measure z
the case where Bob measures x and the other two measure z and the case where Charlie measures x
and the other two measure z there are four more cases but we don't care about them because there
there will be predictions for those cases but they don't come into the argument okay yeah I mean just
maybe make make a few comments because this looks maybe a little coming out of nowhere but basically
behind all this there is some entangled state with all for all three of these observers
and you can think of a b and c again being binary random variables because spin is valued in
plus or minus one but it's set up in such a way that even though all three are individually
independent coin flips 50 plus one or minus one their joint distribution however are not
independent and it's such that if you had set your measurement configurations remember each
random variable it depends on this direction and in this case really need two two elements
x and z for our directions if you choose the three sets of measurements such that they're all x
or one of them exactly one of them is x then their joint distribution is such that any two
of the measurements determines exactly the third one that is a property of these probability
addition and and we can show that because but just by sitting with the predictions are because
they're very simple to state in the case where they measure all three x's the prediction is with
certainty that you will get an odd number of up outcomes okay now it doesn't tell you that number
could be one it could be three but that we don't care about that it certainly will be odd it'll be
either one or three you won't get two you won't get zero okay and because that's made with certainty
if I know two of the outcomes I know what the other one has to be right because if if if the two
I have are ups then the third one has to be enough to make it odd or if the first two you know if the
if the first two is one up then the the last one has to be down because it has to stay odd so again
you have the kinds of perfect correlations which means from Alice's and Bob's outcome you can predict
with certainty Charlie's from Bob's and Charlie's you can you know predict Alice's whatever and it's
those perfect outcomes that again if you say that what happens in any of these labs has no causal
effect in any other lab then you can make those predictions without disturbing the third lab
right you can you can find out from Alice and Bob what they got and now predict Charlie without
disturbing Charlie because all you need is their outcomes yes so if they happen to all
pick X then the predictions are you'll certainly get an odd number of ups if they happen to pick
one X and two Z's then the prediction is certainly you'll get an even number of ups
and again of course if you know two you know what the last one has to be
sure that's it yeah yeah maybe just a small finicky thing should we change ups to downs because I
think of up as plus one and and down as minus one I think it's cleaner when you think about
sure sure sure not gonna change the argument if you want to change it down okay yeah yeah yeah let's
let's do that all right even number of downs yeah because in terms of what we wrote in terms of
bells the the the the notation in bell setup right we talked about when we're going to take
expectations of products of variables that we want to multiply things in either plus or minus
one and so in this case basically in in in this setting here what we're basically saying is that
okay going back to bell's notation you could think of A of X B of X and C of X is being
minus one because we could think of up as plus one and down as minus one right again these are
up or down or plus or minus one valued random variables but if we're going to do arithmetic we
should do plus or minus one so that's that's this case and then in the second case then
let's say A X B Z C Z will be one and and likewise with the three other cases right the two other
cases where there's exactly one X yeah yeah exactly right I mean it'll it'll work out however you
want yeah sure sure I just wanted to you know it's easy enough to hold in your head yeah all
three X's in this case will say odd number of downs in the other case where there's one X and
two Z's even number of down yeah now by the reasoning of the EPR paper if there's no spooky
action at a distance then from the results of any two I can predict with certainty the results of
the last one without disturbing it because if it's local and the two of them do their results
get their results at space like separation and you say look what they did can't make any difference
what they chose can't make any difference the outcome that they got can't make any difference
I can now predict without disturbing it what the third one will get then the third one has to
already there has to be an element of reality that determines what it'll be right I mean it can't be
random how could it be random if from looking at what Alice and Bob got I can tell you for sure
what Charlie's going to get there can't be something random going on in Charlie's lab right
you wouldn't always get the right result exactly this is the three coin flip version of the thing
we did earlier it's just I have three people two people right yeah it's just the EPR criterion of
reality under the assumption that by separating Alice Bob and Charlie we causally isolate them from
each other right we causally isolate their choices about what how to orient their magnets
and the outcome that they get what what happens in one lab can have no influence on what happens in
another lab now if we do that now it's very nice now you say okay so in a local theory I have to
be able to predetermine what the outcomes would be in such a way as to respect these statistics to
respect these requirements and the nice thing about this is you can set this up in a beautiful
diagram again this I think was was invented by David Merman and it's just extremely pretty you
can show this to somebody and you say all right this circle here that's what Alice the results
she'll get if she happens to set her magnet in the x direction this is what Bob will get if he
happens to set his this is what Charlie will get if he happens to set his in the x direction
then z for Alice over here um z for Bob over here and z for Charlie here so that's all there is
right that each each Alice Charlie and Bob each has two choices the nice thing about this diagram
is that the situation where they all pick x's sorry the situation maybe I'll choose a color here
the situation where they all pick x's is this axis with the red dots and the situation where
one picks an x and the other one's picks a z is this one this one and this one
right so nice symmetric little diagram and so what is what what do the predictions say they say
well if they happen to all pick x we need an odd number of down outcomes right so in these three
circles again here here and here I have to put an odd number of d's and on the other rows the
ones connected by blue lines I have to put an even number yes so now the first thing to do
is just try I mean let's just try something random see what happens I need an odd number along the
red row it's one or three just for fun let's make it three because that's easy so I'll put d
d d so now if they happen to pick all x's we're safe
this z c in the middle it did nothing's required here I'll just put a u in there again we're
just trying something but now we start to the constraints start to bite right so along this
row I need an even number I've got a d a u I'm forced to put a d here
and now the I only have this one circle left but I'm screwed because to have an even number
coming down this row I've already got two d's this has to be a u but to have an even number
coming down this row I have a d and a u it has to be a d so I can't right there's no way I can finish
it so that no matter which triple they happen to hit on I'll get the right result
and you might say well okay try something else I mean you just made some random choices
but then there's this beautiful argument of mermen's it says you can't do it there's no
conceivable way to put us in d's in these six circles and that's all there is to do here
that satisfy all the requirements at the same time why not here's the argument it's by reductio
suppose you could do it suppose you could put the us in d's down in such a way
that you get odd along that one and even along the other ones so pick up the three along the
red throw them in a hat you just threw an odd number of d's then pick up these three throw
them in a hat even number these three throw them in a hat even number these three throw them in a
a hat, even number. So odd, even, even, even. I now have an odd number of d's in the hat,
but I picked up every disc twice because every single circle is on the intersection of two of
these rows. So no matter what I do, I can't get an odd number, right? If I pick every one up twice.
So it's just easy to see. You can absolutely convince yourself, there's nothing up my sleeves,
there's no hidden anything, right? You just, it's just a simple mathematical fact that you cannot
use in d's in these six circles that satisfy all four of those constraints at the same time.
So that means no matter what you do, there's some chance, if it's a local theory, if what Alice
gets, if she measures x, for example, is independent of what Bob and Charlie decide to do,
then there's no way you can prearrange this so it'll always give you the right results. It can't
be done. But it always does do that, right? I mean, nature, then you say, well, let's go check in
the lab. What does nature do? Answer, nature does what quantum mechanics predicts. Nature does always
give you an even number in this case and an odd number in those cases. So nature is doing something
that no local theory can do. Therefore, nature isn't local. That's it, right? The experiments,
the experiments, which originally were done on like the bipartite case that we talked about,
you have to go to the lab and check. You know what quantum mechanics predicts, fine,
but that's not the issue. The issue is what does nature do? And the answer is nature does what
quantum mechanics predicts. It violates Bell's inequality. It gives you results that cannot
be replicated in any local theory. Even if it's on entirely unquantum mechanical ground, I mean,
it doesn't matter. Again, quantum mechanics kind of drops off to the side. The issue is locality.
Can you come up with a local theory that'll make these predictions? Answer, no. This is what happens
in reality. So real physics can't be local. Actually, on this, no, okay. Let's see. Maybe,
actually, let me make one comment here that was maybe implicit, but just to help our viewers,
it was very important that the choice of which measurements to make, all x's or 1x,
that is not known in advance. And therefore, all the constraints have to be satisfied because,
well, since you don't know which choice is going to be made, in order for it to be
satisfied in general, it has to satisfy all of the constraints.
So on the one side, of course, if you knew from the beginning, oh, Alice is going to check this,
Bob's going to check that, Charlie's going to check that, then, of course, trivially,
you could arrange to give a good answer. But you don't know that. Again, if you think of all
the different ways that those decisions could be made, you can't prearrange it. There's no way
that anybody has the information about what they're all three going to be, right?
So that's the, I've said from the beginning, and maybe this is the right time to bring it up.
The main thing that Bell keeps saying is the fundamental principle that's kept
sacred is locality, right? No action at a distance. Mathematically,
the only mathematical assumptions that go in is the mathematical expression of that,
which is to say that the probability of Alice getting some outcome can't depend on what Bob
decides to do. But then there's another one, which is called statistical independence. It says
that essentially these choices are random choices that Bob and Charlie and Alice are making with
respect to the state of the particles coming in, right? In other words, what you see from this
diagram is that if I prearrange these, then there must be at least one of these experimental
conditions that it would get wrong. And the assumption is that these experimental conditions
are being chosen completely randomly. At least occasionally you'd hit the bad one, right? I mean,
if every time they come in one out of four would go bad, and you keep doing this randomly after
a while, you'd hit a bad one and you'd get a bad result. Now, you know, someone can say no, no,
no, no, they just never hit a bad one. It's true that there's always at least one that cannot be
prearranged, but they never actually choose that one, right? They always miss that one.
And then you think, well, this is just crazy. Why would they miss it? I mean, by what mechanism
would they miss it? By what, what would keep them, right, what would be their flipping coins or their,
you know, that using the digits of pi or whatever to make these choices, what's going to somehow
magically steer them away from the bad choice every single time, right? So this, there's the
second assumption called statistical independence. Bell writes a nice paper about it after this comes
out and people are looking for every loophole they can find. And they say, look, you're making this
assumption that the, that the choices that are made are statistically independent of the state of
incoming particles. And Bell says, yeah, I mean, that's the assumption that underlies pretty much
all scientific experimentation. If you deny that, then you can do anything. I mean, if you deny that,
then experimentation just does you no good, right? As we say, it's the same way. I always like to say
the, the, the tobacco people really would like to deny that smoking causes cancer.
And so you say, well, what's the evidence that it does? Well, the gold standard evidence is a
controlled experimental random trial where you take a bunch of rats and you randomly assort them into
two groups and then expose one to smoke and then don't expose the other to smoke and treat them
otherwise exactly the same. And then seed, you get more cancer over here than over here. Now,
someone could say, yeah, but, you know, maybe these rats that got cancer, they were all predisposed
to get cancer. And it just happened when you sorted them, you put all the certain to be sick rats
over in the, you know, experimental group and all the certain to be well rats over in the control
group. And you say, wait, I just sorted them by flipping coins. I just sorted them by the digits
of pie, right? How in the world, you know, you're saying no matter what I do, no matter how I set
this up, always the sick rats are going to go this way. And the, you know, not sick rats are
going to go that way. And you'd say, of course, as a logical purely logical point, you'd say, well,
that would explain the outcome without the smoke having anything to do with it. But that would
undermine all scientific method, all experimental method, right? Then you could never draw any
conclusions from any experiment. I mean, it's just it's so desperate. And you have theories
that make these predictions. They're non local theories. But they're not conspiratorial. They
don't involve they accept statistical independence. And they actually account for these results,
but they do it by non local means. These exist. People, some people are so upset
about non locality, that they're willing to literally grasp at any straw to avoid the conclusion.
And I just don't get it. Of course, you know, I'm a philosopher, we read Descartes and you say,
well, gee, maybe, you know, maybe we're all asleep and dreaming, maybe no experiments are
ever done. Maybe it's all, you know, maybe we're all plugged into the matrix. And after a while,
you shrug your shoulders and say, okay, fine. But then you're not doing science anymore, right?
If you're going to entertain skeptical hypotheses at that level, then you're not,
you're not engaged in the scientific activity anymore. Because you're, you're involved in
situations where you're saying science can't be done. Right? You can never find out about the
world. If you're plugged into the matrix, you can never find out about the world. Because no matter
what you do, you're just going to see whatever they've programmed into the computers, right?
You have no access. So of course, logically, that's possible, but then give up on science, right?
Okay, great. Okay, so I guess we've, you just summarized the two
essential assumptions of Bell's theorem, locality and statistical independence.
Maybe there's, there's these two more things I want to cover. Why don't we step back a little bit
and summarize what the Nobel Prize confirmed, what, what kind of experiments did they do and
what inequality that they, they were testing the original Bell one, the one we talked about,
where you just have a pair of particles in a singlet state or a pair of photons. You can do
with photons too. What's the trick about it? Well, first of all, you need the two labs to be far
enough apart and the experiments be done fast enough for the thing to be at space like separation.
That is, that, that, that, that, as it were, the, the choice of which experiment is done
on, on Alice's side, even light, a light signal couldn't carry that information over to Bob's
lab fast enough to have an influence on his outcome. Oh, is this the zero 30 minus 30
set of experiments? Yes. Okay. So there, there, you would say Alice's choice of either 30, zero
or 30 and Bob's choice of either zero and minus 30, those have to be made so quick. Now,
of course, that means really quick. If you're doing this in a lab, you know, there's so much time
for light from one side to the other. What, what, what aspe did, which was really clever,
because it's of course much too fast to actually reorient a device. So we set up two devices,
one set as a word zero and one set at 30 and then set up a really fast optical switch.
He was doing photons that can send the photon either to this one or to that one.
Okay. And this has to do with polarization, not spin. Yeah, this is your check. Instead of spin,
you're checking polarization, but it's the same thing either the photon gets through where it
doesn't. There's a binary response, right? You've all, all that's important if you have two settings
and you have a binary response, right? So he sets up these optical switches to make these decisions
as it were unbelievably fast. Then of course, there, there are some, there were some technical
loopholes in the early experiments, the detectors were not perfectly efficient. So a lot of these
photons would just go missing. They wouldn't show up because, you know, the detector efficiencies
aren't great. And if, if some of the, the photons go missing or some of the electrons go missing it,
it creates a technical loophole where you could actually manage in a clever way to get these
results in the recorded data with a local theory. So one thing you wanted to do was improve detector
efficiency. One thing you wanted to do was move the labs further and further apart. So now
Zeilinger's doing these down on Tenerife between different islands, you know, that are kilometers
apart. They're not within a lab or, you know, and you're sending, you're sending these entangled pairs
and they're going to do it up, they do it up in space, right? I mean, you can, you can keep stretching
the labs further, further apart and you can keep improving the detector deficiencies and,
and thereby get rid of these loopholes. And so that's more or less from the earliest experiments
were done by Clouser because he was, he was told by Avner Shimonie who was one of the first people
to appreciate Bell's paper. Hey, these are interesting experiments. I mean, we know what
quantum mechanics predicts, but nobody's checked. And so Clouser did the first kind of much more
simple experiments and as they made these quick optical switches and then Zeilinger kept stretching
these further and further apart and improving detector efficiencies to where nobody questions
the experimental, the fact that nature violates these inequalities, right? I mean, the, the kind
of technical loopholes have all been filled by now. You just, you have to somehow account
for nature's ability to give you these results. And as I say, the only, the only things that go
into the theorem are locality, bell locality, and the statistical independence condition and, and
denying the statistical independence condition. First of all, nobody has an actual theory
that does that and makes these predictions. It's just a kind of vapor where, well, if I deny that,
that, you know, if somehow, you know, if somehow these aren't really random selections, but, you
know, then you're in such a cloud cuckoo land of fantasy that you couldn't do physics anymore.
The right thing to do is just accept the result. I mean, you know, suck it up.
Okay. Let's see, actually, I think this might be a good place to transition to one of the other
things I think we should definitely talk about are, is misconceptions around Bell's theorem, right?
So we, we, I know hidden variables is kind of a dirty word for you, but we did see it explicitly
in Bell's paper when we were looking at before. He does use the term and so do, so do follow-up
papers. Maybe this is a good point to clarify in what sense it is a legitimately used and what,
in what sense it's not and where. So the right term, and this is again, Bell will say in the right
place, the right term is just additional variables. Why? That connects to the EPR paper. The EPR
paper was exactly, is the quantum state complete? If it's not, then there must be additional
variables, right? You can give me the quantum state of the system, but if the quantum state
is not complete, there must be more to it physically than that. Those are additional variables.
Bell at one point says that the term hidden variables is a piece of historical silliness
because if there are these additional variables, they better not be hidden.
I mean, that's his point. It's those variables that are actually giving you the outcomes,
and the outcomes are not hidden. If the outcomes were hidden, so what is the outcomes?
What is a correct usage of hidden? There must be some correct usage. I don't know.
I think that terminology comes in by people who think the real issue is determinism in
determinism. They're thinking, oh, if it's really deterministic, then whether you get this outcome
or that outcome must be determined by some variable you don't know about because quantum
mechanics only makes statistical predictions. Call that the hidden variable, the thing that
determines the outcome. In something like Bohm's theory, these additional variables are particle
positions. In the theory, you actually have particles and those positions are not hidden.
They better not be hidden. They're the kinds of things you actually see with the cat, liver,
die. Well, if you know where it's particles, what its particles are doing, you know whether it's alive
or dead. They're a non-hidden part. It's as it were, the quantum state or the wave function
that's more or less hidden. Harder to get your hands on. Maybe I should say, let me just write
since we're talking about it. In that regard, I would say, if you accept this as a reasonable
definition of a hidden variable, which is basically a variable that you just marginalize out, then I
think Bell's usage of the word hidden variable is justified because that's exactly what he does.
He has this lambda and he marginalizes it out. It doesn't appear anywhere else.
Yeah, I understand. In that calculation, you take the statistical, you do your statistics by
summing over them. You could say that, but again, if you think about the main example of a theory
that adds these additional variables is this pilot wave theory of de Broglie and Bohm,
and they're the additional variables, the things that are not nailed down by the quantum state
are particle positions. To say that those are hidden gives you entirely the wrong idea about
how those particle positions connect to what you literally can see. They're what you can easily see
when you look around you. You can look at your cat and see whether it's alive or dead.
In this theory, what determines whether it's alive or dead is what the particles are doing,
so that's what you can easily see. One could have a puzzle. Why should I add additional
variables anyway if they're hidden? It must be for some metaphysical reason or something because
they're hidden. I can't see them. Why should I care if they're there? Then you don't understand
when you get beyond Bell to the more general question of understanding quantum theory,
and this is one of the things you wanted to talk about. You need to understand how the
theory connects up to experience in general, and that means you need to understand what is and
isn't really visible, literally what you can see and what you can't see. There, the term hidden
variables will give you entirely the wrong idea about how these theories work. This is helpful.
If we're to be the most charitable to the people who use the word hidden variable, let's just say
they really mean extra variable. If you just did that, then that carries no more connotation,
but something not coded up in the wave function. There was this other point that might be a little
contentious, but we've discussed outside this interview, which is that some people also claim
that part of Bell's theorem is this assumption called local realism. We know what locality is,
but there's realism, and my interpretation of that is if we think about quantum mechanics,
in the Copenhagen interpretation, there's no fact of the matter about the outcome of
a measurement until you perform the measurement, the wave function collapses, but before then,
there's no fact of the matter about what the value of a measurement is. The realism assumption is
there is this extra variable lambda that determines the measurement for all time as it were.
And so when you look at Bell's paper, he does write down little a of lambda, things like that.
So it at least seems superficially like he's introducing this assumption of realism. So
can you respond to that, or how do you want to think about that? I can respond to that because
I already have. What you just described, the right word for it is the word you used. It's
determinism. And as Bell said, yeah, he does assume determinism, but not because it's a
fundamental assumption, because EPR had already proven as a theorem that a local theory has to
be deterministic. That's why I say you have to start with EPR. If you've got perfect correlations
and locality, that forces determinism on you. So the problem is when people say, oh,
that's just an assumption of Bell is if you can deny it and you're out of the woods. No,
you can't deny it. If you deny it, then you're back in the woods with just the EPR correlations.
You don't even have to go as far as Bell's inequality. If you deny determinism, you can't
explain the perfect correlations. If you've got a local theory. That was what we said earlier on.
Locality plus perfect correlations imply determinism.
So if you deny determinism, you have to be either denying locality
or denying the perfect correlations. Now you better not be denying the perfect correlations
because those are predictions of quantum theory. So that means you're denying locality.
So you're already solved. Yeah, okay. Off the, think about this more offline. I understand the
words you're saying. I think I'm just as with many things, it takes a while for it to kind of
sink in. What's puzzling me right now is that there is a historical fact of the matter about
how Bell wrote his paper and his position in relation to EPR. Now, if I were just to scrub
all that and just do the bare mathematics, I nevertheless do write down A of lambda.
And I'm just trying to figure out, if you just forget EPR, rightly or wrongly,
and just think about it in terms of math, it does seem like the notation suggests that it's an
assumption. You see what I'm trying to say? I understand what you're saying, but again, I've
already read the relevant quotes from Bell. One is when he's talking about EPR, when he says,
I can't get across to people that determinism is not an assumption of EPR, but a conclusion,
right? It's an inference. They don't, I mean, if you just started out saying, well, I'm going to
assume we have a deterministic theory, then somebody's going to say, well, so what? I don't
think we do have a deterministic theory. Let me just start with you. They don't, they assume
we'll count it. Sure. Sure. I guess what I'm trying to say is think of it as a relay race,
right? So, so you're saying EPR ends with determinism as a conclusion and Bell picks
up the baton and starts with that. But all I'm just saying is that if you only saw the end of
the relay and not the whole thing, then it looks like it looks like Bell picks up the assumption
when in reality, he, he picked it up as a conclusion. Inherents it. Yes. The inherent assumption,
he inherits a conclusion. No, he inherits a conclusion, which becomes a quote unquote assumption
in, you see what I'm saying. Yeah, but if you call it an assumption at that point, you've missed
it, right? Okay. Or that's okay. Assumption is maybe not the right starting point. His starting
point is determinism, which looks superficially like an assumption. But when you backtrack and look
at the whole pipeline, it becomes inheriting a conclusion. Right. And that's why, as you say,
you know, the paper is called on the Einstein, Podolsky, Rosen paradox. And I read the entire
introductory paragraph where he tells you, this is as far as EPR got.
They, you know, I'm going to show you that they showed you already, if you want a local theory,
it's got to be deterministic. I'm now going to show you that even then you can't get all the
predictions of quantum mechanics. Right. But you just have to read that first paragraph carefully.
I mean, yes, if you, if you thought that, that Bell was starting out of nowhere.
But what more can he do? I mean, he says it's on the paper and he tells you in the first paragraph
what he's taking from the EPR paper. And then he tells you later, you know, EPR do not assume
determinism. They infer it. He can't be clearer. Right. I think it's just people who don't, again,
people don't like the conclusion. So they want something they can deny. And they say, oh,
I'll just deny determinism. Now I'm home free. Now, whatever Bell wrote has no relevance,
because he assumes determinism, whatever he proved as a theorem doesn't apply to my theory,
because it's not a deterministic theory. That's what millions of people have done.
But it just completely misunderstands the dialectic here. And he insists over and over again,
what's held sacred is locality, locality, locality, try to make a local theory. You will soon find
you're forced into determinism. And then you'll soon find that doesn't even, even with that,
you can't get, you can't get all the votes you want. I see. We've talked a lot. I think we've
met a lot of progress. Maybe just one, one final thing, if there's nothing else, how do you think
about interpretations of quantum mechanics? Because there's several. There's also many worlds,
which we haven't talked about yet. Yeah. Do you, do you have anything to say about
interpretations of interpretations of quantum mechanics and, and, and, you know, how Bell's
theorem plays a role in it, if at all? Yeah, I mean, first of all, I'll say what I always say.
I hate the word interpretation, because it sounds like quantum mechanics is some
theory, which is then further interpreted, but that's not right. There's no,
there are different theories. Okay, there's quantum phenomena. You can talk about the predictions of
standard quantum formalism. That's fine. They're quantum phenomena, which are the kinds of things
that, that, that those next standard predictive stuff predicts and turn out to be correct in
the lab, as far as we can tell. But there's no, there just is nothing that would count in a proper
sense as a theory that you call quantum mechanics. You have different theories that are trying to
account for these phenomena. And there's a general argument that I've given that I think is perfectly
correct, which says that there are three things you'd like to hold. There are three principles you
would prefer to hold, but you can't have all three as a logical matter. They are mutually
inconsistent, right? You can't have all three, you can have any two, but you can't have all three.
And what that means is you can then, any approach to this, the first thing you want to do is identify
which one of these does it give up, right? So let me just state what they are.
The first one is the very one that EPR is worried about. Is the quantum mechanical wave function
complete? That is, if a system is described by a certain wave function, does that capture all of
its physics? Or, contrarially, could you have two systems described by the same wave function,
but that are nonetheless physically different, right? So that's one question.
The, certainly Bohr wanted to maintain, Heisenberg wanted to maintain, the quantum
description is complete, and Einstein and Podolsky and Rosen were arguing it isn't complete. So that's
question one. Question two, once you've got this wave function, how does it evolve? In particular,
does it always evolve by Schrodinger evolution, which is a linear unitary evolution? Or does it
sometimes not evolve by Schrodinger evolution, which is what we normally call the collapse of
the wave function, which instead of being smooth and deterministic and linear is stochastic and
sudden and wildly nonlinear? Okay, so, okay, that's a binary choice. Is it always Schrodinger? Is it
sometimes not Schrodinger? Most people would like it always to be Schrodinger because as soon as you
say, sometimes it collapses, you then have to confront the question, when? You know, how? How
do these collapses occur? If you, again, if you say the wave function is incomplete, then you're
confronted with the question, well, what else is there? Give me the additional variables, right?
The third thing you'd like to believe is that when you do an experiment like Schrodinger's
experiment on the cat, it has a unique outcome, right? You start with one cat, you end with one cat,
and the cat you end up with is either alive or dead, period end of story, okay?
That seems like a kind of basic assumption of all experimental science, that when I do experiments,
I get an outcome, and there's one outcome, and I know what it is, and I can collect statistics and
so on. Now, the problem is you can't hold all three, because if the wave function is complete,
and it always evolves by Schrodinger evolution, then in a setup like Schrodinger gives with the cat,
it won't end up in a state where the cat is either definitely alive or definitely dead.
So you can't have all three. The pilot wave theory gives up one. Okay. Because the wave function is
not complete. There's in addition to the wave function, if you want to describe the situation
of the situation of a system, you have to tell me where the particles are.
You have to give me the particle configuration. You can't read that off the wave function.
But the wave function does always evolve by Schrodinger evolution. And experiments have
unique outcomes, right? Sometimes the cat ends up alive, and sometimes the cat ends up dead.
And there's a definite fact at the end of every experiment, whether the cat you put in,
the single cat you put in is alive or dead. Okay. So pilot wave gives up one, keeps two and three.
Objective collapse theories like Gerardi-Romini-Weber, the sort of thing that Penrose wants to do,
take wave collapse seriously as a physical change. So sometimes the wave function doesn't
evolve by Schrodinger evolution. It collapses. And that collapse is both sudden and indeterministic
and most importantly global. It's not a local thing. Okay. So they can try and maintain the
completeness of the wave function, and they get unique outcomes because the outcomes are determined
by the collapses. But they give up on the linearity of the evolution.
Yeah. If you want to keep the completeness, Gerardi-Romini-Weber,
objective collapse theory, this is also true of Philip Perls, has a continuous reduction theory.
Roger Penrose talks about an objective reduction theory, an OR theory, he calls it.
Those take root two, right? They give up on two. Okay.
Okay. If you want to keep the completeness of the wave function and the linearity, then you've
got to give up on the uniqueness of outcomes. That gets you to many worlds, right? I do the
experiment, I start with one cat, I end up with a million cats or a billion cats or an infinite
number of cats, some of which are alive and some of which are dead. Where does Copenhagen fall into
this? Copenhagen falls into this as not being a clear theory. Okay. They're just not clear enough
about what they're doing. Despite it being textbook quantum mechanics. Now, Bohr says,
let me say one thing, Bohr says the experimental situation and the experimental outcomes
have to be described in classical language, which means he's not going to go with many worlds.
He thinks of necessity, you have to say, I set up the experiment this way and that cat,
it ended up alive, period end of story. So he's not going to go that way.
And he seems, he insists on the completeness of the wave function. That's why he didn't accept
the EPR paper. So they're kind of as a logical situation rather forced into a collapse theory.
And that's what von Neumann, when he writes mathematical foundations of quantum theory,
it's explicitly a collapse theory. He says, the wave function can evolve by two completely
different equations. Sometimes it evolves in a nice smooth linear way. When? When you don't observe
it. Or you don't measure it. Sometimes it randomly collapses in a very different way. When? When you
measure it or observe it. Well, that puts the measurement problem right at the center of your
physics. Because then you're going to say, well, when, what counts as a measurement? You're telling
me that this fundamental difference in physical behavior depends on whether I'm doing a measurement.
What counts as doing a measurement? Now, you know, Einstein comes along and says, can a mouse do it?
Right? Can a dog do it? What constitutes a measurement? If you don't tell me, I mean,
this is the measurement problem as it appears in that tradition, because they, they're really
collapse theories. I mean, if you ask me what they are, what they have to be, although they wouldn't
forthrightly admit it, they're collapse theories. But when you ask, but when do these
collapses occur, they say, oh, when you make an observation. And then people go nuts quite
rightly and say, well, when is that? Who has the special ability to make observations? Right?
So I would say that's really what they're forced into. But they're not happy about it.
On this note, maybe we can finish up with where do you fall in this spectrum of
pick two? Well, I, I, I think, I think the many worlds thing has all kinds of just
conceptual problems, even understanding what you could mean by probability,
because if every time you do an experiment, you get every possible outcome. What does it mean
to say there's a 50%, you know, 75% chance of this and a 25%. I mean, it has all kinds of problems.
I find it kind of, I'm not at all, I don't see what you get out of it. I, I, I think the kind of
pilot wave thing is much cleaner. I mean, this is the same thing Bell, when he goes through these,
he says that the, the bone theory shows the finest craftsmanship. And I think that's true.
You write down two equations, you write down the Schrodinger equation and you write down the so
called guidance equation for the additional variables. They're both just equations. I mean,
in the non relativistic case, they're nice. First order differential equations give you
all the right predictions. What more do you want? It's a non local theory. I mean, the main complaint
against that theory from the beginning was it was non local, but that was before Bell. And after
Bell, you want to shrug your shoulders and say, okay, it's non local. So what we know the right
theory has to be non local. So that's not, it's not a reasonable complaint. To me, the collapses
don't feel right. I mean, I don't like this. I certainly don't like this idea of alternating
between Schrodinger evolution and then this collapse, the evolution, right, this kind of
jumpiness. But it's a theory. I mean, it's worth it. It's worth taking seriously. It's worth
working out. It makes slightly different predictions because of the collapses. Bell writes a nice paper
about that called are there quantum jumps where he's expositing the GRW theory. He writes a nice
paper about bone called on the impossible pilot wave where he's expositing that theory. He never
writes about many worlds because he could never make sense of it in a way that he thought, you know,
even with something that he could think could be developed. And I guess I'm pretty much in agreement
on that. I understand why people are attracted to many worlds because if you do any of the other
things immediately, the question is clear. You're adding additional variables. What are they?
You're collapsing the wave function. How and when, right? I mean, these are you take on the
obligation to answer those questions. The many worlds is so kind of hard to understand what
it's doing and how it's supposed to work that it's not even clear what questions you're supposed to
ask, right? And so I think it gives the illusion of being clearer when actually it's just it's
obscurity is more hidden. The other ones because they make these rather forthright assertions,
you say, okay, follow up that assertion by giving me more details. And you do and then you run into
some problems, right? You can do it for non relativistic quantum mechanics with bone. But
then when you get to relativistic quantum field theory and you get to particle creation annihilation,
you have to do something else. You have to make adjustments when they're different phenomena
that you're worried about. Okay. But they're all non local. They have to be. You're not going to get
away from the non locality by any of these three choices. It was a mistake. It's a it's a mistake
that used to be made. I think it's made less that many worlds people would say, Oh, ours is a local
theory because deco here and happens at the speed of light or something like that, which just doesn't
make any sense. I mean, we could go into that. That claim just doesn't even have any content. And
it's not true. And now people who do many worlds, many of them will recognize, yeah, it's a non local
theory too. But you say, Yeah, of course, it's non local. It has to be non local. It better be
non local. Right. That's not a that's not a bug. That's a feature. If you got a theory and it's a
local theory, I know your theory is wrong. Okay. Well, this is great, Tim. And thanks for this
overview of the different theories of quantum mechanics laid out very cleanly here. Any final
thoughts? No, I think we've probably beaten everybody into the ground at this point.
Well, I learned a lot. This is a lot of fun hashing out things carefully. I think it's
I think this will be a very rewarding. Well, certainly was rewarding for me and hopefully
other viewers will will find that to be the same. Okay, great. Thanks for thanks for putting up
with me for so long. My pleasure. Yeah, thanks a lot for your time.
