correspondent and associate editor Bob Woodward's latest book on President Trump, entitled Rage.
Robert joins me now. Robert, what have you got?
Well, my colleague Phil Rucker and I for The Washington Post have read
Bob Woodward's new book. It's called Rage, and it has an enormous amount of information based on
more than a dozen interviews Bob Woodward conducted with President Trump from December 2019
through July of 2020. And if you read our article that just posted on WashingtonPost.com,
we lead with a meeting in January of 2020 where Robert O'Brien, the national security advisor,
and Matt Pottinger, the deputy national security advisor, told President Trump in late January
that the coronavirus threat was the biggest threat, the gravest threat that President Trump
would ever face in his presidency. And then a few days later in early February,
President Trump speaks with Bob Woodward on the phone on the record. And to be clear,
The Washington Post through Woodward has acquired tapes, tapes of President Trump speaking about
all this, these interviews with Woodward, and Woodward has decided to publish the tapes.
And in this early February call, February 7, the president says on the phone to Woodward that the
virus is deadly, he repeats it's deadly. He also says it's airborne, it's spread through the air.
And so he acknowledges how deep and serious the threat of the coronavirus is in early February
on tape. But it's not until weeks later, of course, as we all know, that the national
shutdown of businesses really commences. And so you see through Woodward's reporting
an awareness on President Trump's part of how serious this threat was.
And he also says in another interview in March with Bob Woodward that he deliberately played down
the threat of the virus. He said he wanted to avoid a panic. But he said he deliberately played
it down. And the rest of the book, Andrew, I could go on. It's a long book, very detailed,
based on interviews about inside the North Korea situation, the so-called love letters between
Kim Jong-un and President Trump. Woodward has copies of what Kim Jong-un has sent to President
Trump. There's also a lot of detail in the book about former director of national intelligence,
Dan Coates. Your famous interview with him, Andrea, Coates, through different reporting methods of
Woodward, you really see inside of Coates' world his criticism of President Trump, his deep concerns
about the country's future, concerns from General Mattis and others. I'll leave it there for now.
Hey there, I'm Chris Hayes from MSNBC. Thanks for watching MSNBC on YouTube.
If you want to keep up to date with the videos we're putting out, you can click subscribe just
below me or click over on this list to see lots of other great videos.
