Some breaking news tonight, the House of Representatives is launching an official
investigation into the Trump administration and his Department of Justice's use of subpoenas
to surveil Trump's political enemies. After learning that Trump's DOJ had secretly subpoenaed
with gag orders, phone and data records from everyone from Adam Schiff, the New York Times,
Washington Post reporters, we learned over the weekend Trump's DOJ even got data from the
president's own lawyer. That's right, Trump's Justice Department subpoenaed Apple for information
in February 2018 about an account that belonged to Don McGahn, Trump's White House counsel at the
time. Now, this secretly happened, like all these other subpoenas happened, right, under a gag order,
which meant that no one was allowed to say anything. And it recently lapsed, which allowed
Apple to inform former White House counsel Don McGahn, oh, by the way, your data had been seized.
Now, one level that's insanely paranoid to secretly subpoena your own White House counsel
also shows just how widely aggressive the Trump DOJ was wielding this power.
Just over an hour ago, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee announced that they will open
a formal investigation into the Department of Justice's surveillance of members of Congress,
journalists and others, saying the reports of spying raise serious constitutional
and separation of power concerns.
One of the reporters who broke the news that Trump's Department's Justice Department
spied on his own White House counsel, New York Times, Washington correspondent,
Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Charlie Savage. And he joins me now.
First, let's just start with the basics here. I mean, this one really put my jaw on the floor.
Your own White House counsel. I mean, you know, we know that Trump doesn't think particularly
highly of Adam Schiff and, you know, thought the New York Times and other places were sort of
his enemies and was an elite investigation. Do we know when this happened, what the context was?
Some, but not all. And I would say that, you know, this is not Trump ordering any of this.
This appears to be the Justice Department. And we don't even, in terms of McGahn,
we don't even know if it's the main Justice Department or it could be the Mueller investigation,
which is kind of, sort of the Justice Department. All we know is that in February of 2018,
Apple received a grand jury subpoena for information about the account of Don McGahn.
And this appears to be similar to the subpoena that resulted in the collection of that congressional
information, which also went over in February of 2018, although they appear to be coincidental
rather than, rather than connected to each other in terms of which federal district they were coming
out of and the date and so forth. So one of the common techniques in a criminal investigation of
various types is that when you're looking at somebody, you get all of their phone records or email
records, and then you have this long list of phone numbers that called them, and you don't know who
those people are or email addresses that interacted with them. And so investigators often use a grand
jury subpoena to a company like Apple or Google to say, do you have any accounts that are linked to
this phone number or this email address? If you do, please tell us what the name is, what the address
is, what the credit card number is, where they've been logging on from. Basically, they're trying to
identify the social networks of the suspect. Right. And so what appears to be happening here is that
McGahn was swept up in a subpoena like that or an investigative effort like that, similar to how
members of Congress were swept up in a subpoena that sought 109, account information about 109 phone
numbers and email addresses about someone they were looking at for a leak investigation in Congress.
So this is not, as far as we know, targeting Adam Schiff or Don McGahn. Nevertheless, it's really
extraordinary that the sitting White House counsel, the now chairman of the House Intelligence Committee,
could have their data so easily swept in by federal prosecutors and not even be told about it for
years and years. Right. I mean, I guess that, you know, if it's a fairly normal or standard method
of investigation and to go about this sort of like crawling through this network, what's not normal
is the people that appear to be getting these things who are some of the most powerful public
figures. I mean, you've got, you know, minority ranking member of the Intelligence Committee. You've
got the own White House counsel and a Department of Justice, again, that like is okaying all this
right at some level, both judges and senior officials at DOJ. Do we know like who's saying
like, yes, keep going, this is fine? Or do we think that there's some, it seems to me there'd be
some break on this. There'd be some governor that someone says, by the way, I think we're going to run
down the White House counsel stuff. What do you think of that? Yeah. So that's, that's one of the
big questions that members of Congress and also the Justice Department inspector general are now
starting to look into what was the background here. This is extremely broad subpoena, 109 phone
numbers and email addresses for a apparently surrounding a congressional staffer. You know,
you've got to know you're going to be sucking in members of Congress's information if you're going
after all those different accounts to find out who they are. Is that a good idea? Was that necessary?
What given the political sensitivities of an investigation like that, was this just a sloppy,
overly broad thing by a very low level person? Or was this being driven by a more high level
person who was determined to see what they could find? We certainly have reason to believe that they
were hoping that Adam Schiff would ultimately fall into the net of that particular leak investigation,
even if he was not their official subject at that moment. His aid was.
Yeah. This is from quoting from the piece. You wrote a leak investigation appeared to have been
primarily focused on Michael Bahar. I think that's how you pronounce it. Then a staff member on the
House Intelligence Committee, people close to Mr. Sessions, Mr. Rosenstein said the top two Justice
Department officials at the time and said that neither knew that prosecutors had sought data
about the accounts of lawmakers for that investigation. And then there's now some scrutiny
of a senior Justice Department official who's a Trump appointee who has announced that he'll be
leaving his post in the sort of wake of these revelations.
That's right. This is John Demers. He is the head of the National Security Division in the Justice
Department, which includes the section that oversees leak investigations. And he is a Trump appointee.
He's a holdover. He generally has a reputation as a straight shooter, not a partisan Trumpy figure.
And the Biden people wanted to keep him on as they came in to take over the Justice Department
for continuity reasons, especially in the important area of national security. So he was supposed to leave
sometime this summer and suddenly abruptly he's leaving next week, just as senior members of
Congress are calling for him to testify about what he knew about these investigations.
President Joe Biden's first foreign trip, which he's on right now, comes at about the same
point in his presidency as the last president's first trip abroad. It's a pretty incredible set of
contrasts. First of all, for the second time in my adult life as a journalist, you have a Democratic
president attempting to clean up the damaged relationships, some in ruins, left behind by
his Republican predecessor. Global confidence in the new American president has already swung up by
more than 50 points. A Pew Research survey of 12 nations finds 75 percent of confidence Biden will do
the right thing regarding world affairs compared to 17 percent at the end of Donald Trump's term.
Again, not hard to see why when you look back at the debacle that was President Trump's first foreign
trip in May of 2017. You may remember this. His first stop was strangely the authoritarian monarchy
of Saudi Arabia, where King Salman literally rolled out the red carpet for Trump's arrival.
The streets of the capital were filled with American flags. Even the men on horses accompanying his motor
cave waved the stars and stripes. Billboards went up featuring his face and one of his tweets.
At a welcome ceremony, Trump joined in a ceremonial sword dance, awkwardly bopping and flopping his sword with
the music.
His Secretary of Commerce, Wilbur Ross, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson fired by tweet less than a year
later. They also got on the action. Things only got weirder the next day when President Trump, the
Saudi king, the Egyptian president walked into a darkened room at a new center for combating extremism
and placed their hands atop a glowing orb for nearly two whole minutes. The internet had a
lot of fun with that one, comparing it to Lord of the Rings and Wizard of Oz. And from there, Trump went
on to Israel, where he visited the Holocaust Museum and Memorial in Jerusalem, left this strangely upbeat
note in the guestbook, quote, it is a great honor to be here with all my friends. So amazing. And we'll never
forget exclamation point. The president later headed to the Vatican. He and his family met with Pope
Francis, who looks like he's waiting for someone to tell him this is all a joke, before continuing on
to Belgium for the NATO summit. Trump took on a strong, I'm not here to make friends attitude in
Brussels, shoving aside the prime minister of Montenegro to get to the front of the pack of
leaders ahead of a group photo. Then he engaged in a bizarre white knuckle handshake grip off with
French President Emmanuel Macron. When it came time for the formal remarks, he basically demanded his
counterparts pay up. NATO members must finally contribute their fair share and meet their financial
obligations. But 23 of the 28 member nations are still not paying what they should be paying
and what they are supposed to be paying for their defense. This is not fair to the people and
taxpayers of the United States. Final stop back in Italy for the G7 brought one last bit of photo op
drama when six of the seven leaders strolled through town after the traditional group picture,
while the American president chose to follow behind in a golf cart. Okay. Yeah, that was like a weird
drug trip or something. After four years of that, it's refreshing to see an American president abroad,
you know, engaging in diplomacy, dealing with complex multilateral issues. There are a lot of them.
But also not to mention just behaving like a normal person, not making us worry he's going to like
rough up someone on the way to the camera.
Back in January, right before he left office, of course, Donald Trump became the first president
in American history to be impeached twice. The most recent time was for inciting an insurrection
on January 6th. The time for that was in 2019, one year earlier. That was for abuse of power and
obstruction of Congress relating to pressuring the president of Ukraine into manufacturing dirt
on the man he feared most to run against him, his then political rival, the guy who ended up beating
him, Joe Biden. For that impeachment, Congressman Val Demings of Florida was picked to be one of the
seven impeachment managers, the people making the case that Trump should be convicted and removed from
office. His use of power for personal gain harmed the national security of the United States. As the
second article of impeachment charges, the president sought to conceal evidence of this conduct. President
Trump did not take these extreme steps to hide evidence of his innocence or to protect the institution
of the presidency. As a career law enforcement officer, I have never seen anyone take such extreme
steps to hide evidence allegedly proving his innocence. Moments like that that propelled the former Orlando
police chief onto Joe Biden shortlist for vice president. Since then, many in the Democratic
Party have urged her to make a statewide run for governor or senator. Last week, Congresswoman Demings
announced she will challenge Republican Senator Marco Rubio for his seat representing Florida,
in part because she says, quote, too many times Marco Rubio did not show up, but when he did show up,
he did not have enough courage to fight for Florida. Congresswoman Val Demings, Democrat of Florida,
member of both the House Intelligence and Judiciary Committees, joins me now. Great to have you on,
Congresswoman. Let me just start with the news that we got out of one of the committees on which you
serve, the Judiciary Committee with General Nadler, announcing there will be some kind of investigation
into the spate of revelations over the last, say, 10 days of this kind of dragnet the Department of
Justice was running on phone and email data in what they say was a leak investigation, or at least appears
to be. What do you think of that announcement by the chairman? Well, Chris, it's great to be back with
you. And look, we have an obligation to investigate. You know, Congress works on behalf of the American
people, and the American people have a right to know the full extent of the abuses of power by the
former president of the United States. We have some serious constitutional concerns when a body who
provides oversight is then being surveilled under the guise of a criminal investigation by the
administration that that body provides oversight over. And then, of course, the same thing for the
media, as well as God knows who else is out there. And so the Judiciary Committee has an obligation to
investigate. And we will. We will get to the bottom of it. But it's just here we go again
with unprecedented behavior from the former president of the United States.
What's being revealed here? And I think that through line through both impeachments,
what's being revealed here and the challenges that we face, things that are happening in states,
including your own in Florida, where there was a sort of election changed law
passed by Republicans, signed into law by Ron DeSantis, even after the state had a very smooth
election with very high turnout, the Republicans did well in, is a feeling among many that there's
like a real kind of existential threat to American democracy in its current form. And I wonder whether
you feel that's the case. Chris, there is no doubt about it. There is a major threat
to American democracy. Look at 1-6. I was in the Capitol on that day watching the peaceful transfer
of power when all hell broke loose, an insurrection on our government. But even after what the members
of Congress, our staff and others, the people who work in the Capitol went through, we had, as you know,
several members of Congress who came back to the House floor and voted to overturn a free and
fair election. And now you've said it. We see Florida, but too many other states around the nation
who are passing anti-voting rights laws. And so, in order to change that, Chris, we've got to change
the kind of people that we send to Congress. We've got to have people in the upper chamber and the lower
chamber who support an independent commission that will get to the bottom of it yet again,
so we will know exactly how it happened, you know, who planned it, who helped to fund it,
who else incited it. We saw the President of the United States at that time incited before our very
eyes. But we need that investigation, that independent commission. And so, if we're going to
change what's happening to our democracy, we have got to change the kind of people that we send.
I want to ask you a question where there seems to be a very clear and emerging policy difference
between Republicans and Democrats across the country. And that has to do with unemployment
insurance, particularly the sort of supplemental unemployment insurance provided in the American
Relief Plan, which, of course, was passed with no Republican votes. The governor of your state,
Republican Governor Ron DeSantis, along with, I think, 24 other Republican governors,
have announced they're cutting off that supplemental program. I think as of June 26th,
folks will be tossed off that. That is supported, again, if I'm not mistaken,
by Marco Rubio and Rick Scott. Do you support what DeSantis is doing? And if not, why not?
Chris, I really think it's pretty shameful. And thank you for mentioning that it is supported by
Marco Rubio. Look, 2020 was a tough year. We lost 600,000 people. We also know that hundreds of
thousand people were put out of work through no fault of their own. Those unemployment benefits
were there to help people who were in trouble, people who were going to work every day, by the
way, who were in trouble through no fault of their own. Now, I believe that we have an obligation to do
that, but not only helping them during tough times, but also it helped them to be able to pay their bills,
to be able to buy grocers, to be able to pay their rent, which also stimulates our economy. And so I
really think it is shameful what governors around this nation are doing, but also the senators from
Florida and senators from other states. Government's primary responsibility is to help the American
people during some of the toughest of times. Marco Rubio chose not to do that, and too many others
chose not to do that. And that's why we need to change the kind of people that we send to Congress.
Congresswoman Val Demings, now a Democratic candidate for the U.S. Senate in the state of Florida. Thanks
for making time tonight.
