This video is sponsored by Polygon, a library of textures and models for professional 3D artists.
Click the link in the description to learn more.
All right, enough fooling around with flaming monkey heads. Let's start making that donut.
So I've got a brand new scene open in Blender, so clear whatever you did in the last video.
And what I'm going to do is delete the default cube just by hitting delete.
And I'm going to replace it by hitting shift A, remember to add a new object.
And then underneath mesh, we've got the base meshes that you can start with.
So you want to start with something that looks closest to what you want to create,
which in this case is a donut. So this one, this one is the closest match, a torus.
So when you click the torus, you can see you get this and it's okay, but it looks a little thin.
It's a little bit weak for a donut. Thankfully though, in the bottom left hand corner,
you'll see a box. And if you click the box, you can see you get settings.
And this is going to change the look of the torus. Now, by the way, if you don't see the box,
it's because you accidentally performed an action after you added the torus.
So if I was to, for example, click on the donut, even though it's already selected,
it's gone. And I can't get those settings back there. So some actions in Blender,
you will get options immediately after you perform an action. But if you do another action,
it clears it and you don't have those options anymore. Anyway, so with these options here,
you can see I could change the resolution of the donut and down here underneath major radius,
I could change the size of it, how thick or how fat the donut is. So speaking of the radius and
the size, it's a good idea when you're building something in Blender to start with the correct
real world scale. So this major radius here is saying that this is 0.4 meters,
the radius, so a diameter is double that, which means that this is currently an 80 centimeter
donut, which is almost half me. It's a big donut, very big. By the way, if you are American,
and you would like to use a different unit system, you can do it over here in the properties
underneath units, you can change your unit system to Imperial, and then it will use feet and inches
and penny farthings or what other crazy, crazy units you guys have come up with. You can use
that if you want. But for the tutorial, I'm going to stick to metric. So this, this size here,
we wanted to match the real world. So the research that I did says that most donuts are
about 10 centimeters, right? Like about that, that big, right? So a radius is half of that.
So therefore, this should be five centimeters. So if I just typed in here five centimeters,
we would get the correct thing, which is 0.05 meters. And then if I adjusted my minor radius,
I mean, there's obviously no measurement for this, but like, you know, how fat the donut is,
is totally up to you. If you want it to look like chubby, you can go like that. But I don't know,
I think something around like 0.28. I think that looks pretty good. Maybe 0.26. I think that's
what I used previously times, the times that I did it. But anyways, like that, there we go,
that's the one, that's the size I'm going to use. And then the other thing is the resolution,
the resolution of our donut. Now you might think that you would want to use as high a resolution
as possible, right? Because I remember I did that when I was starting out with blender,
every new object I added, I used the most vertices I could, most highest resolution,
not realizing that actually what you want to use is the lowest resolution and then use a
sub surf modifier, which we'll get to next to smooth it out, because then you've got
less vertices to work with, it's easier to work with a lower res mesh than a higher res.
Anyway, point is, is we want to set this to something low, but something that will at least
have the correct overall shape that we want. So, you know, something like this.
And also, I want to keep the size of these faces, I want to keep them close to square,
like as square as possible, I want to say. And you're not to know it because you're just starting
out. But the reason for this is later on down the road, we're going to use displacements,
and it's much better if you've got square faces for displacements. So anyway, something like that
is pretty good. So these are the settings I'm going to use. You have a second to use it.
And we're done. Okay, that's it. We have the donut ready to go. So we've added an object.
But let's say you want to change the shape of that object, because that's very common thing
you want to do when you're building 3D creations is you want to tweak it to look how how it you
want. So right now, this is the most perfect donut that ever existed in the history of the world.
You could have the like a donut competition, and no one would ever be able to make as perfectly
round and smooth shape as this, right? Because computers make things that are perfect,
and in the real world, they're not. So that's why imperfection is the virtual perfection,
which is a quote by someone. But it's very true. I don't know who said it, but it's very true.
So what we want to do is make it look a little bit lumpy, a little bit misshapen.
So to do that, we need to enter into edit mode. So if you go to the top corner top left corner,
you can see we are in object mode. And if you change that to edit mode, you will see that we
get this which makes it look like a grid like a cage has appeared over it. Or the hot key for this
is tab, because this is a very common action to switch between object mode and edit mode is tab.
By the way, when you are in edit mode, the only thing you can do the only thing you can click on
is within the object itself. Like if I'm in edit mode on that, and I tried to click on the lamp
or the camera, you can see nothing happens. The only thing I can click on is the object itself.
So just something to keep a note of. So while in edit mode, you can see that now that I'm clicking
around, I can click on these little dots here. And each of these dots basically is the shape of
the donut as you can probably guess, right? And if I use the same hot keys that you remembered
from the last one, G to grab, if I was to G and grab this up, you could see that I would make a
spike in my donut there. Now I don't want just one singular spike, because that would be horrible.
And I also don't want to have like if I want to make this donut look lumpy, I don't want to go like
this one, and then this one, and then this like that's a lot. That's a lot of work. And it's not
even going to look very good. What I want to do instead is I want to like grab one and then like
have it affect the vertices around it. So there's a tool for that. And it's proportional editing.
So at the top of the screen there, there's a little button, or the hot key for that is O
to turn that on and off. And then when I do that, if I use the same shortcut G to move this one
vertices, you will see that now as I move it, the rest of the donut comes with it. But it only looks
like the whole donut's coming with it. If I was to scroll up, like scroll on my mouse right now,
just scroll up or down until you can actually see what's this little circle appear around. So
if you scroll up, it'll get smaller. So anyways, if I do this, you can see that I can affect the
area of vertices around it, right? So what I want to do is just make I want to make it look lumpy.
So around that sort of area, and I'm going to hit Z, because I'm moving it and I want to move it
along the Z axis. So it's just going up. And now you can see I've got part of the donut,
which is a little bit lumpy. That's actually probably a little bit too lumpy. So let me just
undo that. And let's try it again. Move it up. Oh, come on. It's cleared my thing because I
undid it anyway. So something like just a little bit lumpy. And then I'm going to grab like this
one here. And I'm going to move that down a little bit. So now I've got a weird little lumpy bit of
donut. And then I'm just going to like misshape the rest of it, right? Because no donut, no donut
is perfect, although they do try. Just make it look a little bit squishy, because otherwise it's
going to look like a, like a, I don't know, like at a water park, right? There's little inflatable
rings that you get. I'll never forget as a kid, we go to the water park a lot. And yeah, there was
like this, this ride called the Calypso Bay at Wet and Wild Australia. And I used to love like
stacking the rings on top of each other. And they kicked me out of the pool. They told me how to get
out, because you're not allowed to stack the rings. But it was so fun. I wanted to stack them up and
then be inside it and like roll around. But the lifeguards who have nothing better to do
told me to get out of the pool anyway. So as you can see, I'm just grabbing parts of the mesh and
I'm just moving it. You don't have to copy my exact motions as I'm doing this, just so you know.
Just make your own misshapen donut. Don't copy mine. Follow your instincts. Make your own lumpy
looking thing just by clicking G, etc. Anyways, like that. Look at that. Horrible, weird,
misshapen looking donut. That's what you want. You don't want a perfect looking donut. You want
something that looks weird. So well done. You've made something weird. Now you're probably thinking,
cool, but can we please get rid of the jagged look? Because it looks like you would cut your
finger running across this donut. It's too jagged. So if you are in object mode, which is important,
you have to be in object mode, and you were to right click your mesh, you have these settings.
And at the top there, you've got two settings which are very common. Shade smooth or shade flat. So
we're going to use smooth. So flat is used for things like buildings, flat planes, things like
that. And smooth is for organic shapes like this one. And it's going to basically, where there's two
faces, it's going to try to smooth them. Yeah, basically it'll try and make a look smooth. Now
you'll notice it does look smooth, but the edges of it, you can see it does still look sharp. So
shade smooth is just like a, it's changing the way it looks, but it's not actually affecting the
actual shape of it in any way. So if you want to actually make this higher res, what you need to do
is use a subsurf modifier. So the modifiers are found in the properties. So this is the properties
here, by the way. We haven't really talked that much about properties, but it's this whole section
on the right here. So if you click on the wrench spanner, I always get them confused. You can tell
I've never got my hands dirty. I'm going to go with spanner. And this is the modifier panel.
Okay, so it's empty right now. But if you click on add modifier, you get this lovely list. And the
one we are looking for is right down here where it says subdivision subsurf. And it's probably the
most common mod or like effect that's used across all 3d software. What it does is it smooths out
the mesh, right? And as a modifier, so what's good about modifiers is that it is what's called
non destructive, meaning that it's not applied. Like I can work on other parts of the scene. And
then I can come back to the donor and go like, I want it to be smoother. And then I can change
the smoothness. And then I can come back to it later and go, it's too smooth. I want to change
it again. So you're not actually like nothing is being applied. It's just it's all the settings
are kept there so that you can come back and change them as you need to. So modifiers are
fantastic. So what this subsurf modifiers doing is basically, if you look at the each of these
faces here, so this is what's called a face. And it's like, when you've got three or more
vertices, and you add a solid face between them, that's a face, I don't know how to explain it.
But a subsurf modifier, what it's doing is it's adding like another grid between it and it's
taking like the average shapes of it. So like on the edge there, like where it was previously like
sharp, it's added, it's doubled the resolution, and it's averaged it out to try to smooth it.
So what you're looking at is one subdivision, because that's the viewport setting, the render
setting is what will it will render at, right? So when you actually when we get to that stage,
that's the setting it's going to use. So if I was to increase viewport, it's doing another subdivision
over that. If I was to increase it again, it would make it even smoother and smoother and smoother.
You don't want to go too high, though, because the higher you go, the more graphics is going to be
used to render it in your viewport, or when you do your actual render. So keep it low, but one is fine
for this. Okay, so well done. All we've got is a lumpy donut. And yeah, yeah, we did, we did,
we did make a long video. So go ahead and join me in the next video. And we're going to make the
icing for our lumpy donut.
