interview. There we go, he is working. Tony! How are you? Good and you? Yeah, I'm good, thank you,
it's so great to have you here. Yeah, just like thank you so much for reaching out to me and
asking me to this interview because like I was just saying this is like my way of bringing together
my two passions of like actually, you know, interviewing and surfing. It was the last time I
interviewed live for the ISORM. It's like the first one, I think. Really? Really? Yeah, I think so.
Oh my god, I'm so honored to be the first person. It's like a conversation with kind of like
the internet. Yeah, is it okay now? Yeah, and I don't even know what you're about to ask me.
So I know, I haven't even said you're my questions yet. I'm like trying to find all my
questions on my thing. Okay, I'm going to try and find these questions on my last question,
I remember anyway, which is that you obviously grew up around surfing, you grew up around big
waves surfing. Your dad was a big wave surfer, you grew up in Portugal. Do you think basically
that big wave surfing chose you or did you choose big wave surfing? That's a good question. I think
the answer is that big waves surfing kind of like choose me, you know, because yeah, since I'm a kid,
I've been watching my father going like in like traveling for surfing big waves,
coming for Nezra for a long time, you know, and I grew up in Pragyran and Pragyran is known in
Portugal like the best big wave riders from Portugal, they are from Pragyran, you know.
So I grew up in that beach and like I was my kind of like idols, they were surfing big waves,
they are like from the same place I am. So basically like growing up in that environment,
I just got like, okay, I think that's it, you know, it's kind of like it was meant to be like
this way, because like the brother of my godmother is like one of the first big wave riders from
Portugal. Wow. You know, then my father is one of the pioneers of touring in Portugal, you know,
so everything is just like, okay, you're meant to be this. So I'll say that big wave surfed choose
me. Yeah, did you ever, it was always going to be big wave surfing for you, was it? You never
considered like, you know, going on like the CT or like doing any other kind of surfing like that?
I mean, when I was a kid, I was kind of like, yeah, the CT, but then I don't know, since I
first big wave session, when I was 12, since I tried like the feeling of adrenaline, the feeling of
going out of your comfort zone, I was like, nothing, this is it, you know, so since I'm 12,
I put my mind into like big wave surfing, and I just like kept going. Yeah, 12, that's crazy. Yeah,
I mean, I like, I'm going to get on to asking you questions about fear later. But for me, like
learning as an adult, even going into like six foot surf in the Pacific, and like getting in the
washing machine and experiencing my first hold down, I was like, oh my god, this is terrifying.
Like, I can't imagine how you did that 12 years old. But the thing is that, I don't know, the
feeling of being turf, like being scared and going out of the comfort zone and then kind of like,
whoa, I survived, it's just like a addiction, you know? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I can imagine.
So, okay, I have my questions now. And the other next thing I want to ask you was,
other than your dad, were there any other surfers that you really looked up to?
But either big wave surfers or just surfers in general when you're growing up?
In speaking like national, there's Joe Macedo, that is like the brother of my godmother,
kind of like started surfing with my father and on his surf school when I was a kid.
And then like, I was a kid and he was always telling me stories about Mavericks and
like a lot of crazy stories. And I was just like, whoa, that's amazing, you know? Yeah.
There's João, there's my father, obviously. And then there's Lucas Schumbo and Kailenny,
like right now, they're like the best in the world on big wave surfing. And having the opportunity
to surf like, to surf with them the same, the same waves, like on the same spot and watching
like what they're doing, it's just special, you know? So right now, those are my inspirations.
Amazing. Yeah. So you obviously started surfing, as you said, really young,
started big wave surfing really young. And you were, I think the youngest person nominated for
a Billabong XXL award, right? Not to the finals, but I think, yeah, for the nomination. Just being
nominated, yeah. Yeah. How did that feel? I was like 15. Well, I didn't even remember that.
We're going like, like the old, yeah, I didn't remember that. Yeah, I mean, I remember like
the day I got the nomination, the cameraman sent me a photo just like, congrats, you're nominated
with one photo he did. And I was just like, I know that it wasn't like a really important
nomination, like in terms of the big wave world, but for me, it was just like, oh, I just got
nominated, you know? And after that nomination was when I decided, I realized, okay, like,
I'm going to do these four years of my life, you know? Because I started at 15, I was like,
well, I'm getting the nomination, that's 15. So if I just keep doing what I'm doing, I mean,
in five years, I don't know, I can be surfing big waves.
What change do you think in 2020, when you had that big breakthrough year, it was obviously just
after the pandemic, there have been a time, presumably when you weren't able to surf. So I
think it was banned in Portugal for a while. And then you kind of came out in 2020, and you had that,
we'll talk about it later, but 101 foot away. How did what change during that time was made?
Do you come out so strong? So that year was a bit weird, you know, with all the COVID things,
like everyone was like, I mean, why is COVID, what is COVID, you know? And then there was the moment
that we got for being surfing for like almost two months, I think, because we had like one of the
biggest swells we ever had here in Ezra. And the crowd on the cliff was just crazy. We had like
more than 10,000 people there. Yeah, there's a crazy photo that is like hundreds of people,
the police trying to stop everyone, everyone trying to go down to see the waves. And that
flood is kind of like scary. And like on pandemic situation, because of that, we got forbidden to
surf in Ezra. But that wave, I mean, it changed a lot like in terms of media, let's say like that,
because after that wave, I managed to get like into the national media and international media
and all of that. But for me, personal, like, I don't know if it changed that much because
the way I ride the wave, it wasn't my favorite, you know, because I spent all summer working,
I didn't train that much. I was like, okay, the season is about to start. So I'm going to training
like as soon as the season starts. And then on the beginning of the season, we had that swell.
And that swell, I mean, I wasn't like 100% ready. So that wave I surfed a bit like with fear, you
know, I didn't surf. I didn't surf the wave I wanted to. So it's kind of like a wave. With that
wave, I have a love and hate relationship, something like that. Because it's like, okay,
it's a huge one. But then I see it was like, I could have surfed this wave way better, you know?
Yeah. And with that, I mean, I think it was because of that wave, that right now I am where I am,
you know? Yeah. I think a lot of surfers are like that with those like the biggest wave ever that
goes viral. Like Garrett McNamara famously was like with that massive wave, like it wasn't a real
wave, it didn't break, like whatever. Exactly, exactly. And then the thing is that when that happened,
I was, I don't know, 18 maybe. Yeah, 18 when I got the wave, I was 18. No, yeah, 18 exactly. I was 18.
And then on the media, I started to see like a lot of good comments, but a lot of bad comments.
And like 18 years old kid, I was kind of like, this sucks. Yeah. Watching the good ones like,
okay, this is nice. But then like the bad ones are like really bad ones. And I was just like,
this sucks. So after that, I kind of like, I didn't forget that wave, but it just not like on my
main list about, you know? I know exactly what you mean in terms of like, it's hard getting into
the spotlight and then having to deal with negative attention and like, you're doing what you're
proud of. We just need to get used to it. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. So you mentioned there that you
didn't really serve the wave in the way that maybe you would have wanted to, because you still had a
little bit of fear. And I'm super interested in how you deal with it. Because as a big wave surfer,
it's almost like you just, you just live with it. Like you must never really get over it.
So basically the fear, I mean, I'll see that. I see that there's two types of fears. There's the
one that is like, you're scared, but you manage to overcome that and go out of the comfort zone.
And like, kind of like you overcome that fear. And there's one fear that you just get blocked
there and you can't do nothing. Like those fear that you just stop, you freeze and you're like,
I can't move, you know? There's two types of fears. I already had like,
both situations on big wave surfing. I already saw waves that I was pedaling with these big boards
right here. And I saw the wave and I just freeze, I was like, I can't, you know? But then I already
had sessions, I was scared. But then I was watching the wave and I was like, okay, I'm scared.
Let's go. And basically like dealing with fear, you just need to get used to it. You know, the
beginning is hard. But then like, if you feel that what you're doing, it's what you really love,
you're going to find a way to overcome the fear. And that like the passion of adrenaline,
because the truth is that I don't know how to explain what I feel when I'm surfing big waves.
I know it's a mix of adrenaline, happiness, fear, like everything together. And that mix
of feelings is so like, it's an addiction, so that, you know, like it's, it's bigger than the fear.
So I just like, I want to have those feelings. So I just try to turn off the fear and go for it.
That the fear helps you a lot on being more, more focused in the water, you know?
And the truth is that if someone tells you that he is not scared of surfing big waves,
or he's crazy, or he's crazy, you know, there's, I think it's impossible to be out here in
Nazarene on a huge day and don't be scared. Like it's impossible.
Even looking at it is scary. Even looking at it online is scary.
Just being on the cliff, I don't know. Did you have an answer right now?
I haven't. I really want, I need to come. I need to come.
An invitation. If you come here, I'll take you out on the jet ski.
Amazing. Oh my God. Oh my God. Okay. Right. How could I turn that down?
And the thing is that just being on the cliff on a huge day, when the waves break,
you can feel the cliff kind of like shaking, you know? So I mean, yeah, it's, it's impossible to
don't be scared with that. And when you're scared, like when you have fear, you're doing everything
like 200% focused, you know? Okay. I need to do this, this, this. I can't, I can't do a mistake here.
I can't do a mistake there. So I would say that, I mean, it's important to be out there with fear,
but like choose the fear, not the good fear, not the one that you just get frozen.
That's a really interesting point because like presumably if you have that fear response,
which is just like freeze, you shouldn't go. And it brought to my watching 100 foot wave when
Maya was out being towed in and she kept holding on and not going. And then when she did go,
she almost died. That was almost like the, the fear response being like, don't do this,
you're not ready. Like, have you ever had that sense of, I actually shouldn't be here. I'm not
going to go. I mean, about Maya, I'm, I'm not going to say that she, she wasn't ready because
the truth is that Maya, like she's, she's a water woman, an amazing big wave surfer,
but I believe kind of like in faith, in faith, you know, like in that everything is already
like meant to be. And especially of Maya, I see it like that, you know, like was meant to be.
And she got scared obviously, but the truth is that she managed to overcome that. And now she
have like two Guinness world records. Yeah, exactly. And then she beat the one she had.
And now she has another one, you know. So basically what happened on that day with Maya was kind
of like, okay, you need to go through this to now be like here, you know, and that's kind of like how,
how I see it. And I already had like one situation like that was in
January 12th of 2022. Yeah, exactly. I had a crazy white pout on a, on a here in Israel,
on a paddle session, like one of the biggest waves I ever caught paddling. And I got really,
really pounded. Like I got, I stayed like, I don't know, maybe 30 seconds underwater on that one.
And like 30 seconds doesn't seem much, but when you have, when you have like your knee
behind your neck and you're like on your, yeah, exactly. I know, I know for my five second hold
down, it feels like a minute. And then I got pounded with like more six or seven waves. And I
got off the water a bit like, well, I almost drown like there. And that one got in my mind for,
for a long time. But then the truth is that like with training and like a lot of mental like training,
I managed to overcome that fear, but that one got me like scared for like almost one year or
something like that. Yeah. So if it wasn't that, I mean, like I said, I think that was meant to
be because if it wasn't that, probably I wouldn't be like traveling, the travels I did, I wouldn't
be catching the way out of Portugal, like I went to Chile and Mexico. I wouldn't be surfing those
places like I surfed if I didn't have that experience, you know, so I just believe that
everything is meant to be and everything happens for a reason. I'm also really interested in what
you say about fear as an addiction, because that's something that's repeated by a lot of
a lot of athletes and extreme sports as well. And it seems like that goes one of two ways.
Yeah. Either it becomes like, okay, I have this relationship with fear. I'm going to try and
overcome it. I'm going to meditate on it. I'm going to like go inward and try and figure that out.
Or it becomes, I need to keep chasing that high and that rush. And in some extreme places, you
know, you've had surfers that end up, you know, they take drugs or they have extreme injuries or
like bad stuff happens because they can't manage that relationship with fear because it's actually
an addiction. So I wonder how you deal with that. How I deal with that. That's a good,
really good question. The thing is that that addiction sometimes is like way too strong. And
when the addition is way too strong is more, most of the times is when you get injured, you know,
because there's like, there's the addiction, but like you also need to listen to your mind. And
if for some reason, mind is kind of like telling you, like, okay, maybe don't go today, like rest
today, you search like big waves of the towing for one week straight, like maybe it's better
if you rest today or I don't know, like something happens and you don't feel like really,
really confident. Like you, you need to have like the capacity, the mentality to be like, okay,
like I don't feel about surfing to them or conserve today, you know, and there's a
problem. There's a lot of people that are like, no, I need to be out there or because of that,
because there's my sponsor, because there's cameras, because, because like I didn't catch
the wave I wanted yet, you know, but actually I managed, I can control that like, I'm not going
to say easily, because there's days that I want to be out there, but I have like a bit of pain on
my back or my or something like that, because I search like for too long the last week. And I
kind of like, I go out, but I stay on the jet ski or I do like one or two waves and kind of like
control myself. But that is that you just, you just can't, you know, like it's pumping,
like it's everyone out there, it's good vibes in the water. Yeah, yeah, I'm gonna have to, I'm gonna
have to go. What was I gonna ask you next? Okay, yeah, so let's talk about the world record attempt.
So I know we've spoken a bit about that way, we don't want to talk all about that way,
but it is, you know, as you say, something that brought you really a lot of media attention.
And I guess just the listeners who aren't really very familiar with the way that this works,
can you explain what happened? Why there is this idea that you've claimed to serve on a 101 foot
wave, but it's not been verified, why it takes so long to verify these claims, why it actually
matters both to you and to like big waves surfers generally. So the world record attempt was kind
of like, like I said, was kind of like to put my name into the world of big waves surfing,
because honestly, I knew that I was not gonna get like the record, because even if like the
wave was the biggest one, like it wasn't like the most critical one, you know, because I didn't
surf like the way I want. If I surfed the way of like the way I wanted, it could have done,
it could have done the job, but I didn't surf the way of how I wanted. So I put on my head,
okay, I want to do this more to be like, not not famous, but the thing is that nowadays,
it's really important to be strong in the media. If you want to find sponsors, if you want to
travel around the world to surf, like, you know, the media is kind of like really,
really important. And I had that wave, that swell, like from the Portuguese team, I was the one that
caught up like the best and the biggest wave. So I was like, okay, so in Portugal, no one, no one
did that. So yeah, I'm going to do that. I mean, it's kind of like part of the job, you know,
we tried, we didn't get any answers. They just said like, okay, we're checking this,
then I managed to the professor Miguel Mouraera to measure the wave. He measured my wave and the
waves of the other surfers. And on his like method, my wave was like the biggest one.
So we kind of like use that to send to all like the television channels and everything.
And actually, I can say like, I'm proud of like a really good job. I managed to go through all the
main like channels in Portugal. But if I knew that the wave was not going to win, yeah, I knew,
you know, was more about like, and the truth is that I don't regret doing that because right now
I'm just here because of that, you know, yeah, yeah. So that was kind of like what happened.
And right now we have the record is Bastia, Bastia's German guy.
With like 86, right?
Yeah, something like that. I think on some, I'm not sure the size.
But yeah, like that. Yeah, something like that. I mean, like,
some listeners will probably find this a bit weird, because they'll be like,
obviously, why is it so hard to measure a wave? But like, as you know,
even one problem on bigger surfing seems like bigger surfing exists, you know,
there's this way, but then one guy said that that way is not the best way. So then there's this way,
but then there's the other way, there's another way. So it's kind of like,
you know, it's just like, yeah, too much. It's moving all the time. Like,
where's the bottom? Where's the top? Like, when's the biggest point? Like, yeah,
it's not like measuring something that's static. Like, on that wave, I tried to measure the wave
because I knew I was a big one and I wanted to do all of like this media work to get recognized
on big wave world, because if you don't, if you don't go out of Portugal, like of your place,
of your beach, it's going to be hard for you to be recognized on the big world surfing world.
So because of that, I managed to find a new sponsor, I managed to start traveling. So that was
like what kind of like helped me do doing that. But the thing is that now, like the world record
is such like a big thing that every season there's guys, yeah, doing the wise, no, my wave is the
biggest one. My wave is the biggest one. And it's kind of like a bit, a bit too much, you know, like,
yeah, I did that. I'm not saying that I didn't, I did that. But right now, like mentality ahead is
just like, go, go surfing, have fun. And then if you have a big wave.
I can't hear you. I think the sound's gone.
There you go back. Yeah. And yeah, then kind of, kind of like just go out there, surf your waves,
and then if you see that you have one of, like, if it's really like one of the biggest ones,
then you do that. It's kind of like, if you know that is not the biggest one,
don't do the same as me, you know, don't do what I did. Because like straight, I just did that
to have like the recognition of the media, because I knew that my wave, I mean, to be really hard to
win because one of Sebastian Schumann, they will, they like they surf the wave on the critical spot
and I didn't. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it sounds like you've got a very, a very good attitude towards
it. And another question I have is, as you said, like, to be a professional surfer now,
you have to have sponsors, you have to be in the media, you know, you have to kind of build up a
brand. It's similar to a lot of professions already. It's kind of, I guess, like similar to what I do,
like you have to be able to say, this is, you know, this is me. Do you find that stressful,
like having to maintain a certain level to keep sponsors to, like, put yourself out in the media,
or do you actually like being out in the media? You seem very good at it. I mean, I'm good at it,
because I'm kind of like used to it. Yeah. The truth is that if you ask me if I prefer to be,
to get pounded on a big day in Israel, being in front of a camera, they're like getting pounded.
Yeah. But the thing, I'm getting used to it, but still, like, it's kind of,
it's not, it's not annoying, because I've been doing it for so long that I kind of, like,
used to it already. And I kind of like it sometimes. But the pressure of, like, okay, I need to,
I need to have a good image everywhere I go. I need to have a good image on the Instagram.
On the interviews, I need to be careful with what I say. And there's a moment that's just like,
too much. And we just, you might get a bit crazy, but then you just take, like, one week off,
two weeks off, and then everything gets back to normal. But like we just said, like, it's part
of the game. If I want to leave from me, we're surfing. I'll, I have to do that. Yeah. I've been
doing that for so long that I'm kind of like, I like it already. So that's good. The other thing
I was going to ask is, so lots of people say about surfing, that it's a very selfish sport,
that it's like a completely individual thing, that you're just out there and it's just you and the
waves. But big wave surfing is different in that sense, isn't it? Because you have to have a team.
You're having someone who's towing you in, someone who's taking pictures. Like, do you like that kind
of team aspect of it? And how did you kind of put together your team? Yeah, I mean, there's a huge
difference between normal surfing and big wave surfing because big wave surfing, if you don't
have like a team that you can trust and like a strong team, you're going to be out there and you're
not going to do nothing. You know, you're not going to feel safe to go on the big server of the day
or something like that, you know? So yeah, I mean, I don't see big wave. I mean, big wave surfing can
be a selfish sport, but like kind of like to, to the family of the surfer, you know, because
you're putting your life in risk, the people you love and the people that love you, you're going
to be worried about you because you're surfing like the biggest waves in the world. On that,
on that scenario, I would say that's selfish. But then on other scenarios, I wouldn't say it's
like a selfish sport because you need a team, you know? If you don't have like a guy that drives,
drives well that you can trust, of course, you need a spotter with a radio to be on the cliff
to help you. You need like to have a good physio because like towing surfing,
it's like one of the most intense like things for your body ever, you know, hours on the rope
and it's just, and like cold because nether during the winter is really, really cold. Yeah.
So then like a good physio, the spotter, a good safety guy, we need like a good driver to put
in the waves and then a good safety guy to be on the extra jet ski to save you when it's huge.
You know, so it's like there's a big thing behind it. A lot of people think that just like you grab
the jet ski with a friend, you go out, you do a few waves and that's it. But no, like there's a huge
kind of like structure behind it. And if you don't trust that structure, if you don't trust that team,
like you're not going to be out there safe, you know. So it's kind of hard to find people
because basically that's what you're doing. You're trusting your life on other persons.
The connection went a bit funny there, but I think, are we back now?
Yeah. Can you hear me? Yeah. Okay. Cool. Good. So yeah, the other thing I wanted to ask was like
can you hear me? Yeah, my phone just went down. Okay, fine. Okay, we're good. We're back.
Yeah, it's how like the culture of big wave surfing differs to the culture of, you know,
like mainstream surfing, for example. So, you know, we think about like surfing culture,
we think of like, you know, localism, maybe like a bit of kind of competitiveness, maybe like,
you know, yeah, that kind of like grows, like competing and like pushing each other around
in the lineup. And also like the friendliness and, you know, like the whole idea of being in the
surf sound and having fun. How is big wave surf culture different to that? Because it must be
quite like a small world, like you guys all know each other. Yeah, compared to normal surfing,
it's like a really, really small world. And like the main ones, we all know each other because,
I mean, I'll say it for me because, because of Nezra, you know, because everyone comes for Nezra.
Probably in other place, I don't know, like France or something like that. It wouldn't be the same.
So here I basically like the biggest ones are bigger surfing because of Nezra.
And actually that on that thing, it's kind of like the same as normal surfing, you know,
there's the good vibes, like in the water, good vibes, like good waves, but there's also like the
competitive part, you know, like, because we are out there and all of us like,
we all want like the biggest one or the best one, you know, and the same on normal surfing,
you're on a session and you want the best one, you know, so it's kind of like out of the water,
friends in the water, friends, but different. Yeah. But on that, I would say that is the
same as a, as normal surfing. Yeah. Except there's obviously a lot riding on it. There's a lot on
the line. Yeah, true. Let's talk about Nazare itself now. You think is so special about that wave?
Nazare. So Nazare is special because like it's one of the only places in the world that you can be
on the cliff and you see the wave like in front of you. It's not like you're on the cliff and the
wave is like, I don't know, far away in the ocean, you know, it's like you literally like the waves
they're surfing, they're breaking on the place that you are, you know, the waves are breaking on the
cliff and you're here on the top watching everything. And that just makes like Nazare a
special place and then there's also the canyon. Yeah. And the canyon is like what basically
Nazare have the waves that we have because of the canyon, you know, when it's like the right
direction, the waves came like from the canyon that starts in some islands, they call it like
bird language. That's where the canyon starts. And then when there's like the right direction
is when we have the famous A-frames, the famous peaks from Nazare. And there's not like a lot of
places in the world with that like from that effect of nature. Nazare is like one of the only
ones, you know. And like I said, having the opportunity to have one wave like that and you
can see it like first row, it's just amazing. Like it's something that honestly for everyone that
loves surf or big wave surfing, I say that they need to come to Nazare on a big day to feel the
because you can really feel the energy, you know. You can like, well, while you are in the water,
you can hear like the crowd screaming when you when you catch a good one. But if you're out
and the surfer like screams because you got a good one, you can also hear that, you know.
So just like feeling out of that energy, it's like, it's special. And it's also what makes it so
crazy and so dangerous, right? Because most of those big wave surf sports, they're not shore breaks,
they're like reef breaks, way out somewhere where it's deep. And they have like, there's a channel,
everything, Nazare. Like driving the jet ski Nazare on a big day is like a nightmare.
Like a nightmare because you have waves coming from everywhere. You have like normal wave,
you have one wave coming from the cliff because the the way it's coming. You have one wave coming
from the other side, you have sometimes you have backwash coming from land. So driving there,
like I'm telling you, driving in the Israel, like on a big day, as soon you arrive like to the lineup,
your heart is like, that adrenaline is huge, huge. The adrenaline of driving in Israel is bigger
than surfing. Really? Yeah. Because like, while you're surfing, you're like, okay, I'm surfing,
my driver needs to pick me up. Yeah. If you're driving, you're like, okay, I just throw this guy
into like probably the biggest wave of his life. And then I need to pick him up. So basically,
his life, his life, I'm in my hands. Yeah. It's not like, it's not like you're safe when you're
on the ski, because we've seen so many clips of like skis flying in all different directions and
like Nazare, you're safe, or you're at the beach on the sand, and you went to the beach, or you're
like far, far out, like when the waves don't break and where we choose waves. But in the middle,
between the lineup and the sand, there's like, there's not like a safe zone, you know, you need
to be all the time, like paying attention on what you're doing, because like this, you can lose the
ski. And then you go to the beach and you lose the session, might like lose the jet ski, that's not
like a ship, it's not like a ship thing. So yeah, it's kind of like hardcore to drive the jet skis here.
No kidding. And is Nazare still your favorite wave in the world? And what are the ones, what are
the other waves that you particularly like? So in terms of figure surfing, I didn't travel that
much yet. I surfed in Basque country here in Spain. I surfed in Mexico and I surfed in Chile.
I love like Punta de Lobos, the left I surfed there in in Chile. I just love that left,
just love that wave. Where? Only in Mexico this year, my first year there. And what a year. Yeah.
And that place was just like, amazing, you know, and was the first time surfing big waves,
like with warm water on shorts and not like wet woods, gloves, wood, everything. But I mean,
Nazare, Nazare, Nazare is like there's, I mean, just having the feeling of doing a good session
at home is just impossible to have something better than that, you know. So Nazare, it will
be always Nazare and my favorite place for sure. Of course. What was Guerto like this year then?
Because I saw all this amazing footage coming out, including some very scary wipeouts like
Nathan Florence, like being that terrifying hold down. Was it was it cool? They're a bit after
the trail of Nathan, the one that Nathan was there. And Puerto is like is a is a special place,
you know, in terms of crowd, in terms of local terms of everything, because the locals there,
they are like real locals, you know, and it's totally totally understandable because they need
to, they want to surf those like their waves. Yeah. And they need to be surfing their waves with
50 guys, like from outside. And some guys respect some some guys they don't respect.
And that sometimes it's normal, like they get mad, you know, because it's kind of like
understandable. It's the same, it's the same here in Nazare with me. Like I'm from here,
and there are sessions that there's way too much people that you need to say something,
because if you don't say it, you're not gonna surf, you know. But I mean, the wave, I mean,
the wave is just amazing, you know, like being out there and seeing like huge, huge barrels,
like with sun warm water. It's just amazing. I mean, it wasn't, I didn't score like I wanted,
but I kind of like already had that mentality because I know that's a really hard way to
surf. And it's a really hard way to catch waves because of the crowd. So I kind of like went
there to to win some, some knowledge about the place and not like with the mentality I'm gonna
arrive there, I'm gonna score them on this, this, this. No, I arrived there. Okay, this year's gonna
be kind of like to get juice to the wave. And then on the next years, I'll like, I'll probably
have mentality to score, you know. I'm gonna say that I went like there with that mentality and
the trip went good, you know. I didn't, I caught like a really good one, but I, I fell on the way
out of the barrel. But still just like that wave, my, my, my, my whole trip like worse.
Amazing. And yeah, that, that was my season in Mexico. I spent one,
yeah, I think one month in the elf, something like that. Nice. Is there anywhere right now
that you think, I really want to go there? Yes, there is.
Oh no, he's caught up.
The internet stopped for,
the internet stopped for, I did it. I don't know if it's mine or yours, but yeah, I can,
I can't, oh, no, yeah, no. Is it better? I don't know if, I don't know if you'll listen to what I said.
No, I want to hear, where do you want to go?
Oh, of course, yeah.
Because like I'm a goofy footer and it's a left, so yeah.
It must be very exciting watching everyone in Tahiti right now. I know I've been watching.
Yeah. Oh yeah. Okay. The other question I was going to ask about Nazaré is how do you think
it's changed over the last like decade or so? And do you think it's changed for the
better or the worse? Because obviously it was only kind of discovered not that long ago.
Yes. So Nazaré, I mean, like I said, there will be always haters. So there's a lot of people
that say that Nazaré changed for better and a lot of people that say that Nazaré changed
for worse. Because I'm not like original from Nazaré, but I'm original from Sintra,
it's a bit more south. But I've been coming here since I'm a kid and all the local guys from here,
they all already consider me as a local. And I remember to come here during the winter when
I was a kid and Nazaré was empty, like no one, no one. And now with the big way surfing, Nazaré
is full during the summer, during the winter, like during the whole year, Nazaré is full of people,
you know. And that obviously for like the for the business here in Nazaré, for like the local
business and the economy, it's good, you know, because they had like a lot of, they had like kind
of like good economy during the summer. And then the winter arrives and it's like kind of like a
ghost city, you know. With big wave surfing, we have days in Nazaré that's like the big days
in Nazaré, it's full, like you can't even drive in Nazaré. It's amazing, you know. And but the
thing that with that, like it's good for the economy, but then like for us surfers, I mean,
it's kind of like hard because there's more people arriving and more people that want to prove themselves
and they want to surf big waves and they want to surf the wave of Nazaré. And with that sometimes
there's people, there are people arriving here that they're not really ready, like for the waves
of Nazaré, you know. And when that happens, it's like when us surfers, we start to be kind of like,
yeah, maybe it's like, maybe it's a bit too much. Yeah, we have questions like that. We have people
out there that most of us, we know that they're not ready to be out there, but on their head,
they feel ready. So they just go, you know, and that's kind of like, not really good. Yeah,
no kidding. Do you feel, you know, as like a community around Nazaré, do you feel some sense
of responsibility when people go out there and they're like, they're not ready? Would you ever
say to someone like, look, I don't think you're ready for this? I love to, because like, I'm
Portuguese, I'm from here, like I live in Nazaré, basically, like I have that wave on my backyard,
and I have an amazing connection with that wave. I mean, I have something that I do that every
time there's kind of like big waves, I need to go, I need to go there and watch the waves and I spend
there like, a medium, like one hour just watching the waves, you know. And when I see someone that's
out there, and I know that that person is not ready, I kind of like, I try to warn them.
And most of them, they just went like, oh, don't try and know what I'm doing. And then I'm kind of
like, okay, so I don't say nothing more. But then if one of those people get like my team in,
yeah, because the truth is that if we see one, someone like passing a bad moment, we're not
going to leave him there, you know, like one of us, like if it's not my team, from the other team,
he's going to go there, he's going to save the guy. But the thing is that if some of your team
like gets in danger because of one people like that, I mean, honestly, it's really hard to don't
kind of like, yeah, it's not freak out, but don't say nothing to the to that people, you know,
like it's because imagine I'm surfing with my father and we really close friend of mine, a French
guy Pierre Calais. And imagine I'm watching like one guy that's like a brother to me or my father
going to side on a big day because that guy was there and he shouldn't be there.
It's hard to don't get mad, you know. Yeah, of course. So, so yeah, kind of like feel that,
I feel that a bit. Yeah, so that is a message to anyone who is listening to this and thinking
like if someone in the lineup, it's like Tony comes and says to you, chill out, listen to him.
Oh, no.
Ah, the connection's got a bit dodgy. Oh, no.
I don't know if this is me or Tony and I don't know if you can still hear me, but I'm trying to
work out what's going on. I think it might be Tony because I think my internet's still working.
In which case, I mean, I was going to end it in like a few minutes anyway, but I just want to
see. No, we can't hear you Tony. No, just a few more questions anyway, if you can come back.
I mean, maybe if you want to leave and then reconnect, we can try. Oh, you can.
You can hear us. Oh, that's weird because I can't hear you. Tony, do you want to maybe
like try and leave and then come back in?
Let's see. I just literally have like two more questions that I really want to ask. There we go.
Okay, hopefully he's going to be reconnecting in a second. There he is. Okay, good. I don't know
what's going on there. I think it's my connection. We've been going for like nearly 50 minutes now
anyway, so it's already quite a long interview. I'm not in my home. I'm like at my warehouse
where I have all the words. Oh, wow. That's why everyone watching this now is insanely jealous.
Okay, I'll just do a last, okay, last few questions. Is there anyone in the surfing world
right now that you look at and think, oh, I really admire them. I really want to surf a bit more like
that. Yeah, it's like Lukashumu and those are the ones that I look at them and I'm kind of like,
yeah, I want them, yeah, those are the ones. Kind of like not like beat them, but like being,
I mean, the goal is to be the best one. And what drives you to keep going and to keep
trying to be the best and keep trying to come out on top? What drives me to keep going is
like the addiction. The addiction, the love of going out of your comfort zone and just like,
I mean, big wave surfing is part of my life already, you know. Like for me right now,
it's impossible to live without bigger surfing because I've been, like bigger surfing has been
in my life for a long time now. So just kind of like give up like this is not, it's not going to
happen. You know, it's already kind of like family. And the truth is that all my family,
all my family is like involved into that, you know, so we kind of like, we breathe bigger surfing.
So yeah, probably that's, that's something really. And what are your plans for the next few years?
Like, do you have anything? Well, obviously you really, you want to go, you want to travel a bit
more? Like, I mean, the plans are to travel all around the world surfing like the biggest and
the best waves like ever, like a normal bigger surfer like once. And I have like the personal
dream and goal to win the Nazaré to win challenge. Because the thing is that
like Nazaré was like, where everything started for me, like all the love surfing, like all the
efforts that my family put into that, like here in Nazaré and everything, like we moved to Nazaré
because of me. And so my family has been supporting me like for a long time on the big wave surfing
thing. And having the opportunity to win the contest that like it's on, on my beach, let's say
like this, with all the people I love, like watching, watching me like all my friends and
everything. And having the opportunity to bring the trophy like home after all the effort my
family did for me, you know, so that's, that's like the main dream, the main goal.
And I cannot wait to see you do that. Very excited for you. Yeah, that's everything that I had to
ask you. So I just wanted to say thank you again, Tony, for coming to me to allow me to interview
you despite the fact that I am a very inexperienced surfer, but I hope a slightly more experienced
interviewer. You get the invitation to come to Nazaré. Oh my god, I got on the jet ski. Okay,
I'm slightly terrified, but I will obviously take you up on that. Perfect. Great, thank you so much
and thank you so much to everyone who has been listening. We're going to record this and put it
out as a video on various different platforms. And I also just wanted to quickly say, and I'm
sure Tony does as well, we're all thinking about everyone in Maui. I've said that at the beginning
of the show, sending all all the love and like obviously I put some links in the description
so if you can donate. Even yesterday, I was speaking with a friend that lives there and
he just told me that it was like so all my prayers to tomorrow. Yeah, and on that note,
thanks guys. This was so much fun. Thank you so much, Tony. And yeah, speak to you soon. Bye.
