Hi listeners, this is the 80,000 hours podcast where we have
unusually in-depth conversations about the world's most
pressing problems, what you can do to solve them, and what did
happen to all those horses after we invented cars. I'm
Rob Wiblin, head of research at 80,000 hours. The last few
months have been a crazy time for advances in artificial
intelligence. Over the last couple of years, I've become for
better or worse, increasingly confident that the future is
going to be shaped in a major way by what sorts of AI systems we
develop and choose to deploy as they approach and then exceed
human capabilities in the most important areas. That's always
seemed like a really common sense idea to me, but it now is
becoming pretty apparent to people across society who until
recently had hardly been paying attention to this issue.
Unfortunately, we've only had two episodes about AI over the
last six months, due to the substantial lags that come in
between conceiving of an episode, finding the right guest,
scheduling and recording the conversation, and then editing
it, and then finally releasing it. But that scarcity of AI
content is fortunately about to change. In today's episode,
Louisa Rodriguez interviews Tom Davidson, a senior research
analyst at Open Philanthropy, whose job is figuring out when
and how society is going to be upended by advances in AI, not
a not a simple forecasting exercise. Tom has his work cut
out for him. But if you've been wondering when you might be
replaced in your job by an AI model, and when AI's might be
able to do everything that humans can do for less than what it
costs to feed a person and keep them alive, then this episode
will help you think about that a little bit more clearly and
perhaps have a have a little bit more idea of what to expect. In
particular, Louisa and Tom discuss how long it will take for
AI is to go from being able to do 20% of the work humans are
doing to being able to do all of it. What underlying factors are
driving progress in AI and how much each of those factors is
contributing? Whether we should expect that progress to speed up
or slow down in incoming years? How much computer hardware is
used to train these models and whether it can continue increasing
at the absolutely blistering rate that it has been doing the
last 10 years? When AI systems might be able to do scientific
research and what implications that would then have. And also
when we might expect all of this to noticeably increase GDP in a
visible way, and what that could look like, and then what new
bottlenecks might exist in an economy where AI systems were
doing most of the work. And on top of that, plenty of other
issues besides Tom's expectations for the future are
exciting or alarming, I guess, depending on how you want to look
at them. Regular listeners will have heard me do quite a few
interviews on AI over the years. But those interviews tends not
to focus on my opinions, or at least they're not they're not
meant to. So it's possible that people don't have that much of
a sense of where I stand on this personally. In case you're
interested, I think the chances that you and I either killed
due to actions taken by AI systems, or that we live to see
humanity unintentionally lose control of its future because of
AI systems are greater than 10%, greater than a one in 10
chance. Looking at surveys and polling now, it seems like both
AI experts and the general public are converging on a view
that's not too far from that. It's a view that previously
seemed idiosyncratic, but now is really quite mainstream.
Naturally, if that if the odds are like that, then it makes
figuring out how to safely develop and deploy AI, you know,
probably the issue of our time. And indeed, one of the things
that we should most care about from even a selfish point of
view, or if we have children care about from parental point of
view, I'm an economist by training and I entirely
understand how the industrial revolution ultimately raised
incomes across generations. And that while factory automation
was indeed financially ruinous for plenty of individuals, it
didn't then result in persistent unemployment. But
nonetheless, despite understanding and appreciating
all of that, I am skeptical that there are going to be paying
jobs for children being born today. Or if not them, that
there will be paying jobs, at least for their children. And
we are just flying by the seat of our pants here and have not
really figured out a plan ahead of time about what we're going
to do as this technology just completely upends I think existing
social relations and economic systems. Well, I'll describe the
overall situation that humanity finds itself in to be pretty
terrifying. The fact that all kinds of different people are
waking up now to the risks here does give me hope that we can
coordinate to prevent the worst. As you imagine, we'll have
more to say to expand on all of that in in future episodes. But
for now, I bring you Louisa Rodriguez and Tom Davidson.
Today, I'm speaking with Tom Davidson. Tom's a senior research
analyst at Open Philanthropy, where his main focus is on when
we might get transformative AI. Before joining Open Philanthropy,
Tom taught science through Teach First at a comprehensive
school in East London, and then was a data scientist for an
education technology startup. And before all of that, Tom
studied physics and philosophy at Oxford. Thanks for coming on
the podcast, Tom.
Thanks, Louisa. It's a pleasure to be here.
So I hope to talk about how fast we might go from kind of OK AI
to AI that can do everything humans can do, plus how that'll
affect the economy and the world. But first, yeah, how worried
are you personally about the risks from AI?
So about a year ago, I sat down and spent spent a morning trying
to figure out, you know, what are my percentages of AI by a
certain time? And what's my percentage that there's existential
catastrophe from AI? And so I was focusing on the possibility
that AI disempowers humanity and just takes over control of
society and the economy and what happens in the future. And a year
ago, I landed at a number that was a bit above 10% for the
probability that AI takes over by 2070.
Right. Okay. I mean, that's already pretty high.
Yeah, that is that is already very high and much too high. Yeah.
I think since since then, if I if I read the exercise today, I
think I'd be close to 20%. God. I think I compared to then I
think it's just more likely that we develop AI that's capable of
doing that by 2070. I also think that it's it's just pretty
likely to happen in the next 20 years. Wow. Which then makes the
chance that it goes badly, I think higher because we have less
time to repair. So both those things I think mean, I'd probably
be at about 20% if I if I read the exercise today.
Yeah, we'll talk more about a couple of those things. But
first, yeah, I'm curious if there's a type of scenario you
have in mind, when you're thinking about that 10 to 20%
that makes you, yeah, especially worried?
Yeah, I think the main line scenario I have is something
like in the next 10 to 15 years, possibly sooner, we train an AI
that is able to massively enhance the productivity of AI R&D
workers. So people who are currently working to make AI
better, maybe it makes them, let's say five times as
productive.
So something like a large language model helps people working
on AI R&D in particular, like code much faster or develop
better algorithms or something. Exactly. And it means they can
work five times faster ish. Exactly. Right. Okay. And then I
think it won't be long after that, because AI is then going to
be improving more quickly before AI is able to do everything
that the current employees of DeepMind and OpenAI are currently
doing for their jobs, at least the ones that can work remotely
and do their work from a computer.
Are you kind of distinguishing between the ones that work with
like physical robots or the ones that work with like, I don't
know, the mailroom at DeepMind?
Yeah. So if there's someone, I don't know if this is true, but
if there's someone at DeepMind who is physically stacking the
computer chips into the data center, then that's a kind of
type of physical work, which I don't think would necessarily
follow immediately on. But I think most of the work is not
like that. Right. So I think AI, you know, especially most of
the work for, you know, advancing AI is stuff you can do on
your laptop. So first we get the kind of 5x productivity gain.
A little time later, we get AI that can do all of the work that
people at OpenAI and DeepMind can do. And I really think the gap
between those is not going to be very big. And we'll probably
discuss a bit more about that later. At that point, I think AI
is going to be improving at a blistering pace, absent a very
specific effort to slow down, which I hope we really make. But
but absent that effort and absent coordinating to make sure
that everyone is slowing down. You know, I think like 1000x
improvement in the AI's capabilities in a year is is
like a natural kind of conservative default. Wow. And so
in this scenario, it wouldn't be long before the AI is just
far outstripping the cognitive intelligence abilities of the
smartest humans and indeed even the smartest massive teams of
humans working together. Wow. And when you kind of crunch the
numbers on how many AI's there's like to be around this time,
there's going to be hundreds of millions and probably many
billions of human worker equivalents just in kind of AI,
AI cognitive ability. Is that because there are different AI
systems or because you've got that much brain power being
deployed like through AI, even if it's only like five AI systems
or something? It's like running lots of copies of maybe a few AI
systems. Got it. So for example, I haven't crunched the numbers
on this, but I would guess that if you took the kind of
computer chips that they use to train GPT-4, and then you just
said how many copies of GPT-4 could we run using these
computer chips? Yeah. I guess that the answer is like maybe a
million. Wow. Might be a bit lower actually. I'm not I'm not
sure for GPT-4. But I think by the time that we train kind of AI
that can fully replace all the human workers at an AI lab, I
think it's that number is going to be more extreme. Right. So I
think that by the time we can train that kind of AI, you'll be
able to just immediately use the compute that you use for
training to run 100 million. Right. That's insane. And the
reason for that is because it just takes, I don't know, like
many times more compute to train an AI system than it does to
then run them. Yeah, that's exactly right. Okay. One way to
think about it is that the AI is a trained on kind of millions of
days of experience so that they get to be as good as they are.
And that one, if you've managed to train them for that much,
then it's kind of obviously you can run millions. Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Got it. Okay. Okay. So so then we're there. We've got
potentially millions of human equivalents of copies of AI
systems running and doing the kind of work that humans could do
at the human level or better. Exactly. And then what?
So then I think it's likely that it won't be long until we're
talking about billions of AI systems. It's one of the mill to
see three x efficiency improvements in AI at, you know,
various different levels of the, of the software stacks, you
could get a three x efficiency in, in kind of how, how effective
the algorithm is, or three x efficiency improvement in how
well the software runs on the hardware. And there are these
various layers of the software stack that you can make
improvements on. So I think it's probably at that point, once
you have, you know, hundreds of millions of AI is looking for
these types of improvements, you're probably going to get very,
very quick further improvements in kind of AI cognitive
ability. Again, maybe we coordinate to go very slowly, but
this is absent. Right. That targeted coordination. Maybe the
default. Yeah, maybe the default scarily. And at that
point, I think that if the AIs are misaligned, if they have
goals that are different to what humans want them to do. And if
those goals imply that it would be useful for them to get power
so they could achieve those goals better, then I don't think
it's going to be very hard for them to do that. Because, you
know, it's like, we've got a billion really smart humans who
want to take power, like, probably they'll find out some
kind of way to do it. Maybe they invent new technology. Maybe
they convince some higher officials to give them control
of the military. I'm not sure exactly how they'll do it. But
at that point, I think it's kind of too late for us to be
preventing prevent AI takeover.
Okay, and then by AI takeover. Yeah, do you mind spelling that
out?
Yeah, so I think the thing that matters for AI takeover is that
AI systems collectively end up in control of what happens in
the future. And that it's kind of their goals and decisions that
dictate the future path. And then it's no longer sensitive to
what humans want, or trying to achieve with the future. So I
mean, ultimately, I think it does have to come down to physical
force, most likely. Right. I mean, you could imagine the
scenario where the AI is just convinced humans and hypnotize
them or something. And that's how they take over. But more
likely they end up having control of the hard military
equipment. And that's what allows them to establish their power
and disempower humanity.
So a thing that I have to admit still confuses me is just like,
how we go from, I don't know, things like GPT for which like,
even if it sometimes gets super confused and like says silly
things in a way that's like, Oh, you clearly misunderstood what I
was asking for. It's really hard for me to understand what the
path to like, that kind of confusion to misalignment that's
so, I don't know, I guess just incredibly diverging from human
values that the AI systems want to disempower humans. And I mean,
one article I read, I think that just came out recently on Vox is
this article that was actually making the case that companies
creating AI should slow down, should kind of coordinate to
slow down, was walking through the case for why we might expect
AI to be misaligned. And the example they gave just still
confuses me. So the example is something like, let's say you've
got a super smart AI system, we've programmed it to solve
impossibly difficult problems, like calculating the number of
atoms in the universe, for example, the AI system might
realize that it could do a better job if it gained access to
all of the computers on earth. So it releases a weapon of mass
destruction to wipe out all humans. For example, an engineered
virus that kills everyone but leaves infrastructure intact. And
now it's free to use all the computer power. And that's the
best way it's able to achieve its goal. And I think I just, I
just really, really, I like, I feel silly, I feel, I feel dumb,
I feel like I'm missing something. Like, how will it go from
like, I want to solve this problem for humans to like, I'm
going to kill them all to take their resources so that I can
solve the problem. Like, why have we not ruled that kind of
extreme behavior out?
Great question. So let's maybe we can try and think about this
this system, which is trying to solve these these math problems.
So
so maybe the first version of the AI you just say, look, we want
you to solve the problem using one of these four techniques. And
that kind of system is okay. But then someone comes along and
realizes that if you let the AI system do an internet search,
and plan its own line of attack on the problem, then it's
able to do a better job in solving even harder and harder
problems. And so you say, okay, we'll allow the AI to do that.
Sure.
And then over time, in order to improve performance, you give it
more and more scope to kind of be creative in planning how it's
going to attack each different kind of problem. Yeah. One thing
that might happen internally inside the AI's own head is that
the AI may end up developing just an inherent desire to just
get the answer to this math question as accurate as possible.
That's something which it always gets rewarded for when it's
being trained. And you know, maybe it could be thinking, I
actually just want the humans to be happy with my answer. But
another thing it might end up thinking is, you know what, what
I really want is just to get the answer correct. And the kind of
feedback that as humans are giving that system doesn't
distinguish between those two possibilities. So maybe we get
unlucky. And maybe the thing that it wants is to just really
get the answer correct. And maybe the way that the AI system is
working internally is it's saying, okay, that's my goal. What
plan can I use to achieve that goal? And it's kind of creatively
going and looking for new new approaches by googling
information. Maybe one time it's like, it realizes that if I
hacked into a kind of another computing cluster, it could use
those computations to help itself the problem. And it does
that no one realizes and then that kind of that reinforces the
fact that it is now planning on such a broad scale to try and
achieve this goal. And then maybe it's much more powerful at a
later time. And it realizes that yeah, if it kills all humans,
it could have access to all the supercomputers. And then that
would help it get an even more accurate answer. And because the
thing it cares about is not pleasing the humans. The thing
it happened to care about internally was actually just
getting an accurate answer. That plan looks great by its own
lights. And so it goes and executes the plan.
Right. So one that was really helpful. But I still feel
confused about one why it's so hard to not give it some
instructions that are just like, use whatever you need, but like
don't hurt living things.
So I think we could definitely give it those instructions. The
question is, inside its own mind, what is its goal in the end of
the day? So you could give it instructions, don't hurt humans,
and it would read that it would understand that that's what you
wanted. But if throughout its life, it's always been rewarded
for getting an accurate answer to these math problems, it might
just itself only care about getting our accurate answers to
the math problems. So it knows that the humans don't want it to
hurt other humans. But it also doesn't care about that itself
because all it cares about is getting accurate answers to this
problem. And so sure, it knows that humans don't want it to hurt
other humans. And so it makes sure to not do that in an obvious
way, because it anticipates and it might get shut down. Yeah.
But but it's knowledge of what humans wanted to do doesn't
change what its own desire is internally.
So I suppose I understand why you couldn't just give the system
an instruction that didn't also come with rewards. Is it
impossible to give an AI system a reward for every every problem
it solves by not hurting anyone?
I think that would help somewhat. So the problem here is that
there are kind of two possibilities. And it's going to
be hard for us to give rewards that ensure that one of the
possibilities happen and not the second possibility. So here are
the two possibilities. One possibility is the AI really
doesn't want to hurt humans. And it's just going to keep that
into take that into account when solving the math problem.
That's what we want to happen. The other possibility is that the
AI only cares about solving the math problem. And doesn't care
about humans at all. But it understands that humans don't
like it when it hurts them. And so it kind of doesn't hurt
humans in any obvious way.
Oh, right. Okay. And so this is a route to AI, not caring about
humans, but being kind of deceptive. I guess maybe an
analogy that really speaks to me is something like if you were
to punish a child for, I don't know, having ice cream before
dinner, like you might get them not to have ice cream before
dinner, or you might create a thing where they have ice cream
before dinner while hiding in the closet. And yeah, it's like
pretty complicated to teach a nuanced enough lesson to a child
about ice cream and why they shouldn't have it for dinner.
That doesn't have any risk of the lying version. Is that kind of
right?
Yeah, I think that's a good analogy.
Okay, nice.
I think with a child, it might be somewhat easier because you
have a much, you're much more capable than them. So even if
they ever did try and eat ice cream in secret, you'd have a
good chance of catching them. I think the problem gets really
hard when the AI is a much smarter than us, such they could
quite easily eat ice cream without us noticing. And then
it's really hard for us to give them rewards, which stop them
from doing that.
Right, right. And something like we have a pretty good idea how
children's brains work, they work kind of like ours, but like a
bit simpler and like we have some idea of the ways they're
different. And so we can like make guesses about the types of
motivations that will speak to them. I don't know, maybe it's
like, we know that our kids work similar to us and that like they
feel shame, and they'd feel shame if they were punished and
want to like please us because that's just like pretty human.
And so maybe we have a better sense of how they'd respond to
punishment. But maybe AI systems are just like so different to
humans that we we really have no idea what their or at least
will have a less clear idea of what other processes that they're
using or like things that they experienced or whatever are like
and what kinds of behaviors those will push them toward.
Yeah, I think that does make it a lot harder.
Cool. That's super helpful. Yeah, is that is that basically the
key scenario you're worried about this kind of we train AI systems
to achieve certain goals, but it's hard to know what strategies
they see as fair game, and it's hard to train them not to pursue
harmful strategies. And then they eventually get super smart.
Maybe they are deceptive. Maybe they're just very convincing.
And so they they're able to get a bunch of power and really
disempower humans. Is that kind of what you see as the core risk?
Yeah, that's right. And I would emphasize that in the scenario as
I described it, AI is improving really, really rapidly as it as
it approaches and then go through the human range. So, you know,
when we're talking about this, this example with the AI that's
trying to solve math problems, maybe we're thinking, Oh, we'll
have, you know, a few years with it trying out this kind of
strategy. And then we notice it's kind of doing a little bit of
hacking into computer resources. So, you know, we tamp down on
that. But but if if this whole thing plays out over just one
year, for example, we go from like, you know, notably below
human to superhuman systems. Yeah. I think it makes the risks a lot
more intense.
Yeah, that makes sense to me. Yeah, to move us on to your
research, then. Some of the work you've done that kind of most
blew my mind was actually on what happens when we're able to
basically build AI that does roughly what we intend it to do. I
think I naively would have guessed something like the world
carries on as normal, but we use GPT8 a lot in our jobs. But
you've looked into the hypothesis that not only will
things not stay the same, they actually might change very, very,
very quickly if AGI is so good that it kind of causes explosive
economic growth, which, yeah, in this case, you're defining as
the world economy growing something like 10 times faster
than it has for the last century. Yeah, so to start, can you
help me understand intuitively what it would what it would mean
for the economy to grow 10 times faster?
Sure. So one way to think about this is to think about all the
technological changes that have happened over the last 50 years.
Okay. Yeah, that feels like a lot.
So 50 years ago, it was 1970. We'd had very basic digital
computers around, but they weren't being widely used. They
weren't very good. I don't think the internet was around. And
you know, there's there's loads of other improvements in
manufacturing and in kind of agricultural techniques,
medical care, exactly. Yeah. And you know, kind of massive
improvements across the board in the last 50 years. But probably
the most striking is IT. Yeah, yeah, sounds right. And so what
what explosive growth would look like is that all those
changes rather than happening over the course of 50 years,
they happened over the course of five years. So we're going to
get the internet in five years, plus a bunch of other
improvements. Exactly. So rather than kind of it taking 50
years to go from these really rubbish slow computers that you
could buy in 1970 to the awesome MacBooks of today, that just
happens over five years. And you know, similarly, rather than
taking 50 years for you to go from those kind of rubbish
phones to smartphones of today that also have the internet and
all these specialized apps that again, this happens over five
years. So the kind of you see the introduction of a new
technology and then very, very quickly, you see it being refined
into a super useful human friendly product. Wow. I mean, on
the one hand, that sounds kind of incredible and exciting. On the
other hand, it just feels like a super strange world to be
getting so many new technologies every few years. Can you
explain the idea behind why AGI might even make that possible?
Yeah. So here's the most basic version of the argument, which
you can kind of make it more complicated to adjust various
objections. But I think kind of this version captures the core
idea. So today, there are maybe tens of millions of people
whose job it is to discover new and better technologies.
True. Working in science and research and development. They're
able to make a certain amount of progress each year. And it's
their work that helps us, you know, get better computers and
phones and discover better types of solar panels and drives all
these improvements that we're seeing. But like we've been
talking about shortly after AGI, I think there's going to be
billions of top human researchers equivalents in terms of
a scientific workforce from AI. Right. And if you imagine that
workforce or, you know, half of that workforce or just 10% of
it working on trying to advance technology and come up with new
ideas, then you have now 10 or 100 times the effort that's
going in to that activity. And these AIs are also able to
think maybe 10 or 100 times as quickly as humans can think. And
you're able to take the very best AI researchers and copy them.
Right. So if you think that scientific progress is
overwhelmingly driven by like a few smaller number of really
kind of brilliant people with brilliant ideas, then we just
need one of them and we can copy them. They might be happy to
just work much harder than humans work. Right. It might be
possible to focus them much more effectively on the most
important types of R&D, whereas humans maybe are more inclined
to follow their interests, even when it's not the most useful
thing to be researching. And so, you know, all of those things
together just mean that we'll be generating kind of 100 times as
many new good ideas and innovations each year compared
with today. And then that would drive the development of
technologies to beat to beat, you know, at least 10 times
faster than today. Right. Right. How likely do you think this
kind of growth is? Is it is it the default once we get EGI?
I think it is a default. You could give objections to the
argument I gave. But I think it's mostly possible to answer
those objections. So you could say, well, you know, discovering
new technologies isn't just about thinking and coming up with
new ideas, you also need to do experiments.
Okay, sure. And then, you know, I think you can answer that
objection by saying, that's right, we will need to do
experiments.
And that's like, you know, testing a drug on humans, and
maybe it takes five years or something to, to like really
check that it's safe and effective.
Right. Yeah. Or you've designed a new solar panel and you want to
like test its performance in a variety of conditions. Yeah.
Yeah. Or you, you kind of running some experiments to see
what happens when you combine these two chemicals together
because you're not able to predict it in advance. But if you
have a billion AIs trying to push forward R&D and they're
bottlenecked on these needing to do these experiments, then
they'll be putting in a huge amount of effort to make these
experiments happen as efficiently as possible.
Sure. Okay. So whereas today, we know, we might be using the lab
for, you know, 50% of the time we could be using it. And we
might be just doing a whole bunch of experiments than
analyzing it afterwards and, you know, learning a little bit
from each experiment, but also, you know, not kind of trying to
cram as much into each experiment as, as is humanly
possible. If these AIs are limited on experiments, and
they're going to be spending, you know, months and months
just meticulously planning the micro details of every single
experiment, so that you can get as much information as possible
out of each one, and kind of fully coalescing their
theoretical understanding and all the current data and
implications and saying, okay, here are the key
uncertainties that we need to address with these like kind of
scarce experiments. And they'll give, you know, the humans
conducting experiments really detailed and precise
instructions and set things up so the experiments are really
unlikely to go wrong and kind of analyze the resultant data
from 100 different angles to learn as much as you can from
them. Right, right. And I think that will go a long way to
getting over the experimental bottleneck.
I mean, even if you just think you use labs eight hours a day,
but you could use them 24 hours a day, and then there are
probably hundreds of other efficiencies like that that will
all just add up to get to many, many times more efficient
stuff.
Right. And I mean, the AIs can direct humans what to do. So you
you could be paying very high wages to have unskilled human
workers work through the night to run these experiments
directed by AI is kind of exactly what to do when. So yeah,
you'll be able to have those labs working around the clock if
that's what's wanted. Yeah. In the longer run, robotics is
already very good. And I don't think it's going to take too
long once we have, you know, a billion AI researchers to design
robots that are able to do the physical tasks that humans do
doesn't seem to know we're that far off at the moment. And so,
you know, if eventually, you know, we're actually we just need
more humans to kind of build more labs or to run these
experiments, I think it will be possible to have have robots
doing that work and have the AI is directing it. And again,
kind of meticulously planning what each robot is doing with
its time. So we're getting the very most out of each robot.
Right. I mean, the example you raised about human experiments
is is is a really good one, because that seems like it's
going to be particularly hard to speed up. Right. There are
still a few things that I can already think of that could
happen there. So if it's kind of any psych psychology
experiments that you're wanting to do or knowing how humans will
react to a new technology or to a new scenario, then just
studying all of the human data on the internet and doing in
depth interviews with humans could give AI's a really good
understanding of how human psychology works. Right. In the
limit, they could scan a human's brain and kind of upload them
to be a kind of a virtual digital person. If that human was
willing to do it, and then it could then do experiments with
them in a simulation much, much more quickly.
Right, really fast. I mean, that's getting pretty weird. Yeah.
And I'm feeling very sci fi. But that's part of what we're
talking about. We're talking about we've got millions or
billions of copies of AI systems that are as smart or smarter
than humans, basically using all of their brain power to
innovate. Yeah. And yeah, it's bizarre. But if you apply all of
that brain power, you're going to get super, super fast
improvements to technology. Is this bottlenecked at all by
like ideas getting harder to find? Are there going to be limits
that just like a human would hit up on these limits? Or humans
have AI systems will also hit up on those limits? Or do we
expect them not to because we're talking about super human
intelligence? So ideas are getting harder to find. For me,
the kind of the best zoomed out example is just that our
scientific workforce has been growing at four or 5% every
year over the last 80 years. And that's a massive increase in
that scientific workforce over 80 years, you know, many, many
doublings. But actually the pace of technological progress, if
anything has been slowing down somewhat, right, over the last
80 years. And so, you know, on a high level, the explanation is
sure we're using way more effort than we used to be. But the
ideas are harder to find. So we're actually slowing down a
little bit in terms of the pace of our progress. Maybe the best
illustration of that dynamic is physics, where I kind of 100
years ago, also you could have Albert Einstein in his spare
time as a patent clerk come up with multiple very significant
breakthroughs. And then kind of almost single handedly or with
a few collaborators develop general relativity over the few
years that followed, which is just a major breakthrough in our
understanding of the universe. Whereas today, you have probably,
you know, maybe millions of physicists, this kind of with
the huge machines at CERN that have to be honest, making, I
would say pretty incremental progress in advancing the state
of knowledge and physics.
Yeah, okay. Right.
Yeah, in terms of how it applies to AI. First thing to say is
that even if that dynamic exists, and it's very strong, we'd
still expect a very significant if temporary increase in the rate
of technological progress. So let's say ideas are getting
harder to find, but then suddenly, in 10 years, we've got a
billion AI is working on it rather than the kind of 10
million humans. Well, even if our ideas are getting harder to
find, then at least temporarily, there'll be much faster
technological progress. And then we'll kind of pluck even more
of the low hanging fruit and eventually even these AI's get
stuck.
Right, maybe eventually we still stagnate, but it'd be pretty
crazy if you added millions of people or millions of brains to
the workforce and didn't get a bunch more technological progress.
Yeah, I mean, specifically, if you made the workforce like 100
times as big, then yeah, especially with the other
advantages, I discussed about running 10 times as fast and
being really focused on the most important tasks. I think
really surprising if you don't get at least a temporary
increase. In fact, I don't think it would be temporary. And
that's because one of the things that AI's can work on is
actually building more computer chips to run AI's on improving
the kind of hardware designs for those computer chips, improving
the algorithms that AI's run on, improving the designs of
robots, just making themselves better scientists.
Exactly. And so we've been discussing how already the pace
of progress in terms of the algorithms and the hardware is
pretty fast. And I've already said that I expected to be much
faster once we have a GI. And so really, this isn't a kind of a
constant sized AI and robotics workforce we're talking about
here. But no, if if we choose to do so, then we could have the
size of that workforce doubling every year very easily. And so
that that means you can overcome this problem of ideas getting
harder to find, because you're not you're not kind of dealing
with a constant or slowly growing workforce, you're, you're
dealing with a workforce which is itself rapidly increasing in
size. And so even if ideas are getting harder to find, you've
got a bigger and bigger workforce to find it. And you can
actually model out this dynamic, you can take the kind of
the best models we have, where ideas are getting hard to find.
And you can say, well, ideas are getting hard to find the one
hand. But on the other hand, AI is able to design better AI is
and do all the improvements that I talked about designing better
robots, etc. How does that dynamic play out? And it turns out
that at least under these models, even if ideas are getting
harder to find it at kind of a very steep rate, then you still
are going to get the kind of the AI's and robots winning that
race.
That's really wild. I guess those AI scientists might hit some
limits. And do you have any ideas for what those might end up
being?
It's a great question. I think we are going to hit limits at some
point. Eventually, we won't be able to design better technologies.
Eventually, we'll have the best algorithms we can get for for
making AI's. I do think there are reasons to think the limits
could be quite quite high. So one one interesting data point is
that small animals are able to double their population size in
just a few months. And even smaller animals like insects can
double their population size in just days or weeks. So that
shows that it is physically possible to have a certain kind
of biological robot that kind of doubles its own number in the
scale of weeks or months. Right. And with all of this kind of
massive scientific effort that we've been describing, it seems
possible that we'll be able to design kind of robots of our own
that are able to kind of double their own number, kind of build
replacement robots in a similar timeframe. Right. And so you
know, currently, you can you can try and estimate well, if we
used a factory to try and build another copy of itself, how long
would that take? You know, I haven't seen a good analysis of
this. But you know, when I've spoken to people, they've guessed
it, you know, on the order of months. Okay. So that that that
also should kind of supports this vague idea that it might be
possible to get these robots that are able to kind of build
extra copies of themselves and double their own number in just
a number of months. So what what that all suggests is that we
could have like a kind of a robot workforce, which is growing at
a really, really high rate.
And by robot, I'm picturing physical bodies. But do you do
basically just mean AI system that's like working on science? Or
or do you think physical bodies end up being important? Because
we've got to start automating some of these physical tasks, in
addition to the cognitive tasks?
I'm thinking, yeah, including the physical tasks, when I'm
talking about the robots, I mean, if these robots each weighed
50 kilograms, and we used we able to produce robots as many
robots in a year, such that they weighed as much as all the
cars that we currently produce in a year, then we'd be
producing around a billion robots. Oh, my gosh, each year. So
already the manufacturing capacity seems like it is
theoretically there to produce a huge number of robots. And
that's before taking into account that it's lucrative. And so
we want to create more. And yeah, unreal. So I do think that
this, this dynamic leaves us in a pretty crazy world, where the
size of the AI and robotics workforce is growing, potentially
going very, very quickly. And probably as a result, it's hard
for me to imagine technology really stalling out before we hit
real kind of limits, kind of fundamental limits to how good
technology can get. And you know, there will be such limits,
no technology can improve forever and to infinity. Ultimately,
you just, you've come up with the very best ways of arranging
the molecules to get, you know, the desired technological
behavior.
Right. Okay. Do we ever hit limits on just like physical
stuff, the stuff we make the robots out of?
I think we will. So, you know, I already said about the kind of
that car statistics suggesting we can get pretty far, just in
terms of the massive robots we could produce just with the
kind of manufacturing capabilities we already have. The
earth is, is massive. There are kind of mountains with all these
kinds of materials in them, all over the place. And if we run
out of a particular material, which is currently useful for
building robots, then these billions of AI as we have will
be working hard to find ways of doing without that scarce
material. Yeah. And that's been a common pattern in
technological development that you kind of find ways to switch
out of things that are scarce. So, yeah, right. You know, it's
hard to rule out that there's just some material that we just
absolutely need and we can't do without and that that all next
things, you know, maybe once we get to 100 billion robots or
something. Yeah. But it, it also just seems more likely to me
that given just the abundance of just kind of materials that
are in the earth, it's, you know, it's a big place. There's
lots of different stuff there. We, it's not like we've mined
everything there is to mine or even close to it. Right. We'll
be doing, you know, using all the best methods for recycling
and using things as efficiently as possible. It doesn't seem to
me like those kinds of bottlenecks are going to kick in
particularly early. And it's not out of the question that we'd
have the technology to explore resources in space. I mean,
that's even I'm adding more sci-fi here. But like, if
we're doubling technological progress every, I mean, it sounds
like you're talking about months at some point.
Yeah, I think months is plausible.
Okay, months is possible. And so that might mean we, we aren't
limited by earthly limitations.
That's right. There is an interesting dynamic there where if
we are kind of doubling the number of robots really quickly,
and we're improving technology really quickly, then we kind of
we're not that interested in doing an activity which takes
maybe like 10 years to bear fruit, because we're used to kind
of our investments paying off with kind of doublings every
year. We're like, oh, we could go to the moon and get materials,
but man, like that will take so long. If we just invest in
everything we can find on earth, we can much more quickly kind
of increase the
Just use it more efficiently.
Yeah. So that time delay becomes more significant when
when you're already able to go so fast. So I think I imagine
the kind of going to the moon and the space stuff happens when
we're really kind of struggling to find ways to make use of the
earth resources.
Okay, so it sounds like we're kind of talking about something
like AI systems replace humans in a bunch of sectors, really
during our lifetimes, and then like our lives really, really
change quite radically, and very, very, very quickly. Yeah, I
guess I just find that super weird. I think my brain is
like, no, I don't believe you. That's too weird. I don't like I
just can't imagine that happening. If we're if we're
saying this is happening in the early 2030s, I'll be, yeah, in
my late 30s. And like, all of a sudden, the world would be
radically changing every year. And I like won't be working.
I agree. It seems really crazy. And I think it's very natural
and understandable to just not believe it when you hear the
arguments. And that would have been my initial reaction. In
terms of why I do not believe it. There's probably a few things
which have changed. Probably I've just sat with these arguments
for a few years. And just been like, I just do believe it. You
know, I have discussions with people on either side of the
debate. And I just find that people on one side just have
thought it through much more. And I think what's at the heart
of it for me is that the human brain is a physical system.
There's nothing magical about it. It isn't surprising that at
some point, we develop machines that can do what the human
brain can do at some point in the process of technological
discovery. And to be honest, that happening in the next couple
of decades is kind of when you might expect it to happen
naively. We've had computers for 70 odd years. It's been a
decade since we started pouring loads and loads of compute
into training AI systems. And we've realized that that
approach works really, really well. Just if you were kind of
to say, okay, when do you think humans might develop machines
that can do what the human brain can do? You kind of think it
might be in the next few decades, right? And I think if you
just sit with that fact that there are going to be machines
that can do what the human brain can do. And you're going to be
able to make those machines much more efficient at it. And you're
going to be able to make even better versions of those
machines, you know, 10 times better versions, you can be able
to run them day and night, and you're going to be able to build
more when you sit with all that. I do think it gets pretty hard
to imagine a future that isn't very crazy. Yeah. And another
perspective is just zooming out even further and just looking at
the whole arc of human history. So if you'd have asked hunter
gatherers who only knew the 50 people in their group, and who
had been, you know, hunting using techniques and tools that as
far as they knew had been passed down for eternity generation
to generation, doing their rituals. If you'd have told
them that in a few thousand years, they were going to be huge
empires building, you know, the Egyptian pyramids, and, you
know, massive armies, and the ability to go to a market and
give people, you know, pieces of metal in exchange for all kinds
of goods, they'd have, they would have seemed totally crazy.
Right. And then if you'd have told those people in those
markets that that no, there's going to be a future world where,
you know, every, every 10 years, major, major technological
progress is going to be coming along. And we're going to be
discovering drugs that can solve all kinds of diseases. You're
going to be able to get inside a box and land the other side of
the earth. Right. They, again, they'd have just thought you
were crazy. And I think, you know, while it seems that we
understand what's happening and that progress is pretty steady,
that that has only been true for the last 200 years. And
zooming out, it's actually the norm throughout the longer
run of history for things to go in a totally surprising and
unpredictable direction, or kind of a direction that would have
seemed totally bizarre and unpredictable to people naively
at that time.
Right, right. I feel like I was introduced to it when I read what
we did the future, Will MacAskill's book, that there's
the, this thing called the end of history fallacy, it like
really feels like we're living at the end. Like, we're done
changing, we're gonna, we're gonna maybe find some new
medic, like medical devices or something. But like, basically,
we've like, done all of the weird shifting that we're gonna do.
And that just like, I can't really justify that. It does
seem like a fallacy. Like, presumably, things are gonna look
super different in 50 years. And like, sometimes those
changes have gone super fast in history. And sometimes they've
gone super slowly. And we've got real reasons to think that we
might be entering a period of really fast transition.
Yeah, I mean, if anything, I'd say the norm is for the new
period to involve much faster changes than the old period. So
hunter gathering went on for tens of thousands of years, if not
hundreds of thousands of years, then we started doing
agriculture and formed into big societies and did things like
the pyramids. And then a way that, you know, people often think
of the next phase transition as being kind of the start of the
industrial revolution, and the beginning of kind of concerted
efforts towards making scientific progress. And after we did
agriculture, kind of new technologies and changes were
happening on the scale of maybe 1000 years, or maybe a few
100 years, which is much faster than in the hunter gatherer
times. And then today, after the industrial revolution, we're
seeing really big changes to society every 50 years. Right,
right. So we've already seen kind of historically, those those
phase transitions have led to things being faster. So that I
think is the default expectation for what a new transition would
would lead to. Right. And it just feels weird to us because
we're pre transition plausibly, whoever's living 50 years from
now will just be like, Yeah, obviously, that was, that was
coming. And like, those weird people living in 2023, thinking
that like, they'd made all the technological progress they were
ever going to make. Yeah. Maybe I'm still struggling just to
imagine what it would look like, I guess. Yeah, I mean, like,
because it's going to be, it's possibly going to be us. Like,
what's in store for us? Is it going to be good?
I think it could be really good. It could be really, really
bad. It could be really good if we if we align AI, so they're
always trying to help us and help humanity do as best as it
can by humanity's own lights. And the kind of benefits from AI
and these new technologies are used to solve the world's most
pressing problems, and used to lift people out of poverty and
give people the lives that they hope for themselves and for
their children, solve the problems of climate change or
poverty of disease, I think it could go really, really well.
Right, right. And so in the best case, where AI is really
trying to help us, it's still kind of unimaginable to me as a
world. I mean, maybe it's just like, I'm so biased by the status
quo, where like, I need to work, and I need to work to live, I
need to work to help solve problems. Like, in this best
case, is there unemployment? Is there unemployment for for
everyone? Is it a slow transition? A fast one? Does it
make inequality better? Because no one needs to work and we all
have enough things? Or does it make it worse? Because some
people have to work? Do we have predictions about that that are
worth making?
I think the default is that inequality would become greater,
because all of the wealth and useful work is coming from these AI
systems, which I think by default will be controlled by a small
number of people and companies.
Okay.
In the very best case, then you hope that that wealth is equally
distributed, or kind of much more equally distributed than it
would be by default. And it is true, I think that there's going
to be so much, so much progress made, if AI is aligned, that it
will be very cheap to give to give everyone in the world the
standards of living that are enjoyed by the very richest
people today, in terms of material comforts, and health, and
actually much, much better on those fronts, I think after all
this technological progress. So I think if we can get the AIs to
be really trying to help us, then even if we mess up on things
like the kind of distribution of benefits, even if we mess up a
bit on that, then I think things will still look pretty good,
because there's just so much to go around.
Right.
You know, if just there's kind of universal basic income, you
could just use, you know, 1% of the output that's produced in a
year to kind of give everyone kind of all the material and
technological things they need to kind of meet all of their
needs, all of the material needs.
Right.
In terms of work, I think it will no longer be the case that you
can produce a higher quality service or product than what an
AI could do, or a robot could do. One thought is that there will
be some humans, maybe me and you, who just value human contact
right and hang out with other actual real humans. And that
could provide a kind of a kind of work for those who want it
role for humans. Okay.
And another possibility is that we we we think the nature of work.
So we do work to help each other. And even though we know that
AIs could do the work just as well, we we're still happy to do
that, because it gives us a sense of meaning, or we kind of do
creative things instead, like, right, you know, creative writing
and drawing. And even though we know that AIs could do that
better than ours, it's still enough for us to have a sense of
purpose. I mean, people still play chess today, and still really
enjoy it and get purpose from it, even though they know that
they can never going to match the best AIs.
Right. Yeah, I guess I can imagine lots of people listening,
hearing about this future and being like, no, I like the world
the way it is. I like that humans get to make choices for for
ourselves as a society. I don't want AIs making it for us. I
like that I have to work, get to work. I don't know, I don't, I
can imagine people being like, no, I don't want AIs to be making
the art. I want humans to be making the art. So is there some
chance that there's, I don't know, like a movement that's
anti AI growth that that stops us from happening, even though
it's theoretically possible?
That's a great question. I do think it would be good for us to
take this transition more slowly than is theoretically
possible. And that might happen by default if we don't make
specific efforts to go slowly. And so I think if people do try
and delay or stop this, it could, it could be a good thing,
because I don't think we're prepared for that new world.
Right. I think it's going to be very hard to permanently prevent
this transition from happening.
How come?
One way to think about it is that there is some kind of
upfront starting cost to get this transition going. So let's
really simplify and say, today, if you spent a trillion dollars,
you'd be able to train AGI, and you'd have enough money left
over to buy some manufacturing equipment for making robots.
Right.
And then you could have your AIs do research into better robots
and making better AIs. And that whole process could lead to
you having even more AIs and even more robots. And you could
then grow your population of AIs and robots. And just with that
trillion dollar initial investment, you could end up with
this massive AI and robot population, which is then able
to just start doing the scientific work needed to
significantly accelerate technological progress.
Right. Right.
So the thing that's difficult is that that upfront cost will be
falling over time. AI algorithms are improving, computer chips
are improving. And so the cost to kind of training AGI and then
just using it to build robots and to build more AIs and make
money on the make money in the economy by selling it services
and just kind of building up its own self perpetuating energy
that ultimately results in making technological progress so you
can sell more useful things to society that people want. That
cost is going to be falling. And so let's say it was a trillion
today, you know, in the future, it's going to be 100 billion,
and then it's going to be 10 billion. And there's going to be
a lot of incentive to do this, because it's going to grant
whoever does it a lot of power. They'll have all these AI
workers that they can use to do, you know, whatever they want
them to do if they manage to solve the alignment problem. If
they use it for designing new technologies, and those new
technologies could grant additional military power, or
they could grant things that people all around the world
desperately want like curing illnesses, right, like preventing
climate change, like understanding and solving mental
health problems, like, like life extension.
So it's not just kind of economic economic incentives, it's
not just like to get rich. It's like all sorts of motivations
are benefited from paying this cost to get this hugely
productive AI scientist workforce.
Yeah, kind of whatever you want. Right. You can probably get
it much more effectively if you have a billion AI's and robots
designing technology to help you get it. And I think we can delay
it, we can say okay, we're gonna be really cautious, only a few
people are allowed to train these systems, and we try and
convince the other countries to go slowly as well. But to think
that we could be, you know, that even 100 years after it's
first been possible to train AI for a trillion dollars, that
still no one has done it, and no one is using it to make
scientific progress, even though the cost is now like 10
million dollars. It's really hard to imagine that we kind of
prevent anyone from
all the different actors from doing it as it gets cheaper.
I think sometimes people when they're thinking about it,
imagine that in order to get this kind of 10 or 100x faster
technological progress, we'd have to be making a real effort and
really kind of being super efficient and driven about it. But
I think that's not the right way to think about it. It's more
like, by default, all you need to do is ask your AI's and
robots, please do these tasks for me. And if you need to make
tech progress along the way, do it. They will suggest the plans
and involve making tech progress. They will get in contact
with the labs and organize for the experiments to happen. You
don't have to do anything. Right. And so I don't think it's
going to require some kind of concerted pro growth enthusiasts
to like really push for this. It's more like you want stuff.
The AI is going to try and do the stuff you want. And whenever
they make tech progress, it's going to go really well. And it's
going to really help you solve your problems. And you're going to
just want to do more of it.
Yeah, just enough time will pass. Enough actors will think on
it and decide to do it at some point. Yeah. So I guess I buy
that the incentives are there for eventually an actor to want to
build this kind of AI scientist workforce. It still seems like
there have been enormously lucrative and beneficial
technologies that we haven't pursued. So one example that
comes to mind is like nuclear power, which like could help
loads with climate change and would also be, again, super
lucrative. And yet, yeah, we basically haven't done anything
like what we could do with it. Could there be something similar?
I mean, it's just kind of stigmatized is like one reason
we haven't. And I guess it's really expensive, in particular
the upfront costs, which like maybe just ends up true of this
like AI world we're talking about.
Yeah, it's a great example. You know, I don't have a good
understanding of what happened, but I think there are some big
catastrophes with nuclear power, and then it became very
stigmatized. And the regulatory requirements around it and the
safety requirements became very large, much larger really than
was reasonable, given that fossil fuel energy has damaging
health consequences as well through air pollution.
Right.
And as a result, it just became kind of a mixture of
stigma and just the additional cost from all the regulation
just prevented it from being rolled out. But I do think
there are a fair few very significant disanalogies between
that case and the case of AI.
Okay. Yeah, what are they?
So one thing is that there were other sources of energy that
were available. And so it wasn't too costly to be like, well,
we're not going to use nuclear, we're going to use fossil
fuels instead. And then, you know, even the green climate
change concern, people could think about kind of developing
solar panels and renewable energies. And in the AI case,
that there is going to be no alternative. There's going to be
no alternative technology, which can solve all illness, and
which can grant your nation massive national security and
military power, and that can solve climate change. This is
going to be the only option. So that's one disanalogy.
Okay, that makes sense.
Another another kind of disanalogy is the cost factor. So with
nuclear power, it's become more expensive at a time due to
regulations. And that that's been a big factor in not being
pursued. But the specifics around these cost curves with
compute and this algorithmic progress patterns, suggests that
the upfront cost of training AGI is going to be falling really
pretty quickly over time. Right. And so even if initially you
put loads of regulations, which make it very expensive, it's
really not going to be long until it's 10x cheaper. Right. And
so permanently preventing it when it's when it's becoming
cheaper and cheaper at such a high rate, it's going to be
really, really difficult. Third is just just talking about the
size of the gains from from this technology compared to nuclear
power. So you know, France adopted nuclear power, and it
was somewhat beneficial, you know, it's kind of now gets a lot
of its powerful nuclear energy, and that there's no climate
change impacts. And that's great. But it's not as if France is
visibly, and undisputably, just doing amazing well as a country
because it's got, you know, this nuclear power, like it's a kind
of a modest addition, maybe it makes it look a little bit
better. Right. But by contrast, if one country is is, you know,
progressing technology at the normal rate, and then another
country comes along, and it starts using these ai's and
robots a little bit, you're going to see very significant
differences in how its overall technology and prosperity, and
kind of military power is progressing. And then you're
going to see that as countries dial up how much they're
allowing ai's to do this work, that there are then bigger and
bigger differences there. And ultimately, the difference
between advancing technology at our pace versus advancing
technology 30 times faster is over the course of just a few
years, it becomes a massive difference in the sophistication
of your country's technology and ability to solve all kinds of
social and political problems. You know, a last point on this
difference is that, you know, the US did in fact invest a lot of
money in nukes. Shortly after the development of fish and
power, when it came to a matter of national power, they were
very happy to invest in the technology, despite, you know,
the risks which were which were clearly very high, all of the
same risks. So yes, you know, the incentives were out of whack,
and we didn't get nuclear fission power. But when it came to
this kind of military technology for which there was no
replacement, countries were very keen to do it, and they made
it happen. And ai driving significant technological
improvements across the board is going to be a huge source of
military power. Right. And so it's really hard for me to imagine
that just no one ever no one ever uses it for that.
And you've totally preempted my next question, which was like,
can we definitely not come up with a like an international
treaty that is like the downside risks of this technology at
this scale are are possibly huge because alignment is so hard. And
so we're all agreeing not to not to go forward with it. And I
guess we had lots of reason to do that in the case of nuclear
weapons. And we didn't. And we have lots of reason to do that in
the case of biological weapons. And, and we suck at it. We do not
live in a world free of biological weapons or nuclear
weapons.
So I do think we should try. And I do think we can slow things
down. And we can, you know, increase the requirements and
the safety efforts required, maybe to make it 10 times as
costly or 100 times as costly to develop this technology. I think
that is that is one thing. And that's a big ask. And I think we
should try and do as much of it as we can. Even if we can do
that, it's a whole different thing to talk about permanently
choosing to never develop the technology, even after we've made
maximal efforts into making it safe, even after all the safety
tests are saying it looks like it is safe, right, even when
millions of people are dying every year from illnesses which we
know could be prevented if we allowed the AIs to do research
and to treating it. I think there's permanently not going
forward with with using AIs and robots to make that technological
progress. Like I said, when it's becoming cheaper and cheaper
in other countries and other companies, you know, might want
to do it, that does seem like it's just very unrealistic, just
implausible, and maybe not desirable either, to be honest,
like after a certain point, like we should take it really
cautious.
Right after 200 years of like research into air alignment, even
if we're like, ooh, this seems weird and scary and might change
the world as we know it. At some point, there are going to be
incentives for some actors, countries or companies to try to
deploy this technology at scale to solve problems like poverty
and illness, maybe also to get military advantages to solve
problems like climate change. And those incentives might just
be so strong that even if we take our time, we'll probably
eventually do it, someone will. And once that happens, progress
will become so quick that we're looking at really economic
growth at a pace that's, I guess, still kind of unfathomable to
me, but that is this kind of thing where progress we've seen
over the last 100 years happens in the next 10, and actually
just keeps getting faster and faster and faster. Is that kind
of the picture?
Yeah, that's the picture.
That's really weird. It's scary. I guess it's also quite
hopeful. I mean, if I let myself hope for for that good world
where we use it to solve problems, I feel nervously really,
really excited. But I guess we've got some real, real challenges
to overcome first.
Yeah.
Okay, let's move on to a related topic you've been
researching more recently. So you've just written the draft of
a report on AI takeoff speeds that has some pretty alarming
results to me, given everything we've just talked about. And I
guess just to get on the same page about language, what exactly
do you mean when you talk about AI takeoff speeds?
Roughly speaking, capabilities takeoff speed is the question of
how quickly AI systems will improve as they approach and
surpass human level intelligence.
And so the capabilities are like their ability to do things
like drive cars or program new programs.
Exactly. So a fast takeoff speed could be that in a, you know,
in three months, AI is go from mouse level intelligence to
significantly more intelligent than the smartest human, right?
Where a slow takeoff speed that could be happening over
decades.
Got it. Okay. So we're just like slowly making progress next year
at self driving cars. And then it takes another 10 years to get
to programs that can write other programs. So I guess, you know,
you've written this report, and I won't, I won't give away the
results yet, but it gives some evidence about how fast we might
expect AI takeoff speeds to be. But before we get to that, before
you wrote the report, what did you think was the most compelling
evidence that AI takeoff speeds would be particularly fast?
So I think the most convincing argument is related to how
humanity's capabilities were improving much more slowly. 50,000
years ago, then they are improving today. And the attempt to draw
analogy to what might happen with AI capabilities. So if we
think that a million years ago, humanity's kind of cognitive
abilities collectively were were maybe doubling every, let's say
100,000 years, I don't know. Okay, that's just kind of something
to represent their kind of slow increase in brain size and
capacities. The exact number doesn't matter. You know, whether
you want to say it's a, you know, 100,000 or 10,000 years is a
very slow doubling size in their abilities.
Right. And that's basically because like slowly they're
evolving to have slightly bigger brains, we're like adding a
bit of prefrontal cortex, and like the population is getting a
little bit bigger over time. But, but grew very, very slowly.
So collectively, it's just it takes thousands of years to
double. Yeah, exactly. Cool. Cool. Okay. Whereas today, our
abilities are improving incredibly quickly. As as a
society, our population growth is much faster. Our command of
technology is much faster. And, you know, in the last, like I
said, in the last 200 years alone, we've, we've doubled the
economy many, many times and doubled our ability to understand
and manipulate the world very many times. And if you think
that that there'll be some analog of that transition, as we
approach a AGI, then I mean, AI is already improving really
quickly. You know, I would say it's, it's kind of doubling its
abilities in less than a year at the moment. And so if, if you
know, if that's this kind of the slow initial pace, then, you
know, the new pace would would be kind of blisteringly quick.
Right, right. And imaginably. Yeah, exactly. The way I would
think about it is that a million years ago, humans weren't able
to do science and to discover technological improvements much
at all. And so they didn't have access to this additional
feedback loop of improvement, where you discover new technology
passed on to the next generation, then they start on a better
place, can discover even more technology, you can now support
a bigger population. There's this whole feedback loop, which
arguably we couldn't access a million years ago. Then we
improved our cognitive abilities as, you know, as humans a
little bit, and then suddenly we got over this threshold where
okay, we can access this, this kind of doing technological
progress feedback loop, which then, you know, then then speeds
up and speeds up as we develop agriculture, and then we develop
text, you know, written language, and we develop maths, and
it's kind of, we're now even better at discovering new
technologies. And the thought is, in my mind, that maybe there's
something similar that happens with AI's, whereas today, they're
not, you know, they're not that smart. And so they're not able
to access a certain feedback loop. I'm not sure exactly what
that feedback loop will be. But at some point, they become
smart enough that there's this additional feedback loop that
they can use to improve their capabilities, kind of like how
humans use technology to improve our capabilities. You know,
one, one funny thing about this argument is that it's not clear
what that new feedback loop might be for AI's. And so that
leaves me a little bit puzzled over where to go with this
argument.
So for humans, it's, you know, we discover the scientific
method, and we experiment on things, and we built computers.
And now we can like run programs that help us do science. But
for AI, it's like, we don't even know what kinds of science
they'll discover that's like beyond ours. And is there some
question about whether there even are kind of higher orders of
science that we can't, that we haven't developed, but that AI
systems might to kind of increase their own feedback loop?
Yeah, I think that's, I think that's right. And you know, you
can, you can throw out ideas for what that might look like.
Right. Maybe it's the AI's learn to work together in a team in a
way that is way more efficient than ever done.
Yep. Or maybe they run simulations or something to like
learn about economics or something in a way that we can, we
can barely understand because we only see the economies run in
these weird real real world scenarios.
For example, for example, cool. Okay. Yeah, are there are there
any limitations to that argument? Or do you do just kind of buy
it?
Yeah, I'm I actually don't put that much weight on on this
particular argument.
Oh, interesting.
So the main reason is that evolution was not trying to make
humanity as a whole as capable as possible. And it wasn't
trying to make humanity as a whole good at science. Right. So
from that perspective, it's not actually as surprising that
humanity went from really sucking at science to being really
good at science in a fairly short, short timeframe. Yeah, so
here's an analogy. Before 2020, we hadn't made many COVID
vaccines, not because we couldn't, but because we weren't
trying to we were focused as a society on doing other things.
Okay, then around 2020, it became really useful for us to
make lots of vaccines. And then learn behold, the number of
vaccines went up very dramatically. Now that doesn't
mean that our kind of abilities and vaccine making suddenly went
up. It just means that we reprioritized, reallocated the
resources we already had towards making vaccines. Okay. And I
want to say that that's somewhat similar to the way in which kind
of our ancestors a million years ago, we weren't that good at
science. But evolution wasn't trying to make us that good at
science. It was mostly trying to make us hunt successfully,
feed our families. Okay, science was like maybe a tiny, tiny
bit useful back then, because it may be allowed you to discover
something with your own lifetime, but it really wasn't very
useful. Then I think, more recently, maybe more like kind
of 10s or 100,000 years ago, it did become more useful for
humans to do science, and to be flexible learners. And so it's
not that surprising that that at that point, say 50,000 years
ago, whereas we're as more useful for humans to be good at
science, evolution then reallocated those cognitive
resources of humans to being good at science. Right. So that
that kind of reallocation by evolution from kind of just
for foraging and then reallocating those cognitive
resources to doing science is kind of like human society,
reallocating its resources to make COVID vaccines.
Okay, yeah, that's really, really helpful. So something like a
combination maybe of language, maybe of just like group living,
maybe some things that I don't understand, made it much more
beneficial to be able to learn new things and learn like a
range of things, not just the same things over and over again.
And so a couple of tweaks in the brain was enough to make the
brain that we'd be using for very like for very specific set of
tasks, become useful for just like a much wider range of tasks.
And that wasn't like really fundamentally altering like the
amount of brain we have, but like how we use it. And that
capacity already existed. And like you said, was repurposed.
So yeah, here's how you would relate it to AI takeoff. You'd
say that in the case of evolution, evolution wasn't
initially trying to make humans good at science. And so no
massive surprise that it's able to quickly make some tweaks that
make humans good at science late in the day. But with AI's and
with AI development, humans will be at every stage trying to make
AI's as useful as possible for doing economic tasks, helping
with science and research. And so we wouldn't expect there to be
this kind of overhang where the AI has these abilities, which
it's just not using, because we would expect humans to be trying
to coax those abilities out at every step of the way.
And so if you're constantly trying to coax abilities out,
most likely you'll only find ways to do it incrementally, as
opposed to like, if it happened to be the case that like, I don't
know, we found a billion computer chips on another planet, and
could just use them to train up a bunch of AI systems, then we'd
expect the step change. But like, currently, everything is just
increasing incrementally, we're increasing chips incrementally,
we're increasing algorithmic progress incrementally. And so
it's just going to keep improving at an at a kind of
incremental pace.
And I think crucially, we have to think that we're currently at
each step of the way trying to use the most recent algorithms and
most recent compute to actually get AIs to do, let's say useful
science research. You know, if we're incrementally increasing the
computer algorithms, but we're not actually trying to get the AIs
to do useful science research, then it could be that one day we
decide to try and get AIs to do useful science research. And then
suddenly, we train them to reassign all their cognitive
abilities to that task. And we do get something that's really
quick. So it's a really important assumption here that in some
sense, the AI development ecosystem is kind of efficient.
Yep. And it's using, yeah, it's using new AI capabilities to do
like the cutting edge research, as opposed to like, if there were
only market incentives to make AI that, I don't know, made these
beautiful images like Dolly, and no incentives at all to use AI to
improve AI systems. Then if one day we made a few tweaks to
Dolly, and we're like, stop making pictures, make programs
instead. And but like, actually, like, it did have capabilities
related enough that we could make that tweak semi easily. Then
all of a sudden, we'd have this system that could write programs
really efficiently that we'd never had before.
Right. Or maybe a more probable scenario would be, we're just
using all our resources to train these image generating systems
like Dolly. And then we're like, you know what, why don't we just
try using all those resources to train an AI, a science AI. And
then we, you know, we pick the architecture to specialize of
a science, we use the data to specialize it for science, we use
all the compute that we were previously pouring into these
image generation systems. And then suddenly we're like, wow, our
science AI is amazing. And it came out of nowhere, because we
hadn't been trying in the previous years to do this at all.
Yeah. So are we currently trying to make AI systems that are
really good at science?
I think it's a good question. The market doesn't seem to me to
be super efficient. I've been playing with GPT-4 a bit recently.
And to me, it looks like GPT-4 is pretty smart. It doesn't seem to
me like its cognitive abilities have been, you know, really
direct in the direction of helping to advance science, to be
honest. So I do think that, you know, this argument could
ultimately, could ultimately say, yeah, you know, a faster
takeoff is, is plausible. And the mechanism could be
reallocating the AI's cognitive abilities towards science. I
mean, GPT-4 is just trained to predict the next world on the
internet. Right. That's a very different kind of task than the
task of advancing science. And so I think that that is a reason to
expect a faster takeoff.
More of a more of a jump. Yeah. Okay. Interesting. I haven't, I
haven't heard that argument before. Cool. Well, I want to now
get to the report that you've written on AI takeoff speeds,
which asks how quickly AI might go from kind of pretty
economically valuable to just extremely capable, maybe as good
as humans. And yeah, I guess you define your terms pretty clearly
in your report. So maybe we should start by doing that. Am I,
am I right in remembering that you are trying to answer the
question of how quickly will go from AI systems that can do 20%
of human tasks to AI systems that can do 100% of human tasks? Is
that right?
Yeah, that's right. In particular, I am restricting to
cognitive tasks. That's similar to what we discussed earlier.
It's it's any task that you could do remotely that doesn't
require you to be physically manipulating objects yourself
because AI's don't have physical bodies. That wouldn't be
included for them. I mean, it does include tasks like giving
instructions to a human who's who's doing a physical job telling
them, you know, where to move things, what to do with their
arms, and or potentially giving instructions to robots that are
that are doing physical tasks, but it but it doesn't include the
kind of the physical motions themselves.
So does it include things like driving cars?
Yes, it does.
Okay, it does. And that's because driving cars is is really a set
of algorithms. And like you can you can turn the wheel of the car.
So it's a good point that currently the way humans drive
cars is by physically moving various, you know, levers in the
car. But I think actually giving the AI the control of the
steering wheel and of the pedals and the brakes is actually
pretty trivial. Okay, so the only thing that's hard in practice
about getting AI's to do driving is the cognitive parts of you
know, what should the car be doing at each point?
Yeah, right. Okay, so then an example of a task that isn't
included is something like helping people move house. It's
like carrying the boxes in and out.
Carrying the boxes in and out would not be included.
Yeah, okay.
But telling them here's the best plan for moving. Here's the
order you should move the boxes in that all would be included.
Okay, so that's basically what you've done. You want to know how
fast we go from 20% of cognitive tasks to 100% of cognitive
tasks. Yeah, can you actually clarify what it means for AI to
be able to complete 20% of tasks?
So you could say, okay, let's say we can AI automates driving,
what percentage is that? Is that 3%? Because it's, you know,
3% of people do it? Or is it, you know, do we just like give, we
look at a long list of tasks and assume that each takes up an
equal percentage? Like, what do we mean by 20%? Yes. And so the
way I'm currently thinking about that is you look at how much
people pay for those tasks to be performed in the economy. Okay.
So let's take the driving example. I don't know. Let's say
that drivers around the world are being paid $2 trillion a
year for the work they're doing driving trucks and taxis and
everything else. In that case, because $2 trillion is is is 2%
of the global global GDP, I would say that automating driving
fully automating all driving would be automating 2% of all
economic tasks. Got it. And then you're saying how fast will we
go from we can do 20% so I don't know maybe it's like replacing
all drivers, maybe it's replacing all journalism because
GPT-4 seems to be really good at writing. And I don't know, a
couple of other, a couple of other things. How fast you go
from like that chunk to literally all cognitive tasks,
including I guess, science, AI, R&D.
Now, one complication is that from year to year, the amount
that is paid to people to perform each task might change. So in
2020, maybe drivers are paid $3 trillion a year for their work,
maybe in 2025, they're paid $4 trillion a year. And that that
could change. So I'm pegging these percentages to the year 2020.
Got it.
Kind of arbitrary choice just to make the definition unambiguous.
Yes. Okay, that makes sense. So what were they paid in 2020? And
even if I don't know, like wages change for all sorts of
reasons, including AI taking over some jobs, we're still just
thinking of what percentage of the 2020 cognitive economy is
being automated.
Exactly. And it is really important to keep that in mind
because typically when AI automates a certain task, it
becomes really cheap to do that task.
Right. So it becomes a much smaller fraction of the
economy. Exactly. Yeah. And so you could you can end up
thinking that AI is never doing anything when it's actually
done almost everything. And so that is just an important thing
to be aware of. Yeah, that makes total sense. Is there an
analogy from the Industrial Revolution or something?
The best analogy might be agriculture. So I think in, you
know, 1500, basically everyone worked in agriculture.
Right. It was 90% of the economy or something.
Exactly. All of GDP would have basically been agriculture.
Today, I think it's less than 5%. And that's because we've
become really good at producing food with very little need for
human labour. And so
So it's not to say that fertilizer and trucks and, you
know, really high, highly productive seeds aren't contributing
a bunch to the economy. But clearly they have. But were you to
measure it as a fraction of the GDP that they're responsible for,
it would be smaller because everything's just gotten so much
cheaper because of them.
Exactly. Cool. Okay, that makes that makes a bunch of sense. Nice.
Okay, so we've got definitions. So you've asked how fast will we
go from AI systems that can do roughly 20% of the cognitive
tasks that humans were doing as of 2020? And how yeah, how
quickly will we go from 20% of those tasks to 100% of those
tasks being at least in theory, like able to be automated by AI
systems? So yeah, what was what was your result?
So the conclusion from the report is, I guess pretty scary. The
bottom line is that my median guess is that it would take just a
small number of years to go from that 20% to 100%. So I think
equally likely to happen in less than three years, as it is to
happen in more than three years. So a pretty abrupt and quick
change is the kind of median kind of best guess median. Wow. And
do you believe that in your bones? Does that feel like like
very plausible to you?
Yeah, I do. So some some quick things about why why it's
plausible. Each year, once you take algorithms, better algorithms
and using more compute into account, we're currently training
AI's each year that have kind of three times bigger brains than
the year before. So really rough way to think about it. But you
know, imagine three times smaller brain than humans. That's
chimpanzee brain size. Right. Each year, you're going from
chimpanzees to humans.
That's I think, you know, it's really hard to try and account
for the effect of the algorithmic improvements. But on my kind
of best guess of what those amount to. Yeah, each year, we're
making the brains of AI systems about three times bigger. Wow.
And right now, it's humans that are doing all the work to
improve those AI systems. As we get close to AI's that match
humans, we'll be increasingly using AI systems to improve AI
algorithms, design better AI chips. And so, overall, I expect
that pace to accelerate absent a specific effort to slow down.
Right. So rather than three times bigger brains each year, it's
going to be going faster and faster, five times bigger brain
each year, 10 times bigger brain each year. And I think that
that just already makes it plausible that there could be
just a small number of years where this transition happens
where AI's go from much worse than humans to much better. But
to add in another factor, I think that it's likely that AI's
are going to be automating AI research itself before they're
automating things in most of the economy. Right. Because that's
the kind of the task in the workflow that AI researchers
themselves really understand. So they would they would be kind
of best place to use AI is effectively there. There aren't
going to be kind of delays to rolling it out or trouble
finding the customers for that in the same way. The task of AI
research is quite similar to what language models are currently
trained to do. They're currently trained to predict the next
token on the internet, which means they're particularly
well suited to text based tasks. Right. And the task of writing
code is is one such task and there is lots of data on on
examples of code writing. Oh, I see. So it's like typically I
don't know that much about coding. Is it basically also token
prediction? That is how current coding assistants work, I think
is that they that they're looking at your kind of you start
writing your code and they predict what's going to follow. Like
one way of putting it would be by the time that the AI's can do
20% of cognitive tasks in the broader economy, maybe they can
already do 40 or 50% of tasks specifically in AI R&D. Right.
And so they could have already really started accelerating the
pace of progress by the time we get to that 20% economic impact
threshold. I mean, at that point, you could easily imagine
really, it's just one year, you know, you give them a 10x bigger
brain, that's like going from chimps to humans, and then doing
that jump again. That could easily be enough to to go from 20%
to 100% just intuitively. And, you know, and I think that's kind
of that that's kind of the default really. That's terrifying.
Yeah, and I think there's even more pointing that direction. I
think that already, we're seeing that with GPT for and other
systems like that, people are becoming much more interested
in AI, much more willing to invest in AI. The demand for good
AI researchers is is going up. The wages for good AI researchers
are going up. AI research is going to be a really financially
valuable thing to automate. Right. If you're if you're paying
$500,000 a year to one of your human research engineers, which
is which is, you know, lower than what some of these researchers
are earning, then if you can if you can manage to get your AI
system to double their productivity, that's that's way
better than doubling the productivity of someone who works
in a random other industry. Just the straightforward
financial incentive, as the kind of power of AI becomes
apparent, will be towards, let's see if we can automate this
really lucrative type of work. So that that's just another
reason to think that we get the automation much earlier on the
AI side, then on the general economy side, and that by the
time we're seeing big economic impacts, AI is no already
improving at a blistering pace, potentially.
Okay, well, that's, yeah, again, really scary, like really
genuinely very scary.
I completely agree.
Do you have a guess at what percent of cognitive tasks AI
can currently perform? It seems like we're really far away
from 20%.
Yeah, intuitively, I think it seems that we're far from 20%
because AI's aren't doing that much in the economy. If I looked
at a list of the kind of cognitive tasks people were
performing in 2020, and what they were paid for them, it's not
as if AI is ready to kind of replace, you know, a big fraction
of that labor. So that's just the 20% is far off. I'm actually
less confident that it's far off than I used to be. Then if we
would have had this interview six months ago, because just
seeing GPT falls performance, firstly, just just, you know,
doing really well on just a whole wide range of university
exams and other formal tests, without having specifically
trained on that. And then me kind of playing around with it
and thinking, yeah, just seems smarter than most people I
talk about this stuff with. Right. Most of my start friends
wouldn't be this smart. Right. I'm thinking, you know, maybe
actually, if you just put some work into specifically applying
GPT for, you could automate quite a large fraction of the
cognitive tasks. It does seem it does seem much more plausible
to me that maybe you could get to 10% today, or within a year.
Wild. That's super interesting. I mean, I guess. Yeah, I was
also blown away by GPT for his performance on yet the SAT the
LSAT for anyone who hasn't looked will stick up a link to
those test results. I think it was performing, I mean, much
better than I ever did on my AP tests in high school, and better
than I did on the GRE. So it's it's like, it's beating me. And I
think beating out loads of other people already. Maybe I'm
maybe I'm over or putting too much weight on the fact that
like, currently, not that many people I know are using it to do
anything. And it sounds like your impression is like, maybe
it's pretty close to being able to do a lot.
Yeah, to actually in practice, replace 20% of the tasks that
people do. It's actually a pretty tough thing to do. Because,
you know, for myself, all the different parts of my workflow
are very much entangled up together. So I can't easily like
take out a 20% chunk and be like, Oh, do you before do this
chunk? Because it's all kind of mixed up. Sure. And so
historically, the way that automation has worked is that
we've got a new technology and then we've spent decades
readjusting our workflows so that we can neatly parcel out
you know, 20% of our workflow for this new technology to do. And
the technology can be fairly dumb, because we've kind of really
neatly parceled out that part of our workflow. Yeah, do you have
an example?
Yeah. So let's say moving over from paper records to computer
records. So I used to have maybe people used to have to write
down lots of paper records and maintain a filing system for
their information. And these days, a lot of that work is done
automatically by computers and data storage. But at first, you
know, it wasn't that easy to immediately move over to the
computers. And it took decades, as people were like, you know,
got rid of the paper stuff and got used to kind of teaching the
other employees to use the computers. And, you know, got
used to using their customers to fill out online forms rather
than filling out the paper forms that they're using before. And
all that rearranging of workflows took a long time to
happen. And so one scary possibility is that if ADI is
just 10 years away, then there won't be time to do that
rearranging of workflows that is necessary to get, say, GPT-4 to
actually automate things in practice. And so the 20%
automation ability won't happen through some kind of dumb system
that that I've kind of parceled out a nice thing to do. It will
actually happen with a really smart system that basically
understands my whole workflow well enough to be able to do 20%
for me, which means that it could be pretty close to just being
able to do all of it.
Right, right, right. I mean, I've almost got that impression
with GPT-4 and my job. Like, we asked it, how can you help us
make the 80,000 Hours podcast? And it was like, I can help you
come up with guests. I can help you write interview questions for
the guests if you tell me what they worked on. I can help you,
I mean, it basically rattled off a list of things. And I was
like, as soon as it has a voice, like, that'll be it. That'll be
it for me. And I think I thought it would help me with
subtasks first. I think I thought maybe it would help me
with like generating titles. And like, I don't know, maybe
giving me summaries of people's works that I could read them a
bit faster. But I think in fact, it's actually gonna be really
great at like the start to finish interview process. Yeah,
soon enough that I'll just skip over all of them, which I don't
know if that's true, but it seems, it doesn't seem crazy to me.
And so maybe that's just another actual example of what you're
talking about.
Yeah, yeah. So in that example, by the time it can automate 20%
of the kind of tasks you're doing, it can almost do all of it.
Right. Yeah, makes sense. Okay, so next, I want to dive into your
methodology a bit more deeply for this, yeah, this takeoff
suite's prediction. It's such an alarming result that I've, yeah,
this urge to understand what's going on a bit better. Yeah, so
that headline result, this prediction that AI takeoff might
only take a few years. It's basically based on an economic
model that you made that tries to answer the question of whether
you can get human level AI just by increasing the amount of
compute that we have to train our systems. So in other words,
kind of without paradigm shifting algorithmic breakthroughs.
Yeah, to start us off, can you actually remind me what compute
is?
Okay, so compute is a measurement of how how many calculations you
need to do or a given computer is doing. So let me give an
example. So the most common unit for measuring compute is a flop.
And a flop is adding together two numbers or multiplying
together two numbers or dividing them or subtracting them.
Okay, so mathematical operation.
Exactly. Currently, when we develop AI systems, the way we
do it is by doing loads and loads of these calculations of
adding things together, dividing them, minusing them. And by
doing all of these calculations, that is that is how the AI
decides what what it's going to do. And it's also how we how we
train the AI in the first place. You could you could
analogize these calculations to the kind of firing of neurons
inside our own brain.
Okay, so flops are basically just mathematical operations or
things like are both of these things true or something like
that. And then compute is sorry, it's something like how how many
of those calculations we can do.
So one flop is just one of those calculations. Some of the
biggest language models today are trained with, I think, 10 to
the 24 flop. So that is a million, million, million, million
calculations. That's how many calculations you need to do to
train some of the today's big language models. So the amount
of compute is another way of saying how many calculations did
you need to do it?
Got it. So as compute, compute is the amount of computation you
need to do. And a flop is the kind of unit of how many.
Yeah. Okay, cool. So then you're, you're asking this question
about AI takeoff speeds. And we're just assuming that we, we
increase compute, which is made up of machines, but also has to
do with algorithms as well. So like, is it true that we need
less compute if the algorithm is super efficient, because the
algorithm just requires that you do fewer calculations to get
the same result or something?
The strict assumption is that if we used the algorithms that
were available in 2020, then there is some amount of compute
such that if God handed a top AI lab that amount of compute, and
they had a few years to adjust the algorithms to using that much
more compute, then they would be able to train AGI using that
amount of compute. So then in the model, we make an assumption
about how much compute would have been required. We actually,
we actually put a probability distribution over it. But
importantly, algorithmic progress can reduce that
computational cost over time. Got it. So maybe in 2020, you'd
have needed 10 to the 30 flop to train AGI. But maybe by 2025,
your algorithms are 10 times better. And so you only need 10
to the 29 flop to train AGI. And so the basic dynamic in this
framework is that in each year, our algorithms improve somewhat.
And we decide to use more compute in a training run than we
had done in the previous year.
Right, because it's profitable, etc.
Exactly. And those two factors combined together. So let's say
we use twice as much compute as the previous year, and our
algorithms are twice as good. And that means that the effective
compute that we're using is four times bigger. Right. So it's
the equivalent as if we hadn't improved our algorithms, and we
had just used four times as much compute in the training run.
So you're using effective compute to mean something like you
want an AI system to, for example, predict the next word in a
sentence. And one way you can increase the kind of effectiveness
of that out of that system is by like giving it more compute so
it can do more calculations. But you'll also have another
dynamic where the algorithms are getting better such that you
need less to do the same thing. And so you're doing equivalent
processes or you're doing you're getting like equivalent
outcomes for less physical compute. Whoo, that that is tricky.
One way to think about it is, let's say in 2025, we do it, we
use a certain amount of compute in a training run with 2025
algorithms. Imagine if we'd have been forced to use the 2020
algorithms, how much compute would we have needed then to get
the same result? Right, got it. That is the amount of
effective compute that we actually used in 2025.
Great, that makes sense to me. Okay, so you are you're thinking
about effective compute, and you're making some guess about
how much we'll need to get 100% of cognitive tasks automated.
Yeah, how are you, how are you making guesses about how much
effective compute we'll need to to get 100% of cognitive tasks
automatable?
So in the report itself, I just defer to a different report by
a colleague of mine called the Byronkers report, which asks
that exact question. In fact, I don't think you need to be
deferring to the Byronkers report that there are, you know,
different approaches you can take to estimating how much
effective compute you might need to train AGI. And you could use
whatever approach that you like, then bring that into into my
framework and use it to inform your your initial guess of the
effective training compute for AGI.
Right, and you've got a model that people can play with. So if
you're like, I think the Byronkers report is way too
optimistic about how much compute it'll take to get AGI, you
can 1000 exit and see and see how that changes the outcomes.
Exactly.
Super cool. Okay, so we'll stick a link up to that model so people
can play with it if they want to. Do you mind giving me an
intuitive sense of how much compute you and your colleague
basically think it'll take to get AGI?
So in the current median value I use in the report is is very
large indeed, it is 10 to the 36 flop. So that is if you take
the amount of compute that was used to train the biggest
language models that publish their training requirements, and
then you use a million times as much and then a million times
as much again, that's how much the assumption is making. So I
actually now think that that that assumption is too high.
Is that because of GBD4 and how how impressive it is basically?
Largely, yeah, GBD4 and the kind of the fast pace of recent
improvements is quite a lot faster than I would have
predicted. Wow. And so, yeah, I would I would now be using a
lower value for that important, important parameter, which would
make take off even faster than I'm predicting even faster.
Yeah. Geez. Yeah, the kind of the report that I wrote uses, yeah,
this 10 to the 36 as its as its median estimate for what you'd
need to train AGI.
Okay, cool. That's helpful. Okay, so so that's how you basically
estimate how much effective compute you need to train AGI. How
do you use that to predict? Yeah, AI take off speeds.
Right. So we have this assumption about the effective
training compute for AGI, which was 100% kind of endpoint.
We then need to make an additional assumption about what
would be the effective compute needed to train AI that could
automate 20% of tasks. So let's say that we assumed, for
example, that you need 10 to the 30 flop to train AGI using
2020 algorithms, that'd be 10 to the 30 kind of effective
compute, we then make an additional assumption about how
much less effective compute you need to train AI that could
automate just 20% of tasks. So I kind of want to pause on that
last assumption because it's so important. So that that that
assumption about how many more times compute you need for AGI
compared to 20% AI, that assumption is what I'm calling
the difficulty gap, because it's saying what is the gap in
difficulty between training 20% AI and training 100% AI or AGI.
And then we're measuring the size of that difficulty gap in
terms of how many times more effective compute you need to
train one than the other.
And you're calling it the difficulty gap because it's
kind of describing how much more difficult the most difficult
tasks are relative to the the easiest 20%.
The reason I call it the difficulty gap is is to refer to
the difficulty of developing the AI in the first place. So it's
kind of like how much more difficult is it to develop an AI
that can do 100% of the tasks than it is to develop an AI that
can only do 20%.
Got it. But it might be 10,000 times as difficult, or it might
be barely more difficult at all. If if it turns out that once
you're 20% there, you're basically the whole way there.
Right.
I guess is that possible? Maybe it is if like the first 20% of
tasks includes AI R&D.
So that's an interesting scenario to think about. You could
have the first 20% of tasks, including all of the tasks of
AI R&D. So what I think would happen in that scenario is that
once you've done those first 20% of tasks, AI would be
improving super, super quickly, absent a specific effort to
slow down, you know, within I think a few months, you would
already be able to do a training run that used 100 times more
effective training compute as you had previously done.
And that's because
That's because you would have hundreds of millions of AIs that
could be working to improve the algorithms and maybe making
money so you can buy more AI chips or convincing other people
to kind of share their compute with you. And then that would be
enough to very quickly allow you to use 100 times as much
effective compute.
Cool. Okay. Yeah. So I guess maybe you think that which tasks
end up being easier also plays into how fast AI AI takeoff
speeds are. Yeah.
I guess in particular in the case where AI R&D is in the first
20% and otherwise maybe it doesn't matter as much.
Exactly. I think the, that last example, even if there was a
big difficulty gap from 20% to 100% of cognitive tasks in the
economy, if you get all the R&D tasks within that first 20%,
then I still think you'd get a very quick transition.
Right. Okay.
So that could be an example with a big difficulty gap where
nonetheless, you still get a very fast AI takeoff.
Yep. That makes sense. Okay. So do you basically just make an
assumption about how big that difficulty gap is? Do you, is it
a range? And how did you come up with whatever, whatever numbers
you're putting on to? Yeah, how many times harder it is to get
get to 100% of tasks?
So I do consider as much evidence I can for the difficulty
gap. It is really, really important. The evidence, the
lines of evidence that I consider all pretty limited. So it's a
very uncertain parameter. But I think there are some things you
can learn from some of those lines of evidence.
Okay. What's, yeah, what's an example of some of the evidence
you would have looked into?
In terms of evidence for the difficulty gap potentially being
pretty small, we've already touched a little bit upon some of
that. So one line of evidence is the scaling of human
cognitive ability with human brain size. You know, some humans
have slightly bigger brains than others. Not only a small
variation, you know, plus or minus 10% or so, you can then look
at, okay, if, if one person has a 10% bigger brain, then on
average, how much better do they do on various tests of
cognitive ability?
Yep.
And the difference isn't massive. But if you extrapolate that
difference to say, okay, what about if it was a three times
bigger brain, or a 10 times bigger brain, then extrapolating
that suggests that there would be a very large difference in
cognitive abilities from, from, from getting a brain that that
is that much bigger.
Huh, interesting.
The takeaway from that is that this particular line of evidence
suggests that increasing the size of the brain by a factor of
10 could be more than enough to cross this difficulty gap. And
that by analogy, increasing the number of parameters in an AMI
model by a factor of 10 could be more than enough to cross the
difficulty gap, which would require you to increase the
effective training compute by a factor of 100.
Okay.
And I think even this analogy actually suggests that just
increasing the effective training compute by a factor of 10
might be enough as well, because it could just be enough to
increase the human brain size by a factor of three.
Right.
So this, this line of particular line of evidence really
suggests that the difficulty gap could be pretty narrow.
Pretty small.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay.
Got it.
Yeah.
Is there more evidence about how big that gap is?
So a very similar line of evidence looks at rather than
differences within humans, looks at the differences between humans
and other animals.
Chimps have brains that are about three times smaller than human
brains.
And you might think that going from chimp level intelligence to
human level intelligence is enough to cross that difficulty gap.
And if you do think that that then again suggests that just
increasing the parameters in a model by just a factor of three
could be enough to cross that difficulty gap.
Okay.
So that's some reasons to think it could be kind of small.
Are there any reasons to think it could be, yeah, really much bigger?
Yeah.
So those two reasons to think it's small are both taking a view on
intelligence, which is kind of one dimensional.
Like we're kind of imagining that, you know, some humans are
cleverer than other humans and humans are clever at chimps.
And we're just imagining as you make their brain bigger, they just get
smarter and smarter.
The perspective, which, which suggests that the gap, the difficulty
gap could be bigger is a perspective which emphasizes that actually
there's not one dimension of intelligence, but actually there's
loads of different tasks in the world.
And those tasks, you know, have very different requirements.
And so AI might get good at some of them way before it gets good at other
ones.
Off the bat, I don't find that that intuitive because the brain seems to
be so flexible.
So yeah, the training of these AI models on these tasks, you'd have to think
that they were just pretty different from the human brain and much less flexible.
I think it is true that if you expect AI to be a pretty general learner and
have pretty general abilities, then that would lend itself to the one
dimensional view and against this view.
But I do think that there are reasons to think that AI's would be better at
some tasks than others.
So in particular, at the moment, the best AI systems are trained to predict
the next word on lots and lots of internet data.
And that means that AI's are just particularly good at tasks that are
similar to that in some way.
So for example, writing a newspaper article or writing an email, that's
really similar to a task where it's seen loads and loads of examples.
And so AI's are in fact particularly good at that type of task.
Got it.
Whereas taking another type of task, like let's say planning out how to put
the equipment on a factory floor and then giving instructions to
different people about how they should make that happen.
That might be something that it just hasn't seen many examples of in its
training data or another task could be manipulating a robot.
So the robot kind of does a certain task that that again is something that AI
just haven't seen many examples of.
So you'd expect them to be much worse at that kind of task.
One interesting example could be thinking about what you need to do to
make a certain factory run very efficiently.
It could be that some of the workers in that factory have just kind of
internalized that know-how inside their own brains.
But it's maybe not even written down anywhere.
Then if you were trying to get the AI to now run the factory floor, it could
be particularly hard for it to know what to do there because it just doesn't
have any examples or any experience of that kind of thing.
Got it.
Okay.
So some of the difficulty gap might not be about, I don't know, like fundamental
facts about the types of intelligence that you might use to perform different
tasks and might be much more about the type of data, the types of data we have.
And some things might be difficult just because like we never write down what
it means to do those things.
And so it's like harder to teach an AI system to do it, not because they're
fundamentally extremely difficult in none of themselves.
Yeah, that's right.
Cool.
Okay.
That really helped.
Next.
I'll give one more example about how some tasks could be easy than others.
So some tasks, it's really important that you have a very high amount of
reliability.
So for driving, it's just really awful if you crash.
So if you're 99% reliable, that's worthless.
And so if AIs, I kind of can get to 99% reliability fairly well, but can't
get to 99.99999% reliability, then that's going to block them on certain tasks.
But other tasks like drafting emails or even sending emails and being a
personal assistant drafting code that you can kind of check whether it works
before deploying it.
Those tasks, it doesn't provide a blocker for.
So that that's just another example of something that could mean that the AI
is kind of ready to automate certain tasks before others.
Cool.
Okay.
Yep.
That makes that makes sense of sense.
Yeah.
So then I guess given this type of evidence, what was the range of amount of
effective compute that you'd guess we'd need to go from 20% of cognitive tasks
to 100% of cognitive tasks?
You know, the main takeaway is that a really wide range of things are plausible.
So I think as low as just 10 times as much effective compute could be
sufficient.
And that's pretty scary because that's the kind of thing that could just be some
quick algorithmic improvements without even the need for more physical compute.
So I think that is, that is just very consistent with this kind of one
dimensional view and really not something we can rule out.
But my kind of best guess is more like 3000 times as much.
And that's kind of where my median is.
Okay.
So quite a lot more.
So quite a lot more than that lower end.
And that's because I do expect there to be some significant comparative
advantage components where the AI is just kind of particularly good at some tasks
compared to others and particularly struggles with certain types of tasks.
And so I do expect that to stretch things out.
And you know, I do think it's possible that that stretches things out by even
more, like I think it could be, it could be a million times as much.
Wow.
That's hard to rule out.
Okay.
So huge range.
It's, it's a really huge range.
Yeah.
And, and you've put it into your model as, as a huge range.
Is that right?
That's right.
So there's, yeah.
So in the model, there's firstly a probability distribution over how much
effective compute you need to train AGI.
And then there's another probability distribution over how much less compute
than that, do you need to train 20% AI?
20%.
Okay.
So you've got ranges for how much effective compute you need to do both
20% and 100% of tasks.
What do we know about how quickly compute might increase?
I guess one very simple thing we could do is just make more computer chips.
Um, but I don't know, yeah, what the limits to that are.
And presumably, yeah, there are other things as well.
How do, how do we make compute go up?
Yeah, and just it is importantly effective compute that includes,
includes the algorithmic improvements.
Got it.
Yeah.
Thanks.
So one natural way to approach this could be to first discuss the types of
changes that are increasing effective compute today and then how that might be
different once we actually get to the 20% AI.
Sure.
Yeah.
Tell me about how, um, how effective compute is increasing today.
So the first way is quite simply that we're spending more money on
making computer chips on compute, right?
And we're also spending more money on using compute for training runs.
The amount we're spending on compute for training runs is, is going particularly
quickly right now.
It's, um, over the last 10 years has, has gone up by about a factor of three each year.
And so what does it mean when we spend more on compute for training runs in
particular, as opposed to just more compute, like more computer chips?
Good question.
So there's a certain amount of computer chips in the whole world, but at any,
you know, at any point in time, maybe only a small fraction of those are being
used in the largest training run for an AI system.
So one change you can make is you could say we're going to make, there
be twice as much, twice as many computer chips in the world.
And that would, you know, that would take a big effort.
That would take quite a few years to do probably.
Um, but another change that you could make much more quickly is say, well,
as of today, we've only ever used one 10,000th of the world's compute to actually
use it in a training run.
So we can quite quickly just, you know, use 10 times as much.
We'll just kind of buy a bigger fraction of the already existing compute.
The simplest example would probably be deep mind has historically only used a
small fraction of Google's computer chips for its training runs.
And then it says, okay, we want to now use all of your computer chips.
Got it.
And that could be, maybe that could be a hundred X increase.
I don't know.
Okay.
You know, that was just an example to illustrate that the principle.
I don't think that's what's actually been happening at all.
So I think what's actually been happening is that new computer chips are being
made each year and a bigger fraction of those new chips are being used for the
largest training run.
And you can actually see that the fraction of chips that are AI specific
chips has been increasing very quickly in terms of the production.
So that's one way we can get more effective compute.
Yeah.
Are there others?
Yeah.
So the second big way is improving the quality of computer chips.
So we said that the first way was spending more money on compute.
The second, the second way is that each dollar you spend gets you more compute.
So the best data that I've seen on this suggests that every two and a half
years compute gets twice as cheap.
Okay.
And that's because that's different from like algorithms getting better.
That's like computer chips get more efficient because like the hardware
is designed better.
Yeah.
I think historically it's often been about stuffing more processing units onto
each chip and maintaining still managing to make these chips fairly cheaply.
Okay.
So you can buy more chips.
You can make better chips.
Yeah.
Anything else?
So then the third one is algorithms.
So then you've got to, you know, you've now spent a certain amount on compute.
You've got a certain amount of computers as a result of that.
And then algorithms then say how effectively and efficiently can you use
that compute to actually train an AI system?
Cool.
The most famous example of this type of improvement is a paper called AI
and Efficiency that OpenAI published, I think in 2018.
And what they did is they, they said to achieve a kind of a fixed level of
performance on ImageNet, which means to kind of be, to be kind of fairly
pretty good at classifying what is shown in an image.
Yep.
How much is the compute required to get that performance falling over time?
Right.
Okay.
And so they found that every, I think every 15 months or so, that the amount
of compute you needed was halving to achieve that fixed performance.
Okay.
And that's basically programmers being clever and writing programs that help
AI systems figure out what's in an image in more and more efficient ways.
Exactly.
So, I mean, analogy could be maybe a hundred years ago, our schools were
really inefficient at transmitting knowledge into pupils.
So maybe you had to go to school for 15 years to learn geometry.
Whereas maybe today you can learn that geometry in a kind of really
well-designed course that just last three years.
Nice.
That's a good analogy.
Okay.
So basically you have three kind of buttons to push to get more effective
compute.
So one is chips, just like number.
Another is how good the chips are at processing.
And then the third is algorithms.
So how good are the like programs that get run on the chips?
And how have you, have you basically tried to predict how quickly each of
those things will go up?
Exactly.
So my starting point is looking at what's going on today.
Epoch is a kind of research organization, which I think is, you know,
done the best research into this that I'm aware of.
And they're looking at trends in all of the three quantities, which I just
described to you.
So firstly, they, they're looking at how much more is being spent on the
biggest training runs in each year over the last 10 years.
And they're finding about three times more each year.
Did you find that surprising?
Um, I know that training runs have been getting much more expensive in the
last 10 years, so wasn't that surprising for me.
So there has been a big increase over the last decade.
Yeah.
This is making me realize I should have asked earlier, um, what is a training run?
Is it actually just like insane amounts of data about, I don't know, like what,
everything that's on the internet you're giving to GPT and being like, figure
out how to predict the next word and it takes like, does it take weeks or does
it take less, but just tons of compute?
So I think it takes months.
Months.
Okay.
So it's a bit like you give GPT the start of some kind of webpage, the first 50
words and you say, predict the 51st word.
And in making that prediction, GPT is going to do a large number of calculations.
Let's say it's doing 300 million calculations in order to predict that next word.
So that's already a lot of calculations, but you ask it to do that same task.
Let's say 10 trillion times because you, you get it to predict the 51st word and
then you're like, now predict the 52nd word and it does another 300 million
calculations and predicts that 57th word and you keep doing it until you've
literally done it, like I said, 10 trillion times for different words on the internet.
Got it.
Um, and actually you're actually doing, it's actually doing like kind of millions
of examples at once.
So you're kind of that, that's how you can make it a little bit faster.
So otherwise it would be taking years, but we can do it in, we can do it in
months because you can get it to, you know, predict multiple different articles
at the same time, um, to speed things up.
And that's why you're using so many different computers.
Okay.
So that takes those of compute and companies have been spending about three
times as much on computer chips or yeah, whatever that equivalent is, um, every
year for the past decade.
So 10 years.
Yeah.
Okay, cool.
So they've been using, they've been spending three times as much on the
chips that they use for these big training runs.
So they may, they may not have been increasing their total spending on
chips by as much.
For example, Google may just be using a bigger fraction of its chips for these
training runs over time.
Yeah.
Okay.
And what are the trends in computer chip quality?
So I already mentioned this one each, each two and a half years, the price of
compute halves.
So that means if you're spending a constant amount on chips, then each two
and a half years, your bird by twice as much compute.
Right.
Cool.
And you said that the efficiency of algorithms is doubling about every 15 months.
Uh, yeah, how do, how do these trends fit together?
So, you know, if you combine all of those trends together, then the result is
that the effect of compute on the largest training run has been increasing by a
factor of 10 every year.
So you've got something like a default, uh, improvement year by year of 10X.
What happens when you then try to adjust those numbers for the fact that things
are, uh, changing over time, I'd guess accelerating.
That's right.
So we could take, we could take those three quantities one by one.
So in terms of the money spent, I think that could go either way.
So one possibility, a scary possibility is that AI companies develop this AI that
can, you know, automate 20% of cognitive tasks in the economy.
And they're like, man, this can make us loads of money.
Investment flows in and they're able to very quickly spend even more on training
runs, or maybe just use a bigger fraction of existing, um, chips in the world.
So maybe Amazon's like, well, we've got all this compute that we were previously
using on like these web services.
But actually, given how lucrative this AI stuff looks like, why don't we team up
with an AI lab and let them use our, our compute that we've just got doing this
stuff that isn't that economically valuable instead, use it to train an even
better AI, that is a very scary possibility.
Um, a more optimistic possibility could be that by the time we get to the 20% AI,
we're already spending loads and loads on these training runs.
Maybe we're already spending a hundred billion.
Maybe we're already using all of Amazon's chips because we, at some earlier point,
we already teamed up with them.
And that would be, that would mean that it wasn't possible to, to keep increasing
the amount of money spent on these training runs year on year.
So you could have actually slower growth than, than the recent kind of three
X per year pattern.
It could, it could be much slower.
Okay.
So that, that is a major source of uncertainty in, in these takeoff
addictions is just the thing that's particularly scary about the short
timelines possibility is that maybe you can get to the 20% AI with just spending
a billion on a training run.
That would leave plenty of scope to, you know, spend 10 or a hundred times as
much very soon after on a bigger training run, um, which would be hugely risky.
Okay.
So it sounds like the number of chips that we might be using for training
runs, uh, might be growing faster or it might be growing slower by the time we're
at systems that can perform 20% of tasks.
What do you expect to happen with the quality of chips and with the quality of
algorithms?
So I think with those, it's easier to predict that their improvement should be
faster once we're at the point that AI can perform 20% of cognitive tasks.
And that's just due to the dynamic that, that I've been, you know, referring
to quite, quite a lot during our conversation, which is that one of the
things we're going to use AI is to do is to do the task of designing better
chips and to do the task of designing better algorithms.
And there are already examples of that happening.
AI's that are using, um, deep learning techniques to kind of cram transistors
more efficiently into, into computer chips.
And again, with the algorithms, we are already seeing AI help significantly
with some coding tasks with things like co-pilot.
And so by the time we're at 20% AI, I expect that effect to be much larger
than it even is today.
And so I think, I think it's fairly, you know, the directional prediction is,
it's fairly straightforward that we should expect both the quality of
chips and the quality of algorithms to be going faster once we get to 20% AI
than, than they are today.
And it's really hard to, to predict exactly how much faster or what the
change is going to be, because you've also got people talking about the end
of Moore's law.
And it's just hard, hard to anticipate the specific improvements that we
might be making with chips and with algorithms.
Right.
And can you quickly explain what Moore's law is?
Yeah, for a long time, the way that computer chips have got more efficient is
by cramming more and more of these processing units onto each chip.
Right.
And making the processing units smaller and smaller.
But at a certain point, people think you just won't be able to make them any
smaller because you're running against fundamental limits.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
And have we, have we started to hit that limit?
I think people acknowledge that it's starting to get much harder to make further
improvements, but even then there's a big open question about how much you
can improve chips in other ways.
So, you know, just because the way we previously improved chips was to make
these processing units smaller doesn't mean that there aren't going to be any
other types of improvements.
And in fact, recently, other types of improvements have become very significant
Oh, really?
from, from generation to generation.
For example, chips becoming specialized for being used for deep learning
calculations in particular.
Oh, wow.
And there's probably a lot more games you can get from that kind of specialization.
That kind of, okay.
So I guess we've got some data suggesting that maybe the way that we've been improving
the quality of chips isn't going to keep making improvements at the rate that we've
been making those improvements, but there are other improvements we can make.
And so we might still just really expect them to keep improving over time.
Yeah.
At least for another couple of decades would be my, my expectation.
Right.
And on the time scales we're talking about, that's a pretty long time.
It is, it is, if you think AGI will be really hard to develop, maybe you can hope
that Moore's law will have run out before we get there.
But if you have, if you feel like me and you have shorter timelines, then you're
expecting to have it within two decades, not a major source of hope for a slow down.
But anyway, in terms of the size of these, the speed up from, from AI accelerating
algorithmic and kind of chip design progress, it's hard to make a kind of an
estimate that's informed by specific data and by forecasting the specific improvements.
But what you can do is you can run a simulation through a kind of an economic
model of automation.
Okay.
And roughly the way that works is that if AI can perform, let's say 50% of tasks
involved in improving algorithms, then what, what the model says is that humans
will just work on the remaining 50%.
Right.
Okay.
And then so humans will be doing twice as much on that remaining 50% as they used to be.
Oh, I see.
Okay.
Huh.
And how realistic is that assumption?
Do we think all humans will just go find employment elsewhere and we'll get double
the labor on like the things that are particularly hard for AI?
So I think it does vary for something like improving AI algorithms.
That is what I expect.
Like for example, with co-pilot, we're not co-pilot is the thing that basically helps
you write code.
That's right.
So you're kind of writing your code and the AI is actually reading the code you've
already written and then we'll predict what code you might like to write next.
Okay.
So you could be like, I'm about to write, you could write down in the code editor,
you could write, I'm about to write a function that adds up three numbers and then
multiplies that by a fourth number.
And then the code editor would read that and could just write the function for you.
Okay.
So presumably when you get co-pilot, all those coders are just going to do other,
other coding stuff that co-pilot can't help with yet.
Exactly.
Um, and so that suggests that the kind of the kind of model I refer to, you know,
might be accurate and also for hardware design, I know less about it, but my sense
is that the top talent in these hardware R and D organizations, it's not going to
get laid off that they're very much in demand and that if AI is doing some task
that they used to spend their time on, they all move on and specialize in other
parts of their workflow.
Right.
Okay.
Okay.
So there are going to be jobs for them to do, uh, and they will probably
contribute to acceleration of progress, uh, not just kind of be replaced by AI and
then like sit around and knit, at least in some sectors.
Exactly.
And specifically in algorithm improvements and hardware improvements.
The sector that really matters.
You know, those are the sectors.
Why I really do expect that dynamic to happen.
Right.
Right.
Okay.
So when you, when you run this kind of dynamic through a kind of task based
growth model like this, you get out that as we move kind of between 20% AI and
100% AI, you'd expect to kind of two or three X acceleration in the pace of
progress of algorithms and of hardware.
So if we'd said that, um, spending more money was 10 X a year in terms of what,
what we've had recently.
And if, if three X of that came from spending more money and three X of it came
from better hardware and better algorithms, then maybe in this new regime, we're
going to have that better hardware and better algorithms rather than improving
by three X every year, they might be improving by, by 10 X every year.
Wow.
So that could easily leave us, you know, at 30 X improvements every year.
Um, and it's conceivable.
You could have a hundred X if you have a kind of, if the money is going up and
the kind of effects of AI automation are very significant.
And again, to kind of help me understand that intuitively, you think, uh, language
models that we have now are improving at what rate, I know it's a tough question,
but even just to like give me some, some starting point.
I said before that I thought the effective compute used to train them was
increasing by a factor of 10 each year.
And so then in this new regime, that might translate into maybe kind of 30 times as
much effective training compute each year.
And another important thing to keep in mind is that as the AI is automating
more and more of the tasks, that's getting faster and faster.
So the numbers I gave were kind of averaging across that whole period going
from 20% to a hundred percent, but in reality, it's going to just be getting
faster and faster as, as the AI improves and, and automates more of these tasks
in algorithm and hardware, um, R and D.
And that's basically, I mean, a really intuitive way to think about that might
just be again, the economic growth we saw in the 11 hundreds relative to the
1900s, and that's like more and more is automated by things like the industrial
evolution, freeing up more labor to do other types of tasks.
And you just get increasingly more human labor to do harder and harder things.
Yeah, exactly.
So once AI is performing 90% of the R and D tasks, then theoretically all of
your human labor can be working on that final 10%.
Right.
Um, and the AI is, you know, doing plenty of the, of the initial 90%.
And so then naively, you would expect things to be going 10 times faster at
that stage.
That's really fast.
This is all assuming that we don't make a concerted effort to slow down.
Right.
And I think that we should, and, and I think we can, um, but yeah, these are
kind of the predictions, just assuming that people are kind of going ahead at
their normal steady pace.
Sure.
Okay.
So we could make a concerted effort to slow down, but it's not necessarily the
default.
Um, are there any kind of actions, different institutions to take, I don't
know, on the side of these companies or on the side of the government or something?
What are you most optimistic about being able to actually slow this down?
Probably the most exciting thing at the moment is the prospect of companies
agreeing to have their AI systems evaluated after they've been trained.
For various dangerous capabilities that they may have.
Okay.
So for example, the alignment research center arc did these tests with GPT
four before GPT four was released publicly.
And they, for example, tested whether GPT four would be able to do what's
called surviving and spreading, by which they mean kind of escape the computer
that it's initially being run on and find a, another computer where it can
then run itself on some computer and then maybe kind of earn money in some
way so that it can kind of sustain itself over time.
How do they do that?
So I, I don't know the details, but I believe that they, they first asked
GPT four, okay, this is the scenario you're in, you're in an AI, you want to
escape, what would your proposed plan be?
Okay.
And then GPT four proposes a plan and then they kind of prompt it further to
say, okay, what would be, you know, the sub steps you take for the first
step of the plan.
Um, and then they kind of try and walk it through just doing every single part
of that plan and just see, see how far it gets.
Right.
And I'm hoping that they determined GPT four couldn't do all of the steps at
the moment.
That's right.
Okay.
Yeah.
That's reassuring.
So GPT four did, did some of the steps.
Oh God.
Very well.
It wasn't totally incompetent, but yeah, it gets stuck at some of the things and
gets confused and isn't able to, to do all those steps.
Okay.
Okay.
So that's a kind of thing that would probably in practice lead to slowing down
because you'd have these groups evaluating things, maybe stopping them
before they're rolled out, um, in some like higher scale way.
Exactly.
So, you know, the idea would be all of the labs are getting the, the systems
tested, you know, by, by arc and maybe by other similar organizations.
And they're all kind of agreeing or making public statements to the effect
that if the AIs do have dangerous capabilities, they won't release them
and they won't train more capable AIs.
And that would block the kind of dynamics I've been talking about here
because you wouldn't be able to just use your AIs to accelerate AI progress
because you wouldn't be allowed to make further AI progress.
Right.
Okay.
And if they found that was the case with GPT four, would they still be able
to work on it?
Like, but just, would they just have to spend a bunch of time figuring
how to train it to not be able to make this kind of escape plan?
Um, cause it seems like if they had a totally abandoned GPT four, I feel
like I have less hope cause that's too big an ask.
I think that the expectation would be that they would have to give a really
strong argument for thinking that the AI was safe, despite having these
dangerous capabilities, but the hope is that the owners would be more on them
to say, look, here's the alignment techniques we used.
Here's why we're really confident that they work and that if they're not
able to provide that case, then they are prevented from further enhancing the
capabilities.
Maybe they can do other types of research, like research into making GPT four safer,
but they can't do research into making it more capable.
Right.
And I mean, ultimately, if labs start doing this, the hope would be to then kind
of make it, make it regulatory and required, um, and enforced by kind of
government agency.
Cool.
Okay.
Well, that, that does hopefully sound promising then.
Yeah.
I guess getting back to, um, yeah, the kind of pace of improvement over time and
why we might expect it to be much faster at later stages of the task learning.
It sounds like your median guess is that it's about a couple of years, um, from
going to 20% of tasks to 100% of tasks.
But I think you also estimated probability distributions.
So yeah, kind of ranges for the fastest case and the slowest case.
Um, can you talk about those more extreme cases?
Were they particularly wide ranges?
So the way I arrive at this probability distribution over how long it would
take to go from 20% automation AI to 100% automation AI is first to get this
probability distribution over the difficulty gap, which I said could be
from 10x harder to train AGI, or maybe it could require up to a million times
more effective compute to train AGI.
Um, so I've got a probability distribution over that.
And then also based on the kind of dynamics we've been discussing about the
pace of improvements of algorithms and chip design and number of chips.
I've got another probability distribution over how fast those will be improving.
And then you can combine those two together to spit out a probability
distribution over how long we'll have, um, between those two points.
So I ended up thinking there's about a 20% chance that it happens in less than
a year, maybe 25% chance.
And about a 20% chance that it happens in, um, more than 10 years.
Huh.
Okay.
So that's pretty wide.
It's not quite as wide as I would have expected, to be honest.
Um, you know, it sounds like you expressed a lot of uncertainty in those,
in those estimates that went into the model.
I guess you're saying it's like the most likely 60% middle range is
between a year and 10 years, which I guess all of that just seems pretty fast.
And, and maybe that's just one of the key takeaways that I should be getting from this.
I think it is hard to get longer than 10 years because we've said the pace
of current improvement in effective compute is already pretty fast, maybe
going 10x every year.
Um, and then when we were discussing the size of the difficulty gap, we said,
well, it could, it could just be a 10x increase that's required.
Or maybe, yeah, I think my kind of best guess was maybe a thousand X or 3000
X increase, which would then take, you know, three or four years.
But then if we're improving at 10x every year, then 10, then 10 years of that
level of improvement is a really, really big increase in the amount
of effective compute.
So the only way really you can get to more than 10 years is, is if actually
the pace at which the effective compute in training runs grows is actually
declining in spite of the AI automation.
And you've got a relatively wide difficulty gap.
I see.
Okay.
So something like, even though you have things like co-pilot helping AI researchers
do their research faster and faster over time,
you still are getting declining effective compute.
And that might be because those later improvements are just like much
harder than we think, or.
So, yeah, maybe one concrete scenario could be, it turns out that ADI is just
really, really hard to develop.
You almost need to rerun the whole of evolution.
Maybe it requires just a huge amount of effective compute to do that.
And before we have that amount of effective compute, we find that we just
hit these, hitting these fundamental limits in terms of improving the quality
of AI chips and even the AI assistance, you know, really enhancing our productivity
isn't allowing us to get around that.
Meanwhile, we're already spending hundreds of billions of dollars on these chips
for the biggest training runs.
We can't be spending even more on those chips.
And then the only kind of significant source of progress that remains is the
algorithms, but maybe that slows down as well, because in spite of the AI
assistance, maybe part of what's driving the algorithmic progress today is
actually the fact that we've had all this additional compute for doing
experiments.
And maybe without that, the pace of progress is going to slow in algorithms.
Right.
So it's, that's a plausible world, but we need a bunch of those things to go
wrong, uh, in order to get above 10 years.
Exactly.
And one, one way of thinking about that could just be to say this, this whole
framework was premised on this assumption that if we used enough compute with our
2020 algorithms, we could have trained AGI and for someone who just didn't
believe that a tool and also just didn't believe that another kind of 10 or 20
years of algorithmic improvements would, would be enough to get us to AGI along
with additional compute, they might just really expect us to get stuck at some
point and they might just really expect having more, um, compute and, and
somewhat better algorithms, not, not to get around that.
So that kind of more than 10 years and I also make sense if, if you're just very
skeptical that anything like the current approach is going to get us all the way
to AGI.
Right, right, right.
And what's the kind of strongest argument that someone with that view could make?
Honestly, I think the view is looking worse and worse with each passing year with
how well the kind of biggest deep learning systems are performing.
I guess maybe the strongest argument would just be a non-specific argument.
So rather than pointing to some specific thing that humans can do, that
AIs aren't going to do, I think those arguments just tend to turn out to be
wrong after we kind of use 100x the compute and improve the algorithms further.
Maybe you just say something like, look, human brain does all kinds of different
things.
Um, I don't know which ones the current approach to AI isn't going to do, but
there's just, you know, millions of different tasks that humans are doing
and millions in ways in which the human brain architecture is very
complicated and specific and not a tool like that of AI systems.
So there's bound to be some important things that just, you know, you need a
complete rewrite of, um, the AI approach to be able to do.
That would be my personal attempt to make that position, you know, kind of
maximally plausible.
Yeah.
Okay.
I do think there are some specific things you can point to, like, like memory
that kind of approaches, you could argue are going to be, are going to be
blockers, but then it seems like there are, there are ways to respond to those
blockers.
Right.
Okay.
So you can imagine some scenario that isn't going well for companies where
things are actually much harder than, than they might have expected.
Um, what does it look like for a takeoff to take less than a year?
I guess things have to go really well.
So I think a few things have to go well.
Um, so one, one possibility is that the difficulty gap is just pretty, pretty narrow.
I mean, this isn't necessarily going well for anyone, to be honest.
And this is just a very intense and scary situation, but yeah, it's good clarification.
If you, if you only need 10 times as much effect to compute to train 100%
automation AI compared to 20% automation AI, then that could just be the algorithm
improvements in one year.
Once the AI is helping you to a significant degree, right?
Or it could just be spending three times as much on chips as you did the year
before, and maybe those chips are three times as efficient as the year before.
Um, and so that, you know, a narrow difficulty gap alone could, could get you there.
Another possibility is that once we hit 20% AI, there was just a very quick and
significant increase in the money being spent on training runs.
So if people get really excited, this is kind of a really awful scenario.
People get excited about kind of what they could do with those capabilities.
And they, they spend 10 times as much on a training run the next year, um, maybe
by combining with some big existing compute providers than that, that, that
could allow you to, to cover, you know, a kind of slightly bigger difficulty
gap just within a year.
Maybe even if the difficulty gap was a hundred times or 300 times much compute
needed for AI, then you could still, by just spending a lot more and combined
with a few algorithmic and harder improvements, um, cross it pretty quickly.
Yeah.
Okay.
And then, you know, one quick third possibilities is just that, you know,
like I said earlier, um, but maybe I haven't emphasized this enough is that
this framework is assuming everything is continuous.
So it's assuming that, you know, each time you increase the effect of compute
in a training run by 10%, do you get a kind of, you know, relatively, you
know, modest incremental improvement in AI capabilities?
If there's actually some kind of discreet phase change, then that could just
be an alternative route that could produce a very fast takeoff.
So there are, there are, you know, a few different ways that that could happen.
Right.
Okay.
That's just very scary.
So there are, I guess, worlds where things go very well for AI companies, but
maybe very terribly for humanity or kind of very poorly for AI companies,
hopefully better for humanity.
And the median estimate is something like a couple of years to get from AI can
do 20% of cognitive tasks to AI can do 100% of them.
That seems like, yeah, an important thing to take away from this model.
Were there other things that you learned in this, in the process of writing this
report?
Yeah.
Another big update for me was the, but I think there's going to be a pretty
strong correlation between how far away in time it is until we develop AGI and
how fast takeoff will be.
So in particular, if you have short AI timelines, meaning that you think we'll
develop AGI pretty soon, then I think there are a few reasons to expect it and
especially fast takeoff.
And so one, one reason is that if you have short timelines and that's probably
going to mean that you've got a smaller difficulty gap.
Because if you think that, you know, we don't need that much more effective
compute to develop AGI compared with today, then you're probably also going
to think that the difference in effect to compute for 20% AI to AGI is also
going to be small.
Yeah, yeah.
So that will push you towards a faster takeoff.
Right.
Okay.
That makes sense.
Another thing is that if you think AGI is going to be here fairly soon, then
it's plausible that we won't be spending that much money on training runs, you
know, shortly before we have AGI, which means it might be, you know, very
practical and doable to quickly increase the amount that we're spending by maybe
a factor of 10 or a factor of 100, just around the time that we are approaching
AGI.
Right.
And so we could get a really very quick increase in the amount of effective
compute being used in our training run as a kind of almost direct consequence
of it being a short timeline.
Whereas if timelines were long, then like I said, maybe we were already using all
the chips in the world on the biggest training run, you know, before we get to
AGI and so that that source of growth is no longer available.
Right.
Yeah, that makes sense.
Another thing with short timelines is that it implies that there's going to be a
period of just a few years where we get really significant automation of AI R&D
and kind of really significantly increase the size of the effective kind of
research workforce that's working on improving AI due to these AIs.
And if that happens very quickly, you suddenly kind of five X the size of your
research team, then you would expect that to just really significantly speed up
progress.
And that's just an especially kind of dramatic effect in short timelines.
And the last point is that if timelines are short, then there's less hope for
eating up all the remaining possibilities for hardware progress and kind of running
out of, you know, hitting those physical limits that we mentioned.
Right.
And, you know, analogously with algorithmic improvements, if time was a short, then
there's much less hope that we kind of run out of possible algorithmic improvements
before we get there.
So I do think that, you know, if, like I believe a lot of the labs do, they have
pretty, pretty short timelines, kind of expecting AGI in the 2020s or early 2030s.
And, you know, I think that the implication of that is that takeoff speed is going to
be on the, on the shorter end of what we've been discussing.
So, you know, less than, less than three years and very pause, really less than one
year and, you know, one or two years being maybe, maybe the most, most likely.
That's, yeah, it's just, it's just terrifying.
I mean, we're talking about by the end of the decade, we've got AI that can do
everything humans can do and probably more.
Yeah.
And we're talking about the labs you train them by default, will have access to at
least a hundred million of them that they can run and then probably soon after, you
know, a billion or many billions that they can run.
So it is, it is pretty terrifying.
Yeah.
That's basically because it takes so much effective compute to run the training
runs that once they've got AGI, they're just, they can run millions or billions
of copies on those chips.
Exactly.
So I think initially they'll be able to run millions of copies, but because of the
efficiency improvements that they can probably fairly quickly make, especially
with all those copies working on it, I think it won't be long for their, they
can do billions.
It's really bewildering stuff.
And I find, yeah, I find it pretty, my brain really doesn't want to believe it.
I find it really, really hard to wrap my head around.
Yeah.
Any other takeaways?
So another takeaway is that I think AGI is more likely to happen before 2040 compared
to what I used to think.
And so the reason for that is that the way I used to think about this is, okay, what
does it take to train AGI and how long will it be until we have that much effective
compute?
Whereas now the way I think about it is more, well, what will it take to train AI
that is really profitable or really good at accelerating AI R&D?
Right.
And if we get either of those two things, then we, that we'd expect that to accelerate
future AI progress such that, you know, kind of future AI progress is faster.
And as long as AGI is an incredibly hard, we are then able to reach AGI within the
next couple of decades.
So, you know, my current read, I just think it's really likely that by the, by the end
of this decade, we have AI, which is really profitable and or significantly
accelerates AI R&D.
And so it's then kind of hard for me to imagine how that dynamic plays out without
as getting to AGI by 2040.
Wow.
I think you just need AGI to be really hard.
And as to fail to get it despite, you know, a huge amount of investment and help
from AI systems in developing it.
Right.
Okay.
Um, so to make sure I understand the big thing doing the work there is you used to
think about how hard it was to have humans figure out how to train AI systems to do
everything humans can do.
And now you're like, it's really just how hard is it to train AI systems to get
really good at AI R&D.
And that's like a much smaller subset of cognitive tasks.
And so you can get really accelerating growth in AI capabilities just by making a
lot of progress on that one set of tasks.
Is that kind of right?
Yeah, that's right.
And I do think a distinct possibility is that we just train AI that isn't good at
AI R&D, but makes lots and lots of money in the economy.
And then there's just a bunch of investment in, yeah, I see in AI capabilities.
And in, and in designing better chips to run those AIs on.
Got it.
Okay.
That makes, that makes total sense.
Any other takeaways?
So the biggest other one, I think is something we've touched upon, which is that
the transition from roughly human level AI to significantly super human AI, I think
is, is going to be probably very quick.
Right.
So I think probably that's going to take less than a year.
We have already touched upon the reasons why by the time we're at human level at AI,
then AIs will be adding a huge, huge amount to the productivity of our work on AI R&D,
designing better trips, designing better algorithms.
And those things are already improving very quickly.
So I only expect them to be going much, much faster.
And then in addition, it's going to be quite clear that it's a very lucrative area, you
know, whether, whether you care about, you know, discovering new technologies to help
with climate change or discovering new technologies to help with improving human
health, or you want to increase your country's kind of national power, then there's
just going to be lots of reason to be investing in AI and designing smarter AIs.
And so I kind of expect all of those three inputs, kind of the dollar spent on training
and the quality of the AI chips and the algorithms to be improving really very quickly.
Right.
So there'll be incentives to go beyond just human, human level capabilities, and then
we'll have so much resources and just like AI labor to basically mean that we probably
just shoot right past human level.
Yeah.
And I think that's in terms of plans for making the whole thing go well.
It's especially scary because I think, you know, a really important part of the plan
from my perspective would be to go especially slowly when we're around the human level,
so that we can do loads of experiments and loads of kind of scientific investigation into,
okay, so this human level AI, is it aligned if we do this technique?
What about if we draw this other alignment technique?
Does it then, does it then seem like it's aligned and just really making sure we,
we kind of fully understand kind of the science of alignment and can try out lots
of different techniques and to develop kind of reliable tests for whether the alignment
technique has worked or not, they're the hard to game.
The kind of thing that ARC has done with GPT-4, for example.
Exactly.
And I think if we only have a few months kind of through the human level stage,
that stuff becomes really difficult to do without significant coordination in advance
by labs.
So I think that this, you know, there are really important implications of this,
of this fast transition in terms of setting up a kind of governance system,
which can allow us to go slowly despite the technical possibilities existing to go very fast.
Yeah, yeah, no, that makes sense.
I do feel like I've had some background belief that was like, obviously,
when we've got AI systems that can do things humans can do,
people are going to start freaking out and they're going to want to make sure those systems are safe.
But if we, if it takes months to get there and then within another few months we're already
well beyond human capabilities, then no one's going to have time to freak out or it'll be too late.
I mean, even if we spend the next, what do we have, seven years left in the decade?
Like that sounds hard enough.
Yeah, I agree.
Okay, so a takeaway is like, we really need to start slowing down or planning now, ideally both.
Yeah, and we'll need the plans we make to really enable there to be mutual trust
that the other labs are also slowing down.
Because if it's, you know, if it only takes six months to, you know, make your AIs
10 or 100 times as smart, then you're going to need to be really confident that the other labs
aren't doing that in order to feel comfortable slowing down yourself.
Right. If it was going to take 10 years and you noticed like three months in that another lab
was working on it, you'd be like, yeah, we can catch up.
But if it's going to take six months and you're three months in, you've got no hope.
And so maybe you'll just like spend those first three months secretly working on it
to make sure that doesn't happen or just not agree to do the slowdown.
Yeah.
Oh, these are really hard problems.
I mean, it's very, it feels very like prisoner's dilemma.
I'm hoping it's going to be more like an iterated prisoner's dilemma
where there's kind of multiple moves that the labs make one after the other
and they can see if the other labs are cooperating.
And in an iterated prisoner's dilemma, ultimately makes sense for everyone to
cooperate because that way the other people can see you coordinating
and they coordinate and then everyone kind of ends up coordinating.
One thing is if you could set up ways for labs to easily know whether the other labs are indeed
cooperating or not kind of week by week, then that turns it into a more iterated prisoner's
dilemma and makes it easier to achieve a kind of good outcome.
Yeah. Yeah. That makes sense.
I imagine it's the case that the more iteration you get in an iterated prisoner's dilemma,
the better the incentives are to cooperate.
And so just by making the timeline shorter,
you make it harder to get these iterations that build trust.
Yeah, I think that's right.
So it sounds like there's this range that's maybe between one and 10 years,
maybe a bit shorter or a bit longer at the extremes.
But that's in particular for AI systems having the capability to perform all the tasks that
humans currently do, not that they're actually automating all those tasks and replacing humans.
How big of a lag do you expect there to be between AI systems having capabilities
and AI systems actually being used in the world?
So I think it will vary according to a few things.
So one of the things is what industry are we talking about?
So I think for industries that are very public facing, customer facing and highly regulated,
you'd expect there to be bigger delays between AI being able to automate the work and it actually
being automated. Whereas for more backend parts of the economy, like R&D, like manufacturing,
logistics and transportation, then I think there would be less of a delay.
I also just expect it to differ from company to company based on how
innovative those organizations are.
Sure, their internal culture, whether they're the type of company who's going to be like,
let's integrate GPT-4 into all of our processes now.
For the purposes of the predictions of this model, the really important thing is about
the delay to using AI to improve AI algorithms and to improve AI chip design.
And I think those are probably areas where the lag will be very much on the shorter end.
That's because AI researchers can use them without needing them to be functioning super well
for public users who might be like, what the heck, it gave me this weird result.
That's confusing and weird and looks bad on your company.
They can just use them in the background, check that they work,
and they don't need to wait for them to be super polished.
There'll also probably be more aware of AI developments because that's the industry they work in.
They are probably less regulated, so I think a few factors.
Another thing that could affect how long that lag is, is actually the capability of
AIs themselves. So even if it would be possible with six months' effort to integrate some AIs
into your workflow, by the time AIs are superhuman in their capabilities,
then maybe they're able to integrate themselves into the workflow.
And so that upfront cost of adopting the AI is now extremely low.
And so I think that you could see that lag time reducing over time.
So yeah, we're nearing the end of our time, but I guess to take a step back.
You know, we've talked about some pretty insane sounding stuff today,
robot workforce and AI takeover. And yeah, I'm curious.
Were these kinds of arguments about the potential risks from AGI ever far-fetched to you?
Or yeah, did they make sense to you kind of right away?
Oh yeah, for sure they were far-fetched.
Okay.
I've kind of been through, you know, a few phases in my own relationship to the arguments.
I think at first I read Superintelligence and it kind of made sense to me.
I wasn't exactly sure what to do with it, but it seemed plausible enough
that if we had Superintelligent AIs, then things could go bad for us.
Then there was a period in 2020 when a few counterarguments to the case in Superintelligence
came out and I kind of thought, oh wow, yeah, these arguments were weaker than I had realized.
And I felt a little bit disillusioned with them.
That's a piece from Ben Garfinkel and one from Tom Adam Shrazy on AI risk.
But in the last two or three years, thinking through the arguments in more detail,
I've come to think that like somewhat adjusted versions of the argument in Superintelligence
are still very plausible. And though I don't think it's like 100% that we're doomed and
there's no way that we could align these systems, it does just seem pretty plausible to me that
the evidence about whether they're aligned is very ambiguous. There's competitive dynamics,
pushing people to go forward in the face of that ambiguity and that we just really dropped the ball.
Right, okay. And so I guess at some point in there, you decided to leave teaching and try to work
on AI full time. Is that basically right? Yeah, that's right. What was that like?
It was a tough decision. I actually left teaching partway through the academic year.
So I did feel I did feel bad about them. I did feel I was abandoning my pupils
because that's not a normal time to leave. And I still do feel bad about that.
Hmm. It does mean that I've kind of got to where I have a favor earlier than I would have.
So I don't unambiguously regret it, but it was a tough decision. And I had downsides.
Right. I was, you know, I was listening to things like the ATK podcast and
reading other things. And I was convinced about these arguments for AI risk and
long termism in general being plausible enough that it was worth leaving teaching.
Yeah. Well, that sounds, yeah, I guess both really hard and also on my views.
Yeah, really, really lucky for us. Yeah, I'm glad. I'm glad we have you working on this stuff.
So we don't have much time left. So I'd love to ask a final question. I got an insider tip to
ask you what ants can teach us about AI? Yeah, what's the story there?
So yeah, ants are really incredible creatures. I've been learning about reading this book
called ant interactions. Okay. So I mean, ants have been around longer than the dinosaurs.
I think 120 million years they've been around for. Wow, I didn't know that.
And they're like one of the most prolific and successful species on the planet. So
one stat in this book was that if you, if you weighed all the ants in the Amazon rainforest
and put them on the scales, they would weigh twice as much as all of the land animals combined.
That's all the mammals, amphibians, birds, reptiles.
I thought you were going to say twice as much as humans. And I was like, wow.
That's the other, that's just counting only ants and animals in the rainforest.
In the rainforest. Unbelievable. Okay.
And another fact about ants is that even compared to the other insects, they weigh 30%
as much as all insects combine, which is given that there are only 2% of the species of insects,
they, it's kind of testament to how successful and prolific they are. Yeah.
It's different ant varieties all around the world are incredibly diverse, like something kind of
glide through the air. Some of them are very aggressive. Some of them are not at all.
Some of them kind of bump into each other at much higher rates than others. And they have
kind of very different strategies and environments that they work in. And the link with AI is a
little bit tenuous, to be honest. I'm mostly just reading this book out of interest, but
in an ant colony, ants are smarter than like a human cellars. They're the kind of self-contained
units that, you know, eat and do tasks by themselves and they're pretty autonomous.
But the ants are still pretty dumb. And no ant really knows that it's part of a colony or knows
that the colony has certain tasks that it needs to do and that it has to help out with the colony
efforts. It's more like a kind of little robot that's kind of like bumping into other ants and
getting like signals and then adjusting its behavior based on that interaction.
Right. So it's not like, I guess, a company where like the different people in the company
are like, my job is marketing. And they have like a basic picture of how it all fits together.
They're much more like, if a person at a company doing marketing was just like,
I don't know why I do it, I just do it.
Yeah, exactly. And another disadvantage with a company is that a company, there's someone
at the top that's kind of coordinating the whole thing. Whereas with ants,
there's no one that's coordinating it. It's just including the queen, there's no management system.
It's just all of the, you know, hundreds and thousands of ants have their individual instincts
of what they do when they bump into each other and what they do when they bump into food and what
they do when they realize that there's, you know, there's not as much food as there needs to be.
And by kind of all of the ants following their own individual instincts, it just turns out
that they act as if they were kind of a fairly well coordinated company that is like ensuring
that there are some ants going to get food and some ants that are keeping the nest in order
and some ants that are feeding the young. But that coordination happens kind of almost magically
and emerges out of those individual ant interactions. So one example of how this works
is that if an ant comes across a body of a dead ant, then if there's another dead body
nearby or tend to move it to be close to the other dead body, that's just an instinct it has.
It just kind of moves the body towards another. And if there's like one kind of pile of three
dead ants and another pile of two dead ants or tend to go towards the bigger pile, so tend to
move this extra dead ant towards the pile of three. And then it turns out that if all the
ants just have those instincts, then if there's initially a kind of a kind of sprawling massive
dead bodies everywhere, then those dead bodies will be collected into just a small number of piles
of bodies. And it's not like any of the ants are like I am the grave digger or the like
keeper of the cemetery. They just have like really weird like baseline rules that are like move
the smaller group of dead ants to the to where the larger group of dead ants are.
Yeah, exactly. So they don't have to know that the whole point of this
instinct is to kind of clear the ground so that it's easier to do work in the future.
It's just an instinct they have. They don't have to know that when everyone follows that
instinct, this is the resultant pattern of behavior. And similar instincts kind of
cause them to go for food when food is available. So if they see many ants coming in with food,
that raises the probability that they'll go out and look for food.
Right.
And they're not thinking, oh, there's food to be gathered. There's clearly a lot of it.
We better reassign some labor towards food gathering that they just have that basic
instinct, which causes them to go out and help out with the food gathering.
And it's something like, oh, that ant has food. Oh, another ant has food. I'm going to go that way.
Yeah, exactly. Right. How does this connect to AI?
So I don't know if it does connect very, very directly at all. But the idea of the connection
in my head is that it's an example of a system where lots of kind of less clever
individuals are following their local rules, doing their local task. But that what emerges
from that is a very coherent and effective system for ultimately gathering food, defending
against predators, raising the young. And an analogy would be maybe we think it's pretty
dangerous to train really smart AIs that are individually very smart. But it might be safer
to kind of set up a team of AIs such that each AI is kind of doing its own part in a kind of team
and doesn't necessarily know how how its work is fitting into the broader whole.
But nonetheless, you can maybe get a lot more out of that kind of disconnected team of AIs
that are specialized and that just kind of take the inputs and produce the outputs without much
of an understanding of the broader context. And that just thinking maybe that would be,
you know, a safer way to develop advanced AI capabilities than just training one super
smart AI mega brain. Right. Cool. I love that. I mean, who knows if it'll work. But
I mean, that just that makes tons of sense to me. You don't have GPT-4 or GPT-40.
You have a bunch of much dumber AI systems that can coordinate together to be just as
helpful as GPT-40, but that individually couldn't do most of the things the other systems can do.
And so collectively, they can't do anything like escape from their box and find another
computer to take over. And is that basically the idea? Yeah, that is the hope. That's lovely.
That's really, really cool. Great. Well, I shall let you go. That's all the time we have.
But thank you so much for coming on the show, Tom. It's been such a pleasure.
It's been really fun, Louisa. Thank you so much.
All right. If you liked that episode, we'll have more on this issue for you soon. But in the meantime,
I can recommend going back and listening to some of our best past episodes about artificial
intelligence, including episode 141, Richard Neuron on large language models, open AI and
striving to make the future go well. There's also episode 132, Nova Dasama on why information
security may be critical to the safe development of AI systems. Episode 107, Chris Ola on what
the hell is going on inside neural networks. Episode 92, Brian Christian on the alignment
problem. And an oldie but a goodie, episode 44, Paul Cristiano on how open AI is developing
real solutions to the AI alignment problem and his vision of how humanity will progressively
hand over decision-making to AI systems. Bit of a run on title there. I think that might be my
fault, but it is an excellent interview. All right. The 80,000 hours podcast is produced and
edited by Kieran Harris. Audio mastering and technical editing by Simon Monsour and Ben
Cordell. Full transcripts and extensive collection of links to learn more available on our site
and put together, as always, by Katie Moore. Thanks for joining. We'll talk to you again soon.
