and welcome everyone. My brother-in-law Alistair McWhorter once wrote a short story where he said
the boys got up earlier than anyone has ever got up before and that seems to apply to some
dedicated attenders from the US. I'm going to light a candle first before I say anything else
and I've got a match that works today. Yes, there we are. Good. So a warm welcome to this dialogue
with Rupert Sheldrake and Ian McGilchrist. I've known Ian and Rupert for over 40 years and so
our connection goes back a long way and I'd like to start with just a remark or two on reading
and this comes from the obituary this week in the telegraph of John Thorne who was headmaster
of Winchester when I was teaching there and when Ian was a pupil and in 1981 he was chairman of
the Headmaster's Conference and he said, I do see a cloud bigger than a man's hand in the decline
of reading, he told HMC, if it is not done at school it may never be done and I think this
is a prophetic remark and at Winchester there's something called the DIV system which is a
general studies where the don, the teacher, has a lot of latitude in what is read and while
Ian was at Winchester one of the books he read at the recommendation of his housemaster was
William James's Varieties of Religious Experience which is a seminal book of Gifford Lectures from
Edinburgh University in 1901, 1902 and so Ian read this when he was probably about 16
Rupert didn't get around to reading it until quite a bit later and just yesterday I've been
corresponding with a former pupil who's also a scholar at Winchester, Professor Ben Morrison
and Ben is now the chair of philosophy at Princeton and my first encounter with him
was that Simon Elliott, one of my friends who was a don as well, he sent him round with a six page
essay aged 14 entitled Does God Exist and he went through the usual arguments and so I pointed him
in the direction of William James and lent him a copy of Varieties of Religious Experience which
he proceeded to read and then we discussed it and then Rupert appeared first in my horizon as it
were at Mystics and Scientists in 1983 when I was teaching at Winchester and he was lecturing on his
then new book or new-ish book A New Science of Life and I gave him a spare copy of this book here
which is called Talks to Teacher on Psychology and to Students on Some of Life's Ideals by William
James which I'm sure is still somewhere in Rupert's library and then finally this book here is
incredibly important it's called Human Immortality and it's the Ingersoll lecture on Immortality
1898 at Harvard University and just to start Ian and Rupert off I'm going to read a couple of
short passages from the conclusion of Varieties of Religious Experience and this is my paperback
copy I read it when I was 26 and I remember reading part of it in the Beautiful Gardens in Marburg
so he says summing up in the broadest possible way the characteristics of the religious life
as we have found them it includes the following beliefs one that the visible world is part of a
more spiritual universe from which it draws its chief significance two that union or harmonious
relation with that higher universe is our true end three that prayer or inner communion with
the spirit thereof be that spirit god or law is a process wherein work is really done and spiritual
energy flows in and produces effects psychological or material within the phenomenal world and then
another very short piece on the self and we have in the fact that the conscious person is continuous
with a wider self through which saving experiences come a positive content religious experience
which it seems to me is literally and objectively true as far as it goes and the other thing I just
wanted to observe about Rupert and Ian is that they are both voracious readers and they have read
widely and deeply all their lives and their libraries are pretty impressive I have a fairly
impressive library as well so between us I think we do we we span a considerable range and so
I'm going to hand over to you Ian and Rupert and I think Ian you were going to open the batting as
it were okay yes yes that's good I should refer to Schopenhauer's view that never read books
reading books is for people who've got no ideas of their own but anyway can we spotlight Ian
please and and Rupert just wait till Rupert appears on the screen there we are yes thank you
is I'm speaking from the bedroom of the daughter of a friend in a flat in London
and yes it's hard to get my my I feel so
so much that I belong where I live that it's quite hard to sort of reconstitute my mental
world here for the moment but I think what I want to say is that I've become more and
more convinced that none of the things that we desperately need to do to solve the various
problems that we we we face and that we talk about a great deal none of this in the end
will matter unless we are able to get back to the spiritual ground of our being and
in other words we could by some sort of a miracle we could we could reverse the pollution of the
seas we could perhaps do something to at least slow climate change we could make it harder for
people to carry on felling ancient forests all this I believe in powerfully but I also think that
none of it will add up to a hill of beans unless we re-engage with the spiritual basis of a human
life I don't think it will be any longer know what it is to be a human being I think people
haven't the foggiest idea what they're doing here what the cosmos in which they come into being
is like and what their relationship with the earth that is their home is like and and I'm just going
to say a few things for you but then ask you to to respond to them really in the new book I wrote
the matter with things it I suggest first of all that many of the ways in which we look at
the the constitution of the cosmos are upside down or back to front so in other words we we
tend to think for example that the first of all there are things and then there are relations
between them some of which we make in our minds and that's the way it is whereas I argue throughout
a very long book that in fact relations are absolutely primary there is nothing that truly
exists that is not a relation and is not in fact in process as white heads pointed out
so in other words relations and processes are primary not status and things and I also believe
that for example it's not that there's literal truth and that's really important thing and
metaphorical truths are just some kind of semi imaginary extension of literal truth in fact I
believe that all fundamental truths are metaphorical in nature and that literal truth is just a very
special kind that we've invented to describe a small subset of things that occur at a very
everyday level but for the purposes of what we're talking about now I want to suggest that
it's not that somehow there is anonymity and then there is life and then there is consciousness
and then there is a sense of the great values goodness beauty truth and the sacred I think it's
the other way around that what actually exists fundamentally is a consciousness which is a field
of consciousness which is divine which which has the qualities of attending to and drawing us towards
goodness beauty and truth and the sense of the holy and sacred and that it's for this
that we've developed our complexity as human beings since we are not better than animals but we are
in this sense above them that we can we can hope to respond to to receive to resonate with
and to give a full and fulfilling response to those leading values that draw us forward
so that's the way I would like to think of it Rupert what would you say to that
well I think of it in a very similar way and so do most people in the world for that matter
if you actually look at and we live in a particularly godless part of the world western
Europe but it's not quite the same if you go to Africa or India or many other parts of the world
or the middle or Iraq or you know Iran or I mean the Middle East most people are religious in the
world and you know this kind of secularist secular humanist atheist tinted culture that we have
is is a historical anomaly most people were religious in Europe in in as Charles Taylor in
his wonderful book a secular age points out in the year 1500 in Europe everyone believed in god
everyone believed in the kind of vision you've just put forward it was almost impossible not to
not because people were coerced into believing that but because there was just no credible
alternative and what's happened is through the growth of the first through the Protestant
Reformation the disenchantment of the world that happened in part through the Protestant Reformation
a lack of emphasis on nature a focus entirely on human consciousness and then through the
scientific revolution the mechanistic materialist worldview that's grown out of it we now have this
very secular world where people think that evolution and life starts from the bottom up you know
from genes and molecules and cells and everything builds up until you've got big enough brains
where the light of consciousness mysteriously comes on and then we start thinking about
bigger things like god but they're all just inventions inside our own minds and hence
inside our own brains and you'd be able to tell us exactly where
no i wouldn't do that i mean this this what both you and i are discussing and what in fact
the whole scientific medical network has been concerned with right from the start is
trying to find a way back to a worldview that is in is still consonant with science because
science isn't going to go away and we've learned a great many things about nature through the
scientific process but to recover a sense of this connection which is actually there in all
traditions i mean shamanic traditions all admit that there's a or all just assume that there's some
realm they have different views of it but there are realms beyond our own that what we see is not
all there is and as my main teacher father bead grievous used to point out that you know the
center of all religious and spiritual culture is a direct experience of our minds our consciousness
being part of something vastly greater than ourselves and as he pointed out all religions
start from that experience it's not a dogma it's an experience and then they interpret it i mean
his favorite metaphor was the hand and you know that sort of central experience of unity is like
the palm of the hand and then it's interpreted in different cultures in different traditions
different languages they like the fingers of the hand all the different interpretations
of this primary unit of experience is sense of ultimate unity which are interpreted in all
these different cultural ways but that is the central foundation of all these religious traditions
and as far as we know this intuition that we're part of something greater than ourselves is very
ancient i mean all these cave paintings from 20 30 40 000 years ago the practice of burying the dead
and so on all the or dealing with the dead in a ritual way all these things suggest that this has
been part of human consciousness for a very very long time no doubt the forms have changed and
the development of the great religions has sort of put a more unifying aspect on these insights
but it seems to me that it's been foundational to human life for throughout almost all human history
with the brief anomaly of western europe and parts of north america in the last 150 years
yes of course and it is worth reflecting on the fact that it would be entirely irrational
to suppose that we were aware of everything in the cosmos why on earth would we i mean we know
in the very simplest level that there are sounds that we can't hear but that bears and bats can hear
so what we know is limited by our senses and by the relative unsophistication of our brains
i say relative because relative to what there is for us to approach if one has any kind of
sense of imagination one can see that things that we sense are there and that as you say
throughout the world people have believed were there this is not irrational this is a very reasonable
supposition and there are people in for example australia the native people there who who say they
can hear and see things at a distance they can hear people ancestors speaking to them and who
are we frankly to say that they don't hear those things i like the i think i'm sure you would
agree the very important idea of girders that we develop senses to perceive things in response to
the in the the bits of experience that we we are able to to to get and that therefore if we don't
actually allow ourselves to experience certain things then an organ that we might have will
atrophy and i suggest that we've allowed organs that would help us to see these things and hear
these things and know these things we've allowed them to atrophy and that people that we consider
more primitive than us and indeed our own children up to an age before they're they're told that it's
not it's not wise or intelligent to say that you see these things they'll give you you're
fantasizing i mean these people have the organs of perception that we need in order to to to reach
the divine or to have any inklings of it and i suppose that we all have enough of an inkling
of that that unless we shut it down we can follow it and one hopes to grow it you know keeps called
this world a veil of soul making and in other words we are we are nourishing or or stunting
by the way in which we live
yes well i think the um the one way of looking at it is um charles taylor suggests that in
in europe in say up to 1500 or later the people had the idea that minds of porous
porosity is a word he uses and the anthropologist tanya lerman who's at stanford
is i think one of the most interesting anthropologists of religion writing at the moment
and in her latest paper she talks about porosity in all religions it's assumed that our minds of
porous to influences from each other influences from spirits gods angels other beings that our
minds are porous and what charles taylor shows is that since the 17th century there's been this
shutting down so the idea we've ended up ended up with is our minds are completely insulated
with inside the privacy of our skulls they're nothing but the electrical activity of our
brains or other activities of the brains inside our heads and they're all separated off from
everything else and are completely privatized and what tanya lerman shows is that she wrote
her most recent book is called how god becomes real and and the previous one was called
how god talks back um she's done anthropological studies of charismatic christians you know
evangelical groups women grow women praying in tehran muslim women praying in tehran
shamanic cultures and so forth she's done and she shows that in all these traditions
there's the idea that we're open to spirits or beings of other kinds but she also points out that
this um is actually something that requires a cultural reinforcement and effort on our on our
part you know if you believe in god it's not just a kind of passive belief but people who believe in
god pray they go to temples churches services they meet with others they pray together they have
annual ceremonies rituals practices etc there's a lot of work goes into making these beliefs
more apparent and more directly experienced and i think something similar happens with
people have to put in quite a lot of work to maintain the secular world view to maintain
the secular atheist world view denying all these things involves quite a lot of work hard work on
denial you first have to deny all your own telepathic experiences and 85 percent of people have
these experiences with telepathic telephone calls you have to deny that you can really tell when
someone's staring at you from behind and 95 percent of people have experienced that you have to deny
that you have flashes of insight or mystical experience that appear to connect you with
consciousness great in your own if you take psychedelics which give a wonderful sense of
connection with something great in yourself you have to deny that that's real but you just have to
say well that's just because chemical disturbance is inside the brain so even atheism and and
secularism require quite a lot of effort they do in in denial and and the motive for the denial
i suppose is fitting in with the secular world and what the the only positive side of it all is
a self-congratulatory feeling you're smarter than everyone else because you've seen through
all these false beliefs and childish attitudes that children have and so-called primitive people do
and when you were reading the varieties of religious experience at school i had a house master who
he was you know tried to show me the limitations of the orthodox christianity in which the school
chapel we all had to go there every day and and i was reading bits of jg phrases the golden bow
and robin white goddess yes indeed his aim was to prove to me that christianity was no better
than these primitive superstitious beliefs found all over the world and and since we were quite
happy to dismiss all of them as mumbo jumbo the same flight to christianity it was no better than
them and the first i was persuaded i thought this was an appalling weakness because it presumed to
be a superior to these other beliefs and i've later come to see this as tremendous strength
that it has so much in common with myth and archetypal patterns found all over the world
but the the idea that we're smarter than others i mean phraser and all those late 19th century
figures early 20th century figures had the view that we've risen above the sort of animistic
superstition and then you get religion which is a bit better not much better and then you go beyond
that to science and then you realize all that stuff basically childish rubbish we've drove great
enough of so i think that that's how we've got here and i think it does take quite a lot of effort
as i say for people to maintain that belief and i suppose that you would map some of this i'm just
guessing uh on to act towards the different parts of the brain um yes maybe i mean before we go there
though you raised a number of you raised a number of a number of interesting points
um i i argue also in my chapter 28 of the matter with things of the sense of the sacred
from evidence given by psychological studies that actually it takes more effort to deny
is it's not true that as Dawkins suggests that we are indoctrinated into religion in fact it's
the opposite that it takes more cognitive effort to to inhibit these these ideas that doesn't mean
that they're wrong of course um but it is interesting that if you have the people and maybe that is to
do with the the brain that that some people especially people with autism um and uh who are
something like a 10 times more likely to be atheistic um the normal brain is actually allowing us to if
we will not suppress it to experience the sort of things that you're talking about and you know
going back to my idea that the the things that we think are primary are not and the things that we
think are secondary are not so in the case of oneness you were talking about how we have to
you know go back to an idea of being porous but this is this is a as you as you're suggesting
I think this is the natural state to see ourselves as in connection with the world um and you get in
panpsychism a very interesting phenomenon which is that people people say okay so how do we okay
maybe the logical position since we can't see how to get um consciousness out of mere lumpen
matter maybe the answer is everything's got consciousness in it but then how do we really
compose it you know how do we put this together it's actually called the combination problem
this is typical of the left hemisphere which having first of all rupture the unity then
doesn't know how to quote recreate the unity but the unity is there the unity is primary
not not a secondary phenomenon that has to be put together and achieved and so I think that that
kind of panpsychism is is somewhat irrational and left hemisphere dominated now you I you've
brought me to the position where of course I've mentioned hemisphere and I should say to anybody
listening that my position is not that the brain um creates our experience at all I say that logically
there are three possibilities the brain either imits experience or it um transmits experience
or it permits experience and and I I believe that in fact the brain is a permitter of experience
that shapes it much as the vocal cords as William James pointed out are what shape his voice a
restriction a constriction and inhibition and negation some kind of molding or um no saying
to the breath that would come through if there was no such um molding or permitting then there
would be no voice at all but coming to the boring stuff about brain correlates we do know
that um I'm afraid it just is a matter of of of fact and I give I think it's appendix seven or
something in in in the matter with things I I do go over the science on hemisphere difference in
spirituality in relation to mindfulness meditation in general and shamanism religious experiences
of certain kinds and the overwhelming evidence is that this requires a shift of balance away from
the normal slight uh by a swatter left hemisphere um in these experiences one finds that this
imbalance if you like is redressed and not only redress but that the centers um that are
subtending these kinds of experience are um very clearly um right hemisphere related so
in a culture which I believe promotes the values of the left hemisphere sees the world
as particulate made up of isolated things that are fixed um that are unchanging uh inanimate
abstracted explicit uh there is no room for this kind of um this kind of experience indeed I was
talking yesterday to clergy in Canterbury um and I don't know what they thought of it but I was
trying to explain that all the sort of things that you need in order to open your mind to the
existence of a divine being are militated against by the natural mode of the left hemisphere which
is to pin things down to look for certainty um to focus on the explicit rather than the implicit
to see things as naturally inanimate rather than animate and to be all the time cataloging
and charting experience as on a map or having a theory about it rather than actually allowing
experience to come to you to do that you've got to have an opposite cast of mind which is in fact
the cast of mind that the right hemisphere enables for us in daily life which is the the voice of
um a way of seeing things which in which there is no final certainty there are things that are
probable and there are things that are more likely than others but there's no final certainty
nothing is finally separated from anything else uh nothing is ever completely fixed it's always
moving changing and flowing um all the really important stuff cannot be put into language
anybody who's been in love knows how incredibly feeble the language is to
deal with this extraordinary experience um and of course any of you who are listening who are
persuaded that there is a spiritual realm a divine realm that you can um have
informations of this again is beyond conceptual reduction in language um the right hemisphere
enables us to be more willing to accept paradox um to accept things that are not certain and this
is the realm where we um where we find the spiritual life yes the the sense of not certainty
i mean there is a sense the sense though in some spiritual experiences where there is
a great certainty i mean for example people have had near-death experiences or mystical
experiences spontaneously or as a result of spiritual practices or as a lot of psychedelics
um there i mean i myself when i've had some of these types of experiences one of the things
that people say about them is that you know that it's real that it's more real than not
normal reality sure sure near-death experiences which change which last a few minutes and change
people's lives because they feel they've contacted a realm a reality which is more real more certain
in a way than the ordinary world we live in and they don't have any doubt that there's this spiritual
reality because they've directly experienced it now i don't know whether that to what extent that
depends on one or both hemispheres or whether it goes beyond the brain altogether
but it's what's so convincing for many people about these experiences is precisely that they
seem unquestionably real yes i raises two points really one is this um i would make a distinction
between the absolutely certain and an asymptotic approach to certainty and the left hemisphere
has a category of things that are yes and no and i don't think that experience well not in my
experience there is ever this i'm not lucky enough to have had one of these experiences but i imagine
if i'd had one i'd say i'm almost a certain of this as i can be of anything which is different from
claiming absolute certainty or absolute truth but the other thing about it is something that
my housemaster martin scott the man who really modeled for me the the wonderful relation between
no man who was profoundly sane very funny and hyper alert to the ridiculous was also a deeply
spiritual and in that sense a very serious person and he modeled and conveyed to me that
that way of looking at things and one of the things he emphasized to me was that
the true religious experience is not really about these moments of certainty or about you know
levitating or seeing the future or any of these things nice as they may be they are not the center
of it and that in fact they're not particularly prized by the mystics who had these experiences
and not particularly prized actually by the buddhist masters they don't think that these
amazing transformative experiences are really what it's about but it's typical of our society
that we would imagine that there is an experience to this kind and it's not about a more humble
application of a kind of disposition towards the world which is one of awe and and humility
and compassion which i believe is at the center of it so i'm not disrespecting extraordinary
experiences i'm just saying that i'm i'm a skeptic amongst believers and i'm a believer
among skeptics i've always been like this and and i and when people do this i find myself
suddenly running to the other part of the balance here to sort of keep things properly in perspective
well speaking from my own experience i've had these moments of insight where i've just
known that there's a greater consciousness than all my experience but on a day-to-day
basis those are quite rare those experiences are not like every day and that's where spiritual
practices come in and i myself meditate in the mornings and i pray in the evenings
and i see these as different daily ways of relating i see the meditation i think of as more
like breathing in and i close my eyes i'm trying not to be occupied with the things in in my room
or wherever i'm doing it i have mantras i concentrate on the mantra and sit quietly
and thoughts go through my mind and so on and so it's a way of withdrawing not only from the
outer world but also from the inner world of the default mode network of constant inner chatter
what it still goes on but you detach from it and you just let it pass and so so that's like i think
like breathing in whereas prayer i experience in is almost the opposite direction petitionary prayer
you start with an invocation all prayers start with an invocation our father who
art in heaven hail Mary full of grace oh no my she via oh Allah you start with an invocation to
being grace in yourself a form of consciousness grace in yourself and then in petitionary prayer
we're asking for things which is the most common or common or garden form of prayer i mean basic
found all over the world in all different traditions um you then direct intention towards
things that in the outer world and someone who's sick a problem that you're worried about you know
some threat you want to pray for protection or defense and so it's very practical about the
affairs of everyday life and and the immediate problems in one's life so in that sense it's
like breathing out it's going from a spiritual center towards the outer world towards actual
particular problems and so i see these as both ways i see them as complementary to each other
and breathing in and breathing out metaphor is shows i mean we can only breathe up because
we breathe in and vice versa so have the flow in both directions but these a way of coming to
center within oneself where one's consciousness is connected to or one can sometimes experience
this connection to a greater ground of being or consciousness and then praying this connecting
that center to the affairs of the world both of these increase the sense of porosity the idea
that one's consciousness is related to something greater and also that the everyday affairs that
one's concerned with and the problems in the world and hopes and fears and all that are related
to something greater than oneself as well and i think that everyone who prays and it's in if you
take the whole world most people pray even if you take britain far more people pray than
than actually go to church or have regular religious practices um i think these are ways in
which on an everyday basis we have a greater sense of this connection well i like i like very
much that image of breathing in and breathing out naturally um and i don't i don't in any way deny
your experience but i am also immediately reminded of st francis's admonition that when you pray you
should ask for nothing nothing he's very emphatic about it i think mother tereza said much of the
same thing and i remember the words of the infant samuel was it speak lord for thy servant heareth
when the one's praying it's more about listening than talking but it doesn't mean that one doesn't
remember people that one cares for and cares about it would be odd and and counterintuitive
to do that so i think one bears them in one's in one's mind in one's care and one commends that
to god if one asks for anything one has to after all uh couch that with the words you know if if
it so be your world you know that i i do ask for things i suppose but i'm slightly conflicted
about it i think that the greater part of praying is actually creating a space
in which something can come to you indeed i think all creation and imagination is not
about going out and doing something but about creating a space for something to to happen
and as i often say a gardener can't make a plant all the gardener can do is create create a space
for the plant to flourish or stifle the plant but the plant has its own existence and i think
that whatever the spirit the divine spirit is trying to bring to us we crowd out with our own
um our own desires our own wishes our own formulations and that being being open is about
creating a space for things to happen i'm going to just mention here this extraordinary
notion of the creation that comes from the lurianic cabala the prime being the ground of being aims off
being relational as god is and as love is needs a creation and to return that love to be the
object of that love and to and to realize the relationship with the loved one which must be
free and so what is the first act of aims off in creation it's something called sim sum which
means withdrawal and that is a withdrawal to make a space in which there can be something other than
this creature this ground of being not a creature um and then there are
ends that are there are 12 of them that are in this space to catch whatever it is that comes out
of ends off the single spark of fire comes out of ends off and lands on these vessels and shatters
most of them and and the third act of creation is it's called um tikkun which means repair and this
is the particular honor duty purpose indeed of humanity is to repair these shattered vessels
and to make them more beautiful than they were before and in that image i i think of this
japanese art of ceramics called kintsugi in which you repair a shattered vessel but it's
more beautiful than it was before often repaired with lines of guilt uh or gold that come into
the ceramic so this idea of creating a space for things to happen drawing back and being unknowing
and undoing is is i think very important well i personally i see that as more the role of
meditation i mean there are various forms of prayer contemplative prayer or meditation
is creating a space i'm meditating quite often i mean i'm not meditating in order to have sort of
ideas but quite often ideas pop into my mind about things of work i'm doing ideas scientific
experiments and so forth um but petitionary prayer i mean there's an amazing range of opinions i used
to belong to a group called the epiphany philosophers in cambridge and we had retreats together we had
Easter vigils and we had masses at various times of the year which the the priest who
celebrated them for us at one stage was ron williams um who is a member of this group um
and once i was thinking about prayer and we prayed together we did the matins and even
song every day together when we were on retreats um and i then said well could we go around the
circle we all knew each other very well and just say something about how we ourselves prayed
and it was astonishing i i had just no idea these people i'd prayed with many times
saw it say differently some thought that we shouldn't ever pray for anything specific a bit
like you you know could hold people before god and or hold them in the light of god but not
tell god what to do because god already knew everything so absolutely not right to do that
others prayed very very specifically um as jesus does in the in the new testament and jesus is
not just holding people specifically caring specific people he didn't care everybody when
he walked into the room he'd care one person at a time with a particular personal sort of
act of healing or um so it was much it was really quite specific and so there was a wide
range of opinion about how specific we should be and those who believed in the specificity
would say it's not telling god what to do it's being co-creators with the divine that
god works through us an idea similar to what you just said god works through us and exactly he asked
for god's guidance in our prayers you're not just coming up with ideas i i want to have a new car
or i'd like to have more money or something like that it's a it's not like god in prayer is like
celestial amazon with yes never any day um yes i remember yes um a joke about that um i prayed for
a new bicycle but then i realized god doesn't work like that so i stole a bicycle and prayed for
forgiveness but um i i do um you see i'm trying to hold together two uncertainties which is always
my problem i i i i really respect what you're saying and of course whether you call it prayer
that of course christ to heal people or something else i don't know but the c.s louis pointed out
the idea that prayer will produce the outcome we desire can be completely dispense for it because
the holiest of all petitioners uh in the garden at gasemini prayed three times for this cup to be
taken from him and it simply wasn't so we can we can assume that this is not the way that prayer
does work having said that i i believe that disposing one's mind towards an outcome and
disposing many people's minds towards an outcome may help that outcome come about i don't know
quite how and it may be by modes that you're more articulate about that we call para psychological
but uh um probably entirely natural yes i think forming the the intention you see is is part of
this co-creation and i think the power of praying together i mean i'm a regular church go because i
like praying together i like singing together and i like being in a holy place with members of the
community who pray together so i go wherever i am on sundays and small village churches on
local parish church here in hamster or wherever i am yeah i think that creating an intention together
is very very important um and of course the the secularized version of prayer and intention is
positive thinking which is huge in america i know for a hundred years or more there have been all
these books on the power of positive thinking yeah i know where you form an intention you know and then
to sell more vacuum cleaners or like pedios and then you so you sell more because you form the
intention and one of the most perverse examples of positive thinking is of course the former president
donald trump who was raised in the church of positive thinking um the um the chap who was the
prophet of positive thinking what's he called norman uh i've forgotten the the name for the
moment but the the power of positive thinking i don't have anything to do with these pop psychologists
norman vincent peel oh yes norman vincent peel that's right if i did you know the power of positive
thinking he was the minister of something called the marbles church in manhattan where trump's
family went and as a teenager trump him by him im im im im im im im im im im im im im im im im im im im im in
in Bibedore there, so Norman Vincent Peale married him to his first wife. So he was absolutely
raised and formative on positive thinking and the idea is you just say something and
you can make it come true through power of intention. So he loses the election, so he
says he's won it. You know, this is pure positive thinking taken to its most logical extreme.
In my terms, it's pure left hemisphere thinking because the left hemisphere believes that it
has power to create the outcome at once and there's always an optimism, and if something
doesn't work out the way it believes, it will deny that black is black. It will say a paralyzed limb
is such that they can use it freely. And so its power to deny reality in order to fit in with
its theory about reality is the defining feature of it. And I would say that, you know, Trumpism is
just an expression of this mentality and not one that I particularly want to take as my guide.
Oh, I certainly don't. The point about it is, you see, that it's a kind of debased or secularized
form. Yes, I know what you're saying. It's about getting what you want through positive thinking.
You have success in love and business through positive thinking. That's why these books sell
so well. You know, they're all about selling more of the product and getting ahead and so forth.
And they're basically the principle that forming intentions can actually have effects in the world.
But the point about proper prayer, positive thinking about me getting what I want through
the power of my mind. And that's where the left hemisphere goes magical, as it were,
or attempts to. Whereas the normal prayer, I mean, I myself being Christian always start my
prayers with the Lord's prayer. And part of that is right at the beginning is, Thy will be done.
So it's in a much, as you were mentioning, into a much larger context of God's will and the larger
purposes of which I'm a part. And I play a part within that larger pattern. But if you, and I
suppose that would be more like a right hemisphere thing, because it's part of a global vision of
what's happening in the world. But then you could say the secularization of prayer by as it removes
the right hemisphere aspect until it becomes left hemisphere activity. But I think a positive
thinking can't be understood as a movement or a practice without its background in petitionary
prayer, from which it's kind of truncated derivative.
Yes. No, I think that's fine. I don't think we need to to disagree too much about this.
I mean, I suppose that the touchstone for me is the is the Holocaust. I mean, all these innocent
people and innocent children treated with utmost barbarity. And do you suppose that
the decent people, Jews, Christians, and others did not pray that they should be spared this,
but they weren't? So, you know, that that is a, I can, I can, there is a theodicy, I think,
which is simply that whatever God is, God has to allow his creation freedom. Otherwise,
it's simply an extension of himself. And it's not another that he can love, which is not a creation.
So that that creation must have the freedom to do good or ill. And unfortunately, a lot of
the time we do evil. Anyway, let's talk about many other things, as the walrus said, and what
shall we should we move to panpsychism? Or would you like to talk about consciousness and matter
or the nature of time or where should we go?
Well, I think while we're on consciousness, and I think one, the view that you started with,
you know, our present bottom up view, I mean, the traditional view is the opposite that
starts with consciousness, that consciousness underlies all things. And then the whole of
nature is produced through consciousness. In the Christian version, in the creed, it says,
the cosmic Christ through him, all things were made. That there's a part of the divine, the
second person of the Holy Trinity, the log, asked, which is the realm of names and forms.
All creation is divinely comes forth from an ultimate source of form and structure.
That everything in that sense shares within the divine consciousness, God is in nature,
nature is in God. And that is not panpsychism or panentheism, the idea that God is everywhere
in nature and that nature is in God. So God is the mind of God transcends nature. It's not just
nature because pantheism. And so I think what we've got at the moment now coming to panpsychism
is this, the main driver for modern panpsychism is to try and, as you said, to solve the hard
problem. Because the hard problem is that if you have a materialist view that the whole world is
made up of unconsciousness and nothing else, there's no consciousness out there. The only
consciousness there is is inside brains. And moreover, the maximum amounts inside human brains
and maybe lesser amounts in dog brains and elephant brains and perhaps tiny amounts in worm
brains or ant brains, that consciousness is confined to brains, the entire universe is
unconscious except on this planet. And it's unconscious on the entire planet except for
the inside of human and animal heads. That's the standard view. But it has the problem then of saying,
well, if the whole universe is unconscious, mass is unconscious, how come we're conscious?
Everything ought to be unconscious. And then, as you know, a lot of philosophers of mind,
of materialist persuasion, try to pretend we're not conscious. It's an illusion, it doesn't do
anything. It's a happy phenomenon. Ridiculous, yes. Let's try and get rid of consciousness.
No. So the panpsychist, you know, the bright boy at the back of the class and among
materialist philosophers of mind said, well, what if we say electrons and atoms are a bit
conscious? Then we can explain our consciousness as a difference of degree, not of kind. But they
usually end there. Once they get to the human brain, they think they've made their point and
that's where panpsychism ends. But as you know, I've tried to carry this argument further in my
paper in the Journal of Consciousness Studies is the Silent Conscious. I tried to go with this
panpsychist move and say, okay, well, let's say that there really is this kind of panpsychism.
Then why stop at the human brain? The sun is self-organizing system, vastly larger than our
brains with vastly more complex electromagnetic patterns. Why can't the sun be conscious? Why can't
other stars be conscious? And indeed, whole galaxies with higher levels of consciousness.
And then clusters of galaxies and then the entire cosmos. And of course, this is not a new idea.
Plato and Plotinus and many others talked about the world soul, the whole universe having a kind
of soul mind or organizing principle. And that would be a kind of pantheistic global consciousness.
But then the traditional view is that that itself has embedded within the larger,
more inclusive source of consciousness, which is in the end the source of nature.
But so panpsychism as we currently have it is a fairly limited form of panpsychism. It's a kind
of materialist panpsychism, which just attributes kind of epiphenomenal consciousness to material
structures up to the human brain. Yes. Yes. Well, as you possibly know, I'm a panentist and
is a very different thing from being a pantheist. But there is a way in fact of approaching what
is meant by panpsychism further towards panentism and almost making it making them a union. If you
start from the idea that there is separate stuff in the realm of matter and that you've got to
find a union to it, then you have this famous combination problem. But if you start from the
view as I do that the promptly the ontological primitive is consciousness, there is nothing you
can get beyond or behind. You can't go beyond or behind consciousness. Consciousness is the ultimate
reality. I was asked yesterday by clergy, well, is consciousness God? And I suppose,
yes, but no, because I don't want to sort of limit what God is rather in the panentistic way
consciousness is a divine creation. But what I see is that matter is a mode of manifestation of
consciousness. So at times it is something that is immaterial or appears to be. But we only know
what we call material things, because we have consciousness, we don't know that we have
consciousness because of material things such as brains. But we do know the one thing where
can be certain of his consciousness, which is why it's so particularly annoying that
people are sitting on well paid and prestigious chairs in American universities claiming that
consciousness is an illusion. But anyway, consciousness is the basic reality. And people say,
well, matter doesn't look like consciousness. But then I suggest that we think about it as a
phase of it in the way that ice is a phase of water, you know, water is translucent and flowing
and so forth. But ice is static and opaque and extremely hard. So hard that you can split your
head open. And in this room, there is a tunnel more of water in the atmosphere, otherwise I
couldn't breathe. So they don't look like one another, but which is the real water, they're
all real water. And I think that there are all these ways in which consciousness can manifest.
And one of them is in what we call matter. And why should there be matter? Well, I suggest there's
matter because it provides two important things for creation. It provides, importantly,
an element of resistance. Nothing can come into existence without there being some
element of resistance or something that moves against that trend of creation. I mean,
everything has this dual aspect. What is friction? Friction stops movement, certainly,
but it also starts movement. Without friction, you can't move. And without there being some
definition, which means literally the limits to things, there can't be the whole world that
we experience with all its magical beauty and complexity. So it brings that degree of resistance,
and it brings a degree of temporary permanence. In other words, the things I'm saying disappear.
As soon as I say them, or may linger in somebody's mind somewhere for a few seconds, but the
desk at which I'm sitting will be here tomorrow, absent of World War. So those are the ways I
would see it. And that is completely constant with what you were saying about the divine being,
what you're really saying is the divine is imminent, and the divine is transcendent,
and it's holding those two together, which we can in the form of the Trinity. The Trinity is
the best explanation of Panentism. It's like the image of a book. What is a book? Is it the thing
in the mind of the Creator? Or is it the volume here on the table? Or is it what happens when
that volume is taken up and read by somebody? The book is all three of those, but in different
senses. And this is what Rumi said in one of his meditations that the Spirit is the well spring.
It is the cup that conveys the water, and it is the water that quenches the thirst
of those who are thirsty. So I just thought I'd throw that in, because I think it's one way of
making Panpsychism a much more interesting phenomenon, a much closer to Panentism.
I agree. I think that the best model of ultimate reality is Trinitarian, and we find it in
any different traditions. As my favorite book on this is David Bentley Hart's book,
The Experience of God, Being Consciousness Bliss, where he shows that an Indian model,
Sat, Chit, Ananda, is one way of looking at this. And Sat is the ground of all being,
that which sustains all things, all being. And Chit is consciousness, which contains
names and forms, Namarupa, names and forms. The content of consciousness is consciousness about
things, and these names and forms. It's roughly what Plato called the Platonic realm of ideas
in the Christian Trinity as the Logos. And then Ananda, Joy or Bliss, that the divine
consciousness is blissful, which is why mystical experiences of union with God are usually blissful,
because the divine consciousness is blissful. And in the Christian model, where we have
God the Father as the ground of being, and the Logos as the second person of Trinity,
the names and forms which give form, shape, structure, coherence to everything, which
underlie the order and form of the world, and also the order and form of our minds,
which is why we can, the traditional view is why we can understand nature is because
they have a common source, our minds and the natural world. And then the Holy Spirit,
which is the dynamical moving principle, wind, energy, breath, air, flames, flying birds,
it's the dynamical principle. I find that when we understand matter as a combination of form and
energy, which energy according to physics, matter like an electron or a proton or an atom,
are organized by quantum fields, which give form. The energy within them is the same energy we see
in light, and light can turn into matter, and matter can turn into light. Energy is promiscuous
and can take any form. So what we have in nature is a universal energy. This is a scientific view,
as well as a religious view. And we have a whole range of possible forms that energy can take.
And the source of both energy is the ultimate being, the source of both. And the primary metaphor
is, of course, speaking, because when I speak, I'm the speaker. The words I'm saying have formed
structure, shape, connection with each other, meaning. And but in order to say them, I have to
be breathing up. There has to be a flow of air. And if I have just the words, they're silent in my mind.
If I have just the flow of air, it's a kind of white noise of undifferentiated energy.
But the two together make the words which can then relate and communicate and give structure and
meaning. So I think that this metaphor, I find this particular metaphor of the Holy Trinity
particularly helpful. Yes. Well, I'm glad I would endorse every word of that. But I thought that we
might segue from there to the relationship between energy and matter. We know that they're
interchangeable and E equals mc squared is the most famous expression of this idea.
And I'm very interested in your idea, which I believe will be adopted by mainstream science
eventually when they catch up, which is that there are form fields of energy, possibly electromagnetic
energy, which govern the shapes of things and are also the cause of memory. So there are memories
that are stored in form fields. I believe this, this is something that you would you might want to
demur, but I think this is my understanding. Because of course, I mean, I'm sure people are
aware, but when we've done this heroic task of decoding the genome, you know, which I don't
want to diminish in any way, it was a staggeringly clever and brilliant piece of work. But at the
end of the day, what we discovered, this is almost nothing there. I mean, there's absolutely, it's
not just not quite enough information, but by many, many orders of magnitude far, far too little.
Most things are just simply not there. And it reminds me slightly of that episode of Faulty
Towers. I think it's number five of the first series where the chef gets drunk and Basil Faulty
has to go off to a restaurant and get a duck for the gala evening. And unfortunately, somebody
switches the plates around and so he takes away what he believes is a duck, but is in fact a
blancmonde. And he walks into the dining room with this sort of, I've got it here now. And then he
goes, voila, takes off of it. And there's a blancmonde. And he goes, there's nothing there.
I sort of see this as the state we're in now that we thought we've got it, but actually
it's not there. So on a more serious note, you sent me a couple of papers that I very much enjoyed.
One of them was fairly technical, but it explained itself at the end. And what it was really saying
is at the lowest level of neurons and transmitters and so on, there is no stability or there is
little stability, not enough stability to say that any kind of memory is stored in this pattern of
neurons or whatever, because it shifts. It shifts in the brain after a very short while, it may go
somewhere else. But what is stable is not the manifestation in the brain substance,
but some kind of electromagnetic field. Now, expand on that, Rupert, please.
Well, I think both genes and brains have long been overrated. And in the 1970s and 80s,
genes would explain everything, which is why literally billions of dollars were poured into
the human genome project. When it came when it finished, you know, they thought there'd be 100,000
genes that you'd be able to patent them and make fortune and stuff. There are only 20,000. And,
you know, rice plants have about 45,000 and see a few more than us. So it's not it wasn't at all
what was expected. And then all these attempts to explain hereditary in genome wide association
studies where they compare tens of thousands of people's genomes and they look at their height
where they get breast cancer, whether they are schizophrenia, etc. What do the genes actually
explain? Well, they explain about 2.5% of the inheritance of schizophrenia, less than 10% of
the inheritance of breast cancer, less than 20% of the inheritance of height. And yet these things
are known to be heritable. And so the genes don't explain it. So that's called the missing
heritability problem in the trade. And they tried people have tried to fill that gap with
epigenetics, the inheritance of quiet characters, which was as you know, taboo in the 20th century.
I think it depends on morphic resonance, the connection of the kind of memory across time.
As you know, is one of my favorite theories. And the same goes for memories in the brain that
morphic resonance depends on similarity. Any organism is more similar to itself in the past
than to any other organism. Therefore, the most specific resonance is from its own past.
I think this maintains the form of organisms, even though the cells and the molecules turn
over, and our own molecules are changing over time and cells coming and going.
But the form remains more or less the same. And in the realm of memory, I think that we resonate
with ourselves in the past, and that's how memory works, that it's not stored as the
materialists believe, they have to believe that it's material in the brain, because they've got
nothing but material to explain things. And so it has to be material traces. And people have tried
over and over and over again for more than 100 years to find
these memory traces storing memories in brains, and they've proved ever more elusive.
And the paper you were referring to is where people have looked in mouse brains,
inserting extremely detailed electrodes, so you can get tremendously fine grain picture of what's
happening in the brain. And we know that brains have waves going through them, it's not just granular
nerve cell activity. We've known from electroencephalographs for years that they're global wave
patterns. What this new study shows is that these wave patterns are highly specific and
very particular patterns of waves when a mouse learns something and when it remembers it.
And when they first discovered the characteristic wave patterns, they said, oh, we've located the
memory here, they are these waves in this bit of the brain, that in between when learning and
remembering, they must have been stored in the cells in material traces that somehow then come
to life in the form of waves again. But then they found that the wave patterns remain the same when
they remember it, the same pattern, but the pattern can move to different bits of the brain.
It's not in particular cells. It's the ability of the nervous tissue to produce wave patterns
that underlies the memory. And this is called representational drift. So the standard theory
of memory just doesn't work. And I think memory and the memory of form and the inheritance of form
and instinct, I think instincts like habits of the species inherited by morphic resonance.
So I think that the standard materialist view trying to build it all up from granular genes
is simply falling apart through, you know, the inheritance problem,
the missing heritability problem and through things like representational drift and
the failure to find memories in the brain. This of course has huge implications for consciousness
because the materialist view is that when we die, if memories are all stored in the brain and the
brain decays, then oblivion is the only possible outcome of death. Whereas all traditional belief
systems have had some sort of life after death, whether it's a shadowy ancestral realm in Hades,
or whether it's, you know, life after death, or whether it's reincarnation, all of them involve
a transfer or survival of memory beyond the survival beyond the death of the brain. All of those
possibilities are ruled out by the materialist theory, which is why it so fits well with the
kind of atheist world view, because it rules out a lot of religion is about thinking about
consciousness in a big picture, including the possibility of life after death, or whether it's
our consciousness is resorbed into the ultimate consciousness or whatever. Most religions assume
that it doesn't just stop when we die, whereas the materialist theory of memory says that's the
only possible option. Quite, quite. But am I right in understanding? I mean, I know you, like
myself, have had conversations with Michael Levin, who is an evolutionary biologist at Tufts.
I think you've had conversations with him, am I right? Yes. Yes, I went to visit him, actually.
I admire him again. A few years ago, when I was giving a talk at Harvard, I went to visit him,
and we spent some time together in his lab, and that was a purely private conversation.
Did you find that there was, that he had moved towards, my sense is that he doesn't actually
want to embrace it fully or publicly, but that he basically is a deeply sympathetic to this
way of thinking? Yes, he is. His whole way of thinking is about holistic organising principles,
which are more for genetic fields. That's my starting point. The great thrust of his work is that
biology is organised by fields, sort of top-down organisation of the developed form and generation,
rather than building it up from the bottom from genes, which simply doesn't work.
But there's a form of teleology or passive behaviour in all living things. There's global
organising principles that are hierarchically organised, and you've got cells within tissues.
The cell has its own form of organisation, its own intelligence, and the tissue containing millions
of cells as a higher level of organisation, and the organ a higher level still in the organism
and the society. This viewer is almost very similar to what I think. The one thing he doesn't have
is morphic resonance, you see. He certainly knows about it, because when I went to visit him,
he pulled out a very well-thumbed copy of my book, A New Science of Life, my first book about
morphic resonance. He asked me to sign it, and I know he's read it with great attention.
And he's very widely read. I don't claim that I'm special privilege, particularly for me or my
book, but he's very widely read, but he's certainly very aware of the holistic tradition in biology,
very rooted in it, and very well aware of its history. Going back to the early 20th century,
people like Grige and the Vitilist School, he's very aware of that in a way that most biologists
aren't. And I think that he's hovering. I think he'd love morphic resonance to be true,
but he doesn't mention it. He doesn't talk about it. He doesn't do research on it, because
he knows that this would... I mean, he's at present has a very
influential possession within biology. He's very rare. It's very rare for someone who has
a holistic perspective to have such a wide influence where molecular biology has dominated
things for so long. If he started coming out in favor of morphic resonance, he'd be proclaimed a
heretic like me, and this would fall apart. So if somebody else got good evidence for
morphic resonance, I think he'd be pleased, and I think he'd start doing work on it,
but I think he's in a position where he could take the lead.
Yes. While you were talking about this intelligence of cells, which is something I'm
very interested in and have written about in the matter with things, even a single cell can
inventively repair its own form, although it's not programmed any rare in its genome to do so,
and has no experience itself of such a repair being needed. In many ways, that's a small
element in a picture which is much bigger, which is a good point that I think was made by
F.C. Schiller, or F.C.S. Schiller, which is that when somebody's had a brain injury,
how is it that other parts of the brain sort of know that they need to reconstitute this element?
It's entirely different from anything that a machine can do, because it involves a
conceptual pattern of the whole, where it recognizes there's something that needs to be
brought into being, rather like the idea of a representational drift, that another part is
on a much bigger scale and more dramatically, that another area of the brain must be recruited
to do this job, and that suggests that there is a form of what is going on at a higher level,
which is exactly what they're finding in the brain science of memory that you are talking about,
so I think that's wonderful. That's why in the 1920s, when the idea of morphogenetic
fields was first put forward, people liked the field idea, because if there's a field organizing
the development of an organism or a cell, and if you damage it, the field is still there,
which contains the wholeness and can account for regeneration, and the analogy was with magnetic
fields, because fields are intrinsically holistic, even the fields of physics, and after all,
fields were only introduced into science by Faraday in the 19th century, in the 1850s.
Before that, it was just purely mechanistic, you know, pushing and pulling, billiard balls and
things, although Newton's gravitational theory implied interconnectedness of the entire universe,
but the emphasis in classical mechanics was on pushing and pulling, and fields, in a way,
are still involved in pushing and pulling, but through what? I'm pushing, I make a distinction,
I think the things that push from behind are very mechanistic and hydraulic, but actually
what we need to be thinking about are those things, both spiritually, morally, intellectually,
and biologically, that draw us from in front. Yes, of course magnetic fields push or pull,
if you put the same poles together. Yes, that's true. But it's not symmetrical, because if you
shake up a whole lot of magnets, I sometimes do this for fun, they automatically line up,
they repel each other until they pull, and so it's not that repulsion, attraction comes out
above repulsion, because you end up with interconnected magnet, you don't end up with
lots of repelled separate ones. Oh, God, I love that. Although repulsion and attraction are
symmetrical in their own magnet, the redneck result is the domination of attraction.
That sounds a very good point, which to have a break. I have to sort of cut you off somewhere,
because the conversation has been so wide-ranging and fascinating that you brought things
out of each other, which is probably new and fresh, and that's what I think is so exciting
about a dialogue where you have a creative interchange.
