Well Ian, it's great to be here with you on Sky and I suppose how I found my way here
is that for years people have been telling me you must read The Master and his Emissary.
Many people around Dark Mountain have been strongly influenced by it as a book and last
autumn when I had just finished work on At Work in the Ruins I finally sat down with it
and understood why because the question that I'm starting from in At Work in the Ruins
is what's the nature of the trouble that the world is in, not least the part of that
trouble that rides under the name of climate change and early in the book I say whenever
we get into a conversation about climate change that conversation starts inevitably
inside the frame of science because it's science that brings us the news and gives us ways of
talking about it. Climate change is a scientific concept and yet I've been going around for
years saying climate change asks us questions that science cannot answer and the example
of that that I have sent her on in the book is how did we find ourselves in this trouble?
Is it the result of a piece of bad luck with the atmospheric chemistry, that it turns out
seven generations down the line that building industrial societies around all of these fossil
fuels is throwing out of whack the climate system on which the conditions of possibility
of human societies as we've known them have taken place. So is it bad luck? Or is it a
consequence of a way of approaching the world, a way of seeing and treating everyone and
everything that would anyway have brought us to such a pass even if the atmospheric
chemistry had been different, had been less sensitive to all these carbon dioxide emissions
and I feel like you've given one of the fullest accounts I've come across of that way of approaching
the world. Yes. Well, thank you. I suppose when one talks about how we got here a number
of different ways you can answer that question. So it's not wrong, of course, to say that
it's a problem to do with use of fossil fuels and so on, but that itself is rooted in something
bigger and beyond, I believe, which is, as you say, a whole conception of what we are,
the planet is and how the two relate. So how do we begin to describe that or unpack
that in a way that might help us ground the conversations that go on about climate change
differently to the way they often seem to? Yes. The difficulty is that there isn't a
very easy way to say, well, if only you say this or do that, it will work. It's more a
kind of way of being in the world that we need, which we've lost, but it can, I think,
encouragingly be recovered. And I see, and I'm sure you see this, of course, that there
is a hunger for a way of thinking about ourselves and what we're doing here that is more sophisticated,
more inclusive than the one that we've been taught. We've been sort of, almost without
realizing it, we've been dragooned into a way of thinking that would have seemed extremely
odd to our ancestors and to most people who are not brought up in the modern Western tradition.
And it's a very modern thing even in the West. I mean, I would say perhaps only the
last 200 years at the maximum that we have adopted this very harshly reductionist, strictly
materialist way of thinking. And I think that is at the bottom of what we've got wrong.
And you've used that word modern several times there. One of the books that was in the field
of possibility or created the field of possibility for what I've been writing is a book called
Hospicing Modernity by Vanessa Machado-Dolivera, who's a Brazilian scholar who's based in
Canada. And that image of what is called for in the kind of times we're in, being neither
to try and save modernity and make it somehow sustainable, nor to try and overthrow it and
bring it down or stage some kind of revolution, but being to give it a good ending, not least
so that it can pass on the lessons that it has for us that may only be revealed in its
ending. And it feels like that is part of what the hunger or the longing that you're
describing that I think we both encounter.
I like that idea very much because as you say, the sort of overthrow, it's always a
bad idea to do something peremptory and abrupt, but we haven't got a lot of time and we may
not be able to, as it were, save modernity. But as you say, it's very important that whatever
we leave is something that is viable and useful to whatever comes after us.
After Paul and I wrote The Dark Mountain Manifesto, I found myself increasingly getting invited
into rooms where climate scientists were being brought together with artists and indigenous
elders and people representing different kinds of knowledge or practice. And it felt like
the invitation from the scientists, on the one hand, there was an assumption that we
were going to somehow have a magic way to help deliver the message, get people to listen
to what the science was telling. So we were being sort of enlisted as a message delivery
system. And I don't think this is quite what we're for. But equally, where that was coming
from, there was a sense of helplessness on the part of the scientists of, you know, we
have the knowledge we can tell people. And the kind of knowledge we produce is what the
modern world says is the only kind of knowledge that is reality. And yet when we come with
a message that calls into question, our ability to just continue and extend these trajectories
of growth and progress and development as they have been understood around here recently,
suddenly they're not listening to us any more than they would listen to the protesters
who are outside the gates of the COP meeting. And what I've experienced as a paradox is
I find myself trying to say, science has to take a humbler role in relation to the other
kinds of knowledge and practice that are showing up here to people who are experiencing a sense
of helplessness as scientists or as people bringing the message from science, where to
say that more humility might be what's called for, which I think was also in the language
that you were using just now. At first glance, that sounds like the last thing that is needed.
And yet there's a deep truth in there and actually a sense of relief often when we get
properly into dialogue with scientists and non-scientists around this, at science not
being asked to carry all the weight of knowing the world and telling us what it needs to
be done. Absolutely. And the false impression that science can do far more than science
can ever be asked to achieve is one of the reasons for people feeling that science is
an enemy, whereas I believe it to be a hugely valuable tool. But it is only that. And if
one can see it as that and rather overreaching claims are not made for it, then that risk
can be reconciled. People can see it for what it is. It's when it pretends to be a sort
of omnipotent and omniscient or potentially so. We're nearly there, only a few more experiments
and we really understand it all. That is the sort of thing that makes any experienced
and wise person feel alienated from the discourse. So I think what we want is to rehabilitate
science. I find myself in the odd position that I'm a great believer in both science
and reason and I've spent most of my life trying to practice these things. And it falls
to somebody who believes in them passionately to point out their limitations. So another
thing that I do is to say reason is hugely valuable, but first of all it depends what
you mean by reason as it depends what you mean by science. And secondly it depends
on what you're asking it to do. It can do certain things, but beyond that it can't
go. So there are certain things that we know are very real, but are somehow beyond the
reach of mere reason. The nature of music would be an example. We can rationalise about
its structure. We can analyse it. We can take it apart. We can get notes and we can look
at them in our electron microscope and we can say this note is nothing. But the music
is something very great. So it's that process that needs to be done. And so what I'm really
saying is the over-defensiveness of science and the over-defensiveness of reason are understandable
because at the moment they're under attack, I think very wrongly. But the reason they
may be under attack is because they are misrepresenting themselves, or maybe not even that, but there
has gone into the popular culture a myth that science can do everything, that reason can
answer all our questions. But there's absolutely no question that these claims are unsubstantiated
and unsubstantiable. And the analogy that I use is to say, you know, how does one be
a friend to science? If your friend is tripping on acid on the roof of a building and thinks
he can fly, to be a friend to them is not to go, yeah, man, go for it. It's to put your
arm around the shoulder and say, why don't we sit down over here and have a little chat?
Which I feel is kind of what you have been doing in a way that takes it away also from
that, the conflictual mode of engagement with the limits of science that doesn't.
It's a very good vivid example, I like it. And it's effectively the ancient saying, Plato
is my friend, but a greater friend is truth. And, you know, so attributed to Aristotle,
probably wrongly. But it's that, that if you are a friend of science and of reason, you
don't misrepresent it as something that it isn't. Because that way you cause a false
falling away from it from people who quite rightly won't accept extreme, the extreme
positions, the very black and white positions that reason wrongly understood and science
wrongly understood can adopt a sort of dogmatic position. And dogma is our enemy in whatever
form it comes. And in our world now there are far too many dogmas and too many things
that can't be questioned. And when you get to that point, as Hannah Arendt said, if
things can't be questioned, you're in a tyranny.
So one of the things that I get to in thinking about this is the relationship between what
in my terms is knowledge and knowing. And obviously, you know, we talked about this
last night, science as a name for this set of activities only came in around the 1830s.
Exactly.
Prior to that, the people who were doing what we think of as science would have called
themselves natural philosophers. And in a sense, that shift of name is reflective of
a moment in which a monopoly is being granted, where this set of activities are being seen
and seeing themselves as the monopoly on knowing, on the work of knowledge, because that's what
science means. What I found myself thinking about is the place where maybe these scientists
who I was meeting in these rooms talking about climate change were stark, is holding the
knowledge where knowledge is the kind of the fruits of these these activities, but it's
a kind of it's an arms length thing. And then there's another piece of work which is bringing
the knowledge home. And if you think about the way in which the language of knowing,
I mean, if we go to the Hebrew Bible, for example, the word to know include can range
from, you know, sexual intercourse to intellectual apprehension, or the fruit of the tree of
knowledge in Genesis. There is there's a kind of dance for me between, you know, the
experience of knowing out of which I distill knowledge that can be shared, which includes
the kinds that can be put in books and on shelves. And then that dance is completed at
the moment where a reader brings their own experience to the words, so as to bring them
back to life in their experience of knowing, which will not mirror perfectly the experience
of knowing that led me to write it. But it's a bit like two choreographers who use the same
set of choreographic notation, the dance that the second choreographer will make from the
notations of the first will be recognizably akin to the first one. And so there's this
kind of three three way move of the experience of knowing the production of knowledge and
then the experience of knowing arising from encountering that, which when I then read
the master and his emissary felt to me very close to the dance of the hemispheres that
you're describing, which was striking because what I had been saying was, I think we've
got the hierarchy where knowledge is held to be the important bit, rather than the experience
of knowing that might be part of where we're getting stuck, part of the trouble we're in.
Absolutely, that's a very rich vein to mine. And as you know, I sometimes contrast, I don't
think it's exactly the same. But the difference is that we have in German and French, which
are different kinds of knowledge. So there's there's Canon in German and Connetto in French,
which means knowing from experience. And there's a vision in German and Savoie in French, which
is to know, as it were, the facts. And another way of talking is that there is data. There
is information. There is knowledge. And there is understanding. And understanding is is
intelligence. And it's what in fact, whatever you do with AI, but that's another story, you
won't achieve that understanding. Because to have that understanding, you have to have lived
an embodied life with emotions and, and the body and all the, the, what we think of as
disadvantages that go with that. So yes. And the other thing is that what you describe is what
has been amusingly dubbed the McGillchrist maneuver, which is, which is my, my theme that in all
understanding, there is a three step process, the first take on anything, as it were, preconceptually
and as a whole is taken by the right hemisphere, then at a subsequent stage, it is broken down,
categorized, analyzed. It's, it's the bare bones of its structure were examined. But then all that
knowledge needs to be taken back into the holistic picture of the right hemisphere and absorbed there
and become, in a way, implicit in that picture. The easiest example I can give is that of learning
a piece of music, but you're first attracted to it as a whole. As you start to play it, you realize
you have to practice certain passages and you start thinking intellectually about the harmonic
structure. But when you go on stage to perform, you must forget all that, not that it was wasted
time. It was very important time, but that now it must be taken up into and become implicit in the
whole. So I think that's, I hope that something to do with what you were talking about with knowledge,
the distinction of knowledge and knowing. I mean, perhaps interestingly, knowledge is, is, is a
noun, knowing is a verbal participle. And your, your, what you're talking about is, is the idea
of something which is a lived experience. Yes. Yes, exactly. And one of the, the things that
worries me about the ways in which we are responding to things like climate change. And
actually, I wonder if this thought might be extended even to the way in which we responded
to the pandemic is this sense of seeing the world through, in your terms, the left brain
perspective, so that the world comes to be conceived of as a problem to be solved,
that if we can just map, if we can generate enough knowledge about how the world works,
then we can come up with the set of solutions for managing the world as if the world is a
thing that needs to be turned into knowledge for its own good in order for it to continue to
have a chance of existing. And I think that people can build very kind of convincing arguments for
what needs to be done that could actually lead us to very dystopian places. Indeed, and arguing.
Yeah. And the analogy which I get from my friend Paul Kingsnorth, he talks about all the things
that he's learned from keeping a fish tank with a few freshwater fish in it with his son,
and how this, you know, you have to measure the temperature, it can't get too hot, can't get too
cold, you have a whole chemistry set of different things that you have to drop into it to regulate
it, and all of this to do what a river or a lake does easily and for free. And my concern is that
this left brain approach to the world, when it is granted the kind of dominance that it has had in
modernity, comes to, can't see the difference between a fish tank and a living world, comes to
represent the living world as if it were a fish tank, and then attempts to turn the world into a
fish tank, a thing that requires a total system of human management and control.
Yes. Again, there's a lot in that, I think. One being the difference in scale which shouldn't,
superficially shouldn't make a difference, but it does, because what we're dealing with in nature
and what we're dealing with in human society and dealing with everything important in this world
are complex systems, not complicated systems. The distinction being one which is effectively
just like a large mechanical system, the complicated system just takes a bit,
few more arrows and a few more algorithms. But the complex system is one that cannot
intrinsically be modelled in this way. It has re-entrant loops, it has uncertainty involved in
it. So there is a grave danger that complex situations are resolved into a complicated
structure. There was a hilarious piece of analysis carried out for the US Army in Afghanistan by a
London consultancy firm who generated a map of all that was going on in Afghanistan, and it's
hilarious. It's a huge map like this, and it's got little centres everywhere, and arrows going
in every possible direction. And when this was presented to General McChrystal, a man of experience,
an amount of action, he responded, when we understand that we will have won the war,
which you can understand in one of two possible ways. But what intrigues me actually is that at
the moment, I've just been approached in the last couple of months quite independently by
military intelligence pulled between the UK, the US and France, and another approach from
military intelligence in Australia to help them untangle why their sort of systematic,
abstract ways of working things out are not actually helpful, and that we need to reincorporate
into this something which is less certain, less tied down, and if you make a structure too rigid
and tighten up all the bolts, it's got no movement, it will crash down. So it needs to have this
human intelligence in it, another way of putting it is that it needs to be antifragile
in Taleb's terms. But we need to reintroduce the much stigmatized concept of human judgment and
intuition. I love that story of the map in Afghanistan. It makes me think of Borges and the
one-to-one map. Oh yes, this is the size of the whole one. Yes. Because sometimes it seems as if
that's the sort of the unintentional foolishness of this attempt to turn the world into
a thing that needs to be known in order to exist. And the other example that was coming to mind as
you were speaking about it was Dean Bavington, who's an environmental historian in Canada who
comes from Newfoundland and has written about the Newfoundland cod fishery. And the story that he
tells is of how the Newfoundland cod fishery collapsed not once but twice. And after the first
collapse, it became the pioneering sort of case study of fisheries management, where they were
convinced that they now had mapped and knew this wild fishery well enough to say when the boats
could go back out again, how much fish they could take. And through the 80s, it was the world's
leading sustainable fishery. And then in 92, it collapsed again. And what he describes in fisheries
science is this kind of retreat then from attempting to know the wild living complex world to saying
this is beyond our capacity. And so what we're going to do instead is move to fish farming,
where we create deliberately simplified ecosystems that we can know and manage in
this way that we failed to do with the wild fishery. And of course, that is also
failing because those systems are never really cut off from the wild world. They have inputs and
outputs going into it. But it seems like there's a sort of spiral there, which I see in various
areas when we're talking about ecological crisis, which is this desire, this feeling that we need
to know the world in a way that would allow us to intervene successfully in that way.
And then cycling between a despair at the failure to do that and a sort of desperate optimism of
trying to remake the world into something like a fish farm. And I think in what we've been talking
about in the invitation that you're making in your work, I feel like there are clues for letting
people know that the world might be something other than the way it appears through this lens.
And therefore that the failure that failing to make the world into something that can be known
and managed in that way is not the end of the world, only at the end of a way of seeing it.
Sure. Yes. No, that's surely right. But I suppose the difficulty would be how people
can actually put that into practice. That's always the difficult bit.
Yes. How do we... Have you thoughts about that?
Well, I think it starts with giving up, in a sense.
Yeah. Yeah. You know, it starts with... It starts with stopping. It starts with stopping what you're
doing, which is not working. Yeah. Yes. And it was Gustavo Estavo, who was a Mexican activist and
thinker who can really taught me this, because he described how he'd had these three times in his life
where he had walked away from a situation without being able to explain why. And the last time was
in the mid-70s when he turned down a job as a cabinet minister in Mexico. And he said,
I couldn't explain to anyone why or what I was going to do, but in the way that he talked about
it, because he then got involved with these grassroots networks and the pueblos and the
and the barrios of Mexico City. And it was the... Until he left that position where he was standing,
he couldn't see what was invisible from there. He had to actually go somewhere else without
being able to give anyone a justification of this move for things to come into view,
because the way that the people he was then working with were seen from above,
from within the system he'd been working in, missed something important.
About their ability to make life go on. So that's the first step of giving up, not as an end,
but as a necessary... I say in the book, giving up is always giving up on something, though it
may feel like everything until after you've done it. So that's the first move, is to stop
trying to save the world as we have known it, but also stop assuming that if you give up on that,
then you know how the story ends. Yes, well that in particular we don't do, as A. N. Whitehead said.
Profits, we don't know what to do with them, perhaps taking them outside and stoning them in
some sort of merciful kind of way would be the best thing. But when everyone's asked to predict
the future, I sort of think of Neil Spore saying prediction is a particularly difficult matter,
especially when it concerns the future. So I don't think we ever know, and keeping that
space open about what is going to happen is very important. And the failure to do so is all part
of this. We must have certainty, we must follow this path, because we know what will happen. We
usually won't be following that path, something we didn't know happens, like the famous economic
collapse of 2008-9, where we thought we had now mapped how these markets work so successfully
that they would never crash again and they promptly crashed. So the difficulty is taking
something that works, as I mentioned earlier, on a small scale. And I'm trying to suggest that this
is going to work on a larger one. For example, if you do have a complex system, which can't be reduced
to mechanistic chains of causation, you can nonetheless find a very small isolated part of
it, where it appears that that's what's happening. And you can hone in on that, and you can see a
little chain of causation, and you can interfere with it and produce a result. And the temptation
is for science there to say, so we understand that now. But what you've understood is how that
little chain of causation there worked. But you haven't understood the nature of the whole in
which it inheres. And so when one's zooming out from some small scale experiment, usually the
thing is quite different problem when you are looking at the whole in which whatever it was,
you modeled along. So there's a distinction that I use in the book, which came to me from
John Michael Greer. And it's the distinction between a problem and a predicament. And he says,
a problem has a solution. And the thought experiment he gives is he says, so suppose that
you can get in a time machine and go back to some prosperous rural village in the south of England
in 1700, equipped with the knowledge of the industrial revolution that is coming and everything
that that is going to mean for the people there. And suppose that you can actually convince them
of all of these things that are going to completely disrupt their ways of life and for
a small number of people going to make them amazingly rich off things that no one's dreamed
of yet. And for many others mean life in factories or going off to fight foreign wars.
And then they say to you, so what should we do? And there's no answer to that because it's not a
problem that can be solved. It's a predicament, which doesn't mean that there aren't responses,
doesn't mean that there aren't actions worth taking. And some of those will be wiser than others.
But the world that's born out of that, which is the world of industrial modernity of the last
couple of hundred years that we've been talking about has been better at solving problems than
any human culture that the world has ever seen. But increasingly over time, more and more of
the problems it's faced with are the consequences of earlier solutions. And meanwhile, it almost
can't see that some things might not be problems, that there might be predicaments, and that another
way of seeing and acting might be called for in the face of a predicament. And what would that
way of acting involve? Well, suspending the belief that you can solve this now
should be an important part of it. So a good example of a predicament that we almost still
recognise as a predicament would be mortality. When we meet somebody, I remember meeting someone
who had his membership card of the Cryogenics Institute with the instructions on the back,
if you find me dead, then put ice around my head and call this number.
And I shook his hand and it felt like the coldness was creeping back into him even
while he was alive. But most of us kind of at a gut level see that as a category error.
We see the fact that we're going to die one day is more like a predicament than
a problem to be solved. And it doesn't cancel out the meaning of the fact that we're sitting here
alive now. It doesn't remove there being lots of things we can do with the life that we
have. But if our response to the fact that we're going to die one day is to try and throw ourselves
into treating that as a problem to be solved, then that may not lead us to make the wisest
use of the time that we have. Indeed, there's a further step we could take, which is not only
not to see it as a problem, but perhaps not even to see it as a predicament, but to see it as
an inalienable part of life and something that has its strength too. I was very impressed by
something that Mary Midgley said when she was 92. And I think she died when she was 96. And she was
extremely sharp until the moment she died. And she said, it's very easy to come to terms with death
because one only has to ask the question, what would it be like if you literally could live on
this earth forever? And I'm sure there may be some people somewhere who say, oh, marvelous, but
most of us begin to feel a sort of craziness and almost a sense of panic that there is no end to
this. And if that is the case, that it's better that it has its finite nature, has its finest,
then it's only a question of when. And nowadays, we always think a bigger portion is better, but
sometimes there's something quite good about the standard portion of a human life. As I find myself
three school years and nine at the moment, I feel quite happy with the idea. And I really
think that the lack of our awareness of death and what it brings to the pecancy of life is a great
loss. And in the past, of course, people would have had a scholar such as I might have had a skull
on the table that reminded me from my twenties onwards that I was going to die and that this
had meaning. And once you accept this, you don't see it as the enemy of life, but part of the nature
of life. As I think the Chinese, the Far Eastern tradition, Chinese and Japanese are much better
at seeing that the transiency of things is not a problem to be solved, not even a predicament,
but is in fact something very beautiful and part of their meaning.
It's a sentence without a full stop on the end has a problem.
I reminded of the story of Beethoven before he went deaf, hearing somebody in a neighbouring room
playing a piece as far as the last note in the scale and not actually going there, having to go
out and press the note before he could go back to bed.
The line when Paul and I wrote The Dark Mountain Manifesto, the line that has stayed with me most
deeply is right at the end when we found ourselves saying the end of the world as we know it is not
the end of the world full stop. And together we will find the hope beyond hope, the path that
lead into the unknown world that lies ahead. And a year or two after we wrote that, I found myself
sitting with the philosopher David Abram talking about this and in that conversation a new turn
on that came out which was the end of the world as we know it is also the end of a way of knowing
the world. And so I think that's what I'm kind of, that's what I'm inquiring into and I feel
like you're one of the people who's kind of holding that question at the moment.
Well, it's wonderful to have that expressed because the idea of the way in which we know
something affecting what it is is absolutely central to my philosophy, which is why I pay
so much attention to attention and the importance of how we attend, not just whether or not we
attend, which is important, but how we attend, by which of course I didn't mean the means by
which, but the way in which. And that changes the nature of the world. And I believe that
actually once one starts looking at the world with a different kind of attention,
it can change its nature quite quickly and quite responsibly. That has been my experience. So we
don't have to, people often say, so what do we do? And in a way that's a sort of secondary left
hemisphere question. Now we've got a vision of how we want to do things, what are the steps we
need to take to accomplish it. And the left hemisphere servant should say, well, I will go
and do this. And you say that's a very good idea and so forth. But really what we're talking about
is inhabiting our lives, inhabiting the world, inhabiting the cosmos in a different way,
which depends on the nature of the attention, which means a relationship, because attention is never
a camera doesn't pay attention, a microphone doesn't pay attention, it receives. And we don't
just receive, we pay attention. And that means that we bring something of our own to whatever
it is that we encounter. But I also profoundly believe that that something else responds to
our attention. I don't never have believed since I was a young adolescent that it was true that
the world was a sort of heap of non responsive material. It always seems to me to be vibrantly
communicating with me. And that there is this exchange all the time. So out of that exchange
comes what is real, because I do believe and I argue philosophically for those who can't see why
I would say that in the matter with things that relationships are primary that what actually
exists first of all is relationship. And that the things are secondary to the relationships.
So when there are relationships, bits start to stand out and we go Oh, there's something,
a thing. And that's what we identify. But it's a web of relationships. When you think about how
an embryo develops into the animal, it doesn't add a liver and a heart and a
spine and a whatever. These things come out of the hole. And they only are embedded in that
context of the whole. And then they stand out and you go What's that over there? We'll call that the
liver. So in an organism, there are areas of relationship which become what we then call things
and this is quite coherent with something that means intuitively something to me,
but it's part of all the great so called wisdom traditions of the world, that whatever we mean
by God, that first grounding, whatever that encompasses is all is that its nature is love.
I mean, that is a common theme of all these traditions. And love is nothing if it's not
a relationship. That's exactly what it is. It doesn't exist. You know, you don't have to things
first love exists and out of love come the beings. And I believe that the purpose of
this is getting a long way out, perhaps. But I think that the purpose of the cosmos,
one might say why, why if there is this ground of being, whatever you like to call it, the Dao or
God or whatever else, why did it bother to create? And I think the answer is that
it itself only becomes fulfilled through this act of creation, because there's another
and there is a reciprocity. So that reciprocity between the divine and ourselves is usually
important, not just for us, but also for the divine, which means that we also play a crucial
role in it. We're not just passive observers, once again, like the camera or whatever, we are
making ourselves and we are forging the reality of the universe by our responsiveness. And that
helps to explain why things evolve in the way that they have done. Why? Why was the first,
as we believe, in animosity? And how did animosity come about? And why was why has this animosity
taken the form that it has of developing creatures like ourselves, who are in many ways so much
shorter lived and more vulnerable than ancient creatures way back down this phylogenetic tree?
And there are examples of actinobacteria in the depths of the ocean, single-celled organisms
that are themselves over 100 million years old. So a 70-year life seems like, well, what's that
achieved? I think the whole drive of it is towards differentiation, the unfolding, like the bud that
unfolds. And it's not the negation of the bud that it turns into a flower, it's the fulfillment of
the bud that it turns into the flower, and the flower eventually to the fruit. So all these things,
that's an image, of course, from Hegel, but that idea that things are fulfilled through their unfolding,
their individuation, without that threatening the integrity of the whole is very important.
And this process leads through life to two important things. One is our greater responsiveness,
and the other is a much rapider rate of response as a whole, as a species, or even as an individual,
to the world. Both a more rapid ability to respond and a far more intense and wide ranging response.
So a vole may well appreciate the things in the garden that I appreciate at some level,
but there are certainly things that I can see and appreciate as a human that that vole can't,
which is not to say that the vole doesn't have things that it appreciates that I don't,
taken as granted. But what we bring to the party is our greater response, which includes things
like writing The Mass in B Minor. And this is an extraordinary response to the creation. People
sometimes talk about it as, oh, well, yes, but it's so tragic, you know, we're tragically cast
into this pointless meaningless universe. And our response is to do this. But this is, this is back
to front, that that thing came out of the universe by willingness to listen to it, by willingness
to write what I write, by willingness to write what he wrote, all these things come out of the
cosmos, they can't come from anywhere else. So they're in a sense, things that are unpacked,
that are potential in it. So there is no chasm between us and this cosmos, and it only looks
like it has no meaning and no awareness, because science at some stage in the last couple of
hundred years decided that it would make a simple principle that it was not going to consider
anything that suggested either purpose or responsiveness, and anything that couldn't be
measured and wasn't material. And so at the end of its elaborate process, it solemnly pronounces,
I can't find any purpose or any evidence that consciousness can be real. I mean, there really
are people, tenured professors in Western universities who hold the belief that consciousness
is an illusion, but consciousness, for there to be an illusion, there has to be consciousness.
And it seems like the invitation that is contained in this end of the world, as we know it, with all
of the harm and damage that is unfolding, that is also the end of a way of knowing the world,
is an invitation back in, an invitation back into relation. Absolutely. Back into participating in
the world, as we always were anyway, rather than pretending that we're standing above it and knowing
it and managing it. Absolutely, that is so true. And really what I'm saying is that something as
simple as practicing changing the way in which you attend to things, changes the world, and changes
you, and obviously changes for the better of a relationship, if you can pay appropriate kinds
of attention. And of course, everything involves a different kind of attention. There's a kind of
attention that is detached and is entirely appropriate, that for example, the surgeon who's
carrying out a delicate operation, and simply has to treat the body as not that person that will
wake up from the operation in order to be able to do his or her job efficiently. So different kinds
of attention are important, and they bring us back into connection with something surprisingly
quickly. And so when people sort of despair about what is happening, those who wish to find,
can find quite quickly what it is that they're seeking. And it may be a problem or a predicament
that many people won't survive. That is always going to be a possibility. Maybe our civilization
won't survive. Maybe it will. Maybe it will in a wiser form, in a less arrogant and hubristic form,
on a much more local level, and a much more coherent and interconnected way.
We don't know. But this business of being taken back into relationship and this
receptive, this giving and this taking, which is so fundamental, this can be achieved.
I'm thinking of an Italian philosopher, Federico Campania, whose work I got to know while I was
working on this book. And he has a lovely way of putting it. He says, sometimes you are born into
the ending of a world. This is a thing that has happened before. And the way that you diagnose
this is that the future no longer works. Because what we ordinarily are talking about when we
talk about the future is an extension of a story that we were born into. And if you've been born
into the ending of that story, then attempts to extend it no longer convince anyone. And I think
a lot of what we've been witnessing around the world in the last 10 years or so is the political
manifestation of the failure of the future. And the appeal of the past is so powerful in politics
today. Attempts to invoke the future don't work in the way they did in the mid 20th century,
because this world is in some sense coming to an end. So what Campania says is, so if it is your
discernment that you have been born into the ending of the world that you were born into,
what's worth doing? And he says, well, you can stop trying to make sense according to the logic of
the world that is coming to an end and start trying to create good ruins, things that may turn out
to be helpful to the people beyond the end of this world, to those who have to make life work
among all of the things that will be left behind and carried forward, but understood perhaps in
very different ways after this particular story that we happened to be born somewhere late in
has come to an end. And I feel like maybe that's what we're trying to do as thinkers, as writers,
as artists right now in networks like Dark Mountain is to make good ruins, things that may
turn out to be fertile and full of possibility after the failure of the future that we were promised.
That's wonderful. And I suppose what it suggests is that we don't, by any means,
give up on the future. We just give up on the future as a projection of the way we've been doing
things. Exactly. And that's a hopeful idea. It's a very profoundly productive idea if it can be
embraced. And again, one has to accept limits and mortality is one of them. And the civilization has
some mortality as well. In fact, they tend to thrive for a few hundred years, probably 300,
400 years, and then they tend to decay wherever they have been. And so we have to accept that
there is limitation. But the left hemisphere absolutely rejects any idea of boundaries,
limitations, finiteness. The simplest example is that it will absolutely deny that there is
anything wrong with it. Although it has, the person has a paralyzed left arm, perhaps the whole
side of their body, they'll just deny that it exists rather than accept that there could be a
problem or a limit. It's always going for, we can do away with the limits, the boundaries, and
a lot of what is wrong with us now is we knew no limits. There were no limits to what we thought
we could do, and the world would still carry on being okay. This turned out to be, predictably,
actually, a very stupid thing to believe. And I can't really imagine why people still carry on
with a philosophy which is all about trying to dispense with what they see as the limits on
being whatever we want and doing whatever we want. So how do we help the left hemisphere
at that point where it's stuck in that limitlessness? What are the moves? I mean,
I think that's what you're doing as a writer. It's as difficult as how God could have helped Satan
in Paradise Lost. Lucifer, the brightest and best of his angels, became this grunging competitive
force. And this is really an introspective understanding as there is in so many mythologies
of an overseeing power that understands and a part of it that thinks it knows but doesn't,
and that tries to use up the power. So it's a very difficult thing to do. However, there are a
couple of things that work in our favor. And the first is that we can see what is happening,
I believe, that the left hemisphere is predominant and that this is damaging for a whole range of
reasons, since it is less understanding and less intelligent, and its way of going can't be sustained.
And that means that we can actively favor what the right hemisphere is. We can make a point of
listening to understanding and directing our efforts towards receiving what is the right
hemisphere can tell us and give to us. And the other is that the left hemisphere is rather like
in The Emperor with no clothes on, that it sort of believes that it's marvelous and fine. And suddenly
you see how pathetic it is. And that itself is a wonderfully liberating insight that we don't have
to be tyrannized by this voice that says, we're clever, we understand it all, it's all mechanical,
we know it. We can just say, but actually that's hilarious. There's something about laughter in
the middle of all this. I hope so. This takes me back to the way that I've thought about knowledge
and knowing, because the example I always use to talk about this sort of threshold between
the arm's length knowledge and the experience of knowing is I say, think about the moment when
you get a joke. You don't have any information that you didn't have the moment before,
but you see something differently and it will affect you emotionally, intellectually, bodily.
That's the simplest version of the kinds of encounter, the kinds of being
pulled across a threshold out of the trap that we need.
Holy, I agree. And I think that the great humorists are up there in my pantheon along
with the great poets, because what they're doing is just that. A poet doesn't, as it were, tell you
things you didn't know, but it helps you to see things that you thought you'd seen, but you didn't
really appreciate, understand or feel. And that is profoundly moving. And humor is in another way
the achievement of this kind of an insight through what they have in common from a, sorry to refer
to the brain here, but what they have in common is that both of these things depend very largely on
the right frontal cortex, which can understand implicit meaning, multiple meaning, and tone,
and all these things that modify meaning, which are present in poetry and are present in humor.
And one of the things we absolutely have got to do is to liberate humor again and say, no,
it's not good enough to say people can't make jokes about things. They can make jokes about
anything. And if you don't like it, that's for you to sort out.
So it's as if the left hemisphere, like applying all of this back to the predicament or problem
or whatever it is of the trouble that the world is in, not least in terms of climate change,
left hemisphere wants to design a way out of that to come up with a plan that will somehow allow us
to reboot the future, to have some extension of the world as we have known it. And the invitation
is somehow to stumble into another way of being human together, to stumble into another chapter
of the story rather than to design and plan it out on a spreadsheet and implement it in the world.
Yes, and that stumble, of course, is the way the left hemisphere would think of it,
that it's a stumble. But actually what it is is quite probably a wise move that comes from
our unconscious. And what you're really pointing to is that having everything consciously planned out
is not the way to achieve everything in life. It's the way to achieve the solution to various,
incredibly circumscribed problems. It's been estimated that 99.5% at least of everything
that we know, as it were, with our body, with our brain, is not in the focus of our consciousness.
But because of that, it can be much, much richer. And there's an argument for saying that
there's something damaging about making things explicit and focused, because you limit them
to one single simple idea that has to be pursued. Whereas in the implicit understanding of a
situation, one can, with enormous economy, bring together a whole lot of different
elements that come out of the field of one's experience, out of being alive, and bring them
to bear. And, you know, here again, I just, I often quote this, but I think it's so mildless.
And Whitehead said two things. He said that a civilisation advances according to the number of
actions and thoughts that can be taken care of outside of the glare of experience. And the other
was that applying thought is like a cavalry charge in battle. It's something that can only
be done occasionally. It's very expensive and requires fresh horses. So you can't just be
doing this all the time. In fact, in a way, what one would say is that one only brings this cumbersome
mechanism of, you know, focusing on it and the full glare of the spotlight and trying to solve a
problem when there is a problem. But when things are running well, you shouldn't be bringing that
glare to bear on it because you will freeze it, much as if the pianist starts to remember his
fingers while playing, then have to stop playing. And if the problem is actually a state of frozenness,
then you can't attack it with that kind of cavalry charge. Yes, but also what I was thinking is that
when you are focusing on it, then you are likely to either stumble or march. Whereas when you are
not focused on it, it's not so much that you will stumble, but you will be guided by something that
if you trusted, not uncritically and not without a dialogue with yourself, often not the conscious
one about what you are doing, but you will be guided by something which is different from what
your immediate analysis at the conscious level would suggest was the way to do it. The stumble
becomes a dance. It becomes more of a dance, a step in a dance or something of the kind that comes
out of one naturally. And I think we all have the experience, don't we, of knowing when that
happens that I always think of it in relation to music, that if on occasion one dances well
and joyously, it's because one's not trying to dance at all, but the dance is happening in you
and through you. And the music too, that music plays itself through you, not you play the music.
So one more layer as we maybe draw this conversation to a close that's coming to mind for me is
this thing that I've been describing as a sort of left hemisphere attempt to
map and respond to the trouble that the world is in. I think that a lot of those who in good faith
are kind of describing and telling us what we need to do about the situation in these terms.
It seems to me that they have a map in which the thing that the left hemisphere sees, or this way
of seeing and describing the world, that is kind of through calculative measurement and that kind
of reason, that this addresses the deep level of reality. And then the things that we're talking
about that we might associate with the right hemisphere, you know, poetry, humor, music,
they'll say, well, all of that stuff is lovely. And it's this thing that becomes possible
once the people who think like us have done the hard work of making sure there is a platform
underneath it. And it's almost as if I've noticed this, even amongst novelists,
there is an attempt to resolve Snow's two cultures dilemma from the mid 20th century
by staging a marriage between the two cultures in which the, you know, the scientific side plays
the husband and the arts or other ways of knowing play the wife. And so they're held to be kind of
beautiful, entertaining, decorative. They make the world a better place. We wouldn't want the world
without them. But it's a good job we have the practical, you see the stereotypes that this is
based on. And it seems to me that then as things get difficult, the people who are who have staged
that kind of way of seeing things go, well, now it's time to, now it's time for the hard, serious
stuff, which requires us to go into the left brain mode. And of course, what you're suggesting,
and I would say is that this is quite the opposite. It's the upside down story. Yes. And it reminds
me of the image of somebody who after an evening hard work in the city goes to Covent Garden
to amuse themselves watching the magic flute. And they see that real life is the hard stuff
of working at Goldman Sachs. But all this stuff is in the evening from Mozart. It's just a decoration.
But of course, it's entirely the other way around that that is the only chance this person is going
to have that sort of thing to bring them into touch with reality and what they're doing in
that office under strict lighting. You said this is a fantasy and not necessarily a harmless one.
So I absolutely agree with that. And it's the story the left hemisphere tells that it is doing
the hard work. And it's the one that was sold to me as a medical student, you know,
it was almost as though the right hemisphere, we don't really know what it's there for,
but perhaps it's there to prop up the left hemisphere so it doesn't fall over. But everything
important was done by the left hemisphere, but this is not the case. And your example of the
magic flute, for some reason, calls to mind for me the most powerful experience of this
inversion of the stories of reality, which was when my son was born. And beforehand,
I was working at the Swedish National Theatre at the time and my boss, who was about five years
older than me and had a couple of young children, he said, birth is the most animal experience you'll
ever be part of. And he was, of course, completely right about that. But the bit I was less prepared
for was it was also the most mythic experience that the temporality of that journey through birth
and the turns within the journey was absolutely something that was familiar to me from, you know,
the terrain of fairy tale and mythic story and the kinds of journey that's being staged in
the magic flute, that somehow the kind of, again, the linear accountancy version of time is not the
thing that's there underneath, not the thing we encounter when we're there with the blood of birth
or death. But actually, in those moments, we're not just, we're simultaneously drawn into the fact
that we have always all along been animals, and that to be an animal is to live in dream time
and myth time more than to live in the kinds of time that, you know, the guy is under the
strip lighting in the city office, or lots of the ways that we do science or talk about science
imply is the true real. Yes, I suppose it's that these existential encounters of birth and death
that we realise that time isn't the, I think it's very real, but it isn't, it's rather like science.
Science is very real and important, but it isn't necessarily the way it's now conceived,
and time is other than the way it is now conventionally conceived. And that would take us a long
time. I have a chapter in the matter of things solely on time and the ways in which the hemispheres
see it, but I really like that. And this idea of a process struck me very forcibly, because when my
third child was born, my mother was dying, and my mother was at one part of the M3, and my wife
was in the labor suite in Winchester, and I had to consult with the obstetrical team
and take time to go up the motorway, say goodbye to my mother, and come back to see my daughter
born. So you can imagine the strange experience of that and the emotions and the sense of being
in a non-bureaucratic time. So, yeah. Well, thank you, Ian. I hope that conversations like this
provide sort of strange little openings or doorways through which people have a chance of
stumbling into another way of seeing where we find ourselves in the best way of doing it.
Yes, dancing into it. Another way of doing it. Thank you very much. It's been lovely Duke of Talking.
