So, welcome everyone. I am Charles Bédard. I'll be your host today. I'm a postdoctoral
researcher at Universitat de la Switzerland Italiana in Lugano, Switzerland. And today
I have the pleasure to be animating a conversation between Charles Bennett and David Deutsch
on the nature of computation in completeness and mathematics. I'll please ask everyone
who's not David or Charlie to mute themselves so that we don't hear any background, any
noise in the background.
So that means that among the Charles, that includes yourself, right?
Yeah, I'll keep myself unmuted, correct. I'll be animating the conversation for around
one hour, and then I'll open it up for the audience to ask questions and jump in. Well,
let me introduce our guests to continue. We have Charles Bennett. He's an IBM Fellow
at the IBM Research and a Fellow of the American Physical Society. He has been awarded the
2023 breakthrough prize in fundamental physics for his pioneer work on quantum information.
Well, not just me. What about David Deutsch?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's a good thing because he's with us, so I'll have to come up with
him at some point. So the breakthrough prize was in fact shared between Charlie, David
Deutsch, so two of our speakers today, and Gilles Brassard and Peter Schor. So we have
two of them with us today.
So throughout his career, Charlie played an essential role in investigating and clarifying
the roles between the links between information and physics. Among other things, he co-invented
quantum cryptography, he set the basis for quantum information theory, he resolved the
Maxwell-Demons paradox, and he developed logically reversible computation. Charlie, welcome and
thanks for being here.
All right, good. Glad that's over. Yeah. What was this all about?
So we also have David Deutsch visiting.
I think actually, as Smolkowski solved Maxwell-Demons problem and then people sort of forgot
about it for 50 years.
Oh, okay, good. Yeah. Thanks for the note. David Deutsch is visiting professor of physics
at Oxford University, a fellow of the Royal Society and the Institute of Physics. He has
also been awarded the 2023 breakthrough prize in fundamental physics for his pioneer work
on quantum computation. David is mostly known for his discovery of the universal quantum
computer and the first quantum algorithm, yet he's also a pioneer of constructor theory,
and he's made significant contributions to the philosophy of science. David, thank you
and welcome for being here. Welcome and thank you for being here.
Thank you.
So I'd like to start the conversation by discussing the theory of computation. Computers are all
around us. Their usefulness in day-to-day life is now evident, but when it comes to computers
and the theory of computation, what makes me the most intrigued is what computation is
fundamentally and physically, and what role does it play in understanding of the world
around us?
So Charlie, I'll address the first question to you, but eventually hopefully this becomes
a conversation. So please, David, at some point you want to jump in. Please feel free
to react like you would in a regular living room kind of conversation. Charlie, what is
the theory of computation all about?
Well I think it's almost, you shouldn't ask about the computation particularly, but the
deep philosophical question is about the relation between mathematics and the physics, or the
way I posed the question, the problem of cosmology is to find a mathematical home for
our classical phenomenon. So a phenomenon is like a genome. It's the set of phenomena
that we are, the world that we inhabit. So this is both a, it's a problem of mathematics
is a structure which we think is absolute and independent of anything physical, and
yet if we, the goal of cosmology or of science in general is to find a mathematical explanation
of the world. In other words, to find a part of this vast structure that is mathematics
in which what we see is typical instead of surprising and puzzling. And I think that's
why I've gotten interested in cosmology lately, because there are some things that seems to
be, have been learned by modern cosmology that make it harder to feel that we've solved
this problem of finding a model of the universe within which, within which what we see is typical.
So this is, this touches on the question of the distinction between what is and what could
be and also on the anthropic principle and what questions that some people have asked
in terms of self-locating uncertainty. And it's, it also gets into a question that's
very ancient in mathematics, which is infinity, the nature of infinity. So the big, some big
problems in cosmology, I must say, I always go and ask Andres Albrecht, because he's
been thinking about cosmology for much longer time. And in one of the workshops we organized,
he said, well, maybe let's take an hour now and wallow in prior probabilities or prior,
mean priors, say this is a field where you never can solve anything. And I, one of the
main things I got from him was the, the, the attitude of being as, as unsatisfied with
your own ideas as you are with everybody else's. So where was I going with this, but so the
problem that, that I said was, what I think we, one way of trying to approach this is
just to, to think of, oh, I was saying that infinity is very important. I think we can
kind of prove that if you have a finite world in thermal equilibrium, you get a very boring
world with, with essentially because of the Boltzmann brain problem. And so we can get
interesting things in an infinite system, which we can't get into finite ones, qualitatively
different. And within that, I would say what I'm trying to find out is how, how permanent
disequilibrium can arise and how from disequilibrium complexity in the sense of logical depth
can arise and how in that, in the system that is doing that a science can arise. And I don't
ask about consciousness directly because I think it may be a sort of illusion. So here
we have a whole bunch of people who think they're talking to each other on the screens
or in the room, but, and the, the big philosophical, I guess they call it the hard problem of
consciousness of trying to decide what, what it means that we feel conscious. Maybe is, is, is
asking too much. And it would be easier to say because our consciousnesses are not independent
of one another. We, we, if a person is raised without contact with other people, they, they
don't learn to think the way the way we do. And Charlie, I know it's not my turn yet, but can I
just say it is infinity an illusion? Well, I think it's, it's no, I think infinity is a math is a
mathematical notion. So I, but I think that you need infinity to get the kind of permanent
equilibrium that you need to, to, to escape the, the Boltzmann brain problem. You may need it, but
you may have another way of doing it. So, so, so in other words, I would say that instead of saying,
asking questions like what is it sort of the Copernican principle, is it unusual that I'm,
that I'm alive at this moment or that my observer moments are typical? I would just say the
the entirety of, of terrestrial civilization or the terrestrial even larger than human
civilization, the terrestrial, the complexity of the terrestrial world is something that we can look
at a little bit more objectively than saying speaking of consciousness. And so we can say,
well, maybe whales are conscious in a different way. And that's not quite a scientific question.
But, but I think we need to look for a mathematical model within which, and I think it's
has to be infinite, but maybe I'm wrong, within which what we see is, is, is typical under a kind
of anthropic is as weak as, as weakly as possibly anthropic selection. Okay, and end of speech,
that's sort of the reason why you're invoking infinity, because then you could have fluctuations.
Well, if you have infinitely, yeah, I don't, if I just have an infinity,
let's say like, like, Boltzmann's idea, which gave rise to the Boltzmann brain, of just an infinite,
almost, not, not even, this is before general relativity, an infinite
universe at equilibrium, then you, you get the Boltzmann brain problem, you get the fact that
you can't believe anything that you see. Because everything happens somewhere. And I think this
problem is, is somewhat better understood in the, in the more modern cosmologies.
But I was looking at very simple cellular automata models, in which by making the model in infinite,
and it's, it's dynamics is reversible, you get something that looks like unbounded complexity
that goes on forever, but it only goes on forever because the model is infinite. And it, therefore,
it can never, it can never equilibrate and get boring. I think I got a, I got a picture of it.
I'll see if I can find an example of the model like that. Here's, okay, so this is a reversible
cellular automaton. And the time goes horizontally, like that. And there's, there's three,
there's three domains here. It's one dimensional automaton. So this is time history of it. And
these, these differ just by the reversal of black and white. So there's, there's domain,
domain boundaries that, that collide here, producing this, this complicated thing that
just goes on forever, getting more and more complicated. This, this business up here is an
artifact because I was doing it with periodic boundary conditions. And this was the wraparound,
it was beginning to affect it. But if you do it on an infinite model, at Lattice, it gets.
So this is the sort of thing where you can't get this in a finite model if you do it in a,
in a finite system with local interactions, you get something that's, that's looks more like
here, I'll just do it at the beginning. Yeah, same model. Yeah. So it gets, it gets interesting.
And then if it, if you run long enough, it just gets boring. Okay, now stop the screen share. So
that's, that's, that's why I think infinity is important. But that's just maybe I haven't
been familiar enough with cosmology, but I think the cosmologies, I think,
let's see what Andy says, but that I think that the, the, the cosmologies tend to be infinite now
of also, now I have to stop sharing my screen. Where is that? Yeah. Screen sharing stopped,
there it is. Good. Okay. I was expecting Charlie to, to throw us into cosmology, but to be honest,
I didn't expect on question one, we would go on to cosmology. Thank you, Charlie. I enjoyed it.
David, would you like to react? Like maybe, maybe you can either react to Charlie's comments and,
and how very as reaction. Yeah. Perhaps you have a, you can backtrack the question and, and, and
retake the theory of computation. Well, I think that I can, I can react and respond to your
question at the same time, because I think the, where I disagree with, with Charlie would be
right at the beginning, sort of foundationally. Oh, you remember, you should say the three Rs
react, respond and refute. Simultaneously to save time. Yes.
So I'm, if you ask, what is computation? What is computation in the universe? Well,
what, what are computers? Well, what is that all about? If I was answering that question,
I would have to have universal and universality, right in the first sentence somewhere, because
I think that's what it's all about. Computation is physical, you know, I'm sure we can all agree on
that. But I think there is still a hint of the mathematician's misconception in Charlie's
conception of the computation, computers, physics. So I would say that the, the, the
computation exists, universality exists in, in a particular property of the physical universe.
Namely, that the physical universe can accommodate machines, which are universal in the sense that
they can be programmed to mimic any other machine if they run long enough and have enough memory.
And for them to have, to run long enough and have enough memory, they have to be maintained,
they, they, they have to have additional memory added. And so there has to be implicitly,
there is a background of knowledge creation. If, if there is to be a sufficiently powerful
computer, like Turing machine or something, then in the background, there has to be knowledge
creation. Just like, I think I first read this in Charlie's thing, like, what would happen if you found
a fountain pen on the moon? Then it would, it would tell you a massive amount.
It would tell you that you had been settled by people from the 19th century.
Yes. Yes. Most likely. And it's very, very unlikely that it formed spontaneously.
And so the most likely explanation for it would be that there had been a civilization. You could,
you could infer a lot about the civilization by, as you say, it's a 19th century type
civilization. And, and you can analyze the ink and therefore see what kind of squids they had there.
And, and so on. So this, another thing that this illustrates, which you didn't mention,
is that there's an intimate connection between emergent, simple emergent properties and simple
microscopic quantities. In fact, there are laws about emergent properties.
And the laws about evolution and knowledge and so on are among the ones we would use to
analyze the origin of this fountain pen. So the, we would, we would,
we would gain a lot of knowledge about microscopic information from some macroscopic
information and macroscopic laws. Now, so I haven't mentioned mathematics.
The reason I haven't mentioned mathematics, even though I totally agree that there's a
mathematical world that's sort of super infinitely large and that world contains all
possible functions and all possible laws and all possible mathematical objects.
The vast majority of which we cannot even describe.
The ones we can describe are basically the ones that are computable by these machines,
which are universal within our universe. So it's no good trying to explain that
via what is going to be likely, what you are going to be likely to see, because
what is typical, what is probable and so on, those are all determined by the laws of physics.
There is no mathematical notion of probability that applies to physics,
unless we have a law of physics saying so. And in some cases we do and in some cases we don't.
And even when we do, so and where we do have a probabilistic theory of something,
the anthropic principle alone doesn't contain any information about what the laws of physics are.
This is an argument that I got from Dennis Sharma a long time ago when in with his reaction to
Brandon Carter's famous paper about the anthropic principle. The thing is, if you think of this as
how do we fix what the dimensionless constants are, or just the laws themselves,
you could think of the laws themselves as being enumerated like in Solomonov induction,
so we have all possible laws and so on. And you ask given what we see, what is the most likely,
that is all inapplicable to fundamental physics, because at least not via the anthropic principle,
because if you think of the set of all the class or whatever it is, the set of all
universes consistent with something, like something consistent with the fountain pen on the moon,
or consistent with what we see, or whatever you want to say, consistent with the existence of
computers, almost all of them are on the very near the boundary of that set.
They are almost all of, because the larger the dimension of the set, the more of it is contained
in near its boundary. So if the only reason why we're here is that we're anthropically selected,
then it's overwhelmingly likely that we're going to die in the next nanosecond,
or picosecond I suppose, it depends where the chaos, how fast the chaos is going to come in on us.
And since we haven't, that theory is hereby refuted. So that's not the way to get the answer.
I think the way to get an answer is not to try to derive microscopic properties that will then
give you the desired emergent properties, it is to think of emergent laws, which among other
things will give you microscopic laws, as well as microscopic initial conditions like the ones that
produced that fountain pen. You see, Charlie, your example has lived with me for decades,
and this has changed me deeply. Well, I was thinking of an ordinary ballpoint pen,
said Ben, you put it back at sensory. Oh, it's evolved into a fountain pen in my mind,
because of its because of its its deep significance.
The ballpoint pen would just mean you have a hole in your pocket.
It fell out of an astronaut's pocket is likely explanation.
For you, David, an example of an emergent law that constrains also the microscopic laws would be
there exist universal computers. Yes.
Okay, would you like maybe to expand a bit more, because you've contributed quite significantly
to the church during thesis, I think there was quite a bit of ambiguity of how we should understand
the church during thesis. And now you name the physicality of the universal computer.
I right away see a link, maybe it'd be good to expand a little bit on that, especially for the
audience here. Okay, well, I this is controversial, and I don't think I did. I think it was Turing.
So the way the story is usually told is that Turing, girdle, church and post,
all kind of came up with the same idea at the same time, all proved the same theorems,
basically, although they had different points of view and and they didn't none of them copied
from each other, they just sort of, then, although some of them knew about each other,
but they they kind of converged on a conception. But I think Turing's Turing's conception was
different. The other three all had the mathematicians misconception. They all thought that they were
doing a piece of mathematics, or as as Roger Penrose would say, meta mathematics theory of proofs.
But Turing, the way he solved the Hilbert's decision problem, was to think of a physical
model of proof, a physical model, and and then argue, implicitly, explicitly, that again is
controversial, that that that that argument is decisive. That is, he thought he was proving,
and he almost did prove, that no physical object can, sorry, no physical object can escape
being part of the Turing, Universal Turing machine's repertoire. And the Universal Turing
machine is an idealized physical machine, it's really got nothing to do with mathematics.
And the and its relationship with the physical relationship with the rest of the universe
is is what he elucidated. And then he said that that solves the decision problem, because we
must regard the decision problem itself as a question about the physical world,
including mathematicians and so on. And so that's why he used language like
functions that would naturally be regarded as computable. Naturally, I always took that to mean
straightforwardly, computable in nature. But when I said that to mathematicians,
they howled in rage and said that I misunderstood it. Well, if I misunderstood it, that misunderstanding
turns out to be the truth. And Turing's writings look exactly like that truth. So I think he knew
he just wasn't used to talking about physics. He was a mathematician, but but I think he did not
have the mathematicians misconception. We're all brought up to have it. We have to free ourselves.
How would you say what is the mathematicians misconception?
Well, it's, it's the idea that, well, okay, for present company, I can put it like this.
It's the idea that the integers and the logical operations like and or and not
are given to us by God. They are the natural things. And if you can make some build some structure or
form some conclusion on top of those, then you have proved it. Whereas the real truth is that
the integers and the logic logical connectives and classical rules of inference and all that,
they are all given to us by physics alone. There is there is no
underlying mathematical substrate that we can appeal to. If the laws of physics were different,
then we could have laws of physics that didn't mention and or and not or integers or real numbers
or, you know, they could they could they could use any mathematical objects anywhere in in the
mathematical world. But they the fact that they don't is a feature of the laws of physics. So
the and with this, with this misconception comes some other misconceptions such as, for example,
that simplicity is somehow defined independently of the laws of physics and infinity as well.
As I have written, you know, Zeno, Zeno was puzzled by the fact that there's an infinite
number of points between here and the other side of the room. And how come that he can go from one
point to another, an infinite, how come he can do an infinite number of things in a finite time?
Well, the answer is that what is finite or infinite physically, its relationship to mathematical
finiteness or infinite is a matter for the laws of physics to determine. And they happen to say
that this particular infinite infinite thing in classical physics, the continuum, can be traversed
an infinite number of steps of traversing it can be finitely performed. So what can be finitely
performed or not or and what conversely what can only be infinitely performed, i.e. can't be performed,
is mandated by the laws of physics, not vice versa. So it's physics that tells us the difference
between find an infinite complex and simple and also probability, which is which is a sort of scam
lodged in the in the middle of all these misconceptions. The idea that it's a meta misconception,
a meta misconception. It's a what, sorry? Meta misconception. Well, no, no.
Good place to hide a scam. There is simply a misconception that probability is another one
of these concepts that we can help ourselves to and we haven't yet invoked any physics.
You know, we would like what we see to have at least 0.83 probability, then we won't worry that
it's strange. And that invocation of probability we take to be sort of harmless. We don't see that
there's a rich world of physics defining what we mean by that. And in the case of probability,
unlike the other things, it doesn't even apply to most of the universe,
or the multiverse. It just applies to very special situations. So there's no excuse for it.
Let me just ask a little bit, a clarification, David. If I would have been asked what's the
mathematician misconception, in a nutshell, I would have said it's the idea that proof theory is
a branch of mathematics. But proof theory is a branch of physics, ultimately. It's given rise to
computer science. Computer science has its roots into what are computers. Computers are physical
objects. Now, the story you just gave us, you started speaking of natural numbers and logical
connectors. How can I bridge those two pictures of the mathematician misconception?
Well, they are the same, I think. Maybe I'm giving a try and then tell me, but it's
because we typically do proofs with typical logical connectors, and that will give rise
to somehow our computers, so that we end up abstracting our computers with those logical
connectors and those integers. And that's where you say that taking this as a way to formalize proof
is basically physical, because I'm already abstracting my physics of the computation.
Yes. I think that's basically what I said. I'm not really used to speaking in mathematical
language, so I speak of it in terms of laws of physics. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay, now I was trying
to map the statement proof theory as a branch of physics. Yeah, so I think probably Turing never
said this, but I'm sure if he was here now, he would agree that proof theory is a branch of physics.
Okay. I found myself agreeing with almost everything you said until you started talking
about the mathematical mathematician's misconception, which I don't think Turing would have agreed with
you about, and which I think is actually a piece of officiality, a dysphemism. It's an idea that you
don't like, but you haven't shown that there's anything false about it. In fact, I think Turing
thought more about physics than his contemporaries, but I think he felt that the discovery of
universality meant that the physics that we have here could be simulated by a computer,
and the physics that might exist in a very different world, perhaps one with a different
number of dimensions or one that's not even has a notion of locality, could also be simulated
by a Turing machine. In other words, I believe he felt he was very aware of physics, but he
didn't think that different parts of the multiverse, think of the string theory, the vast number of
different supposed things that can come out of string theory, of which we might be one,
that they would have a different mathematics. I think he believed in the universality of
mathematics and its ability to simulate physics. That's where I think that you're even calling it
a misconception of what Turing thought, and also a dysphemism rather than any kind of refutation.
However, almost everything you said at the beginning, I agreed with, I said, I take for granted that
universality of computation, the unsolved problem, which is the same thing, is the heart of what
the notion of computation is. The other thing that I also didn't even say, because I believe it
so strongly, is that this mathematics, this universal mathematics of computation is
capable of simulating physics, not only the physics that we have here, but if you talk to
Andreas, if he's still around here, there he is, yes. In many models of cosmology, now imagine that
there are inaccessible parts of the universe, which are no less real than ours, except that
we'll never hear about them, in which the laws of physics, such as the number of spatial dimensions
and the number of temporal dimensions, if you want, are extremely different. In almost all of them,
universal computers don't exist. They exist physically, but there's nobody there to complain
about it or to celebrate it, but they're there. They're like the desert areas of the universe,
but all of that could be simulated by mathematics. I don't think there is a
mathematician's misconception. There is just the idea, which has been around since Galileo,
that whatever physics is, is discoverable by experiment and modelable by mathematics.
I think that's clearly untrue. If by universe you mean
the set of all, or potentially the set of all possible mathematical entities
instantiated as physical objects, as you say, most of those would not be
simulatable by a Turing machine. No, no, they all would be simulatable by a Turing machine.
Most of them wouldn't give rise to the physical possibility of Turing machine in that part of
the universe. For example, I don't think there are a lot of Turing machines in the middle of the sun.
But in the space of all mathematical objects, there are objects which solve the halting problem,
and that such an object cannot be simulated by a Turing machine. There are also kind of
universes where- Oh, yeah, yeah, I have, yeah, this is in other words, these like the
cleanly hierarchy of all of these higher level of unsolvable problems. The problems that you
could solve if you had an oracle for the halting problem. Now, I have an idea that I'd like to run
by mathematicians such as yourself, even these mathematicians, which just as I have been lately
over the last five years seduced by cosmology, and so think, oh, it must have the answers to all
the things I've worried about since I was five. Let me try to understand it better. So, you know,
you're a mathematician and you've said you've gotten to be so fascinated with physics. All the
answers to all the things I'm wondering about in mathematics must be in physics somewhere. Let me
learn some physics. Well, anyway, this is an idea that you probably know more about as a mathematician,
but when I was writing about the Chaitin's Omega number, the halting probability of a
universal computer with self-delimiting programs, where if you had this number, you would have an
oracle for the halting problem, but it would be a painfully slow oracle. In other words,
in order to answer any question, you would have to run for a busy beaver amount of time.
And I said, well, this oracle would be universal in the sense that it would
decide all finitely refutable propositions. In other words, problems such that you can
express them with one quantifier over the natural numbers. In other words, there exists a time
such that if you run this Turing machine for this amount of time, it halts.
And then I speculated that the harder problems, like which would involve two
quantifiers or more like the twin prime conjecture, might be by and large not interesting because,
not mathematically interesting, because they could be decided by a stronger but
finitely refutable proposition. In other words, instead of saying there are infinitely many
twin primes, you could say that the spacing between twin primes grows
more rapidly or more slowly than a certain function. So in other words, one of the quantifiers,
something that has more than one quantifier, might turn out to be a consequence of something
that has only one quantifier. So what you're feeling about when you say natural in mathematics,
maybe these things that are harder than the halting problem are just kind of boring because
probably most of them would be, what do I mean by probably, I'm invoking your scam of probability,
probably most of them would be decided as cases of the halting problem.
I was sure for most of what you've just said that you were addressing,
Charles, because I'm certainly not a mathematician. Them's fighting words, you know.
Okay, okay. Well, if you have an idea, I'll do, if you have a tentative answer, David, go for it.
But I also thought about it. I know. Go ahead. Yeah, no, I, yeah, okay. I think that your case,
I remember that piece Charlie, you wrote in which you say that you specifically spoke about the twin
prime conjecture, but was that naturally carry over to higher elements of the arithmetic hierarchy?
I think so, because if you're saying, if there's, if you, if you bound these quantifiers,
you can make them go away. And if a bound exists, it could be that there's a proposition that decides
the twin prime conjecture by proving a stronger conjecture that is just of the same form as a
halting problem. Yeah. And if you had three or four quantifiers, it could same thing,
I believe the same thing could happen. I didn't think. And what if the, okay, so another, another
sort of possible glitch that I see is if the spacing in the twin prime conjecture scales,
suppose, suppose larger than busy beaver, then, then no, no algorithm can be.
Oh yeah, yeah, it could. Yeah, yeah. So that's exactly it. In other words, if you say
irrefutable. Yeah, that's, yeah, certain things of that sort,
clinic exists. So I guess this is like a experimental mathematics, but
except you can't do the experiments. But it just, I don't know, has anybody thought about that?
How do you decide how plausible it is that, that, that one of these higher level conjectures
could be decided by a provable. Oh, yes, it's really a funeral gesture, because it's a,
if I had a solution to the halting problem, then maybe I could solve the twin prime conjecture
without doing any extra work. But that's like, if my aunt had wheels, she'd be a trolley car,
because I don't have a solution to the halting problem. Yeah, but it might also be that you
have a solution to the halting problem, and you still can. And you still couldn't. Yes. Yeah.
So how do you compare the likelihood of those two things? And I'm sure we mean by likelihood. Yeah,
shut up. But actually, basically, bring perhaps, we could move on on the topic of
incompleteness. And I think you bring it on. I had a bit of a context maybe to get people into it,
but a incompleteness was the incompleteness of mathematics was, perhaps we have to start it back
to Hilbert, where he was hoping to put into a single formal lexametic theory, all of mathematical
truths. And, and Girdel in 1931, basically put an end to this hope by finding a statement that is
true and has no proof. But Girdel's statement is self-referential, and it might look like an exotic
kind of statements. So it's tempting to think that these kind of statements are an anomaly and
that we can safely ignore them and keep doing proofs and mathematics like we usually would
have before Girdel's resolve. And I assume most mathematicians live their life this way,
and I don't blame them. But seen from an algorithmic information theory perspective,
notably due to the work of Gregory Chaitan, one of your former colleague, I believe, Charlie,
incompleteness is a much more widespread and inevitable phenomenon. So for one thing,
Chaitan's result of incompleteness does not involve self-referential statements. And also,
they're usually cast in a way that he comes up with an infinite family of true but unprovable
statements. And, and then you say, oh, I will enlarge my formal lexametic theory to be able to
prove more of those statements. But by doing so, you only manage to prove finitely more,
but you're still in front, regardless how big your formal lexametic theory grows,
you're always in front of an infinity of true yet unprovable statements. These are generally the
ideas from the algorithmic information theoretic proofs of incompleteness. So, so yeah, I think
algorithmic information theory makes the case for somewhat natural. Incompleteness becomes somewhat
natural and actually inevitable. Charlie, would you like to react or comment or expand on the limits
of our formal lexametic theories? Notably, I have in mind like maybe some of how we should behave
with respect to formal lexametic theories in the light of these incompleteness theorems. You know,
Chaitan has suggested maybe we should acquire new axioms based on their fertility of the consequences
the problems that they help us solving. To me, there's a striking similarity now between what
theoretical physicists do, where they change or update their principles based on the problems
that we're care to solve. So do you have any remarks to make on that line of philosophy of
incompleteness? Well, I'm more of a physicist. So those the things that I suggested, which is maybe
I really love computational universality and the and the I couldn't live here. This reminds me of
what Danny Greenberger said about one of the mechanics. He said, in any God that would know
which slit the particle went through, I wouldn't believe in that God of the two slit experiments.
So I would say any anyone who would like to live in a world that Hilbert wanted to find,
I wouldn't want to be friends with that person. In other words, I think that the
universality and the dual to it is the incompleteness is just the way a beautiful feature of the way
world is. It's beautiful in mathematics in the same way that quantum mechanics is beautiful in
physics or general relativity. Nice. Thanks, David. What is what is your take on incompleteness? And
it doesn't have to be from the algorithmic information theoretic perspective. Just what are
your thoughts? I would agree with what Charlie just said. It's the world that Hilbert envisages
the world without creativity. And probably ultimately, if you take sort of our world and
hobble it down to that level, life could never have evolved. So ours is a world in which life can
evolve because there's incompleteness in the mathematics that describe our world. I said
mathematics just now as a concession to you. But what I meant is entirely a physical thing.
It's a physical property of the world, which is responsible for the possibility of life and then
later, presumably, of intelligence and creativity and science and of the
limitlessness of science. So the the illimitability of science is itself,
let's put it the other way around. If science was limited, if there was a feature of the universe
that limits science in the way that Hilbert wanted to limit mathematics, then there couldn't
have been any science in the first place. And this is another one of those connections between
emergent what we call emergent properties and what we call microscopic properties. I would like to
see a way of formulating the laws of physics that doesn't discriminate between microscopic and
emergent laws of physics. A lot of the sort of notorious problems we have, like how to define
entropy and the arrow of time and so on, I think are just because we insist that the
the world must be fundamentally made of microscopic laws. So just to let you all know,
constructor theory is an attempt to have a scale-independent way of describing laws.
I think someone's raised a hand, is that? Okay. So you said that if there was anything
that limited science in the universe, if the universe somehow limited the scope of science,
then science couldn't have gotten started in the first place. But I can imagine that the observable
universe is actually all the rest of it. Beyond the observable universe, there's no matter, there's
only space. So there's nothing to help us for in larger and larger computations. So at some
point we reach the limit of what we can do with computers for something like that. And
that would still be consistent with us having to do science right now. And I was wondering if you
think it's wrong that maybe even if there's a world without, even beyond the observable universe,
there's no matter, that you can somehow still have science that progresses infinitely,
or if there's another mistake, or yeah, I'm curious about the response about it.
Yeah. So I think that is wrong. And it's for exactly the same reason that I was just saying.
If we characterize all possible laws as being like, like our world, but it only lasts a million
years, or like our world, but it only lasts a billion years, then there are lots of possibilities
where it would look like our world was the actual one. And similarly for mathematics,
you could have, it might be possible for proofs to reach up to a million steps, but no more,
because it's so happened that the laws of physics make all computers decay
after they have performed a million steps. And so, but, and there are many more of those worlds
than there are what we think the actual world is with no limits. And that is because that's an
illustrator, not because that that's an illustration of the fact that
I won't say it's because the limitless one is simpler, because that would be falling into the
mathematician's misconception. But I want to say something like that. I want to say that the
limitless one is a good explanation in high level terms. If you try to translate that into
low level terms, you'll get to variations of it, which look like, well, it only lasts a million
years, it only lasts two million years and so on. But at the high level, variations of it are very
difficult to find, because you would have to say, okay, proof is limited by by what? That you would
have to have some high level thing that can fit into the language of talking about proofs and
limits and completeness and so on. So from the point of view of physics, these are all
high level macroscopic constructs. But I think those are the fundamental concepts
in which the laws of physics actually are expressed. And because of that, we can say that
insisting on describing it all microscopically is perverse, because it's much less simple.
But what we really mean is that there are no good explanations along that route.
Very good words. Can I summarize? The way I understand what you just said is that there's
other explanation of, you know, might well be that in some sense, it could be that the universe ends
above the observable, that the observable universe is all there is, but that would ruin other explanations
that might be based on science words. Yes. And if you're going to settle for that, you might as
well settle for the fairies at the bottom of the garden. We needn't have embarked on this great
project of mathematics and physics. Yes. Thanks. David, would you relate the incompleteness
phenomenon in mathematics with fallibilism in knowledge creation in general? It seems like you
sort of invoked it when you invoke life. Is that the similar idea? Yes, it's again a similar idea
and for the same reason. If fallibilism were not true and there were infallible ways of deriving
knowledge, then when we have derived some knowledge, it would never change. And it would be true and
the world would be finite, the world would be a representation of that finite piece of knowledge.
And conversely, the real situation is that the world is infinitely amenable to knowledge creation.
And therefore, it must be infinitely susceptible to errors, which, however, can be corrected.
But nothing provides a firm foundation. Not even, and I repeat what I said earlier,
not even logic, not even the logical rules of inference. Those are all conjectures.
We pick them because they seem right, because they seem useful, they seem fruitful. But
who knows, we may find new ones. Are you saying that there could be a world in which
pi was rational or a square root of 2, say? Well, of course, that's a fairly simple case.
All it would have to do is have a different geometry from ours,
not Euclidean geometry. I mean, pi isn't instantiated in the universe anyway, it's an idealization.
So if you actually measure a circle, you'll never get pi as the ratio between the radius
between the diameter and the circumference. But I was thinking of the mathematical pi.
Well, so there are two different things one might mean by the mathematical pi.
Physics allows us a certain window onto the class of abstractions, a tiny window. We can see some
of them, we can form theories about some of them, we can learn about some of them, and they include
Euclidean geometry with its pi. That pi cannot be changed by anyone, like not even God, not even
if we look out of a different window. But if we did look out of a different window, thanks to
having different laws of physics, or if the laws of physics were not what we think they are,
but are a bit different from what we think they are, as happened with Euclidean geometry and
general relativity, then we won't find pi out there in the stuff we can look at. We can still
describe it, we can describe pi, and we can describe the universe as it actually is, which
doesn't have pi. And there will be other ones which we can't describe. We can't describe,
but they may have people in them which can describe them. And then there'll be infinitely
more where there aren't people who can describe anything. And be careful to conclude that therefore
we don't exist, because that is like the anthropic principle misconception.
Just because- You don't have misconceptions. I would say the misapplication of the anthropic
principle. These places exist, but there's nobody there to complain about it. No, but you want to
use it to deduce something about the world we do see. And I don't think the anthropic principle
is powerful enough to do that, because the most it can do- Yeah, I agree. I want to say something
about on the edge, because you reminded me of that. And I don't want to show you a picture,
is that okay now? Yeah, sure, go ahead. Okay, so I started worrying about this in terms of
the Boltzmann brain problem, which most of you are familiar with, but here's a sort of a
summary of it. The New York Times version from Sean Carroll. This was Boltzmann's idea that the-
We don't see it Charlie. Oh, I'll have to stay share. I see it. I don't see why you- Okay.
That the reason the universe is out of equilibrium is is anthropic. That is that if the
universe is infinite and at equilibrium, but we couldn't exist in one of these typical parts. So
we're in an atypical part, anthropically selected. But then somebody else, I think it was Edicton,
said, wait a minute, if that's true, then we probably, most probably are in the smallest
fluctuation consistent with with our brain existing. And so the idea was that you would get
something like this. Where do I go to the next screen here? Yeah.
Let's see if we go down here. Yes.
Yes. Okay. So people worried about equilibration and were in the 19th century, they called it the
heat death of the universe, but they thought it was a different problem for the distant future.
But Boltzmann or Edicton showed us a problem in the present, undermining our ability to make
inferences about conditions in the past or elsewhere, because the inhabitants of any universe
that will eventually equilibrate would have to make the additional postulate that they're situated
atypically early in its history. Now that gets into David's very nice pointing out that from a
Occam's razor point of view, a world that is just like our world, but ends in a second from now,
or a million years from now, has almost as simple a description. So anyway, the Boltzmann brain
problem says that if world equilibrates, then almost all places that experience the same phenomena
that we have, these are illusory phenomena that that that that don't give grounds for scientific
inference. So now there's this is a little bit like the doomsday problem, which which you can
argue that the the world that has civilization in it is has only existed for a very short time
compared to the time available to it. And why are we so atypically early? Maybe it's because
tech civilization is is intrinsically unstable, it'll destroy itself. Or maybe there's something
I think David would like is perpetual noonless. That is, maybe a billion years from now,
there will still be people, but they will be preoccupied that some qualitatively new feature
of their existence, which they consider very important, is so new. And they wonder why why
they are so near the beginning of of infinity, as David would put it. So I would like to credit
the anthropic principle to Schopenhauer, who really expressed it in the 19th century 1844,
before Darwin. And here he says that that the the world is is on the brink of self destruction.
And we should expect to find it that way, because of this surface to volume argument in high
dimensional space that that David made, that is that if there are many variables, and all of them
have to be within a certain range for the world to be habitable or for it to support life or for
to support universal computation, then with the highest probability we're right near the edge and
only a little very close to self destruction. And this is Schopenhauer's, he didn't put it
in a mathematical terms, but if you did, if he says, we do not live in the best of all possible
worlds. In fact, we live in very nearly the worst of all possible worlds, because if we imagine
goodness of a world, depending on many parameters here too, and we we just take everything to
lowest order, and the goodness is a quadratic function in the best of all possible worlds is
the maximum. And then we find that we're very close to the edge. So with with, we're probably
right around the edge here, and therefore we should expect the world to be in the brink of
self destruction, as it apparently is politically right now. And so that's, we just have to hope
that it survives. Well, that's that's my comment that I thought had to do with what we were talking
about. Yeah, again, I advocate thinking in terms of high level fundamental laws, rather than insisting.
How do you discover what these file high level fundamental laws because
how do you think same? Well, we already have the same way that we discovered low level ones,
conjecture. We have a problem that we think might be soluble by by postulating a law of nature.
And the law of nature seems to answer that problem and many other problems. And so
if it doesn't, then we we haven't solved the problem yet. And the more it does,
the more problems it exposes, which we then solve and so on. Now, we're doing this at many levels
already. I mean, there are there are people who have deep theories about what it takes to win a
war and what it takes to make a stable society and what it takes to cure depression and so on.
It's just that we have a culture that stigmatizes those from the point of view of being fundamental.
So we only expect such knowledge to extend to our own planet, our own time, our own species,
if that, you know, we don't have we don't think of them as being fundamental, but some of them,
like the law of the existence of universal computation is is and the law of increase of
entropy for that matter. They are from a practical point of view. We do regard them as fundamental,
like as Eddington or someone said, you know, somebody tells you that the the first law of
thermodynamics is wrong, then so much so much so much the worst for the theory. But if they if they
say the second law is wrong, then they must retire in deep humiliation and so on. So so we do we do
actually have confidence in high level laws. It's just that we have a culture that tells us
that those can't be fundamental. We can't kind of infer things about the universe and the big bang
and the long term survival of the universe and and and bits of the universe that we can't see.
This sort of consideration is, you know, is considered it's considered ludicrous to try to
talk about that from using concepts like knowledge, and even computation and information and and so
on. Information actually is a bit of an exception because thanks to the mathematician's misconception,
people are inclined to think that information is fundamental and everything might be made of bits.
So you like it from it rather than it from bits. Sorry? You like bit from it rather than yeah yeah
absolutely. So that's very much Landauer's, you probably sympathize with what he said
about this. Information is physical. Oh yeah, well of course, I thought we all did. I thought
that's that's his great contribution to the world. Wheeler put it the other way, he says physics is
informational. Yeah, well that's a misconception that that obviously can't be right.
The you know that that's it's the same same thing as expecting us to be in a simulation and the aliens
simulating us on a giant computer. And for some reason people think that that computer has got
to be a Turing machine. That's simply a non sequitur. It's just a parochial
forcing of a human concept onto imaginary superhuman aliens. You mean you think it might be a
machine at the higher level of the hierarchy which could solve the holding problem and then was
worrying about harder things. Yes, although calling it higher level, that's from I mean in the
cleaning hierarchy. Yeah, which is again expressed from our point of view. It could just have different
fundamental states and different fundamental operations. So one of its fundamental operations
might be to solve the halting problem. Not not very slowly like like you're in in visiting but
instantly. So you could ask it questions about Turing machines and it could answer all such
questions instantly. On the other hand, adding two and two would have it scratching its head for a
million years. Probably like Warcase, right? I haven't read actually. Oh, it's full of things
like that about about a guy who remembers everything and and is is is paralyzed by that and about
Oh, right. Well, you know you you can't deny that in the set of all mathematical objects such
things exist and therefore it is logically possible that physics conforms to that object rather than
the objects we think it conforms to. Okay, I admit that I think I'm going to just disagree with you
in a way that we can't prove very easily because Turing is dead that
he would have sympathized more with with my view that that all the different parts of physics,
including the parts of the universe we can't get to because they're beyond the Hubble distance
would be simulable by a Turing machine and wouldn't involve these higher things. But you may
seriously physicists like remember Hartle, Geroch and Hartle wrote a paper about what would an
uncomputable number look like if it was a physical constant. And I think that's certainly a legitimate
question and you're saying that those things that that one aspect of the mathematician's
dysphemism is that it is that they assume that such things don't exist.
Yes, yes, when applied to physics, yes.
And I think David was also invoking not just beyond the Hubble distance but also in a
completely different universe. Yeah, well, that's what string theory gives us as far as I
understand, Andrea, is that there's there are things where I guess it's consistent with with
quantum field theory and general relativity, but things that are just extremely different from
anything that we easily imagine. Yeah, you don't even need string theory. I would say the development
of theoretical physics keeps pulling us in that direction. And it's hard to truncate. I don't know
if it's, you know, right. But but but the flavor of theoretical physics. Yeah, even
uncomputable things could be there. I don't think that way. So I don't know how to, how to answer
that. But I these, these, I mean, I think one of the fascinating things about cosmology is that
physicists pride ourselves in this culture of we only talk about real stuff we can touch
and measure. But cosmology really, really disrupts that it's really hard to to write down theories
with the laws we have with with the tools we have that allow us to limit ourselves that way.
Maybe and I I'm actually really intrigued by David's angle, which seems to be
to take that as a judgment of our ideas about physical laws. If I understand that,
which I find fascinating, I've come at, I've come at a lot of these ideas from the point of view
that physics, physics has nothing to do with infinity, because you'll only ever collect finite
data. And you're, you're, you'll only ever shape the what you'd only stuff you have to work with
this finite in terms of having finite data and so on. And what I'm hearing, I'm very directly
from David and I think implicitly, or maybe directly to from Charlie. Anyway, I'm hearing in
both your comments that the problem of the arrow of time or the problem of bolts and brains or
however you want to put it is looming enough to transcend the that's forcing us away from that
position, that position. Making us love infinity. Yeah. And I, I'm, I just, I will say that whatever
wherever I am in my prejudices and all of that with that, I think that that problem looms so
mightily that that I, that I have to respect, even though you're, you're doing stuff I, that I
find uncomfortable. That problem looms so mightily that it I'm, I'm, I respect. It's very radical
to me, it's very radical what you're trying to do, but something has to give. Oscar Wilde said,
we're all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars. Well, some of us are looking at
infinity, because it solves problems here and now. But it seems to me like a cheat. That's,
I think that's, so I think you're also giving up. So, so, and I think you're explicitly saying that
you're giving up on the standard ways we think about doing physics. And, and whether it's embracing
some beautiful, better thing or giving up is a little hard for me to tell. We've embraced the
continuum for centuries. Yeah, just, just a derivative that we do in class. But it doesn't,
but it's, but not for, okay, but, but that's only to make our life easier. And if it were
discreet instead, it wouldn't, it wouldn't, it wouldn't change it. It wouldn't be a radical
thing to put it on a lattice. We're not here to make our lives easier. We're here to understand
the world. And that's why these continuums and, and derivatives and all that infinite stuff was
invented, was conjectured. And it might be false, but it might not be where you shouldn't have
prejudices about these things. But, but our, our, yes, that's, I like your line. I find the,
I find the finiteness of the, of physics, that physics is finite, except you're saying,
what I'm hearing is, okay, physics might be finite, but except for the arrow of time problem,
forcing us out. I don't think the continuum forces us to infinity. We can have a lattice,
we can have all kinds of things that do just fine. But you're saying this is the one thing that
forces us to think about infinity, which is intriguing. I'd like to go in the audience and
give, give the chance for some students to ask questions. If any one of you have a question.
Hi, I'm not sure whether I understood, whether I understood why
incompleteness is fundamental for non-equilibrium phenomena and so forth life. I think it was
a point of David that he made before. Yeah. So I'd like maybe more comments about that.
Oh, thank you. Cool. Thanks. David, would you like to react? I'm sure Charlie could do this
better, but, but I, I, the connection is that if you have to look at the contra positive, if
there is a limitation, such as Hilbert imagined, that you can write out an algorithm that will
be a criterion of truth, then mathematics has stopped at that point. And the same would be
true of physics. If, if, if there was a knowable law of physics that predicted everything, then
that would be the end of physics. And if there were such a thing as life in a universe, which I
think there couldn't be, but if, if there were, then it would really mean that the design of
the most complicated creature that could exist, which would be finitely complicated, would exist
baked into the, to the laws of physics at the big bang. So, you know, the, the, the universe
would not have any of the kinds of openness, explain the complexity and the all the high level
structure. If, if it were not, if, if, if there were infallible truths available,
put that the other way around, unless there were fallibility.
So, Charlie, yeah. Yeah, I think that's right. That, that is, that if, if you didn't have, it's because
incompleteness is the flip side of universality. If you had a, if you restricted
the, the laws of nature to, to something in which you couldn't produce a, a universal computer,
of course, it would be limited by how long it could run before, but basically something that was
behaving like a Turing machine until some, some part broke. Then you couldn't get something as
complicated as, as, as a, of a bacterium. Thanks. Are there any other questions from the audience?
Yeah, Vincent, would you like to come?
So, hello, thank you so much for the great discussion. Maybe I have a question about
a bit of a different topic, namely about artificial intelligence and AGI maybe,
because some of us are interested in this. So from the Turing church ceases, we know that
our brains are not doing anything magical. They could be simulated by a Turing machine, right?
So that means in principle, some, we could implement something like AGI if you, if we
would know how, but it could be that the only way, at least in my view, the only way to implement this
is to simulate something like a human brain on a Turing machine, not that there's any simple
AGI program that does something like human level intelligence or creativity, or maybe there is
any reason we might get there or do you think there is any reason that we should expect a
simple program that implements AGI or is, do we have to take the detour to simulate something
like a human brain and this then? I think, well, human brain might be simple, looked at the right
way. I think simple doesn't necessarily mean easy to find. I think there is a very strong
reason to believe that the explanatory universality property of the human brain,
which the present only humans have, must be encoded in a very short amount of DNA,
the tiny amount, like we are, people have different numbers for this, but you know, we seem to be
95% or 99% of our DNA is the same as chimpanzees, and of the rest, a lot is junk DNA, and of the rest,
a lot is differences between us and chimpanzees that aren't connected with these deep epistemological
things. So maybe it's only a few K of code in DNA terms that encodes the AGI-ness or the
GI-ness of the brain, but that doesn't mean it's easy to find. I would guess that it is a short
program. I mean, a few K of program is actually long if you want to write it, but it's relatively
short compared with the kinds of things that happen in biology, and I think it'll be very hard to find
and probably, well, I would expect us to find it only once we have understood a
philosophical theory of what the function is, what the creativity, consciousness,
qualia, and so on, what those things are in some precise terms, precise but high level,
I would expect, and then we can probably quite easily write a program that has that property.
Then we'll be in various kinds of trouble, but not any of the kinds of trouble that people are
thinking about now. I worry that people who know more about it are scared about it, but
people are so good at being cruel to each other with their intelligence that
I doubt that the machines that do much worse. I take this Schopenhauer's principle,
which is what they should call the anthropic principle pretty seriously,
and it may be that we're not likely to last more than a few or decades before we,
I don't think that human civilization will extinct itself, but white set us back a few
centuries or millennia, and we just hope for the best. That's why I don't worry about it so much,
but maybe I should. Oh, I know, it's also if you want to be universal, not in the sense of
computational universality, but in the sense of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
where do we get off thinking that we have better rights than these machines? They might actually
do a better job, or they might be our successors, not in the sense of the ones that conquered us
and enslaved us, but in a way that provided a shortcut to what maybe, to the bad instincts,
or let's say the maladaptive instincts that humans have, and that it might take a bit of
very unpleasant natural selection to get rid of, and maybe the artificial intelligence would get,
make a shorter shortcut to- So you're saying AI might be better people?
Yeah, yeah, in other words, another way of doing it would be giving us a transplant of
bonobo genes or something that just makes us more susceptible to taking it easy and less
susceptible to getting angry at our neighbors because of misinformation we've heard about them
and going out and killing them, which seems to be the tendency people have, which probably
was very adaptive at one stage, but is not helping us right now.
Thanks. You don't believe that in the better angels of our nature and Stephen Pinker and all
that stuff, you know, he says we've been getting better and better, and look, if civilization-
No, that's tendency, but there are also strong tendencies in the other direction, you know,
we saw in the 20th century it got pretty bad and it could do so again, you know, and it's worse
now because the reach of things is even more global than it was in the 20th century, so
a very repressive world government would be harder to dislodge.
There's a more fundamental reason why you're right, namely because of fallibilism,
there can be no upper bound to the size of error we can make, so although we have the potential to
go exponentially into the future at infinite, we have the potential to make arbitrarily large
errors, and we may have a dark age and another dark age and a dark age lasting a million years,
or we might wipe ourselves out and something else might evolve somewhere else in the universe
or somewhere else in the multiverse, and there can be no guarantee that that won't happen,
there can be no even, there can be no guarantee that it probably won't happen,
so what we have to do is solve problems as we find them and create knowledge as we can
and not rely on supernatural guarantees.
I thought you'd like that point about a finite bound.
Are there any other questions from the audience?
Adita?
I'm changing chairs depending on which side people come.
Hi, so I had a question because of this discussion we spent about discussing about
how undecidability and the halting problem are, I guess, flip sides of the same problem.
Would you also say that...
Universality.
Sorry, yeah, universality and the halting problem are the kind of opposite sides of the
same problem. Would you also say that these are opposite sides of induction and deduction as ways
to kind of acquire knowledge because we talked about, I guess, Solmanov induction a little bit
in the beginning and how maybe that is one conceptualization of how you could derive
knowledge from instead of using deduction from a formal set of axioms where you would use data
instead. So would you say that the incompatibility of something like ideal induction is the same as
not being able to deduce because of incompleteness?
Yes, they are both impossible for the same reason and their impossibility is a very good
thing for the same reason. So in both cases, instead of deriving things, we have to guess
things, we have to conjecture and the conjectures are always fallible. And I'm spouting Popper's
philosophy here. So that's where you have to go for this. And he got an amazing number of things
right working almost in isolation.
To link to relate to Edita's point, I think also Solmanov's induction is an idealization and
to have Solmanov's metric, one needs to solve the halting problem. But in concrete applications,
one cannot find Solmanov's prior. And so what we do, we can, as you know,
upper semi-computed perhaps, and then come up with guesses, oh, maybe this phenomenon from
which I got these data has been explained by this program. Now, everything is programs, but
and one can come up with this. Actually, that's also a problem, how we link scientific explanations
with programs. But I think there is a bit of a of a Popperian flavor in Solmanov induction
once we realize that it's uncomputable. So forget it. It's a beautiful idea. It does converge to
whatever it needs to converge. But the fact that it's uncomputable, we can only guess programs.
Thing is, usually, or often, shall I say, often, the problem we're trying to solve isn't in data.
We haven't yet got any data. Sometimes it's a theoretical problem. Like, how is it possible
for Maxwell's equations to be true and geometry to be what we think it is? There's no data,
no data at all. So you have the problem first, then the theory, then the data.
And so induction of any kind simply can't exist in that kind of a reality. And as I keep saying,
it's a very good thing that it can't. So Solmanov is solving, trying to solve a problem that isn't
there is trying to say, you know, how can we make this induction or this Bayesian inference or whatever
makes sense? How can we get the priors right? Well, the priors aren't right. Get over it.
Well, my colleague, John Smolin, told me about the story of induction and about an explorer who
comes to a place that's inhabited by anti-inductionists. And these are people who believe that if
something happened once, it's less likely to happen again. And they have a miserable life
because their buildings fall down and their crops fail. And so this explorer says, you know,
I understand why everything is not working here. It's because your principle of anti-induction
is wrong. And they looked at him and he said, why should we give up this principle? It's never
worked before. Nice. Good. Thank you. Thank you so much for your answers.
Other questions? Sam?
I'm interested in what kinds of cosmology entirely is interested in. I mean, we have the
cosmology for people like Hitler. There's Barbara's cosmology. I'm just curious what
interests them at the moment. Well, I don't know a lot about it, but I've been trying to
understand these models they call eternal inflation, where there isn't a beginning or an end,
but in which there's inflating pockets that appear here and there with all sorts of different
natural laws in them. And in that, that's a pretty scary place to live. And it's populated by
all kinds of problems, like David mentioned, that it's hard to get a universe in which
you're not extremely likely to disappear in a microsecond from now.
Other questions from the group?
If they come up later, feel free to raise your hand at some point. And at this stage,
I could also take questions from the online event.
I would have a quick question.
Cool. Go ahead, Sophie.
Yes. I'm wondering when you're talking about other universes that could solve the all-thing
problem. And for them, it's pretty easy, but for us, it's difficult and vice versa for other tasks.
Are you thinking about other branches in the multiverse or something that would be completely
outside of what we are studying now? The latter. In the multiverse, all universes in the quantum
multiverse have the same tame mathematics. They even have the same computable functions.
They just have different complexity theory. But complexity theory isn't that important anyway.
So, yeah. But we have to consider universes with different laws if only to examine explanations
like the anthropic principle, which purport to explain things in our universe. And only
certain very special kinds of anthropic argument constitute arguments. Otherwise,
they simply fall victim to this Boltzmann brain or boundary of the set of possibilities problem.
Dennis Sharma, when he told us about this objection, he said that what we should really
look for anthropically is a case, not a case where a slight change in a fundamental law would
have meant that we're not here, but where we are located at the center of the region, let's say,
define structure constant, rather than saying if it was 1% different, we wouldn't be here.
Look at the region where we would be here and try to find out whether we're near the center.
If we're near the center, that is a real anthropic problem. If you tell this to religious people,
they're going to say it's God. And it's very hard to argue them out of it. But I don't think we will
be in the center. But I think you don't think we're also on the edges because if we're on the edges,
we're out of it right after. Yeah, we're neither at the center of the edges because that's not
where the explanation lies. The explanation of the actual values doesn't lie in our existence.
It's a common cause. It's caused by things like the law of the universality of computation.
Mm-hmm. I was about to say a side effect. Yeah, a comment. Yeah.
Thank you.
Are there other questions? We're not at the middle and we're not at the edge.
Exactly how far from the edge are we? Probably a non-computable amount
or an intractably computable amount.
David, I'm just curious. This is a small question, but I'm just curious.
So your comments about the sort of unpredictability of the future of our civilization and the
possibility of our demise, is that the same thing as this edge that we've been talking about?
I hope not. Do you see a difference?
Yeah, yeah. It's almost the opposite. It's to do with our fallibility,
which is to do with our capacity for infinite growth.
Good. That's interesting. So it's our hope as well as our possible demise.
Well, you know, I'm not expecting our possible demise. I think, you know,
arguing that there will be a demise is itself not legitimate. That's a prophecy.
But it's in the scope, but it's not. You're saying we can't be sure to avoid it.
Yeah, the future of knowledge is unknowable. Again, we've got to get over that.
You're saying, unlike other predictions, it's not false survival, because if there is a demise,
it's like, I think Gilles Brassard wrote a book on clear computation in which it had a cartoon
of a bunch of elderly scientists looking into a steaming test tube. And one of them is saying,
we may have discovered the elixir of immortality, but it will take forever to test it.
Any more questions?
I will have another question maybe for Charles.
I wonder what's your view of probabilities?
My view of probability?
Yep.
I think it's just, I think it arises from entanglement.
Yes, I think that is the problem is the feature of a subsystem
in a larger system that evolves uniterally.
My question could also be formulated as do you agree with David in terms of what are
probabilities? And I guess the answer is yes.
Not necessarily, because many people view probabilities as entanglement, because they
understand quantum theory as unitary. And so entanglement is out there. But even among these
people, there's still many disagreements about how we should read the Born Rule.
And so maybe the follow up question for Charlie, without being so specific as does it equate to
David, despite you embracing a theory quantum theory, still, how do you view the Born Rule?
Is it a decision?
Oh, yeah, it's hard. I try not to think about it, but I know it, too.
David, do you have an answer on that?
Yes, I think the decision theory approach to probability in quantum mechanics is correct
and sufficient. And whether you call that deriving the Born Rule, I don't know,
I think the Born Rule is not a universal rule, obviously, because it doesn't apply to quantum
theory. I mean, it only applies to quantum theory in a tiny minority of situations.
In those situations, modeling the situation with decision theory,
the decision theory approach, if I can say very quickly, is to take classical decision theory
and quantum theory, strip out all the probability from classical decision theory.
So strip out all the probabilistic axioms and so on. And then quantum theory, strip out the
probabilistic, you know, if you're going to have wave function collapse or something,
strip out all that stuff, anything that's supposed to be probabilistic, then
smush them together and you get consistent quantum theory, namely Everett's,
and you get a consistent theory of probability, which only applies when people are making decisions.
And the rule that they use, assuming that they make measurements accurately and all that stuff,
in that approximation, their rational behavior, as determined by decision theory,
is the same as it would be if they believed in stochastic processes,
even though stochastic processes do not happen in nature.
Yeah, that sounds pretty plausible.
Cool.
I'm not sure I properly understood your explanation, David, because if you
say you want to get rid of the Born rule and you believe in unitary quantum mechanics and
Everett's many-worlds interpretation, how do you reconcile the fact that when we do a
quantum experiment in the lab, you know, we just get to see one result? How do we
interpret the fact that we're in just a specific branch of the multiverse and saying
not another one? We're not, we're in all of them. And the fact that we see only one outcome is a
prediction of quantum theory. If you just write the equation with the variable for how many outcomes
do we see, then you will find that the world, after a good measurement, the world will be in
an eigenstate of that with eigenvalue one. What actually happens is that all of the outcomes
happen, I mean, generically. But the question was about probability. What do we then mean
that some of them have a higher probability than others, given that they all happen?
Then you have to bring in another part of the model, which is suppose we were betting on these
outcomes. How would it be rational to bet? And decision theory without probabilistic axioms and
quantum theory without them together, give the answer.
It's magic. I'm not surprised you're shaking your head. But if you read the papers,
it's, I think it's unanswerable. I mean, it's undeniable.
Do you think it's unanswerable or just we haven't solved a good explanation for it, yes.
It's unanswerable. It's too ambiguous a word. I mean, it's undeniable that this is the explanation.
So David has amidst his other euphemisms and dysphemisms, brought in what is, I regard, the
most widespread obfuscatory euphemism, God, that is, people use it to mean their own idea of God,
which they're going to try to get you to like and believe in, but they haven't actually said what
it is yet. So I'm going to use that also, but in a physicist's way. So if you imagine a conversation
with God, and first of all, you say, what time is it? And God says, well, you would say it's about,
here, it's about 1037 Eastern Daylight Time. But for me, it's all times. I'm eternal.
And then you'll say, well, you're supposed to be omniscient of, will it rain a year from now?
And God says, well, that's like, yes and no. And you'll say, well, will it rain for me from now?
Well, I say, it's like saying, what I see is something that looks like your hand. And you're
sitting here, and you're saying, which of my fingers is the correct extension of my wrist?
They all are. When it gets to be next year, you'll either be on one where it's raining,
which is the one that has my wedding ring, or you'll be one of the other ones where it isn't raining.
And I can see all of them. But, and you, for you now, they're all equally real. And then in a,
next year, you will have a kind of a truncated perspective in which you think one of them
is real and the others aren't, but they all still are.
I'm not going to think that. I know that the other branches exist, even if I can't see them.
Most things in the universe, I can't see. I don't know why that's so, so.
This, this is like this, what Galileo said, he says, I don't know if he actually said this,
but he says that it's a, yes, I say that the earth moves. And if it moves, the way I say it
is you shouldn't be able to feel it moving. So shut up. Yeah, pretty much. Yeah. Everett said that to
do it. Yes. Yeah. Did he use the Galileo example? Yes, absolutely. Yeah. Yeah, that's right. That's
where it came from. And is that the moment where David started to say, okay, I don't know what more
to argue against? Yeah, that's the moment he was convinced. Yeah. So, so the idea is even the theory
says, yes, you will only experience one outcome. Yes. So even though we seem to be bugged by the
fact that no, but the theory says there's going to be many outcomes. No, no, no, it might look
like the theory says there's going to be many outcomes. But if, if each of, if you ask yourself,
how many outcomes am I going to see the theory says systematically only one. So it preserves
its consistency in spite of its striking apparent inconsistency.
Are there other questions?
Hey, do you hear me? Yeah. So, so will you, will you say, well, any of you say that in that sense,
in the sense we just discussed now, the born principle will be a statement about consciousness
of what do you experience? Or do you think it's beyond like consciousness would be beyond the
scope of the statement? It has nothing to do with it. It's, I mean, obviously, if consciousness
is to be described as a physical process, which it must be, then it presumably obeys quantum
theory and so on, but it has nothing to do with these issues of measurement, probability, and,
and anything like that. It's just a physical thing. There's, there's no more reason to assume it has a
special place in physics than it would be to assume that squirrels have a special place in physics.
Obviously, they're described by physics, but they don't have any relevance to fundamental
discussions of physics. Well, I asked before, because the idea was like, I mean, the, the
following, if I'm following the, the discussion is that like, you have this different potential
outcomes of measurement, all of them occur, all of them have their own branches and all of them
are there. But the statement is more like the one you, you will experience one of them. But,
and then it's, if it's about, you will experience one of them, you will see one of them, is
wouldn't it be addressing directly the consciousness of, or, or maybe I'm just like going out on it.
It's the same question can be asked about a seed of a plant that grows into two trees,
the left one and the right one. And you ask the seed, are you going to be the left one or the
right one or, or twins, you know, are you going to be Joe or Fred? You ask the, the fertilized egg.
And it says to you, well, in a sense, I'm going to be both of them. In a sense, I'm only going to
be one of them. That is to say, I will not experience being both of them. But the experience of being
each of them will both happen. Okay, I see. I understand. That's a good way of quoting it. Yeah.
Well, David and Charlie have been tremendously generous over their time. It doesn't seem like
there's other questions. If somebody has a burning desire, and has been repressing his question,
this is the last call. It also applies for the audience. Great. So thank you so much,
David and Charlie. That was a lot of fun to discuss with you. And it was a very, very fascinating
in many regards. Thank you very much. Very, very interesting conversation.
Thank you. Bye everyone. Thanks a lot. This was great. Bye bye.
