In one of my last videos I made the case that we are on the verge of a second renaissance,
the digital renaissance, with many parallels to the last renaissance.
From double entry bookkeeping to triple entry bookkeeping.
From the printing press to digital media and the internet.
From mechanics to robotics.
From wealthy artists to wealthy artists.
And maybe from the Americas to Mars.
So in my eyes it naturally begs the question, how do you deal with that time?
How do you deal with the digital renaissance and how do you personally crush it?
Like Da Vinci, Michelangelo, Copernicus, Galilei, the Medici and others did back then.
How do you have an impact on the world while, of course, living a great life for yourself?
That's what this video is about.
Creating the modern day or digital renaissance man.
There are many different synonyms for the renaissance man, like homo universalis or poli man.
What makes such a person?
All of these terms or phrases describe at least to some degree,
someone who has a wide breadth of knowledge or skills,
but who also has deep expertise in a number of disparate areas,
who is open to broad experiences,
can be a divergent thinker and can solve problems in creative ways as a result.
Polymaths who have a wide breadth of experiences across fields,
yet still have depth in multiple areas are uniquely situated to integrate.
That is to combine, apply or synthesize information from different domains
in order to help develop novel and useful solutions.
This is the superpower of the polymath.
Because they have more tools in their toolkit,
they are able to address problems more holistically and creatively.
This is the best and most precise definition I've heard of the term thus far,
and it already foreshadows what an immense force it can be in the digital age.
You are absolutely deadly.
It also somewhat dismantles the phrase jack-of-all-trades master of none,
where surely there are people like that certainly,
but the Renaissance men go beyond this.
The future belongs to those who learn more skills and combine them in creative ways.
Let's look at some of the characteristics or maybe habits a modern Renaissance person
should have before diving into a skill set.
To become such a person, you need to have high energy levels,
because as a generalist you have lots of different interests
and you can only pursue them with energy.
Most of the well-known Renaissance men like Da Vinci for example,
actually had great physique.
It's like my favorite James Clear quote once again,
entrepreneur's mind, athlete's body, artist's soul.
Hell yeah, exercise allows for a clear mind to explore new subjects
while making you a high-energy human being.
The California Department of Education has consistently shown
that students with higher fitness scores have higher test scores.
Exercise actually primes the brain to learn faster.
A 2007 study showed that subjects who did high-intensity exercise beforehand
could learn vocabulary words 20% faster.
The reason exercise is a key trigger for all kinds of positive effects in the brain,
particularly learning, is because movement signals to the brain
that something important is happening.
I guess it wasn't hyperbole when Dr. Mark Tarnopolsky said that if exercise were a drug,
it would be the most valuable one ever developed.
Focus is of the essence as well.
As Robert Green wrote in Mastery,
In the future, the great division will be between those who can acquire skills
and discipline their minds and those who are irrevocably distracted
by all the media around them and can never focus enough to learn.
I'm definitely a big believer or even chaser of flow state
where you do something for hours on end and it doesn't even feel like you do anything.
It just feels like play, it just feels like you can go forever and time just flies.
Sometimes I get into the state when writing, sometimes when video editing
and a lot of times when coding.
I can also become really obsessive if there is something new
I am really interested in.
There were like eight weeks or something in early 2018
where I fell deeply into the Bitcoin rabbit hole
and soaked up new information in a way I never did before.
So being open-minded in finding subjects and skills you might be curious about
and then developing a passion for them gives you a clear heads up compared to other people.
Because as Naval Rabikan says, it feels like play to you and work to others.
And you really don't want to compete against someone who is playing all day,
doing what he loves when it feels like work for you.
Next up is self-education.
If you need someone to tell you what to learn and how it works
I think you are at a severe disadvantage in the digital age
and I'll come back to that.
Now what are the skills that you should actually learn to find success in the digital age?
To me the answer is everything that allows for permissionless leverage.
That is where you don't need other people or money or resources
to use the skill in a way that provides value to other people.
Essentially any form of media or applications
you can create on a computer and distribute through the web.
This is still somewhat broad and I will give you more context why.
I don't really like when someone says something like
you have to become a programmer or you have to become a digital marketer.
You have to become whatever.
Because there are so many things that you can become
and most of them don't even exist yet.
You can literally create a job instead of applying for one.
Think 20 years back.
Podcaster, Twitch, IRL streamer, eSportscaster.
These were certainly not serious professional occupations.
The most interesting and the most important form of leverage
is this idea of products that have no marginal cost of replication.
It got started with the printing press.
It accelerated broadcast media.
And now it's really blown up with the internet and with code.
So now you can multiply your efforts without having to involve other humans
and without needing money from other humans.
So this newest form of leverage is where all the new fortunes are made.
So all the new billionaires.
Last generation fortunes were made by capital.
That was the Warren Buffett's of the world.
But the new generation fortunes are all made through code or media.
Joe Rogan making 50 to 100 million bucks a year from his podcast.
PewDiePie.
Now I don't know how much money he's rolling in,
but he's bigger than the news, right?
The Fortnite players.
Of course, Jeff Bezos and Mark Zuckerberg and Larry Page
and Sergey Brin and Bill Gates and Steve Jobs.
That is all code-based leverage.
Probably the most interesting thing to keep in mind
about the new forms of leverage is they are permissionless.
They don't require somebody else's permission for you to use them or succeed.
For labor leverage, somebody has to decide to follow you.
For capital leverage, somebody has to give you money to invest
or to turn into a product.
But coding, writing books, recording podcasts, tweeting,
YouTubing, these kinds of things, these are permissionless.
You don't need anyone's permission to do them.
I recently had a discussion with a friend about
what is the one skill that most people,
regardless of profession, should improve on.
So again, it needs to be something broad.
I would call this kind of skill a metal skill.
My friend expected me to say coding,
because he knows it's something I am learning for years now
and I'm very passionate about,
and it's obviously one of the best skills you can have.
But I said writing, and the longer I thought about it,
the more I realized that my answer probably would have been different
just a few weeks ago or months ago or years ago,
and it probably already is different today when I think about it.
I chose writing because writing is clear thinking.
A good writer can explain his arguments
and understand them himself.
If you never write things down and just keep everything in your head,
there is a good chance that there are logical gaps.
It's this feeling of believing you know how something works
and then someone asks you a question about it
and you realize you can't explain it.
That usually means you don't understand it yourself.
I've learned so much while making YouTube videos,
and some of that is just plain research
and diving into new topics,
but a lot of it comes from just writing things down coherently.
I really believe that's the more impactful part.
I've watched the following clip of John Peterson about four years ago
and it really stuck with me.
I instantly remember it when I thought about this topic.
The best way to teach people critical thinking is to teach them to write.
And one of the things that just blows me away about universities
is that no one ever tells students why they should write something.
It's like, well, you have to do this assignment.
Well, why are you writing?
Well, you need the grade.
It's like, no, you need to learn to think.
Because thinking makes you act effectively in the world.
Thinking makes you win the battles you undertake.
And those could be battles for good things.
If you can think and speak and write,
you are absolutely deadly.
Nothing can get in your way.
So that's why you learn to write.
It's like, and I can't believe that people aren't just told that.
It's the most powerful weapon you could possibly provide someone with.
And I mean, I know lots of people who've been staggeringly successful
and watched them throughout my life.
I mean, those people, you don't want to have an argument with them.
They'll just slash you into pieces.
And not in a malevolent way.
It's like, if you're going to make your point
and they're going to make their point,
you better have your points organized.
Because otherwise, you are going to look like and be an absolute idiot.
You are not going to get anywhere.
And if you can formulate your arguments coherently
and make a presentation, if you can speak to people,
if you can lay out a proposal,
God, people give you money.
They give you opportunities.
You have influence.
That's what you're at university for.
Some time ago, I would have chosen reading instead of writing.
But now I realize that while you can make a case that reading is a skill,
like comprehending things quicker, knowing what to read, etc.,
I would put it more into the category of best possible habits one should have
next to regular physical exercise.
Reading is great because it exposes you to new ideas,
but reading is not really acting, while writing is.
Today, however, I would choose a different meta skill.
Reading and writing make up literacy,
which is pretty much the craziest skill you could have just a few hundred years ago.
Today, there is a similar skill like that.
I would call it digital literacy.
Digital literacy is the skill that everyone can profit from.
Digital literacy does not mean coding.
It can contain coding.
But what I really mean is the not so very precise definition of being good with computers.
If you're good with computers, you know how to search things effectively in a search engine.
You know how to find, run and learn new software quickly.
You have a field for different tools and their existence.
That alone is an insane multiplier.
I remember reading an article when I was about 12 years old,
I think it might have been scientific American,
where they measured the efficiency of locomotion for all these species on planet earth.
How many kilocalories did they expand to get from point A to point B?
And the Condor 1 came in at the top of the list, surpassed everything else.
And humans came in about a third of the way down the list,
which was not such a great showing for the crown of creation.
But somebody there had the imagination to test the efficiency of a human riding a bicycle.
Human riding a bicycle blew away the Condor all the way off the top of the list.
And it made a really big impression on me that we humans are tool builders,
and that we can fashion tools that amplify these inherent abilities that we have to
spectacular magnitudes.
And so for me, a computer has always been a bicycle of the mind,
something that takes us far beyond our inherent abilities.
And I think we're just at the early stages of this tool, very early stages.
And we've come only a very short distance, and it's still in its formation.
But already we've seen enormous changes.
I think that's nothing compared to what's coming in the next hundred years.
Saying the computer is a bicycle for the mind is probably the understatement of the century.
It's more like the computer is the light speed space shuttle for the mind.
If you're good with computers, you learn other skills much quicker and cheaper,
because of the endless great resources the web provides.
You can pretty much create anything you want.
This is a generalist's dream.
Imagine Leonardo da Vinci with a MacBook and Internet access.
That would have been wild.
And if you're good already with some tools, say Photoshop, PowerPoint,
and maybe Final Cut for video editing, you are 100% able to learn another new tool,
like Blender for 3D modeling and animations,
faster than someone who is not comfortable with computer programs.
It's like the circle of accelerated adaptation,
a model I thought of myself and talked about in my second video.
A wide set of skills gives you more analogies and learning methods that you picked up by
learning the skills, which makes you learn new skills faster,
which ultimately gives you a wider skill set.
That's the path of the Renaissance man.
This of course makes you much more flexible,
and of course you can do with that whatever you want,
you can create your own things,
but it also makes career changes much more easy and feasible.
It enables you to go for whatever you think is interesting and monetize that skill set.
For me it was gaming at first, then it was Bitcoin,
and I don't know what else it will be in the future.
If I would be really into AI for example, I would just learn stable diffusion,
see what else there is, learn about how these things work,
and I guarantee you I would be able to make money with that skill in a few months.
And this is nothing special in my eyes.
If you are good with computers, if you are digitally literate,
you can 100% do the same.
By the way, the thumbnail of this video was mostly AI generated with some Photoshop tuning.
So there you have it again.
I'm open-minded, I'm curious to new tools,
I try them out and make them work for me.
That's how you get comfortable with new things quickly.
Again, the future belongs to those who learn more skills
and combine them in creative ways.
If you haven't seen my video on the second renaissance,
I encourage you to watch it.
I think it's easily one of my best videos thus far
and gives you more context for this video.
If you did watch it, then hop into my generalist where the specialist video
where I go way deeper into what makes each of them great.
Thank you for watching and see you next time.
