Hi, everyone. I'm Eric Bryn Yolson, and this is the Stanford Digital Economy Lunch Seminar.
Today we're going to have Tomas Coyo give a presentation about the end of nation states.
Tomas was the creator of Uncharted Territories, a newsletter that analyzes the most pressing problems of our time from automation to blockchain, inequality, aging, and many other topics.
You may know him. He became famous worldwide after publishing a number of high profile articles, viewed by over 60 million people, in particular the hammer and the dance about how to fight coronavirus.
I'm sure more people have listened to that article on paid attention to a much better situation right now.
Now, he's a tech consultant and executive doing work in Silicon Valley and let's lead a billion dollar online education business at Course Hero where he's a VP of product growth, number of other positions.
In addition, he's an MBA from Stanford and a couple of masters of science degrees engineering.
During the presentation, please, we welcome your interaction. You can use the Q&A function here on Zoom and I'll read the questions and pass them on to Tomas.
We're also going to try and save about 10 or 15 minutes at the end of the seminar for more general discussion and some questions then.
So, welcome Tomas. We're looking forward to your talk about the end of nation states.
Thank you. And so for those who, I'm sure you guys can see this, for those of you who follow me, that you guys are going to see about 50% of content that you might have seen somewhere else but then 50% that I have never talked about.
And because you guys are all illustrious and very intelligent, I am going, I'm packed these with a lot of ideas. So I'm going to go quickly.
So, so you just need to keep up. So this is a picture actually of the Bay Area from a plane and one of the things you can see here is that it's all built in the flat land, but as soon as a moment and start, there's just nothing, nothing built right and you can see that also here if you go to
Italy, where this is a day and a night and you can see here that all the lights are on in the valleys.
And every moment, every time that you have a mountain, there is nothing. Right. Why is that because in the flat lands, you have the water doesn't run off.
You can have agriculture that's much easier. You can have irrigation that's much easier plants are easier to to grow when you have a lot of that you can have agriculture if you have agriculture can have people.
And then on top of this, if you have rivers that are navigable, you can trade that very easily. You can also trade more easily if there's flatlands than if there is mountains.
And so you have more people and more wealth in flat areas and so you have here geography determining a lot of the, the evolution of a place like Italy or the Bay Area and then you can zoom in out into Europe for example and
you can realize okay actually this is pretty flat to the top that's the north European plain and you have all the south here that is very mountainous. And that's due as you probably know to the African plates, hitting into the European plates, Eurasian plates and
that's what's creating all these mountains of the of the south. And what happens then is that all the water that accumulates from here into the mountains falls very quickly into the Mediterranean because of the mountains, but very slowly in the north.
And that's why you have natural navigable waterways in the north substantially more than the south, which means that together with the flatlands, you have more agriculture more people more wealth than in the south.
And so you should remember this next time that you blame Southern Europeans for being lazy.
And then just another example right like who who line in China 94% of the population is east of that and that corresponds to the area that is hand here these brown ones and there's other ethnicities ethnicities but the big one is the hand.
And you can see here the percentage like red means more than 95% our hand you can see that it's basically all the east of that who line and very like very little with the west of it.
And it's very connected to the density right so huge density in this area and here in Sichuan and a little bit here more but nothing west of it and so why is this.
Well because of that corresponds to the cultivated land, this is the most cultivated and so on and so forth. It corresponds to the line of rain east of this line the 15 inch is a yet you have much more density of population and west you don't have any of it and the
more rain you have the more population you have, and that's linked to the geography where here you can actually see in the geography actually the who lines close to these actually.
You can see all of these are flat lands. And these on the on the west are mountains and what's happening well, you have the winds here in the world are go east to west in towards towards China at this level of the latitude.
As they hit mountains, they the wind goes up the it's colder air it condensate it falls and then when it goes on the other side there's no more water and so it's very dry.
So on top of this, now you have here this tectonic plate between India and China, and it's hitting. And what's happening is that that's what's creating the Himalayas on the on the on the south and then this is the Himalayas and these is debate.
And so what's happening well on top of this on the east side, you remember this flat line is there's a flat land that's the flat land here you have China here you have Korea and Japan.
That flat area corresponds to the Pacific plate going under China and wherever it arrives, it's flat and wherever it doesn't it's, it has mountains from the other tectonic plates hit with India.
So you're having these area that's influenced by the Pacific plate these area that's influenced by the Indian plate. These is called the north south gravity line and what's happening is it's flat east of that mountain is west of that.
It gathers all the water, it gathers the flat lands that are perfect for fertility. And then on top of these then you have all the water caught by the Tibet that flows through two rivers the young San Diego river into these amazing
plain the north China plane and unsurprisingly, this is where China comes from the hand came from that valley and so there were so many of them because this was so fertile and so flat and so so much agriculture that you had a massive population that expanded
little by little through the centuries until it caught the borders of China today. And so I can keep going but this is why China really is the hand is because of tectonic plates, the same reason as Europe is the way it is.
And so that's, these are some examples of how much geography has driven history in the past and so if you ask this guy, this is from 1500. Hey, how are the next few decades going to be like, he's going to tell you, well, it's going to be the same as the last few centuries.
This is Europe in the in the Middle Ages, and you have these feudal system.
And on top of this you have the Catholic Church, which controls most of Western Central Europe in 1500. And they have been growing in power for hundreds of years.
And for all this time you've had some proto protestant movements appearing here and there, challenging the power of the church, but the church destroyed them every time.
And that's why I'm 1500 it looks like this. And then this is what it looks like 50 years later here we're in 1555. The green is the Catholic Church and the other colors in the north are the Protestant ones and so how come you have 1000 years of Catholic church
power that suddenly disappears nearly overnight. You know this is the reformation, but what's interesting right young who's in the 1400.
Founded the usage movement, and he didn't succeed but whereas Martin Luther did. And so what's the difference, the printing press with John who's you needed to write books by hand.
He took a full year for a book to be produced so the best way to propagate your ideas but was by talking which is not scalable. Martin Luther in used the printing press.
Very, very heavily. And one of the things that he used it for is the 95 thesis, and the results was the reformation. Thanks to Gutenberg's printing press, which was created just around 70 years before the reformation started.
And so, whereas graph, geography, used to drive history technology like the printing press has been replacing it. And one way to think about it is in terms of information networks.
You have the village, you have, I mean, in the Middle Ages, you have maybe a nobleman like a night and maybe the priests and then a few villagers that talk to each other.
And you have a little bit of conversations or communication with other villages, not too much, but a little bit of trade leader of interactions. You also have bigger cities with bigger nobleman and bigger higher level priests.
You also have these kind of fractal structure for population which gets reflected in the aristocracy. Yeah, right you have nights and Byron's and, and, and, and, and, and girls and dukes and kings.
And the same thing for the church with priests beacons and cardinals and the pope, except that this one is substantially more connected before the printing press.
You had all the priesthood that was substantially better educated, they had access to handwritten books that they could share with each other.
They had a lingua franca with Latin where all of them could talk with each other.
They could have had correspondence with each other and European scope. So they really had a monopoly of information and information networks in Europe, then comes the printing press.
And then suddenly ideas can be shared across aristocrats or merchants and across educated citizen citizenry citizenry in general. And so that eliminates the monopoly that the church has on the information networks.
And so if you ask this guy in 1500 hey what's going to happen, and then you show him, he's going to be really freaking surprised my information technology killed the incumbents power, because it replaced the existing information networks and so the question becomes okay what's going to replace it right.
What's going to replace the church, as we know it's nation states, but that also was influenced through the printing press through a process called print capitalism.
And so here these were the language families in Europe at the time, and languages really were a gradient. So for example here from Belgium to to Lisbon.
It's not like you had here some French and seems some Portuguese know it was a gradient little by little these languages were different from each other. And so maybe there's a few words that change from a valley to another, but it's very very gradual.
And so what happens with these gradually is, as books start being printed.
The capital, the cities that were the biggest were the ones where they were the more writers, and also the more readers. And so they attracted the the writing in the local vernacular.
And so around these big population and culture centers appear little by little over centuries, these languages.
And so that's why we have languages that we have today.
And so this one I think it's from these pictures from I think the 1400s or so and this is from the 1600s, right to centuries later you can see how dramatic was the concentration of power from this system into these current more of a nation, a state kind of system.
And that emergence of these new nation states, replacing churches that would have gone busy completely crazy.
And that's not the only time that these information technologies have dramatically influenced the political structure right.
What do these guys having common. Well, you cannot have a totalitarian system without microphone and speaker, so you can talk to hundreds of thousands of people in a square.
There's a radio that enables you to reach millions of people without that technology, you just don't have that political system.
And so, over the centuries, nation states states co-opted books, newspapers, radio TV education to strengthen this concept of we're not just a state we're a nation to and we're so we're a nation state.
And that and those media strengthened the, the, the, the position of the nation state, they guided the broadcasters of information on what to tell citizens, and the feedback loop there was very weak.
And so that's why they've been able to create this identity of nation states.
Information technology created these new power of nation states. And it's happening again, these new information system obviously internet is changing again, the political system.
And obviously, the key one here is now citizen are connected and so the information flow doesn't go from nation states through broadcasters to citizens, but citizens now are our network.
And I'm a good example of this right, Eric was mentioning the hammer and the dance.
That was picked up.
It was read more than 20 million times and was picked up by more than a dozen countries publicly to guide their strategy. And this is crazy, like I'm a random dude.
I just had access. I have never done epidemiology until a month before I wrote that article. And so why is this why is this possible because I had access to papers through internet, which was impossible before.
And so I had access to distribution through social networks, which was impossible before and so you get both the content and the distribution through social networks, and that gave citizens like me an outsized power on influence over governments.
And Satoshi Nakamoto are two other perfect examples of this right Q and on a guy or a small group of guys that has had a dramatic influence and what 10s of millions of people believe, and in political representation.
Satoshi Nakamoto also has had these outsized impact trading a trillion dollar asset class, a technology with it, and hundreds of millions of people who believe in cryptocurrencies more than they believe in fiat currencies and nation states.
And so you have this power of citizens that comes from the fact that they're so couldn't network right Q and on Satoshi Nakamoto are impossible in a world where we're not connected.
You have another big source of undermining the nation state that comes from internet, which is the strength of everything becoming digital rights technology is eating internet is eating the world technologies eating the world and every time one of these companies gets created.
You have a beam of that appears so this is the revenue of travel in the 15 years after 2000. And as that grew as much number of travel agents went down, commensurably, right.
And these happens faster and faster and faster because the speed at which technologies get up get adopted is ever faster. That's what happens every time that one of these companies appears.
It becomes a huge behemoth, and where it creates a lot of wealth but it also replaces a lot of players that were local.
And so it concentrates wealth that was globally distributed into a few hands that obviously have a lot of power, not only because they have all the money but also because they have some of them.
Access to information right in the case of Facebook and because of Twitter they control information as Trump learned on January 6.
And not only that but now you have Elon Musk, saying that Starlink is a way to give access to internet anywhere in the world and really local governments can't really do anything about it.
So if they're just transmitting into a country with a local downlink work in the regular to your side, they can shake their fists at the sky.
So you have these other source of undermining the power nation states, you have super national organizations and this is interesting because it just has happened all the time in history.
The question is never whether you can keep all of your sovereignty is three shares says that you just can't.
It has been the fate of humankind to have its face, faith increasingly shared.
Before you have violence and trade between individuals and, and that forms tribes violence and trade between tribes forms from chiefdoms and kingdoms and empires and leagues and, and then we've seen this right more recently where will one push for the League of Nations,
give power to push for the creation of the UN and the European Union, as there's global financial problems the IMF and World Bank, gain power, global train problems, gave power to the WTO pandemics, gave power to the World Health Organization and I argue that the
delivery of the World Health Organization is only important in so far as it was so unbelievably necessary. So I don't think the who is going anywhere. I think something like it or itself is going to keep getting power.
However, you have a globalized world, you will have globalized governments, and then you have blockchain, right.
Bitcoin, Ethereum, and there's the obvious way in which these undermines the power of nation states, because it reduces the power of printing of the printing press and so the legal, the wiggle room that you have with your fiat currencies.
And that goes beyond this right, because you have here gatekeepers like financial institutions that are one of the ways that nation states have power over its citizens.
With blockchain, you can have DeFi and you can start taking away the power from these financial institutions. And this is true not just with financial institutions but really wherever you have a gatekeeper, you can replace that with blockchain and decentralize that
with your governance. So, wherever you have an industry that's based in knowledge, and not in something more physical, you will have an industry that can replace the gatekeepers of the nation states by something powered by blockchain.
So you have all of these potential, these actors that are reducing the power of nation states at the worst time for them, right. So, where Kodak was 150,000 employees, Instagram had just 12 people, it was sold for a billion dollars,
WhatsApp 22 billion dollars by 55 employees that's $400 million of value per employee. And so, these employees in tech are generating so much well they're so productive that they obviously are the ones with the biggest jobs that make the most money.
And so what happens is, as these people keep working on tech, the share of GDP controlled by tech increases, but because they're so productive, actually the share of tech employees does not grow.
And so, you have here all these 50 jobs, top jobs in the US and so many of them that are going to be automated, and oh by the way over these top 50 jobs only three have been created in the last 60 years, which tells you a lot of about how fast the destruction is going to be of work versus the creation.
The creation, because tech is so much more efficient, the creation of jobs is not going to be as fast as the destruction. And so what you happen to have them is a lot of workers that either don't work or are under employed, and which you cannot tax.
Is this under, is this concept of the hollow out where the medium skill people who are the vast majority of people, there's fewer and fewer of them, there's more low skill people, there's more high skill people.
And obviously that creates the inequality in wealth that we know we 3.5 billion people in the world that have as much wealth as the top 26.
And that is hard because now you cannot tax these middle class, right you don't have as many workers that you can tax.
And so you need to tax these people who are high skilled, except that is high skilled people can move around, and they can dodge your taxes.
And it's true not only for the creators of these companies but also for their right so there's another example right.
And this is Lorena Gonzalez from California said this to Elon Musk and then bam, a few months later, you must move to Texas where he pays substantially fewer taxes.
And so the this mobility of these wealth generators is true for the entrepreneurs. Like here you have also creators in Spain, for example they're moving to the equivalent of Puerto Rico in Spain which is Andorra, where they don't pay taxes.
And the same is going to be true for workers, where a share of all employees working remote during COVID was huge. And here the red is the people who want to work fully remote according to different in tech according to different.
No, sorry, in knowledge based industries. And so most people actually want either hybrid or remote and the remote ones can go wherever they want.
How do you tax the people who can go wherever they want right companies are mobile, the richest companies are mobile the richest owners are mobile the richest workers are mobile. And so how do you tax them.
It's going to be much harder. And so there's going to be substantially more competition for taxes.
And so today, just at a moment where workers, the average worker can be tax substantially less. This is not a coincidence that of the top 25 countries in GDP per capita, most of them are actually tax havens, and some of them have have also oil but if you take out oil, it's mostly tax havens.
And that's why Shenzhen Dubai, Singapore, Hong Kong, all these, all these cities, which were nothing 50 years ago 100 years ago. Now there's this massive metropolis is not a coincidence that they have low taxes.
And obviously we mentioned this we can print money because of Bitcoin.
They printed money in the United States in the just after the, the great recession and it worked well and then they tried to do this again and doesn't work as well. Right.
And you have this flight to other money to things that are hedges against it the stock market is one of them but obviously is Bitcoin is one another one of them.
And as you have more cryptocurrencies is going to be harder and harder to print money without consequences and so now you have states have fewer workers to tax.
They can't tax them as much workers and companies and and founders, and they can't print money during a demographic thinking about right so this is Europe but it's equivalent for for the US population projection by the UN in Europe is that this year is going
to be one of the population for now we're going down is due to the number of children per woman, which is vastly under 2.1 which is the replacement rate.
By the way, not a single country in the world that has gone down the, the, the, the 2.1 threshold has been able to go back up above it, not a single one.
Obviously, life expectancy is going up at the same time so you don't have children, but you have a lot of older people, which means the, the ratio of retirees per workers in the European Union same thing for for the US is going to go from zero three to zero six right for every worker you
zero six retirees in a few decades.
And so, and by the way today, the share of government budget spent on old age benefits, such as you know, Medicare or social security retirement.
It's around 20% in Europe, it's slightly lower in the US, but this that imagine what happens when you have double the the retirees are you going to have 40% of the entire budget of the European Union spent on this.
That's not the discretionary that's the entire budget.
The nation states, the power goes down with new competing actors, such as individuals, communities, companies, super national entities, their income goes down, because they can.
They have fewer workers to tax, they can't tax those people and companies making money, they can print money. And at the same time, their spend goes up because they have more under employed people, so they want more distribution and they're more retirees.
And so, nation states are not in a good position, and they are in a very similar position to what the church, where the church was 500 years ago.
They were the incumbent power, and you had these information network technology which was the book at the time that replaced it with this new nation states.
And now we have these nation states are completely crumbling power, and the question becomes what will replace nation states.
Now we need to understand actually this concept of nation states where the key component, the nation, that means that my identity is loosely linked to this geography, like in this place.
There's a bunch of people, and we all share this identity which called the nation, and, and then, and that is the logic for, for banning us together.
So, these identity comes from these information networks, right the way we're sharing information they were we're sharing our culture through information networks and that's what creates this nation and, and, and it was linked to geography.
States means that the government is linked to the geography, which is linked to the fact that assets are linked to geography. What does it mean.
We have the original source of states is the monopoly of violence right you you, you have trade in an area that might be crime that might be violence and so you grow to control that area so you have a monopoly of violence so that trade can happen.
And that creates value, and that enriches the state.
But here what's happening is that in these information networks are becoming digital, and the assets are also becoming digital. So, where the nation and the state where anchored to geography.
Now both of them become anchored to the digital world.
So, the question, there's two questions right on the nation side, what identities will emerge are they're going to be identities that are stronger than the nation that undermine the nation, the same way as the nation undermine the identity of religion.
And the second one is what state services are geographically bound because those are geographically bound are going to remain the ownership of the geographic state.
And the state services that are not bound to geography. Why would they remain in the, in the scope of a geography state. Right. So let's start with what identities will emerge.
For starters, English is by far the number one language in terms of GDP globally that bleeds enormously enormously in languages in internet more than 50% of all websites are in English.
And the results is that most popular languages being learned around the world, the English is about 20 times the second one which is French, and it's more than all the other ones combined.
Why, because of network effects, if most of the revenue, if most of the people are learning already English, you want to join that network not another network.
And so by far now, English is the most valuable language to learn. That's why everybody's learning it. And so in one or two generations, suddenly everybody will learn English with no English.
And remember what happened last time, right, when books evolved and grew, they created the nation around the scope of the language of the book.
Now, if you have suddenly a language that's global, what happens is that the geographically bound identities are going to slowly melt away to start creating a global identity.
And so that's one of the reasons why the summers are going to be replaced by the anywhere, right, the summers people who are rooted into a geography, anywhere is people who feel comfortable anywhere in the world.
So there's more identities that can be created through digital right is not just this uniformization, you also have now suddenly is vertical communities, there's people who were too far away from each other before to form a community now they can form a community through
the left and right is an obvious one. One better way to think about left and right is actually urban versus rural that's the biggest predictor of them off of Democrat versus Republican.
And so you can think in terms of, okay, now you have, you have to be bound together but not anymore. And you have these information networks now that are creating these identities are more urban versus rural.
What matters was a movement that started in in the US but you've had support from these ideas everywhere in the world, even in places that didn't have a lot of history, recent history of slavery.
These can be understood as a group of people who care more about the world, the environment of the world, then they care about the nation.
Crypto is a community 200 million people strong. They have a very defined set of beliefs. They have set way of thinking how problems should be resolved.
And so you can consider them as one of these communities, rationalists, transhumanists, all of these are what we could consider proto virtual nations, right, these communities that are based on digital, but they have a culture that shared, not just the
culture, but also a strong opinion on how we should be governed.
And that happened in the past you had past virtual nations like churches were virtual nations, really, and communists was always also a kind of virtual nation right where they, they say, workers of the world, unite, but they're saying is the nation is not the right way to think about it.
It's the social class and so the Soviet Union really had to be geographically bound because the information networks they don't exist.
But you could understand it as a virtual community that had a geographic instantiation.
You can see these proto nations emerging. And then the other question is the state, what state services are geo bound so these is a breakdown of most of the biggest services that the state provides in a country like the US.
And if you look about it and look at it, there's actually few that are bound to geography, violence, especially military, it's defined as you know, defending your borders, parks, dams, public works, police,
whether by protection these things are geo bound but the other stuff is actually not geo bound like inequality.
Why does it make sense that a Californian is taxed to fund the retirement of an Oklahoma woman.
And the head of funding the under the unemployment of the retirement of European, with whom they might share the exact same ideas, because that's imagine both of them are transhumanists, and they want to have some solidarity between them.
Education, why does it need to be geo bound regulation like food medicines, why does it need to be geo bound endowment protection, why does it need to be geo bound that when the, when the dam and burnt in Paris you had all these American donors that gave a lot of money.
It makes no sense that this is geo bound and so you can imagine an unbundling of nation states, where you have a bunch of services that remain bound to a geographic state.
These services of states that can be delivered by digital states.
And so, digital communities can take over state services that are no not do geographically bound. And so, what will happen in the future.
Nation states lose power to corporations individuals committees, Supernational organizations.
English raises intellectual borders.
The identity of global communities, strengthens online.
Communities develop network governments governance mechanisms.
Some increase the share of digital governance services.
Some instantiate geographically.
The existing nation states shed the nation and adopt communities, and you can think of, for example, a Salvador today with crypto, or Dubai with finance as two examples of these states or nation states that move more towards communities than towards nation states
The larger community based states grow versus nation states.
The national sentiment becomes a secondary and nation states are replaced by community states over the decades and centuries.
And so the only question that reminds from this is how will community states organize themselves.
And that's I think is the core question that we need to solve in the next decade or two.
And how global communities can organize themselves to take on more and more services in digital states.
So we'll talk about that another time.
Thank you.
Thanks so much Thomas that was amazing. I'll cover like you said you promised you covered a lot of territory there.
And we have a lot of questions as well. But let me, let me highlight a few of them for you here. Let me start with one from Andrew one Nordenflict.
He says that digital technologies that undermine various aspects of nation states are in turn underpinned by a physical infrastructure, like electricity production transmission communication infrastructure wire satellites, etc.
And some entity or entities need to provide a control them. So won't that be a source of power for the government.
You know that is still a physical infrastructure to these. Yeah, so a couple of thoughts about it. So, there's one thing that I haven't commented on.
And it is the fact that there's a bifurcation that can be happening. In fact, all of these that I'm saying presupposes that the government is not going to stop all of this.
Right. There is a way to stop it and China is walking that path, you can actually control all the digital networks.
But then what happens is a lot of the value from these information networks disappears. The key of the value that's created is the fact that every person can talk with each other.
You eliminate that you limited a lot of the value and so there's going to be a massive economic penalty in the case of countries like South North Korea or China that might not care, because they care more about the power.
But this is a bifurcation pretty big. I mean, maybe they're making a bet that with 1.3 billion people that that's that's big enough. I mean, they have a pretty thriving tech sector within that.
Yeah. So, so, okay, so this is this is a I'm going to try to address it in two minutes.
The frontier in GDP per capita is the United States, not not be no big country in the world gets gets at the same level of GDP per capita as the United States.
Every other country is in is at one level or the other in the case of Australia, for example, they get close at 90 90% 95% Canada say same thing, and then you go down from there, like France is nothing 80% UK 70%.
And so, what happens, for example, talk about the miracle after the world war two. There was no miracle is just Europe was catching up with the United States in GB per capita.
And so the miracle that's China today is just China catching up with GB per capita. Now, the level at which they stop that growth is going to be determined, mostly by their, their governance, right.
And so, today, they actually slowed down in the GB per capita in the next six years or so growth. And there's two reasons for that their demographic growth is down and actually demographic growth has an impact on GB per capita.
But then also, they might be in the middle income trap, which is linked to governance. And so it's fine to be extremely totalitarian when you're growing at 10% a year and everybody's like, Okay, who cares on rich.
But once when you're growing at 3% or even less.
It's going to be substantial or problematic and so I think the Chinese problem is, it's going to get much worse in a few years, and they're going to really suffer from the is loss of productivity due to their governance.
It's going to be much, much, much harder for them to maintain this without, without social unrest, which means that they're going to be even more totalitarian, so that they don't lose their heads.
But, but so now I'm going back to the question. Right. This is a big verification. And so I think that countries like Europe and the US, they won't be able to go in this direction.
It's going to be too hard for them. And so they will need to leave internet open.
And that is also an optimal in terms of the economy. And so, and so it's kind of hard to to fight this. And as I mentioned before we say SpaceX, we SpaceX actually you don't need actually infrastructure you can have your own antenna to receive it.
And you don't need anybody else as we can have access to the network without the government approval.
I mean, aren't there some infrastructure that are very geographically bound and are you saying that like the, that is not political parties or transhumanists or whoever else wouldn't need to access a physical infrastructure or if they do need to access a physical infrastructure which seems
more possible. Doesn't that whoever controls that have a lot of power.
So, the way I would think about this is like, it's like the church, like, did the church need access to physical infrastructure.
You know, kind of like that I think that's the interesting piece where you had a the secular power and the virtual power on top of it, and they interact with each other and so, and it was so much so at the end of the system that the church overpowered the
system and I think that's a more reasonable thing that I think there will be instances of of nation states that are community states like they were papal states in Italy.
But I don't think these are going to be the majority or that they're going to be the first I think if like first what happens is you have these communities that become substantially stronger, and they are strong enough that they can influence policy, just a recent
the US government like the Senate and the House trying to pass legislation against crypto crypto, and then the crypto community being strong enough to push back against it.
So this is actually a very nascent example of how these communities can start having power on geographically bound nation states.
I think there's also a little bit more about specifically the role of crypto in enabling this and the blockchain.
You can see the current version of it with with proof of work being the way it's going to play out or is it.
Yeah. So, so I think there's two things that need to be dramatically separated and they're bundled together in in cryptos today, they should.
One of them is the technology and the only the second one is the culture that there's this ad age right that not a single, not a single use case for crypto, recover sorry for for blockchain really requires
I think I actually would put aside Bitcoin, because I do think that very fundamentally needs the blockchain but if you go into the detail of a lot of projects.
There's usually some failures where where the blockchain is actually not ideal like for example you have these games on an axi right you have axes a game that has its own currency.
Well, and you can buy NFTs you can buy the currency.
That is only valid in so far as these and these digital goods and these cryptocurrency feeds into the game, you eliminate the game, and that is worthless.
And where is this game run is it in a public database know it's in a private database and so really the only value of axi is in connection to the company that runs the servers.
And so there's a failure point and so if you look at all of these projects, most of them, not all of them, most of them have that point of failure in the technological side where really you have you need some kind of this
decentralization and decentralization is not useful today.
This might happen in the future, but the point to me for me is, there's a question around tech and we can debate this.
There's another one that I don't think can be debated and that's the interesting one which is the cultural side, right, you might need centralized technology for some of these things.
But the point is, there's no turning back in having these decentralized concept. There's no turning back in tokenization of the economy. There's no turning back in those.
There's no turning back in putting in code all these rules to organize in ourselves. And I think that's where the power lies where before we accepted gatekeepers.
And now we just don't accept them anymore. That's where the power of crypto lies.
Okay. Well, that leads me to a question from Quentin Hardy, who used to teach a course on some of this stuff like I spoke about 10 years ago.
And he says that people would just will die for their country and even for other things like the religion.
But will they die for, you know, some of these other virtual communities and if they won't die for them, you know, is it, is that really the core thing that they live for.
It's kind of a cultural question. Yeah, so this is the good thing. This is the amazing thing about the example of the church versus nation state is like, we have we know what what happened and we can just look okay what happened before is going to be the same thing.
And they say like the same thing happened like 500 years ago, people died for the religion, and they didn't die for the nation, like for starters because it didn't exist right so if you think about it.
Out of the 196 countries existing today, only about 50 existed at the end of World War Two.
Only 50 of the 196 countries exists today in 1800 and in the year 1800 only 12 were nation states.
The qualify fully as nation states.
France was one UK or maybe England rather the Netherlands was one was was becoming was one, sorry, Japan was one there's a few this black a dozen.
So, all of you to say, the concept of the nation state is completely artificial, it has been created, it didn't exist before, and the same way as that identity has been manufactured by states, you can manufacture that identity.
So today, I would argue that these, I anywhere's.
They don't they don't feel these allegiance to the nation state, and the more everybody speaks English, the more these digital communities become stronger and stronger.
The less you're going to feel for the nation and the less you're going to be willing to die for it.
Do you see people having a primary allegiance to one of these groups or they're going to be kind of members of multiple, you know, dozens of groups simultaneously.
How do you see that playing out.
Yeah, that's an interesting one right because before the by definition, you had a, a, the default that's the monopoly of the geography right, but even even a few people maybe you know a tiny fraction people who kind of had multiple passports and that's right that's
like even even today like what's it's not like people are like oh yeah I'm American now I'm American.
I'm also Californian.
I am also from San Francisco.
I am also a tech worker.
I am, you know, so and so I think identity is already many things.
It just happens that the nation state was overpowering them all because it had the monopoly of violence and all that stuff. And so I think we are evolving more in we're going in the direction where identities are much more fluid and I think I was just thinking about this a few days ago.
Who will we want to get our digital governance services from right, and I thought about it a little bit like the companies today our, our private goods.
I think it's one company like depending on the service that you need you might go for one or the other. And so you could imagine. Oh, I like the regulation of these organization for for my, my, my drugs, right.
So today, as you know the US, like doesn't regulate, I mean, chemical compounds, chemical compounds in food. There's very few regulated by the US, the European Union and regulated dramatically more.
What if you are American you say actually I want the European version and so you can have a label that says you know it's European, but it doesn't need to be your European Union label it can be a community that organizes to do the labels for for food.
So you can have each one of these identities, where you have these communities that emerge on one area of focus and they do this well, and they deliver the services for that particular area.
So let's come to that key question you brought up about the monopoly on violence and you know people are still physical as, as one of the commenters pointed out so.
And in China when you know they had a lot of Bitcoin miners for a while and then the government has guns and could go and say okay you're not going to be doing that anymore and and shut them down and push came to shove.
One group had the power and the other group didn't you gave the example in the US where there was a push against some types of crypto and then the crypto argument one so is the is the story that that even if the government has a view of the geographic
and has a monopoly on my violence to be co-opted or or influenced by these other entities or how does that, who ends up having the ultimate monopoly on violence.
I think that the we're, we're also bundling of violence is here because the nation state has a monopoly on all types of them, but there's two very, very different types of violence you have state sponsored violence and non state sponsored
violence, which means basically the military and the police and those are radically different. So the, the, the military is there to protect the physical assets, like the physical integrity of your country.
And as more of these assets move from geographic to digital.
There is less of a value for that geographical defense there's still going to be one, but it's much less valuable and, in fact,
the physical assets have this interesting thing where if another country attacks you to take over those assets what does it mean, like, what does it mean.
Oh, agriculture or minerals.
Exactly.
If China going to invade the US to to have Google, but you can't. Right. So, so, so on the on the state sponsored violence, I think it's going down dramatically.
But it remains, you still have.
I mean, you can, I mean, there is cyber attacks right.
Yeah, and so and so but but so so yes you can have cyber attacks, but I don't think cyber attacks state sponsored cyber attacks are not to destroy.
Unless you're in a geographic bound war, you don't want to destroy the assets of the other country, because actually because of trade, you have a huge benefit in having in having those assets like right.
So that's on the sponsor site. The crime is a different animal right before crime was linked to geography because assets were geographic, but if you have the assets digitally, then you have this is a different animal and like two weeks ago there was or like a month ago.
There was a founder of a social network in Spain that was attacked in his home and tortured for a few hours until he gave away the keys to his Bitcoin and it's in the millions of euros and so that's an example of what happens.
And I think that's a very individual talked about this.
I believe they're either either this is going to happen and it's going to happen more, or there's just going to be a technical solution to this. So, so coinbase for example, you have the, you can freeze.
You have cold storage for your assets. You can also have no two different emails to confirm a transaction and so you can have ways in which it's substantially harder to to force you physically to get your digital assets and so I think actually the overall violence is going to go down.
That's a hope though.
I have a few minutes left here but I wanted to ask you a little bit more about the technology that you see underpinning this, this transformation.
I didn't quite, I'm not sure I totally got what you were saying about the role of the blockchain and those technologies.
At one point you said that most of them could be done other ways that the blockchain was not essential but but I think I didn't quite understand that.
Yeah, and I'll give you an example and I think it goes at the core of the question that matters the most which is, how will digital communities govern themselves.
And like using an example which is the encyclopedias right so you, you have the encyclopedia retanica and what was in secret but it was a bit more than 100 people in a room.
They were thinking, analyzing, making some calls, looking at data, and then every now and then they put all their things on paper and they push it out, and that's an encyclopedia.
Those were very intelligent people, probably more intelligent than the average person, but then came comes Wikipedia and completely destroys them.
And nobody saw it coming because they say, oh, like this impossible that's aggregating the knowledge of a few million people this can be going to go anywhere.
But here's the key thing about Wikipedia.
It was a mechanism for crowdsourcing information so that's whatever area you were an expert on could bubble up.
And then there was a mechanism to reconcile all of these, all of these insights in a way that you end up being faster, you end up being more accurate and have substantially more quantity of information.
Now, the exact same thing is going to happen to governance.
Today, lawmakers are like the encyclopedia Britannica 25 years ago.
They, it's a bunch of people in a room thinking and talking with each other and analyzing and making some calls and then every now and then they publish some papers and that's our governance that's our laws.
And so, obviously, the same way as Wikipedia replaced.
In Britannica, there is going to be a mechanism that is going to replace legislation, the lawmaking process.
It just needs to be one that properly aggregates the knowledge and the efforts of different people and I have, I don't, I haven't solved this, but this is probably the thing that occupies most of my brain.
And I think there's a few directions in which this is going where you can build these mechanisms for better governance.
There's an outsourced set of laws and constitutions.
And you also have some already saw have some examples like so so if I ask you what's who's the president of Switzerland you're going to blank.
And if I ask you actually one president of all of its history you're going to blank. And that's because it doesn't.
And it's a substantially more networked government with everybody being asked their opinion about everything. I don't think that's that is the way to go.
I think there's a lot of rules that this is actually doable and so there's many things, many ways in which democracy fails today right that for example, the bandwidth of information that goes from the citizenry to two lawmakers is too low.
It's like a few surveys and one votes every four years is just like the bandwidth is too low.
And the other one which is because because of these you need to bundle a lot of solutions right you're voting for a party with all these solutions and you shouldn't.
Another thing is you're bundling the solutions to the goals right and in fact you shouldn't like you should say hey this is what I'm optimizing for, but the mechanisms to achieve this should be separated from your opinions because you're not an expert on what works and what doesn't.
You are an expert though on what matters to you. So these are some examples of where I think this is going.
Yeah, well, I mean there isn't an argument that it's not just because of lack of bandwidth that we have representatives make decisions. It's also, you know, most people have the time and energy to know all the nuances.
I mean, here in California we have like a lot of propositions that we vote and I tried pretty hard to study them all but with with dozens and dozens of different propositions I don't feel qualified to make some of those decisions.
Exactly. I want to make some sense. And so you shouldn't be able to do this. What you should be able to do to say is look, I care about these things, right, not the propositions like the number one thing that matters to me is economic development right.
Healthcare. So you can have these things and then you have a mechanism where you don't need to participate in all these decisions, you can participate in the ones that you know about.
Well, it turns out that you know a lot about automation and work. And so this piece of legislation, I know for a fact that this is strong and so you need a mechanism so that Eric can propose something because it's right, it's wins.
Well, I like the Wikipedia model because that is kind of how it works that you know there are thousands or I mean hundreds of thousands of articles there and I've contributed to a couple of them but but most of them I wouldn't be very helpful to contribute to.
Yeah, so that's great. Well, this is absolutely fascinating so much information and I'm sorry we're out of time. You do have a blog post on this at your at your website on charted territory so I refer people to that it's got lots more links and facts about it and yeah.
And in fact I haven't talked about many of these. So the end of nation states I've talked about the origin of nation states, the church and all stuff. I haven't talked about the unbending of the nation states, the communities that are emerging, the future of violence and so those are things that I'm working on but I haven't
published yet so I'm trying to territory is you have to sign up if you want to receive those. Yeah, no great, great, great talking great agenda you're doing so thank you so much for sharing that all with us.
I'm afraid we are out of time and so we're going to move on. And in fact that ends our seminar series for the fall quarter here at Stanford will be restarting next year so stay tuned we'll be posting the new set of speakers shortly but that's it for for this year.
Thanks everyone for joining us and thanks so much Tomas for sharing your insights with us it was great talking. It was a true pleasure thank you so much for your time, and I look forward to doing more of these in the future.
Great.
Bye folks.
