We're live, we did it.
For what it's worth it still shows as starting soon in LinkedIn.
Oh, nope.
Live.
Oh, no.
Hmm.
Let me go. Let me see.
What's happening?
I wonder what it's like on YouTube.
Are we just hanging out on YouTube?
Hi YouTube.
Hello everyone on YouTube.
Wait a minute. Wait a minute.
I think it's just slow.
We're live.
Okay.
We're up on LinkedIn now.
Hi.
Welcome.
Isn't technology great?
Here it is the year 2023 and every day is a new adventure.
Well, you never, never change.
Get used to this platform.
We've used it several times at this point.
This is always new surprises.
But we're here.
Thanks everyone for joining.
I'm done.
I am going to be.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for seeing.
Really just asking questions and letting these.
Great people talk.
I'm filling in for Lindsay.
He's not.
He's usually here.
And yeah, thanks for being here.
We're excited to talk.
To everyone.
And hear your comments and questions.
If you've tuned in.
We're here with Lindsay.
We're a group of people that are here.
We have a platform for development.
And we like to help people.
Make the products or make products better.
We are currently in our third.
Incubator session.
And today we're talking to one of two.
Two founders.
Two founding teams.
Here.
And in case you aren't familiar with incubator.
It's an eight week program that we run.
from Plot Pot and we undergo market research,
customer discovery, basically market and product validation
exercises to help us hone in on a solution,
a potential solution for the problem that we're trying
to solve and build a product plan with the founder
and basically set them off on a path for success hopefully.
And yeah, next steps.
Like I said, if you're here, please leave comments
and questions on whatever platform you're on.
We love this to be interactive and we'll, you know,
throw those in at whatever points they come up
in the conversation, but otherwise this would just be
fun conversation for everybody.
I thought we'd make the rest of the team.
Do you want to kick us off, Jordan?
Tell the people about yourself.
I'm Jordan.
I'm the director of product strategy on Don's team.
Don is my boss and I sort of run the incubator.
I have also founded two startups
and been the first head of product of two others.
So for startups, for early stage startups, that's me.
Josh, I'm in Boston.
And I'm Josh.
I'm also in Boston.
I am the founder part of this who is working
with the ThoughtBot incubator.
I founded a startup.
I wasn't very good at it.
And I've been head of product at a whole series.
I was very lucky at it.
I was head of product at a whole series of other startups.
And I enjoy that a lot.
And a few folks have asked me why I wanted
to join the ThoughtBot incubator.
If I've done this before, I'm like moderately techie
for a non-technical person.
And I coach other founders in doing the sorts of things
that Jordan and her team are coaching me on.
And so, you know, why am I doing this thing?
I'm doing this thing for a few reasons.
One is being a founder is really, really lonely.
But the other one is that there's just a huge value
in bringing together the diverse set of perspectives.
And we're doing that with a company that's really good
at getting complicated things out the door,
having them be successful through a focus
on who the end user is.
It kind of felt like a no-brainer,
because I felt like, you know,
I had to think we talked this last week,
I had the Josh problem,
that I wanted there to be a solution to,
and trying to figure out,
is there a larger opportunity that this represents?
Nice.
And excited to be here.
We're excited for you to be here.
So, well, you kind of, you cued us up well for the topic,
at least that we're gonna start with today,
which is user research or customer discovery.
I think it probably goes by several names.
That's another interesting topic we can get into.
But what is this user research that you're doing?
Why is it important?
What's it doing, you know, for this team at this stage?
Yeah.
And discovery and validation for y'all.
One of the founders I work with,
asked me a couple of months ago,
he's like, just remind me again,
what are the things I have to do to build a product?
And I'm like, it's actually really easy, right?
My like, standing on one foot advice is,
talk to users, mostly customers,
bring your engineers along when you can.
And if you do those things,
mostly everything will work out.
But I think it's actually like,
there's some subtlety in all of those things, right?
So almost, it's not that talking to users or customers,
when you solve all of your problems,
it's just that you're not gonna make any progress
in the absence of doing that, right?
Because then you're just talking to yourself.
And I don't know about everybody else here in this group,
or who might be listening,
but it's really easy to get yourself all spun up
inside of your head, if you're only talking to yourself.
Users are the ones who ground you, right?
And ultimately, right?
Users are the ones who can turn into customers.
So why customers, right?
As a people you really wanna be talking to,
now we don't have any customers yet, so we can't do that.
But customers are the ones who have like,
you know something about customers more than anybody else,
and that's they're willing to pay for the thing,
for the problem you're trying to solve, right?
They could be paying in money,
they could be paying in time,
they could be paying in reputation.
Oftentimes, they'll be paying in all three of those things,
or two out of three of those things,
but they have an express willingness to pay.
And that's really the magic of like,
having a product, having those conversations.
Now, why do you bring along your engineers?
It's because the most effective tech companies,
and I think Thoughtbot is, you know,
may be unusual in design build firms
and really internalizing this,
but the most successful tech companies
are the ones where the entire organization
is aligned around understanding who is our market,
who is our customer, what is their problem,
and what does it take to solve that problem for them?
And too often, right?
All that stuff is like stuck inside of the founder's head,
or the sales team's head, or the marketing team's head,
or the product manager's head,
or little bits of stories are stuck other places.
But when we're all listening to the same conversations,
that's when it's most effective to build alignment
around, you know, who's the customer,
what are their needs, what would they pay for?
Okay, that was a lot of Josh talking.
Jordan, what do you think?
I agree, and I would add some detail there
that like, why does it work like that?
How does having every one of the organization talk
to users and customers build that alignment?
And it's one of those things that's kind of like,
has to be seen to be believed in a certain way,
but like, you can break it down.
Like, you know, we can all sit in a room
and argue about what reality looks like out there,
but it's a lot more efficient if we're all living
in that reality together,
and then there's a lot less,
there's a lot less bringing everyone along.
You know, and if you've got skeptics on your team,
and I hope that you do, because they're very useful people,
like they want to hear it from the source.
So great, go have them hear it from the source.
And there's nothing that's more motivating
than having been an engineer,
than seeing someone live fail to achieve their goal
and the piece of software you're working on.
You will turn around and go fix that bug right then.
A bug that has maybe been sitting at the top of the backlog
before like six weeks or six months,
when you see someone struggling with it in action,
you will immediately, you'll be like, oh, I see, okay,
this is actually causing a lot of angst out there.
And I, you know, so anyway, building that empathy,
it's always easiest to build it directly.
And it's harder if I am here,
if I am having to triangulate empathy through someone else,
like if only one person on your team
is talking to users and listening to users,
and then they come back to the team,
they're like, here's what I'm hearing.
Maybe the team believes you,
maybe they hear the same things out of your mouth
that they would have heard directly out of the user,
but probably not.
So it's just a lot, it sounds less efficient.
People resist it because it seems like it's more,
it feels intuitively, I think,
to a lot of people like a waste of time
to have engineers doing user interviews
or having anyone else.
There's a lot of pushback at organizations
for doing this for different reasons.
People also, you know, if it's,
if you're doing like an enterprise-ass thing,
sales might really not want anyone else
talking to customers because they worry it's going to erode
that relationship that they feel like they have.
Nothing could be further from the truth in my experience.
Customers feel valued,
the more people on your team they talk to,
the more they are listened to,
the more they are taken seriously
and like have people engaging with them,
that only bolsters your relationship with them,
not the opposite, the opposite.
But either way, it's very motivating and very,
it's just much more efficient
when everyone is hearing the thing
from the people it's impacting directly.
And I get that that does not intuitively feel true,
but I assure you that it is true.
That is all I would add.
Yeah.
And even more so at this stage where, you know,
our experience as designers or engineers
is much less important than our experience as team members
who are trying to find who is that initial audience
going to be who is so motivated,
they will let us build a product for them.
That's exactly what my follow-up question was related to,
which is, you know, there's this sort of perception
that you sort of stay in your lane, right,
with the different roles that you occupy
in an organization,
whether it's early stage or later stage.
And even for people who are participating
in that customer discovery, you know, it can be very,
you kind of want to like ask questions
that are most relevant to your role.
So how do you like prepare teams or, you know,
offer guidance to teams to help them sort of get
into the right mindset going into those conversations,
not so that they execute it perfectly
because, you know, they have to have some UX design background,
but so that you can learn the important things
I have such a strong opinion about this
that I want to hear what Jordan says first.
This is a setup.
I want to hear, you have a strong opinion.
I want to hear that first.
What if I say the opposite thing, you go.
I hope you say the opposite thing.
That'll be exciting, right?
Guess I'm like, Vista cuffs up on this call.
No, I think it is totally natural
for someone to feel unprepared coming into these.
And at the, sorry, I have a cat
who desperately wants to have my attention.
I think it's totally natural for someone
to feel unprepared, right?
But that's okay, right?
Their job is to develop this as a skill.
And the only way they're going to do that
is by actually doing it.
I am certain there were people on the Thoughtbot team
who felt uncomfortable doing this for the first time,
talking to somebody who wasn't even a user,
someone who, you know, Arando,
who Josh found on the internet,
who was willing to chat and go talk to them.
And I know they got better at it
because I get to watch everybody's interview recordings
and I get to watch the notes they're taking
and I get to watch my own.
And we had like a team of, what, five of us?
Four, I can't count, right?
We had a team of five of us, thank you,
who like are all getting better at this.
And that's good.
Like these things are skills and you got to practice them.
Which, you know, putting on my, you know,
friends of Thoughtbot hat is I think one of the reasons
why Thoughtbot likes to do these things
because it's a chance to develop these skills
in a really intense way,
which you might not otherwise get to.
And it's a thing that, you know, as a founder,
I want everybody on my team
to be getting good at as quickly as possible.
So sure, prep work, you read a book,
it's like baking a cake, right?
You know, you can read cookbooks,
you can walk up and down the aisle at the supermarket, right?
You can go to the bakery and try other people's cakes,
but until your arms deep in flour, butter and sugar,
like you have no idea what you're really talking about.
And I just want to get people making a mess
in the kitchen as fast as possible.
Nothing bad happens if you have a bad interview.
Lots of bad things happen if you never interview.
Okay, that's my very strong opinion.
Jordan, I hope you got it wrong.
I share the opinion and its intensity.
That is exactly how I would have answered.
There's no substitute for doing the thing.
And you can spend your whole life feeling
like you're not ready to do the thing.
You're not going to learn and get better at it
until you just start doing it.
It's like, and Josh, you were right,
that is partly what this incubator is for,
both internally and externally.
So like the, one of the main differentiators
of what we're doing here with this incubator
from other incubator programs out there
is that we really do, we get into the kitchen with you
and get our arms, you know, elbow deep in flour with you
so that we can help founders, you know,
not necessarily Josh, you have brought some skills
into this with him, but like,
so that you know what it feels like to do the thing.
There's a lot of content out to there
about how to start a company,
how to do customer discovery, all this stuff.
And you can read all of that stuff.
You can also listen to people talk about it
all the live long day.
There are tons of people out there
who do this all the time.
They are on podcasts.
They are here on this live stream, that's cool.
Like, listen to them,
but really there's no substitute
for you getting out there and talking to people.
And this, I just cannot stress this,
like so many people, given my role here
and what I do, people often bring their startup ideas to me.
People at ThotBot, people outside of ThotBot,
they say, I have this idea.
I ask, who is it for?
They tell me, I say, have you talked to those people?
And they say, I'm not ready to talk,
start talking to people yet.
And I'm like, that is incorrect.
You're talking to me.
The only way you're gonna get to a thing
is if you start talking to people like yesterday
and they resist, well, I still need to figure out.
And I'm like, no, you don't need to figure anything out.
Like, if you're gonna build something for someone,
go engage with them, learn what their life is like,
what their work is like today.
Hello, people listening to this, do this today, please.
Jordan talks a lot about the emotional labor
of being a founder.
And I think it's really important like,
hey, founders out there, who hear this
and they feel a little bit overwhelmed, that's okay.
The thing which you're gonna learn how to do as a founder
is talk to people about the thing you're trying to do
and have people give you feedback you don't like.
And it's not fun.
And I work with a lot of very technical founders
and it's amazing that things people will do to avoid that.
They will take their savings,
their retirement money out of the bank
and plow it into design build firms.
They will quit their jobs to build this thing themselves.
They will like everything just to avoid having
that potentially unpleasant conversation.
So potential founders, if you wanna prepare yourself
for being a successful founder or even a mediocre founder,
the thing which you need to do is
improve your frustration tolerance,
get really good at people telling you your idea is bad
or your process is bad or something else is bad.
Maybe they're right, maybe they're wrong
and it doesn't matter
but you gotta be able to tolerate that.
Yes, you have to be able to tolerate that
and you have to be able to actually listen
for the relevant feedback that's buried in there.
Because people, would you like a story everyone?
So the founder Josh just described was me, PS,
the first time.
Not just you.
Technical, I'm not just me, not merely me
but it was me.
Technical background definitely plowed my meager savings
because I'd already been working at startups
which does not pay well, news flash.
Don't have anyone, any of you know this, they don't pay well.
Anyway, into a product that I haven't really spoken
to very many people about
but I knew that I needed to start talking
about it with people but I didn't know how to do that well.
That's okay, so I started talking to people about it
after the facts, I shouldn't have done this sooner,
that's cool.
And I remember, okay so this,
my first company was this product called Tallulah
which was like, you can think of it like a data diary app.
Basically it's a place you can go and collect small data
to kind of figure out like if you think you have food allergy
think of it like a food allergy notebook
but a digital app for it.
Like, you know, I think that when the moon is full
and I eat over a pint of strawberries,
I get a stomach ache, never does.
So you need to track the cycles of the moon
and how much strawberries you ate and when
and then you can do this analysis.
Anyway, if you're thinking to yourself
that doesn't sound like a business, you are correct.
Anyway, I was describing this to my friend's dad,
my friend had just had her first kid,
I was over meeting this baby, her dad was there
and he was just like, what do you do?
And I was like, oh, I'm a startup.
He's like, what's your startup do?
And I told him and he was like,
sounds like you're just feeding people's OCD to me.
And it like, oh, I felt like I felt physical pain
at that reaction to this.
Like, he was like, not only is his tone was so derisive,
but like, there was information for me in that.
First of all, I needed to think about who is this guy?
Where is he coming from?
Does this have anything to do with his life at all?
Should I even listen to this?
In fact, maybe he's like my anti-ideal customer
and this feedback is great for me
because it means my ideal customer is a good fit.
Whatever, there's information in there, right?
But this was some of the first feedback I was getting
on this from someone in a while.
I had to dig that dagger right out of my heart.
So it's gonna happen.
It's gonna happen, but you gotta like,
steal yourself for it, like Josh says.
And you also need to respond,
find a way to respond to it with curiosity.
So if I could go back in time to that conversation,
I just changed the subject immediately.
I think at the time I was like,
cool, let's talk about something else.
What I should have done is been like, tell me more.
Like, why does it strike you like that?
Like, tell me more about this problem in your life, right?
That was an opportunity for me to have a customer interview
and I just totally whiffed it.
Anyway, we can talk about this all day.
Let's talk about this all day.
Hopefully you didn't harm your relationship with your friends.
No, no, no, I think she felt somewhat aghast.
She was like, dad, lay off.
Which is actually the other lesson to take from this,
which is these things all feel really important
and personal and like, present to you as the founder,
nobody else gives a shit.
No.
Yeah, I mean, this was, and this was a lesson for me.
I at least didn't have that problem
because I had been in a series of touring rock bands
and I had learned over and over again
how little anything I was doing mattered to anyone.
Like, you know, you get to the point where like,
you walk off stage and you're like,
that was the worst set we ever played.
No one knows that.
No one cares.
They were like talking to their girlfriend
at the bar the whole time.
Like, I, whatever, man.
Like, most people, whatever's going on with you,
you as a human are maybe this big in their purview.
What you're doing professionally is even smaller.
So like, don't sweat it.
They're not gonna be thinking about it.
Again.
That's the thing.
Maybe your startup idea doesn't matter,
but you matter.
Everyone here matters, okay?
Yeah.
Josh is not here.
Okay.
So I wanna go back to the users
or the potential customers in this case.
Have there been any surprises?
Have there been any daggers out there or any delights?
What have you been learning?
Okay.
So last time we were speaking,
we were basically talking to a convenient sample
of people who, let's be honest,
look a lot like Jordan and myself, right?
There are people in mostly US tech companies,
mostly early stage ones,
people who not necessarily programmers,
but maybe they found the company,
maybe they work in product management,
maybe they have other kind of executive roles,
maybe they changed their job every couple of years
because that's what people in tech companies do.
Maybe they like, you know, they carry on a smartphone,
they live out of their smartphone,
they care about building a network,
they attend in-person things when they can.
They're in a bunch of like networking slacks
and WhatsApp groups and things like that.
And they all kind of look the same.
And I think last time we spoke two weeks ago,
we were noticing that, you know,
this thing we were trying to work on
was a problem for all of them,
but not necessarily a problem
that they were investing a whole lot of,
on average, investing a whole lot of time and energy into.
We recognize this as a group largely
because everybody was participating in the conversations
and getting better and better at it
and getting better and better, kind of like pulling out
the insights.
So we experimented with a couple of other audiences.
And the reminder here is we're not,
the idea isn't to build a product
for one of these audiences.
The idea is to build the first version of the product
for one of these audiences who feels the need so intensely,
they're actually gonna use the damn thing
and give you some feedback.
So the audience has to have a real pain,
a willingness to do some work,
and we have to be able to find them, right?
So, you know, some attribute
that allows us to identify where they are,
they all hang out at the playground after recess
is like a good attribute,
or they all search for the same kinds of things
using the same language or comparable language on Google,
or they all follow the same people on TikTok,
or all examples of audiences
that we could somehow identify and address.
People who deep down are worried
that their second grade teacher didn't like them enough,
probably not an addressable audience,
even though you can imagine all sorts of potential problems
and potential solutions you could build for those folks.
So we gotta find that.
Jordan, is that a pretty good definition,
description of where we were?
Okay, so we've experimented with a few other groups.
One is we identified early on
in kind of our broader conversations
that journalists might have a need for this.
Journalists are, you know, folks that have a broad network
and they check in with those people frequently.
And the other one was people who do BizDev
or partnerships work at tech companies as well.
And we reached out to a bunch of people
and we discovered that both of those groups
are probably also a little bit too big
for us to be focused on.
It's not that nobody in those groups
had a very need for the thing that we are trying to do.
It's that people in those groups overall didn't,
and now we gotta go figure out like, okay,
is there like a subgroup inside of there
they're gonna defy, right?
Just sports journalists, just investigative journalists,
just journalists who don't have a salary,
who work freelance, right?
Just radio journalists, you know?
Just journalists who went to specific schools.
Hard to know what that's going to be.
That's the work that we're doing like literally right now
when we're not on live video interviews.
Yes.
Go ahead, Jordan.
I don't have anything to add.
That is the work we're doing right now.
And I wanna say that it's not,
we actually published our methodology
for doing this recently.
People should go to thoughtbot.com
and look at our playbook,
our customer discovery playbook.
If you wanna know how to do this,
it is not like black magic or something.
Like basically you just think about the dynamics that matter
that create a need for the thing
that you're contemplating building,
and then you just generate a giant list
of the people who might need that thing.
And guess what?
It's gonna be totally wrong and weird
and a bunch of different shaped groups of people.
It is gonna be like people who hang out at the playground
and also dog walkers
and just like some weird random assortment
of personas, individuals, groups of people.
But that's where you start.
And then you start learning,
you take what you know about those people today
and you find the best place to start.
And then you start talking to them
and then you learn why they are or are not a good fit
and you keep going through the list.
So it's not mysterious, but it is work.
It is hard work.
And synthesizing on a team,
what you're hearing is part of that hard work,
but it's really invaluable
because everybody like Josh mentioned earlier
brings something different to the conversation,
thinks about it from a different vantage,
brings different life experiences.
And that is just invaluable
to unlocking insights, perspectives, directions to pursue.
But it really is very much a,
it's a, I don't know what you would call it.
It's like a real, you know, it's just, it's the hard work.
You go talk to a bunch of people,
you get together as a group
and you talk to each other
about what you're hearing from all the other people.
You go back and talk to more people or the same people
if you realized you weren't asking them the things
that you needed to be asking them,
you come back together.
And out of that process, the patterns emerge.
And yeah, that's what it is.
This is also kind of meta,
the fact that y'all are doing so much customer discovery
with potential customers who their entire work lives
are managing conversations, you know,
both the frequency and timing of that,
but also like what they're learning
from those conversations.
So yeah, that's super interesting.
I know we only have a couple of minutes left.
So I wanted to ask one more question.
It sounds like obviously there's still many conversations
to be had with potential users and customers.
But what else is next?
I know we're about halfway through the program.
So what are y'all looking into for the next week or two?
Yeah, I mean, we don't yet have that audience,
which is I think a really important part of this
and something which I think about all the time
as the founder, what does this mean
that it's hard to find the audience?
Like what does that tell about the idea,
about the opportunity?
But I think we are, we've had enough conversations
with enough people who have enough similarities
and the problems we're trying to solve
that I think we're getting good insights into.
If we knew who would really want this thing,
we have some good ideas
about how we might be able to help them out.
So we're starting to actually go through the process
of the really early sketches, the wireframes
of what might a solution look like,
which I think is doing two things, right?
One is it helps us to sharpen our thinking,
a fair amount, right?
There's like a thing which we can react to as a group,
which is not as amorphous as an interview,
like a sharp pointy thing we can react to.
The second is we can start showing this to people
and not everybody we talked to was going to be like,
our final audience we're building for.
That's okay.
They can still like give us thoughts and give us feedback
and it'll probably change the tenor of the conversations
we're having with them.
And that's also okay too, right?
We're gonna learn different kinds of things
that we would in the absence of this.
Yeah, and that is super exciting.
And then the other kind of like the other side of that coin,
it becomes feasibility questions.
So this thing that we're imagining,
how would we build it?
Can we build it?
What do we need in order to build it?
And so those conversations are really starting to fire up
as we start to imagine a solution.
So, yeah.
I know there's a really awesome blog post to come
from Jordan that I reviewed recently.
Public nudging.
I am late with this blog post
and I am being publicly nudged.
This is so intense.
But it's so relevant to exactly
what y'all have been talking about.
So I'm,
I retroactively point everyone to it.
It's really good stuff.
Yeah, so we're about at time, Jordan.
I know you have another call,
but are there any sort of final requests from this audience?
Any last thoughts?
Well, how would you state the problem, Josh?
If anyone out there has the problem?
Has anybody else?
I'm curious.
So the problem we're looking at is people
who have a hard time managing their social network
in general, but their professional social network
in general, in particular.
That might be, you know, there's people you wish
you were keeping in touch with,
but you just forget to keep in touch with them
or, you know, you tell somebody to do something
in like some thread or some channel
on some social network or some direct message.
And you just kind of forget about that
because you don't go back to it.
Or maybe, you know, you're making friends on Discord,
you're making friends on Slack,
you're making friends out in the real world,
but you don't actually like add them into your LinkedIn.
Something like that, right?
Somebody who's having problems like that
has actually done something about it.
Like, did you go and build yourself like a spreadsheet,
a baby CRM, a Notion, or an CODA, or an Airtable?
Did you search out a purpose-built tool?
You know, if you think you've ever tried, right,
whether you've been successful or not,
to actually solve this problem for yourself,
I'd love to talk to you.
Or Jordan would love to talk to you.
Don would probably love to talk to you also.
But she's super busy, so don't bother her.
But, you know, reach out to any of us any way you can.
I got a super Google-Bull SEO compatible name,
as does Jordan.
So, like, reach out to one of us, and we'd love to chat.
Awesome.
Well, thanks, y'all.
This has been wonderful, as always.
And if anybody has questions for the team,
feel free to comment on the post afterwards.
Awesome.
And we'll see you all next time.
Thank you so much, Don.
Thank you, Don.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah, Don just left.
We're still live.
We're still live.
I don't think she knows.
I don't know how to stop this.
I don't think we...
I think I can...
No, I can just stop by...
What happens if we all leave?
I can stop crying.
I don't know.
