Yeah, no, I will.
So Matthew, when you start this string,
just send me a little message.
And I'll, OK, the stream should be started.
Yeah, the streams should be started.
Amazing.
Amazing.
OK, so could the chat on YouTube just confirm
that they can hear what I'm saying?
And then somebody in the chat on YouTube
confirmed they can hear what I'm saying.
And then I'll, because we haven't done this before.
Yes, amazing.
People can hear me.
So hello, everyone.
Welcome to the annual Maxwell Talk and Maxwell Lecture,
which is co-hosted by the Cambridge University
Physics Society and the Archimedes.
The talk this year will be given by Professor Anthony C, who
is going to talk about quantum field theory in a nutshell.
Now, Anthony C holds a joint appointment
as a permanent member of the Cavalier Institute
for Theoretical Physics and is also a professor
at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
His main areas of research involve cosmology
and the fundamental structures of matter.
And he's well known in the physics community
for his unusual breadth of interest
from condensed matter physics to biophysics
to high energy physics.
C obtained his PhD from Harvard in 1970,
supervised by Sidney Coldman.
And in the following years, he worked
at the Institute of Advanced Study
from and was the Alfred P. Sloan Fellow.
In his first year as assistant professor at Princeton,
C had Ed Whitten as his teaching assistant.
Professor C has authored more than 200 scientific publications
and several books.
He's written particle physics, condensed matter physics,
anomalies in physics, random matrix theory,
superconductivity, and many more.
We are very honored to have him with us here today
to talk about quantum field theory.
Before we start the event, I would
like to thank our sponsors, Seamless Riverlane TTP, TPP,
Define, JaneStream, and CGT for helping make this possible.
And with that, I will let you have
added C after actually just pointing out four questions.
If you post them in the YouTube chat,
we will be watching this.
And if you have any interesting questions,
I will read them out and see.
Would you prefer to, oh, Tony, would you
prefer to have questions during the talk or afterwards?
I think it would be better to have the questions after the talk.
OK, then we will have the questions after the talk.
But post them in chat, and we will keep tabs.
And then I will hand it over to you.
Thank you very much, Oscar.
I'm very honored to be giving the Maxwell lecture
for this year.
So today, I'm going to talk about quantum field theory.
And here is a picture of the field, the lovely quantum field
that we all would like to explore.
OK, so quantum field theory is arguably the greatest monument
to the human intellect.
And I already can hear the humanities professor
snatching the teeth on the side.
But in any case, whatever, it is the most accurately
tested theory in physics.
This comes as a surprise to some people.
But as we will see for various reasons,
it's tested to an extremely high degree of accuracy,
more than any other areas of physics.
So it took us a couple of millennia
before we realized that the universe is actually
pervaded with quantum fields.
And in fact, as you listen to this talk,
you're surrounded by quantum fields.
So today, this talk is addressed to students
and to people who do not know what quantum field theory is.
So I'm going to start with the question, what
is quantum field theory and who needs quantum field theory?
And these days, actually, one doesn't even
need to know quantum mechanics to be
a professor of theoretical physics.
Now, in this talk, I should caution the audience
that whenever I speak about physics,
I mean theoretical physics, because that's what I know.
I'm not speaking of expresses.
For whom I have only admiration since they can do things
that I cannot even dream of doing.
So who needs quantum field theory?
And this is chapter 1.1 of my textbook on quantum field theory
is, in fact, the very first chapter.
The book starts with the sentence,
quantum field theory arose out of our need
to describe the ephemeral nature of life.
This sentence was so widely quoted
that I now see it on the web in collection of quotes
to my amusement.
But what do I mean by that?
I'll explain.
So the ephemeral nature of life, there's
a saying about that, that life is just like clouds and smoke
passing in front of our very eyes.
And it's soon over.
So but more seriously, there was meant to be a joke.
But quantum field theory is needed
when we confront simultaneously the two great physics
innovations of the last century of the previous millennium,
namely special relativity and quantum mechanics.
And here I show you what I call the square of physics.
So on this axis, I've plotted the size of the objects involved.
And on this axis, I've plotted whether the objects involved
are moving slowly or fast.
So in this corner, we have Newtonian mechanics,
the classical physics of Newton, Maxwell, and Laplace.
And as we go to smaller objects, we
have slow-moving electrons scattering all the proton,
for example.
There's no need for special relativity,
but you definitely need quantum mechanics.
Now, we move up to this axis.
Then, for example, a rocket ship moving near light speed,
there's no need for quantum mechanics,
but you definitely need special relativity.
So what we're interested in is moving into this upper right
corner in which we have the marriage of quantum mechanics
and special relativity.
And it's in this peculiar confluence
of special relativity and quantum mechanics
that a new set of phenomena arises.
Particles can be born and particles can die.
So this is a new subject in physics
is required, a quantum field theory,
to describe the birth and death of some kind of life
in between.
So in particle, in classical physics,
there's no such thing of objects being born or objects
going away.
There's no such thing as birth and death.
So this is introduced by a new phenomenon,
totally new phenomenon in physics.
So let's remind ourselves of two gold-plated equations
of physics.
The gold-plated equation of physics of quantum mechanics
is the uncertainty principle.
So we're familiar with the fact that the uncertainty,
in momentum times the uncertainty in position,
is equal to h bar Planck's constant.
So I'll set Planck's constant equal to 1
for the purpose of this talk.
So another version of the uncertainty principle
is that the uncertainty in energy
is equal to 1 divided by the uncertainty in time.
So the advertising slogan for this gold-plated equation
is that accounting errors could be tolerated for a short time.
So for a very short time, nature has
to keep track of the conservation of energy.
But for a very short time, you could
have some uncertainty in the energy.
Now, special relativity, on the other hand,
tells us that energy is equal to matter.
And even the person, the man and woman in the street,
know about the gold-plated equation of special relativity
e equal to mc squared.
And the advertising slogan for this
is that accounting errors could be turning to stuff.
So in one of my popular books, I spoke of a embezzler
working at a bank.
So for a very short time, accounting errors
could be tolerated.
And of course, the smaller the accounting error,
it could be hidden for a long time.
But if you take away and walk away with $10 million,
clearly that would be discovered very quickly.
But that is just fluctuations in accounting
errors in quantum mechanics.
But it's only with special relativity
that the accounting errors could be turned into stuff.
Then Bezler could then buy himself or herself
and Lamborghini.
So when we combine these two equations,
particles could pop out of the vacuum,
and they can pop into the vacuum.
Parts can come into being and disappear.
There's birth and death in physics.
So in order for this to happen, we need,
as we can see from the previous transparency,
that we need both quantum physics and special relativity.
One of them is not enough.
We need both.
But these particles could not exist for a long time,
unless we know of two ways for them to exist for a long time,
which is that if extra energy is available,
or if this is happening near a black hole horizon.
Now in contrast, I think many people in the audience
have studied on relativistic quantum mechanics, which
is the subject before quantum field theory.
In non- relativistic quantum mechanics,
you have the Schrodinger equation.
So no matter how you shake and bake the Schrodinger equation,
it's always the same number of particles.
You cannot create more or less.
If the Schrodinger equation describes three electrons,
you're always going to end up with three electrons.
So let us now talk about fields.
The concept of fields, a heuristic pictorial motivation
for a field, is what I call a mattress.
Well, a mattress is just a bunch of points,
mass points, point masses, connected by springs
in some lattice.
So very far away, on distant scales,
much larger than the lattice spacing,
this looks like a continuous field.
So if we're interested in physics on a distant scale, much
larger than the spacing between the lattice,
then this looks like a continuous field.
And we can press down, bounce up and down on this mattress.
And we can set up normal modes, vibrational modes.
And we can form wave packets of these modes,
and localize wave packets.
So we can form a vibrational disturbance located
in one area of the mattress.
And we can set this wave packet moving.
So these wave packets can move around.
And if the springs are perfectly harmonic,
then nothing much happens.
But if the springs have any amount of n-harmonicity,
this would cause us the wave packets, the motion with no
longer be harmonic.
And these wave packets would scatter and decay
and dissipate and so on.
So this was seized upon by the founders of quantum field
theory in the early days to perhaps
could be used to represent particles.
The particles that they were discovering at that time
right around the century.
So right around the turn of the 20th century,
for example, Thompson discovering the electron.
So let us consider a spacetime diagram.
If this is space, this is time, then
I could set up a disturbance here.
And we could see in particles a packet of energy and momentum
moving in spacetime.
And then it could be absorbed at some other location
on this mattress.
So this, of course, in 30 seconds
is the concept of going from a field to a particle.
Now, of course, I'm hardly describing quantum field
theory in detail here, but I'm just
trying to motivate in some cartoon
feature how a field, how the concept of a field
could lead to a particle.
Now, going to the next slide, we go from the next step
is to go from particle to force.
And I imagine a particle going back and forth.
So this caption, I'm sorry, is rather small on this cartoon.
It says, the pi meson, the pion, is a marriage broker of old.
It's a rather obese lady going back and forth
between two families.
So this was drawn from me by an undergraduate
a long time ago.
The book was published 30 years ago,
so she must be quite grown by now.
So in many cultures, we have marriage brokers going back
and forth.
And by traveling back and forth, it
produces an attraction between two families.
So you could think of the attraction
between the two families as some kind of attractive force.
So this is the first inkling that quantum field theory could
explain the forces we see in nature.
We're going to look at this in more detail.
Well, you may be curious about where this cartoon comes from.
It is, in fact, taken from one of my books, Fearful Symmetry.
Oops, I'm trying to, I guess I have to go here.
So this book was written in around 1984.
Steve, I was planning to write a book on quantum field theory,
but Steve Weinberg advised me that I should write a popular
book before a textbook on quantum field theory.
And his reasoning, I think, is very sound.
A lot of physicists write textbooks about any idea
on how to communicate things to people.
And Weinberg told me that if you could explain things
to the general public, then you'll qualify to write a textbook.
So I still very much subscribe to this advice,
and that tells people.
Now, so excuse me, my book on Fearful Symmetry,
I show you the French translation here.
And as you can see, Fearful, the French told me
that Fearful doesn't make any sense.
You cannot have symmetry that are Fearful.
So you can see that they change Fearful to some other word.
So but it was another amusing aside
is that it took 34 years since my book was published in 1984.
Immediately after it was published,
it was translated into German, Spanish, Chinese,
Japanese, Korean, and so on.
But French translation, there was never a French translation.
I was very puzzled by that.
Until 2018, a couple of years ago, I took a sabbatical
and I lived in Paris for a year.
And as soon as I have a French address,
I have an address in Paris, the French publishers
immediately took it seriously.
And in fact, in one day, I got two offers
to translate my book.
So this is just very amusing.
So having I could tell you all that having an address in Paris
is of very high importance as far as the French is concerned.
OK, so the Germans invited me to India,
to the Max-Mule-Baban, and the trip
was paid for by the United States State Department.
I was quite surprised after this book came out.
And this is in fact an article in the newspaper in Calcutta.
But the title totally floored me.
It was somehow they treated me as a religious cult leader
of some kind.
So anyhow, after I came back, I gave a talk in Mumbai.
And this was then published in New Literary History,
which is a humanities journal published in the United States
by the University of Virginia.
And people were always surprised.
So I went into this story to explain to you.
When people look up this article,
they notice it's illustrated by works of Indian art.
And that is why, because the talk was given in India.
So I digressed a little bit into where that cartoon comes from.
But I remind you, it was a marriage broker going
between two families and generating an attraction
between the two families.
Now, this leads to the theme of particles to force,
my second theme, sorry.
Since the early days of physics, the notion of force
has been among the most basic and the most mysterious.
So it was with considerable satisfaction
that physicists finally understood where forces come from.
Their forces come from quantum exchange of the particle.
I want to emphasize this point.
We are all students of physics.
And when you first study physics, you learn about forces.
But if you ask the professor, where do the forces come from,
they cannot answer you unless they know quantum field theory.
Forces come from the quantum exchange of a particle.
And that's one of the important results of quantum field theory.
And given this understanding of the nature of force in 1934,
the Japanese physicist Yukawa Hideki Yukawa,
whom I think many of you have heard of,
he decided that some kind of marriage broker
must be provided for the strong interaction.
And so he hypothesized a new particle, and this is the pi meson.
So this comes from the talk I already mentioned to you
that I gave him on by, and in fact, interestingly,
it was at the National Center for the Performing Arts.
Now, the third theme that I now get to,
is going from particle to force.
So remember, I went from the mattress to field,
from field to particle, and now I go from particle to force.
So another rough analogy, other than the marriage broker analogy
that people use, I think John Wheeler had used this a long time ago.
Imagine two lumps on the mattress,
and they attract due to the distortion of the field.
So the physical world that we know results from the web of interactions,
and some attractive, and some repulsive.
I'm going to move my laptop closer to me.
Quantum field theory answers why.
So again, when we started studying physics,
the professors tell us some forces are attractive,
and some forces are repulsive.
Now, to be able to compare what is attractive or repulsive,
let's talk about between like objects,
so between the same objects.
But if you ask the professor why, there is no why.
So physicists did not understand why.
But if you ask the professor why, there is no why.
So physicists did not understand why some forces are attractive,
and why some forces are repulsive.
In the physics course, that's usually just stated as a fact.
You take it as an experimental fact or else.
But quantum field theory actually tells you why.
It turns out the sign depends on whether the spin of the mediating particle is odd or even.
Now, to me, this is a really profound result.
I first heard about this from Julian Schwinger when I took a quantum field theory course from him at Harvard.
And I was really blown away that there's such a simple rule that explains the universe,
whether some forces are attractive and some forces are repulsive.
And if you do the calculation, as I do in my book,
you can see that the sign ultimately could be traced to the difference between time and space.
Because in the Minkowski metric, for those of you who know what a Minkowski metric is,
there is a sign flip between time and space.
So according to this rule, then spin zero produces an attraction,
and this is a strong nuclear force, the protons and neutrons coming together.
And that's exactly how Yukawa introduced the whole concept in the first place.
Then you need a spin zero particle to produce the strong force that holds the nucleus together.
And the spin one then produces a repulsion.
And we all know that in electromagnetism, like charges repel.
So spin two, we go to spin two.
And that's, again, an attraction. So just an even on, so simple, so beautiful. It's amazing that this explains the universe.
So that's gravity. The graviton carries spin two.
And that produces an attraction between the apple and Newton's head.
So this allows us to give a lightning history of the universe.
The universal gravitation attraction of Newton,
which is due to the spin two particle, produces the instability that drives the formation of structure in the early universe.
These dense regions become denser still. That's because in gravity, everything attracts. So you have some fluctuation in density.
In some region, the early universe, where there's more matter than in other regions, these dense regions become denser. They pull and matter to them.
A matter for towards the denser regions.
This is a well known phenomenon in the universe.
Not only in the early universe, but also in our world.
We all know that the rich becomes richer.
Now, meanwhile, the photons and neutrinos, they are free streaming because their interaction with the primary matter was very weak, especially the neutrinos.
And so it's a kind of taxation. They take some of the energy and mass density away from the dense region.
And finally, the attraction between the protons due to the spin zero particle of Yukawa ignites the stars and eventually form the rich variety of nuclei.
And then finally, these positively charged nuclei and a negatively charged electrons attract each other.
Due to the spin one particle, and they produce atoms. And so the rest is history as you know that eventually leads to us.
So, it's a beautiful history of the universe. And the entire history is according to quantum field theory just based on this interplay between plus and minus science.
Okay, the concept of field goes back to Faraday.
And Faraday is a remarkable person because he came up from almost the Kenzian poverty.
And without proper education, the mathematics of the continental philosophers were beyond Faraday, who was compelled to invent his own pictorial language.
So, the mathematics of the continental philosophers that Faraday said you could not possibly understand.
It just partial differential equations, which now every undergraduate physics knows.
So, but Faraday, since he didn't know any mathematics here to introduce the concept of a field imagine a field mediating
between charged bodies.
Now here I cannot resist making a side remark about basic versus applied research.
So if you were in charge of the Royal Navy at the 19th century at a time of Faraday, would you support the research of a bunch of strange people in the basement messing around with wires and frogs.
Or with people who are trying to breed stronger pigeons.
So, I say this because all around the world, certainly in the United States, but in other countries as well that I have spent time in.
In the last 10, 20 years, there's a tremendous shift from theoretical to applied physics.
Faraday is one of my great heroes. And for obvious reasons, since he invented the word field.
And a few months ago, I was invited to give a talk at the Royal Institution in London.
And I deeply regretted that because of this epidemic, this pandemic, I was not able to lecture at the same platform that Faraday lectured from.
But I suddenly talk of my spoke of my admiration for Faraday.
And I think that physics students should look at Faraday's life as an inspiration.
Now, from Faraday, we get to Maxwell. Maxwell's theory of the electromagnetic field.
As we know, it contains two hidden symmetries that will rock 20th century physics.
One is relativistic invariance and the other is gauge invariance.
Now both of these symmetries were already contained in Maxwell's theory.
Nobody, including Maxwell, nobody in the 19th century noticed it.
And so is it conceivable that our present day theory also contains all kinds of hidden structure?
To me, that's a possibility.
Hidden structure that's waiting for young people to discover.
And that's like Einstein discover relativistic invariance hidden in Maxwell's equation and Herman Weill discovers gauge invariance in Maxwell's theory.
So in hindsight, how is it that Maxwell did not see this? Well, I don't know how many of you have read Maxwell's treatise.
This is a terrible notation of the 19th century. Since he doesn't have vectors and index notation, he writes out every component of everything.
So nowadays we think of four Maxwell's equations or something like this, but for Maxwell it was actually like 26 equations.
Everything is written down in component form.
So when I teach electromagnetism in the United States, I always ask the student why the magnetic field is called H.
And I have almost never encountered students who can answer this question. So I'll let you think about that.
And this comes to another one of my pet peeve, at least about American students.
Very few students are interested in the history of physics.
And personally, and I think quite a few of my colleagues around the world.
I just got an email, in fact, from somebody in Germany who agreed with me completely that you really cannot call yourself a theoretical physicist if you don't know anything about the history of the subject.
But now Yang-Mills theory also has a terrible notation because it's a redundancy in description.
Those of you who study Yang-Mills theory or gauge theory know that it has a lot of redundant variables that have to be gotten rid of at the end of the day.
So perhaps the twister formalism of Roger Penrose is perhaps the first step in fixing this.
By the way, I've given this talk since my quantum field theory book came out something like 20 years ago.
In those 20 years, I've given this talk in many, many places around the world in the United States and more recently in India and in Stockholm.
And so this transparency is written long, long before Roger Penrose got the Nobel Prize, but I've always been an admirer of his twister program.
So, incidentally, I mentioned my popular book Fearful Symmetry, and some of you know that I was honored that Roger actually wrote the preface to my book, the forward to my book.
So having that's, I guess, a little bit of an ad, but having said this, let me now come back to quantum field theory.
So already in non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the photon, namely the electromagnetic field, is treated as a field, but not the electron.
The photon is a field, but not the electron. The electron is treated as a particle. So that is the formalism in non-relativistic quantum mechanics.
So you write down a Schroding equation for this electron, and then you couple in a photon field.
This is what people in the United States, I don't know what people would call in England, but people in the United States, or at least I call it a half-assed treatment.
It's absolutely bizarre to treat one particle as a field and not the other.
So this motivated Jordan, Heisenberg, Dirac, and others to introduce the field. In particular, Dirac treated the electron as a field.
So hands forth, the electron has become a field.
Now the next very important step was taken by Fermi, and most people do not realize this.
Fermi said photons can be created, so the electron can also be created. So that's what I emphasize in my introduction, birth and death.
Because this is in a weak interaction, the electrons come zooming out.
And the famous, the eminent authorities, the older people at that time, they all said the electron was already inside the nucleus.
It's obvious. And Heisenberg wrote that as a younger physicist, he got angry letters from older people saying that Heisenberg, you're a crazy guy.
You know, we know that the electron is inside the nucleus. And how can you agree with Fermi that the electron was created in the weakened action?
So I'm writing about this in a book I'm working on about how the younger generation got bashed by the older physicists.
So here's the lesson for the students at Cambridge University. Don't listen to those old guys.
Okay, so, so after that, all particles are excitations in some field. The electron is an excitation electron field.
The proton is an excitation in the proton field. We don't talk about protons anymore, but we talk about quarks.
So quarks are excitation in some quark field.
So from in this point of view, the graviton is just like a particle like any other particle is just an excitation in the gravitational field.
And this is the philosophy pushed by Weinberg in his textbook on gravity.
And Weinberg is sort of anti the geometrical interpretation.
But this is a very minority view somehow.
The gravitational field seems to be special seems to be different from all other fields.
So somehow also responsible, the gravitational field is responsible for the space time arena in which all particles work and play.
You know, in my book, I use an analogy. This is like an avant-garde theater somehow there's no stage.
But one of the actors is this is the stage. The other actors are climbing over him.
So somehow the gravitational field is somehow different. And I think this is the trouble that we face in trying to formulate quantum gravity.
Then we now have this, the biggest problem in theoretical physics now is to understand the cosmological constant why it's so small.
So, once we introduce gravity, we introduce a new constant into nature, not just H bar and C, as I mentioned before, but also Newton's constant.
So the square of physics becomes a cube of physics.
But I don't have time to go into this because this is not a talk about gravity.
The talk about gravity I gave at the Royal Institution a few months ago.
Okay, so this is one of the puzzles in theoretical physics today, which I hope some young people in the audience would be able to resolve.
So anyway, as Oscar mentioned, the first year I was an assistant professor Princeton, the very first course I ever taught in my life that is in my entire life.
There was the first time I was in charge of a course for students.
I taught a course on quantum field theory.
And so people at that time, after the course, many people asked me to write up my notes as a book.
But other people, of course, gave me more practical advice, which is that you better not write a textbook until you get tenure.
So I waited for many years for 30 years before I wrote my textbook in 2003.
So here's the cover of the original edition of my quantum field theory book.
And what it is, is this painting shows the student, here's the student, the student is trying to reach the field, the green field quantum field theory.
So in order to reach the field, he or she has to hack through all of these weeds and so on and so forth.
He has to learn a lot of undergraduate level physics before he can reach the field.
And once he gets past the field, then he could start climbing the mountain.
And we don't know what is on the other side of the mountain.
It may be string theory, it may be something else.
So in 2003, and seven years later, came out with a revised edition and added a lot of new material.
It turns out in those seven years from 2003 to 2010, there were quite a few new developments that are important.
One of them is in fact the flowering of Penrose's Twister program in application to quantum chromodynamics.
And my quantum field theory book has since been translated into other languages.
And the most amusing thing so recently was translating the Japanese.
The Japanese publisher told me that the Japanese have smaller hands and they cannot hold the quantum field theory book is too thick.
So my quantum field theory book got chopped into two volumes. This is volume one just came out.
So I just received a copy, but the translation Russian is very amusing.
You can see my name up here and quantum field theory in a nutshell.
But it turns out nutshell doesn't mean anything in Russian.
I don't know why is it because they don't have nuts inside barrier. I don't know.
So the title was translated as quantum field theory in two words.
And so all my Russian friends are laughing that I've now published a book with a logically inconsistent title title already has more than two words.
So now I want to also talk about a little bit more about the quantum field theory.
One of the most interesting things about quantum field theory in the last 3040 years is the rise of field theory in condensed matter physics.
So this is, I want to say this is distinct from earlier use of perturbative field theory.
So for example, when I was a student, there were two textbooks Federer and Wallachia and Abri Kosov et al.
They use Feynman diagrams just to keep track of some perturbation theory calculation when they do perturbative calculations.
So but the rise of field theory in the last 30 years of the 20th century was quite spectacular.
And it's not mainly using Feynman diagrams to do perturbative stuff.
So I mentioned several examples that in the quantum Hall fluid, the microscopic degrees of freedoms will cause the electrons.
But the long distance physics is controlled by as to turn Simon's gauge field with fractionally charged excitations.
Another example surface growth can be connected, can be studied using the language of renormalization group.
And another is that disorder can be studied by the replica method and supersymmetry.
So here I also want to mention another characteristic of my book.
So this is one characteristic of my book because I think this is important so that if you ask me how is my quantum field theory book different from other quantum field theory book is because I include one third of the book is on convinced metaphysics maybe one quarter.
And the other things I introduced gravity as early as possible.
So when I was a graduate student on nobody mentions gravity unless you take course on generativity and gravity and so on.
But nobody would mention gravity in the course on quantum field theory. I never heard a single word about gravity in my courses on quantum field theory but now it of course is taken central center stage.
Another feature of my book is I try to be much lighter in tone in the formalism.
So I introduce a lot of stories jokes fictitious characters a la galileo.
I introduce a character named Confusio and Confusio is always wandering around my book.
And now I get emails from students saying Confusio is their famous character.
And then have us that even recently, a professor Berkeley said on the Internet that he is confused your that he's confused about a lot of things.
The other thing about my book on quantum field theory is divided into eight parts.
And this is also a joke.
I was referring to something in Chinese literature.
I was referring to the eight parts of the celestial dragon. And for those Chinese students in the audience who knows who Jin Yong is.
You can look up this link.
So, now I want to tell you that quantum field theory has had two near death experiences.
And quantum field theory actually almost died twice. Okay.
So in the late 1940s, that was its first death.
Because it was unable to produce Lawrence covariant results and divergences.
And it was not able to handle the strong intention the strong intention that time was this theory of Yukawa's.
And because of the coupling is very strong, the Feynman diagrams and other perturbative approaches are completely useful and were completely useless.
And so people like Landau go as far as to say that quantum field theory should be buried.
I'm quoting Landau, this quote in, in my new book on quantum field theory.
And it's interestingly, it's people like Landau, and I think also news for Heisenberg, all those people saying quantum field theory was dead.
Interestingly, it was the young people who came out of the in the late 1940s.
They were the concert.
The older people were the revolutionary so sometimes we call them the revolutionary conservatives and you know who I'm talking about.
I'm talking about people like Feynman and Schwinger and Tomo Naga.
And the next second time that quantum field theory almost died is in the late 1960s when the S matrix school came into being.
And this was the ability to deal with the strong intention.
And so I had to make a very difficult choice between going to, when I was going to graduate school, I had to make a difficult choice between going to Harvard or going to Berkeley.
And if I've gone to Berkeley, that would be the end of me, because at that time Berkeley was the center of the S matrix school.
In which quantum field theory is looked on as some old ancient thing that nobody cares about anymore.
But no, in the 1970s, as you all know, thanks to the work of the young genius.
To hoofed from Holland, quantum field theory triumphed.
And as my professor Sidney Coleman later wrote, the triumph of field theory in this 1970s was a victory parade that make the spectators gas with joy.
I'm sorry, I can't even read with awe and laugh with joy.
So I'm here also I also wanted to tell you something is for you to think about.
I'm not going to explain the tier quantum mechanics is like a zero plus one dimensional field theory and string theory is like a one plus one dimensional field theory.
Okay, now let me go backwards and talk about quantum mechanics.
So when we teach quantum mechanics or when we learn quantum mechanics, depending whether you're a professor or a student.
Usually we talk about the Schrodinger Heisenberg formalism.
Schrodinger has wave functions and Heisenberg has operators.
But there's a conceptually more profound formalism due to Dirac and Feynman.
And this leads naturally to quantum field theory.
So let's ask about the origin of the path integral. Let me explain the origin of path integral formalism.
So in quantum mechanics, immediately in chapter one, we learn about the two slit experiment.
So electrons are emitted from a source.
And there's a screen where detector is placed all this detector.
And between the screen and the source, there's another screen, which has two slits in it.
And so the electron could either go through this slit and or to go through that slit.
And then there's an amplitude probability amplitude for going through one slit and the probability for going through another slit.
And then you're supposed to add the probability amplitude and you see the quantum interference phenomenon and so on and so forth.
Now here's an interesting comment. Students almost never ask what is three holes.
I have also taught quantum mechanics.
And I've never met a student who asked what if you had three holes in the screen.
So in my quantum field theory book, I imagine a student named Feynman asking this question.
By the way, there's so many Feynman stories circulating on the web.
And I feel why not if people can make up Feynman stories, I can make one up too.
So I imagine a student named Feynman asking, what if you have three holes?
Okay, so the professor then explained, okay, well, you just add the amplitude.
So going through these three holes.
And then Feynman asked, what if you add another screen.
And also with a bunch of holes in it.
And the professor is starting to get impatient and losing his patience.
And the professor said, come on, don't waste my time.
Yes, you just add all the amplitudes that there's an air probability amplitude for going through this hole.
And then this whole and then this whole and you add just at the mall.
Okay.
So, but this student persists.
And he asked the most then question of all.
What if you add infinite number of screens and drill infinite number of holes in each screen.
So,
then there is no screen.
If you have infinite number of screens with infinite number of holes.
And so you have to add amplitudes over all paths. So it's like a young person.
Reach the end of your life. Now all possibilities are open up to you.
So you now have to, we now have to add up not all the, not the amplitudes through each hole.
As a professor was saying, but you now have to integrate over all paths.
Okay.
So this very Zen question, having an infinite number of screens with an infinite number of holes in it.
Is the origin of the path integral formalism invented by Dirac and Feynman.
Okay.
So quite a few theory them amongst an integral. So I'm saying, I was just saying here. Oops.
Normally in quantum mechanics, which was talked about adding the summing over the past.
But if you have infinite number of paths, you integrate over all possible paths.
So, when all is said and done, you introduce formalism and so on.
Quantum field theory, just one great big fancy sum or integral.
So as you can see, sometimes, if I give this popular talk to a general audience, it depends on what the audience is.
They even have to explain.
The audience may not even know what an integral is and I have to tell them it's a big fancy sum.
And the integral is, but this audience, of course, knows what an integral is.
It's an integral over d phi, e to the minus s phi, some function, some functional phi.
And phi is the field, a generic, generic notation for the field.
It depends on space and time.
And the space can be d dimensional. Then you can, you have written the quantum field theory in d plus one dimensional space time.
Now, how do we get the quantum quantum mechanics is when you restrict this field to be just a function of time but not of space.
Okay.
And then this field has another name.
Okay.
Just to confuse the undergraduates in undergraduate courses, it's called position or coordinate of the particle position of the particle.
And so that you recognize is quantum mechanics, if I represents the position of particles, that is the path integral formalism of this is the path integral formalism of quantum mechanics.
So quantum mechanics can be thought of as zero plus one dimensional field theory.
Now, I have also worked on random matrix theory.
And random matrix theory is to say phi is not even a function of time, but it's a matrix.
Then it's just an integral or possible matrices so random matrix theory could be imagined, could be thought of as a zero plus zero dimensional space time.
And one of the things I did in quantum field theory.
Random matrix theory was to develop with the French physicist Edouard Brazil.
How to treat this using Feynman integral. So we, we, we, we introduce Feynman diagrams into random matrix theory.
And finally, students can see if I go down, I can go down to ordinary integral calculus, in which the matrix is just replaced by a number by real number.
Then that's just an ordinary integral in calculus.
So you see quantum field theory, if you like is a generalization of the integral calculus.
So three years of quantum field theory, a big part of it is consists of finding methods or tricks to do the functional integral.
So one example is that people then put this integral discretize it, sort of going backwards from Newton, going backwards from Newton and lightness, replace the integral by some, and then use computer to crank away.
So that's one area of physics you could go into, which is called lattice gauge theory.
Now, so we have an integral to do, which we don't know how to do. Okay. So as I said, the, the path in one quantum field theory, you can think of the simplest version of it just an ordinary integral.
So let me give you an ordinary integral you don't know how that you cannot do.
You don't know that without this term without this five four term we can all do this integral. So if I cover up the five four term. This is just a Gaussian integral that many of you know how to do.
But how do you do this this integral is not known.
Now there's a fabulous idea, which is one way of doing this integral is to expand it in G. So we just expand this in a Taylor series.
And then these are all Gauss versions of the Gaussian integral I told you this integral.
e to the minus m square phi square is doable and also doable with five to the full end. Now I can do this integral and sum it all back up.
But then there are many, many terms infinite number of terms.
The fabulous idea is to just draw little diagrams to keep track of all these terms. Okay.
So I still remember when I was an undergraduate. I was some really eager to learn about five and diagrams, which I had heard so much about.
And then later I realized fine and diagram is just based on this, this idea of expanding the path in a row, and then integrating term by term, and then draw diagrams to keep track of the terms.
But it was a fabulous idea, and nobody else had this idea.
It was amazing.
So, in, in my quantum field theory book.
I talked about some different versions of quantum field theory of five and diagrams I could do a baby version and the baby version is exactly this.
Talking about five and I want to show you guys so show you students because it's also hope to inspire the students in the audience.
I want to show you five months last blackboard in case you haven't seen it.
And he sets impossible standards for himself on the two upper left boxes.
One of them is what I cannot create I do not understand.
I do not have any possible demand, obviously, know how to solve every problem that has ever been solved. But anyway, some of you might take this as your, as your slogan, but also know he has a box called to learn.
I don't know if you can see it's not very clear, but you can make out this stage to learn the second box on the right.
And the interesting thing about all the things you wanted to learn. He crossed out one of them.
I've learned it. So that's it. Okay, so that's very admirable.
Now I also want to mention that after Feynman died.
I visited Caltech and just for one day.
And they let me sit in Feynman's office so I just thought.
Oh, I would look at his blackboard but unfortunately somebody had erased everything already just a blind blackboard.
And I sat there in this empty office. And I thought, well, maybe I could get some secret vibes and get some good ideas.
But unfortunately for me nothing happened.
So now come from Feynman, we get to Schringer.
So Schringer in 1948.
This is the first term of the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron beating Feynman.
So Schringer is so proud of this that he was managed to beat Feynman Feynman was not able to calculate it. By the way, a lot of people don't know this and they just thought fine and this fine and that fine and this fine and that.
But Schringer actually beat Feynman. And so the expression for the magnetic moment of the electron is actually carved on Schringer's tombstone.
So if you ever visit the other Cambridge that is to say Cambridge, Massachusetts.
You should.
You should go check up. You should go look at this tombstone and pay your respect to Julian Schringer.
So, the rack, of course, had given any moments electron but we're talking about deviation from the racks value.
So the rack calculation was not based, did not use quantum theory or course the rack was inventing quantum theory.
So, I show you the current value for the anomalous magnetic moment and muon in some suitable unit is given by this and you can see it's measured to 10 to the minus 11.
People have now calculated all these digits, but Schringer got the 116. Okay.
Now to put this accuracy. That's what I said in the beginning of this lecture that quantum field theory is the most accurately tested theory in physics.
Newtonian mechanics is not tested to the 10 to the minus 11 level.
To put this accuracy in rough pictorial perspective.
Consider the distance between Cambridge and Oxford via a 41 421 that distance is 83 miles than the present uncertainty of 10 to the minus 11.
It corresponds roughly to the minus three millimeter.
For this to make any sense.
I looked up the width of a human hair so it turns out human hair varies whether you have fine hair or coarse hair different races of different thickness.
So, this is maybe something like one 10th, the width of a human hair so just imagine that this interest in Cambridge and Oxford.
By the way, you should also.
I told you to visit the Cambridge in the other Cambridge.
If you have a chance you should also visit the other Oxford.
My son is actually a professor of biology at the other Oxford in the United States.
Okay, so here I show you Schringer's triumph.
And this is taken from my quantum field theory book. So here's a fine and diagram in which the photon comes in and interacts with the electron.
And so this is what the rack calculated.
And what Schringer calculated is this one.
So, in the process the electron emits a photon which is then absorbed by the outgoing electron.
And the Feynman was not able to calculate this, but Schringer did.
So,
as I said, I took quantum field theory courses from Schringer. He was the king at Harvard physics department at the time.
And Schringer was not very pleased. And one of his famous saying is that Feynman brought quantum field theory to the masses.
So, and I think Schringer is more or less right.
That nowadays, you just learn the Feynman rules, you draw a few diagrams, you stick in, then you follow the Feynman rules, and you just calculate away.
If you can't do the integral, you stick it on a computer.
And so, in fact, one of my colleagues in Israel, a professor in Israel, he used to refer some of to some of his colleagues in physics as professors of Feynman diagrams.
That was the derogatory terms people don't understand physics but can calculate Feynman.
So that's what Schringer said.
Now, naturally, at Harvard, at that time, and this is Paul Martin, so I'll tell you who Paul Martin is.
He's a very famous condensed matter physicist who passed away a few years ago.
He was one of Schringer's prize students.
And he, he wasn't in generation. He's probably 20 years older than I am.
When I was a student, I took Paul Martin's course. Also, and Paul Martin was a Schringer students.
And so he was describing the situation a generation ahead of me.
And he said, in the dark recesses of the subbasement of Lyman, Lyman is the name of the building that the Harvard physics department was located in.
So with theoretical students retired to decipher the tablets, and of course tablets doesn't mean tablet computer at those days.
It just means a notebook and where the ritual taboo on pagan pictures could be safely ignored.
So this is still true when I was a student, maybe 15, 20 years later.
Some of my friends were students of Julian Schringer's and Schringer would assign them some calculation to do.
Now, as I said, of course, Schringer can do it in his own formalism.
But it is much, much easier to do calculations, Feynman diagrams. That's why Feynman diagrams are so popular.
So some of these students told me they would hide somewhere and do the calculation using Feynman diagrams.
And then after they get the result, they would try to translate it back into Schringer's formalism. And of course they show Schringer the result without showing how they got it.
So here's another picture, the rivalry between the two grades.
And you see this was at the Nobel Prize ceremony in Stockholm in 1965.
And interestingly, this must be right after the ceremony because you can see Schringer still holding, he has taken off one of his white gloves, but he still have the other white gloves on.
And here's Feynman.
Here, I'm going to include this picture in the book I'm working on right now because it really shows the very different personality.
Feynman is, you can see talking away and who knows what BS is spouting.
And Schringer is very, very typical. He doesn't sit even sit straight. He sort of always sits at an angle. And in this picture, maybe to sort of get away from Feynman as far as he could.
Anyhow, I'm just speculating, of course, I have the greatest admiration for both of these guys. Those are these guys are tremendous.
I really like Feynman.
And one, one reason I really like Feynman was because once at some conference he invited me to go with him to some nightclub.
Now I cannot even imagine Schringer doing such. I can even imagine Schringer ever going to a nightclub. But Feynman is like the opposite.
And by the way, I recommend you guys to read an essay by Deser and also through Google, you can find a Deser was Schringer student.
And he essay about a tale of two pieces about the contrast between Feynman and Schringer. And it's fascinating because Deser is now, Deser is 15 years older than I am.
And so he belongs to yet older generation and he knew both of them quite well. So he was really able to compare these two people to amazing geniuses.
So I want to now talk about some of the landmarks in quantum field theory.
And Heisenberg introduced us to internal space by inventing isospin and Herman Weill introduced gauge symmetry.
And then Yang Mills and others generalize the gauge symmetry of Weill to a non-ambient gauge symmetry.
So these are landmarks. And as I said, Landau and the earlier generation thought that quantum field theory is dead.
But in the 70s, people like Weinberg and Glasshauer and so on resurrected things through the work of Tohoft resurrected quantum field theory.
And now we know that all three interactions are described by Yang Mills theory.
So undergraduates are justifiably fascinated by Yang Mills theory, the weekend action and all these things.
And I in my most recent book, published by Princeton, and which come out in October 2020 that is right now.
It's called Fly by Night Physics. I give a very simple introduction for undergraduates in part nine of this book.
And I know that undergraduates could understand some of this because I have tried it out on the undergraduates here in Santa Barbara.
So I talk a little bit about quantum field theory.
So great triumph, Feynman diagrams revolutionized quantum field theory.
And for many years, the influence of Feynman diagrams was enormous.
So even when I was in graduate school, I was told by one professor that quantum field theory is equal to the sum of Feynman diagrams.
Okay, we now know that this view is wrong.
The Feynman diagram just perturbative.
So one of the important things that happened in the mid 1970s, a new generation of young people came on scene.
I already mentioned to host and, and also Polikov.
I describe it in my book is breaking the shackles of Feynman diagrams.
They discover all kinds of non perturbative structure, such as magnetic monopoles that cannot be seen by Feynman diagrams.
So these go like e to the minus one over G square.
So imagine that interval that I show you earlier.
Suppose the answer has a term that depends on this, then expanding in powers of G as a Taylor series wouldn't make any sense.
You never see this and all kinds of things appeared in quantum field theory, duality, topology, all kinds of things.
And for example, when I talk about the application of quantum Hall effect that has to do with duality and topology.
And all that you cannot see in Feynman diagrams by Feynman diagrams.
So I see it's now my time is already 11 o'clock.
So some of you may be getting a little bit anxious.
So I am coming to the end of my talk, I'm going to wrap up.
I'm going to wrap up by asking a question, which is what is the purpose of studying physics.
I like to ask the students in my class this question.
And no, to make money is not the correct answer.
Well, it may work. It is the correct answer for some people and I do have one student who worked with me and gotten a PhD on a random matrix theory, who is now a big shot on Wall Street.
But to me, the purpose of studying physics is to understand nature.
And not just to calculate and to fit to some experiment, but to understand nature at a deep level, and at a deeper and deeper level.
Okay.
So quantum field theory.
It helps us to understand, help us to understand nature at a deeper level than quantum mechanics.
So now I want to talk about intellectual completeness of different areas of physics.
And what do I mean by intellectual completeness, let me give you an example.
So for example, the Pali exclusion principle and spin statistics connection.
Which says that particles to integers spin, integers spin at bosons and we have in those spins of fermions.
And duck and Sudarshan, by the way, I shouldn't pronounce this word as duck, but since I'm a Chinese American, I could be excused.
He would be very upset if I hear him pronounced it like that.
But he's German. And of course, there's a lot about the you. And it's actually Duke.
Duke and Sudarshan wrote a very interesting book which I recommend to students. So again, I've been ranting and raving about how American students don't know anything about history.
And how the history of the Pali exclusion principle. And this is especially, I think of interest to young British physicists, because the first person the proposed exclusion principle was actually young Englishman named Stoner.
What duck and Sudarshan said was that there's not one fact in the physical world, which has a greater impact on the way things are.
Now this is a very strong claim of one fact in a physical world which has a greater impact.
And in some sense they're right from atoms to neutron stars to lasers, and much of condensed matter physics for example band structure, superconductivity, etc, etc.
All of this depends on the Pali exclusion principle, right.
But this is just a rule in non relativistic quantum mechanics.
What I always tell students, when they're taking a course on non relativistic quantum mechanics is to ask the professor, where does this rule come from.
And the professors wouldn't know the answer is this sticks to non relativistic quantum mechanics because in non relativistic quantum mechanics is just an empirical rule.
It just fell down from heaven.
Okay.
But quantum field theory can derive the Pali exclusion principle Pali exclusion principle and the spin statistics theorem can be derived.
So this is what I mean by intellectual completeness quantum field theory is more complete than quantum mechanics.
There are things that in quantum mechanics have to be treated as an arbitrary rule, but which can be derived in quantum field theory.
So how do you know all the electrons in the world are identical.
They could have been made in a factory somewhere.
And there's manufacturing defects. One electron is slightly different from the others. How do you know.
And we need quantum field theory to explain this.
And the explanation is so elegantly simple that it has to be right.
The electrons identical because as the rack and others told us, this is excitations in the quantum in the electron field, the excitations in the same field.
So, but again in non relativistic quantum mechanics, who knows this was a God given rule or something.
Okay.
Why is the electron charge exactly equal in magnitude to the proton charge.
This is one of the most important facts of the universe. If not the electrostatic repulsion between different parts of the universe would blow the universe apart.
But quantum electrodynamics in this sense is less complete than granulified field theory in granulified field theory this comes out.
Okay, it's a consequence of a requirement in quantum field theory.
The fields belong to the same representation of the symmetry group.
But in quantum electrodynamics or string and Simon.
There is no explanation.
When I was taking the course.
I could have raised my hand and ask Schringer why is the electron charge equal exactly equal to the proton charge.
Schringer will not have been able to answer. Now I mentioned this as a joke, because you know what would happen in Schringer's courses if you raise your hand to ask a question.
And by the other older students they're not supposed to raise your hand and ask questions.
Schringer just would ignore that it is sort of a little bit like the rack when the rack was lecturing, you may run the risk of being kicked out of the room.
If you have to ask a question.
Okay.
Now, let me ask, why is space times three plus one dimensional.
You know, always wonder about that when you started studying physics.
A quantum field theory is in this sense, less intellectually complete than string theory.
Strings theory actually specializes the space time dimension.
Now quantum field theory, of course, can be written in any space time dimension.
It could be written in any, nothing in quantum field theory fixes the dimension of space.
Now, string theory, of course, is much more restrictive. And as you all know, probably, that it could only be written in nine plus one dimension of space time.
So this is also a joke string theory show predicts that space time has to be nine plus one dimension, and they have to scramble to compactify six of these unseen dimensions.
Okay, I'm going to wrap up. This is one of the last thing I mentioned because I want some, perhaps some young people can solve this to me one of the greatest mysteries in physics is that the dynamical evolution of quantum world is given by an exponential of the Hamiltonian
and the Boseman factor in statistical physics also given by the exponential of a Hamiltonian.
So there's a connection between imaginary time and inverse temperature.
Is this just a coincidence or deeper.
Over the years I've asked a number of very famous distinguished physicists this, and people seem to think that two different opinions, some people think it's just a coincidence and some people think they may have a deeper significance.
I know the answer. And I thought about it also.
But be that as in May, it has some very useful consequences.
One very useful consequence is that it could be applied to calculate in the Hawking temperature of a black hole.
Basically almost in two lines. This is shown in my book.
But of course I didn't invent that I think that was invented by Gibbons and Hawking.
And you just analytically continue to, to this imaginary time, and you get the temperature.
I mentioned that this is some very useful consequences I just mentioned one mention another consequence, which is that for a long time.
We had these fundraising events in Santa Barbara Santa Barbara is full of rich people and you may have heard.
And so we're trying to get some of those rich people to give money.
And the attitude is of course I'm rich so why should I give money to a bunch of theoretical physicists.
So, I tell them, I'll tell you some very interesting fascinating thing.
You know, just imaginary time, and this always blows them away.
So, anyway, another useful consequence is that partition function and statistical physics and in mind many body physics could be represented as a Euclidean field theory in contrast to minkowski and theory, because we have to continue.
Right in its imaginary time so we continue, instead of the minkowski metric we continue to Euclidean metrics and many other problems in physics can then be represented as quantum field theory.
So this just to show you that quantum field theory is very useful in many areas of physics.
So, finally, I conclude by saying something that everybody in physics knows everybody in theoretical physics.
There have been two great attempted to great marriages.
And the great marriage of the 20th century was that quantum physics was married to special relativity and as I emphasize in the first transparency, this led to this very rich and marvelous subject called quantum field theory.
Two daughters.
One is called special relativity, the other is called general relativity.
And in the late 20th century, and now continuing into the early 21st century, people are trying to marry quantum physics to general relativity.
And we don't know what it will reproduce.
Perhaps some people say string theory, but it could be something else, it would be exciting if it's something that we, that nobody has thought of, and waiting for a just waiting for a young person in the audience to discover.
So, with that, I end my talk and thank you very much for inviting me to give the Maxwell lecture at Cambridge University. Thank you.
And thank you so much for coming here. There was a very interesting talk and we have had so many questions.
So, let's see.
So, I guess it's a bit hard to, it's a bit hard to hear the applause, but I'm sure the chat will give it anyway.
So, the first question that we have from the audience, regards, you mentioned in the start of your talk, regarding gravitons, and they're asking is how likely do you think it is that gravitons actually exists?
Is there any experimental evidence for them?
That's an extremely good question.
Thank you.
Well, if we treat the gravitational field like any other field, as some people advocates, then Einstein's theory to some action governing the behavior of this field, g mu nu, and we expand g mu nu.
Then it has a propagator as interaction, it acts completely like a particle.
So, I think from this point of view, many of us believe in graviton.
Now, an opposite point of view is propagated by Dyson, which I mentioned in my book on gravity, and which I'll mention in this book I'm working on also.
Dyson said, if you're going to ever measure the effect of a graviton, so for example, in the analog of the photoelectric effect, to see a graviton kicking out an electron from a piece of metal, you can easily sit down and do the estimate.
It will be longer than the age of the universe.
And so, it's clearly experimentally impossible to actually see a graviton.
And so, Dyson said, I don't care about gravitons and we should not talk about gravitons, and we should not even quantize gravity. I mentioned that there was also a possibility that some people do not want to quantize gravity.
I'm not sure. So what I said in my book is that I took the easy way out.
I said on the weekends, I tend to believe Dyson, but the other days of the week, I don't believe him.
So, I was very honored and privileged also to have seen Dyson in Princeton a couple years before he passed away.
And he is one of my favorite persons to talk to. And I like the fact that he's very anti-establishment.
So, maybe gravitons don't exist, but we don't know. We really don't know.
I hope that answers your question.
I think it's actually a mistake. I don't agree with this fact that if you don't see it experimentally, there's no hope of experimentally ever seeing it, and it's not a useful thing to think about.
In the 19th century, you know, you can say the same thing. I mean, I think that was basically what people like Mark were saying that you cannot see atoms, so maybe you shouldn't talk about atoms.
You cannot see electrons. I don't like that philosophy.
So, where is it then that the problems come in with quantum gravity? If we have this field of gravitons, and we can describe it with the same methods as we can, the electric field or the photon field, where do the problems arise?
Yes, yes, yes. Another very good question. Is this asked by the same person?
This is by me. This is just a short follow-up.
Yes, yes. That's also a very good question. So, if you formulate, you know, you quantize the gravitational field just by the usual method, and you have Feynman diagrams.
And, okay, so you scatter, consider scattering two gravitons, one on one, with center mass energy capital E, then you soon see the next order correction get larger and larger as the energy goes up.
But the energy has to go all the way up to the Planck energy for this to happen. So the perturbation series sort of doesn't make sense.
But again, Professor Dyson.
You know, I was tempted to say Freeman, but somehow I'm really inhibited from saying that Professor Dyson, Professor Dyson
would not like that at all. So that you shouldn't even, therefore, Professor Dyson would say, well, you shouldn't even be scattering gravitons and gravitons in the first place.
But that's one way of seeing it. And you can certainly see that if you just quantize the graviton in the usual way, you get into a lot of trouble.
But what Dyson is saying that he says to quantum physics, quantum mechanics should not apply to the gravity, but I find that view is probably inconsistent in my book, I talk about that also.
You cannot say that half the world is quantum and the other half is not quantum.
So, I don't know. I really don't know.
Okay.
It's one of the open questions, I guess, physics.
We have another question, which relates to, is there a possibility that there may exist fields we don't know about yet?
Is there a possibility that there are fields that we don't know anything about yet?
Yeah.
Of course.
But dark energy may be represented by a field that we don't know anything about. Although if you ask me to bet, I would bet the dark energy is just the cosmological constant.
We don't know what the dark matter is, but quite likely that matter is just this particle described by a field.
So that's, that's, I published a paper on that long time ago.
So I think that matter is just a scalar particle, a scalar field.
It could be.
No, we don't know. So suddenly there are, there may be fields we don't know anything about.
And so the experimentalists have to sharpen the experiment.
Yeah. Okay. Then we have another question about, about expanding on quantum field theory in particular regarding loop quantum gravity.
And, and they're asking if loop quantum gravity is more complete than QFT.
I'm not sufficiently of an expert on loop on gravity. So I don't want to say anything. I think you should invite somebody from loop quantum gravity.
Like ash the car or something like that. Somebody reputable in loop quantum gravity. I think not everyone loop quantum gravity is reputable.
According to some measure, of course, that's subjective measure.
But maybe somebody like ash the car can can answer that question.
Okay. Thank you very much. Then we have one question regarding quickly add to that.
And this again, I'm not an expert on the quantum gravity. I, this is only by hearsay from from my string theory friends.
You know, one of the, one of the, one of the things quantum field theory is able to calculate what the Hawking temperature is using field theory methods.
But it cannot understand, it cannot tell us where those hidden degrees of freedom from.
And I understand that string theory could explain, could identify those degrees of freedom.
This is a famous calculation of up and strong.
But I heard from my string theory friends that the loop gravity people cannot even reproduce that result.
So I don't know that just, just, I just remember that. Okay. Thanks.
Okay.
Thank you much. Then we have a question about the, the young no mass gap.
We have, if we have a question asking, what would solving it mean for physics.
The millennium.
Oh, that is has to do with confinement. And so that's the detail of the strong attraction. Now, go man proposed quarks.
And quarks are never seen in the experimental search board in the 1960s and so on so forth.
So go man proposed that quarks were permanently confined.
And that seems very plausible, but has never been proven. So that's one of the millennium price problems which I encourage young people to work on is to prove confinement.
And it's a simpler version of confinement just to prove that there's a mass gap in QED and QCD in quantum chromodynamics.
Then, then thank you very much for that. Then we have another question regarding regarding what's it called.
If there is, so you mentioned in the early section of your talk regarding how spin can be used to predict whether a force is attractive or repulsive between like identical articles.
And they're asking if there is a reason why spin zero attractions like the strong force are much larger than spin to forces like gravity.
Is that underlying reason for this or is it.
Okay, that's a very good question. I think the fee bonus of gravity is not understood by gravity is the characteristic energy scale, the Planck energy is so much higher than anything we have explored.
So this we also don't understand.
Here I can offer you a speculation. Okay.
And this is just a wild speculation.
Why are humans so large compared to atoms and the fundamental particles.
And the reason is entropy, right if we're made up of.
20 atoms or something or a few hundred atoms.
We would be very unstable and tropical effects with.
We'll fall apart and so on so far. It's hard to imagine that we can do anything.
Like reproduce ourselves and create physics and so on.
If we made us 1000 particles so whether it's a big number comes from 10 to the 23.
And the reason is gravity is so feeble.
It's also has to be related to the fact that we are so huge.
Because even if gravity is a lot stronger.
We would, we would be, you know, gravity would be crushing us as well.
So, I don't know, you know, that's just a speculation.
I mean, I'm not talking about gravity being 10 times stronger than it is now.
Suppose the plan mass instead of 10 to the 19 GV, you know, is 10 to this.
10 to the 9 GV or something like this, nine orders of magnitude.
So gravity would be 18 orders of magnitude stronger. I mean, we'll be crushed.
For sure. I think.
So that may be one, one speculation.
Okay.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Then I reckon we maybe have time for one more question or should we say that's, that's the final one.
I'm fine answering a few more questions, a couple more questions if you like.
Here, I will say we had at our peak, we had 400 people watching and now, now it's gone down.
We have, we have, we have slightly fewer now that the top is nearing its end.
But they're all very, very active.
On YouTube, there'll be a lot more views.
I checked my talking radio institutions through a couple months ago and a lot more views than that now.
Anyway, I'm happy to answer a few more questions. Yes.
Let me see if I can find some good ones.
So, I guess we, there's a more not necessarily related to the subject of physics, but rather related to studying physics.
There is a person asking if it's too late for someone to pursue physics at the age of 25, and whether it will still be possible to get into academic field, our research when starting at that age.
I think this question is also a very good question. I'm asked for advice quite often.
This is quite unusual question, but I think it's worth answering seriously.
I think that it's helpful to this question, one is institutional and societal or whatever you want to call it institutional.
And when you're a certain age, it's very difficult to get into a good graduate school, et cetera, because places are limited and so on and so forth.
And getting into a graduate school, a good graduate school is important.
I think getting into a good undergraduate school is not so important because quantum mechanics taught at Stanford and quantum mechanics taught at Boondock University is the same quantum mechanics.
When you get into graduate school, you hear things from the great masters and so on and so forth.
So that's an institutional question. If you're 25, it may be hard to get into physics.
But on the other hand, the second part of the question is, of course, if you are, it depends on your ability.
If you have strong enough mental abilities, never too late, why 25 should be cut off age? Why not 35? Even 45 and so on.
I don't completely subscribe to this thing that Dirac said that if you are 25 and you haven't done anything in theoretical physics, you might as well go kill yourself or something.
I think that's awful thing to say.
There are many examples of people who pursue other things and switching to physics quite late, people that were in engineering and so on.
So it's certainly possible, but it of course all depends on your, it depends on your ability.
I mean, Ed Whitton, I was on the admissions committee that admitted him to graduate school at Princeton.
And he was a very special case because his undergraduate major or sociology, and he had not taken a single physics course.
So he was admitted to Princeton, and some of the other graduate students complained to me, even said that who's this guy, you know, he's taking the undergraduate quantum mechanics course.
And he doesn't even understand classical mechanics. He's like asking us questions about Newton's about classical mechanics.
But then at the end of the course, all the other students are going to him for help. So it depends on your mental ability, obviously, rather than age.
I mean, you can certainly find examples of people that shown their brilliance later in life.
Yeah, so don't take what Dirac said seriously.
Okay.
Thank you so much.
And then I reckon, I guess this is, I'm going to take the opportunity to ask a question of my own, actually, because I have that power.
So, Andy, when you were talking a bit earlier on your slides about about gauge fields and redundancy in the redundancy in description, you mentioned something called twisters that you mentioned that might be a way out of it.
What is a twister?
Well, you are in England. You just have to go those 83 miles. I remember it was 83 miles, right?
You just have to move 83 miles, go over to Oxford and ask Roger Penrose.
He'll be happy to explain to you.
Okay, but in a word, read my quantum field theory book, the last part of my quantum field theory book, which is the stuff I added after the first edition.
And there, modern days, people have done these calculations in QCD, and for example, five gluon scattering.
So in QCD, you have these gluons, Young Mills particle, two gluons scattering producing three.
I've done how many, the exact number, how many, how many diagrams you have to use computers to calculate, and the result when printed in a journal page at the usual resolution, it's just a dox much.
I think I showed this dox much in my quantum field theory book.
And, but this calculation using twisters could be done in one line, basically.
So, there's a better, there's a more common word for twisters these days, people called electricity spinners.
Okay, people, some of the people doing electricity spinners also told me that in the early days of the program, they don't want to call it twisters, because Roger has some other wild ideas and so on so forth as you guys all know.
And they don't want it to be confused with some of Roger's other ideas and so on so forth.
So it's not called twisters now.
Okay.
Thank you very much. Thank you very much. I'll have to, I'll have to go to Oxford then.
Yes, yes.
Catch him before he goes to Stockholm.
When you see him, you can thank him for thank him for me. You said, I, for writing the preface to my book for writing the forward to my book you wrote a very nice forward questions.
Yeah.
So, now, today is much higher level than the questions at the Royal Institution.
I mean, I guess we should thank the audience for that. They've all been brilliant and very, and that's very, very interesting.
Absolutely.
I guess, I think we should probably wrap up at this point with, especially because, especially because I've, there are many good questions still, but I don't think that most of them can be answered in, in a short time.
Right.
Yeah, but thank you. Thank you so much for the talk. And I mean, if we get the opportunity, we would be happy to be happy to host you here some other time in Cambridge, once this whole pandemic ends.
Right.
I wanted to say to the people in the audience that just as a reminder that we host a weekly talks, and we also have a talk next week on by Paul Sheikin on using information content to think about phases, which I hope many of you will attend.
In addition to that, we also have for the first year students at Cambridge, we have next week coming up a pub quiz to, to help you get to know each other a bit better.
And other than that, I think that's the end of the stream. Thank you very much for the Archimedes and have a good night.
Thank you.
