The world today can feel soul-crushing. Whether you're churning out emails in a cubicle for
eight hours a day, or forced to sew t-shirts around the clock that are only worn once,
or you're bombarded by headlines of sea-level rise, droughts, and disasters,
the crushing weight of global capitalism feels inescapable. But all is not lost.
While the destruction of climate chaos and the chains of fossil capitalism feel suffocating,
as science fiction author Ursula K. Le Guin argues,
she goes on to add,
Any human power can be resisted and changed by human beings. Resistance and change
often begin in our art, the art of words.
The story is a powerful tool, one that harnesses the future to create change in the present.
Stories plant seeds, beautiful visions that have the potential to germinate into alternative worlds
that show us that business as usual is not inevitable.
So as we struggle to upend the current status quo of rampant emissions and extraction at any cost,
what role do visions of the future hold? Are they useful? And what stories and artistic utopias
are out there right now that might bring a light to the looming darkness of climate chaos?
This video is made possible by the people who support me through Nebula.
When you subscribe to Nebula using my link below, you can access a brand new exclusive bonus video
to this one, envisioning what an ecological future will look like in 2120.
You can also watch my next video on China's impact on climate change a month early,
alongside more than 20 other Nebula exclusive art changing climate videos when you sign up
for Nebula using my link below. If you want to learn more, make sure to stick around until the end.
In the days of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, utopias were under attack. Convinced that the
utopian socialism of their predecessors was not an effective way to end capitalism, Marx and Engels
rejected any form of utopianism. They immersed themselves instead in the material realities
of history and developed critiques alongside a theory of change that they called scientific
socialism. This framework, unlike utopian socialism, argued that society wouldn't be changed by
appealing to reason or ideals. It would only be transformed by changing the material conditions
of the economy, or in other words, the direct overthrow of the ruling classes by the working
class. As a result, Marx and Engels were critical of sketching out what possible future worlds would
look like and relying on those visions to create revolution. For them, socialism was to be achieved
not by attempting to appeal to people's minds, but instead revealing and exacerbating the already
present contradictions within capitalism, the core of which was the struggle between the working
class and the capitalist class. This is not to say that Marxists never once dreamed of the future,
nor that speculative fiction is useless in the struggle for a world beyond fossil capitalism,
but instead that as much as we need the backbone of scientific socialism to critique
fossil capitalism and guide us through ending it, we also need visions of the future that give us
something to struggle for. We need to imagine what's on the horizon, because those imaginings,
those brushstrokes of the future, are what fuel our fire. Visualizing different worlds,
at least for me, gives energy and purpose to the hard struggle of the present. So bringing
these fictions to the page, to the canvas, and to the screen are powerful tools of revolution.
Which is why, as Ashley C. Ford writes, the goal of oppressors is to limit your imagination about
what is possible without them. So you might never imagine more for yourself and the world you live
in. Imagine something better. Get curious about what it actually takes to make it happen,
and then fight for it every day. But these utopias or visionary fictions don't have to be,
and indeed shouldn't be, perfect goalposts that railroad us into a strict path towards liberation.
Indeed, as DeGro's scholar Georgios Callis writes, paraphrasing Marxist scholar David Harvey,
we should oppose utopias that are meant as models or blueprints, not so much because they are
unrealistic, but because the realization of a perfect ideal tolerates no objection and crushes
everything that stands in its way. Callis goes on to say that we need dialectical utopias, ones that
are contradictory, messy, and incomplete that challenge us and make us reflect on our own world.
Ultimately, this means we need to envision, in the words of the Zapatistas, a world where many
worlds fit. Callis authors, filmmakers, artists, and creatives need to develop a diverse range
of future worlds, so that it's not just Elon Musk, or a white guy like me controlling the narrative
of what's possible. So if we know that these visionary fictions are crucial to sustaining
the fire of an ecologically just struggle for a better world, who's dreaming up those futures
right now? Which artists and what stories are bringing light to the darkness of climate chaos?
The worlds of the future are bright, and coursing through those future worlds are political currents
that show us that a life without capitalism is possible. D-growth, eco-anarchism, and eco-socialism
all seek an economy beyond capitalism that is just and ecologically sound. But often,
the political discussions of how to achieve these tendencies lack engaging narratives.
It's hard to get excited about the future when technical terms like means of production
and metabolic rift are all you hear. While it is crucial to understand these terms in the political
and economic theory behind tendencies like socialism, we need stories to fill those frameworks
with emotion and passion. The story is the spoonful of sugar that makes the medicine go down,
or the Trojan horse that plants the seed of resistance by revealing the beauty and flaws
of more liberatory worlds. Politicians in power have long understood the potency of envisioning
future worlds. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, for example, didn't just submit a jargon-heavy
Green New Deal proposal to Congress and wipe her hands clean. She, together with Naomi Klein,
painted her own vision of what a future with a Green New Deal could be in order to sway people's
hearts. The biggest problem in those early years was a labor shortage. We're building a national
smart grid retrofitting every building in America, putting trains like this one all across the country.
And on the campaign trail, candidates will often ground their platform in personal anecdotes.
Through hard work and perseverance, my father got a scholarship to study in a magical place.
Because as neuroscientist Paul Zak reveals in his research, when we hear a narrative rich with
emotion and tension, our brain releases chemicals that influence to create change. So for the
anti-capitalist climate movement, we need not only direct action and political struggle,
but also stories, narratives, and visuals that reveal suffering and success not just in the
present, but visionary fictions that explore the possibilities of the future. And there are already
countless artists out there doing exactly that. One of the core examples is Ursula K. Le Guin's
The Dispossessed, a sci-fi classic that delves into the specific contours of ecological anarchism.
The Dispossessed gives us two possible futures. One on the resource-rich planet of Urus that
squanders its abundant resources through an overproducing market economy. And another on
the resource-scarce planet of Inaris, a planet of exiled anarchists who thrive communally on very
little. The Dispossessed is ultimately a story of opposite planets and opposite futures. Opposite
in the sense that the planet of Inaris is the moon of Urus and vice versa. But opposite in the sense
that as DeRoth theorists Georgios Kalis and Hugh March write, Inaris is what Urus is not, and Urus
is what Inaris is not. Dispossessed possessed, barren lush, horizontal hierarchical. Le Guin
doesn't just tell us what anarchism can be, she shows us through, for example, the small vignettes
of honorasti children who are unable to conceive of a prison because their society doesn't function
on the punitive basis of our current world. They had picked up the idea of prisons from episodes in
the life of Odo, which all of them who had elected to work on history were reading. And when a
circuit history teacher came through the town, he expounded the subject with the reluctance of a
decent adult forced to explain an obscenity to children. Or through the massive afforestation
projects that the people of Inaris collectively maintain. He worked now in a planting crew,
thousands of seedlings raised in the green mountains. They planted the little trees in the
dust, and they looked back as they went. There was a mist of green, very faint, on the pallid curves
and terraces of the desert. On the dead land lay, very likely, a veil of life. The dispossessed
reveals the quiet, yet messy possibilities of a liberatory future. As philosopher Andre Gors notes,
the book crafts the most striking description I know of the seductions and snares of anarchist
society. And the work of speculative fiction and ecological utopias has blossomed since Le Guin
published her book in 1974. SolarPunk, for example, has witnessed a bright new emergence of artists
and writers developing futures that look very different from the capitalist extraction economies
of today. Animation Studio delines SolarPunk world of electric apple harvesters, lush farming
cooperatives run on solar and wind power, and small technologies that tighten the connection
between humanity and nature is a perfect example of a SolarPunk future. One that mends the relationship
between nature and humanity through appropriate and community centric technologies, cooperatives,
and decentralization. The imaginings of SolarPunk artists reveal that an ecological future doesn't
have to mean living in scarcity or giving things up. It instead shows us how beautiful the world
could be when we live with appropriate abundance. Writer Susan Kay Quinn's short story, The Seven
Sisters, gives us another glimpse into a SolarPunk world, one that isn't a romanticized and unrealistic
view of the future, but instead reveals that struggle and loss will still exist in a post-capitalist
ecological world. Quinn's future zooms in on a tea farming cooperative in the American South
that seeks to decolonize tea through education and fair practices. At the farm, a close-knit
community of chosen family all grows the tea together. The whole farm met the mandates to be net
zero on carbon and make your own energy. But the tea house was quite the spectacle of green tech
from the passive solar design and geothermal heat pumps to the solar glass windows and rooftop
windmills. But in a very SolarPunk manner, the farm doesn't rely on the backbreaking work of
harvesting tea in the blistering sun of a hotter world. They instead use solar power harvest boats.
But of course, not everything is pure bliss. The Seven Sisters' cooperative struggles to stay afloat
after a heat dome scorches seven acres of their crop to ashes and their harvest drones fall into
disrepair. Quinn shows that while the future is promising, there's still loss and pain, revealing
that an ecologically just world will certainly be more pleasant to live within, but it won't be
without scuffs and bruises. Alongside SolarPunk, there are also visions of decolonial, anti-racist
realities embodied in the afrofuturistic visions of movies like Black Panther.
Specifically, the capital city of Wakanda imagines a vibrant urban center that seamlessly melds
accessible transit with pedestrian-centric roads, local fisheries, thrombing markets,
and the use of advanced technology in the service of ecological living. All the while
trying to answer the question, what does the world look like without the destructive influence of
white capitalist colonialism? This imagery is crucial, and is expanded in the Indigenous futures
of storytellers like Gina Maguire, who drills down into the complicated impacts of a future
where meat is banned in the US. And how does that work?
He had never liked the idea of the plant-based proteins of meat being made and had watched
with fear for his people, as the rising protein prices had come along with industry. He had watched
as their waters had been increasingly fished by all those who couldn't afford the protein.
Each of these fictions grounds notions of degrowth, anarchism,
ecosocialism, anti-racism, and anti-colonialism in tangible vignettes. They imbue these
politics with humanity and emotions, and allow us to stretch out our legs and walk around in
the world we're fighting for, if just for a moment. But there are also future visions from
scholars and activists, those that want to bring the power of the story to their political framework.
This includes work stretching all the way back to the utopian socialist William Morris' 1890
book News From Nowhere, which describes a socialist world in the year 2000. A world without private
property, hierarchies, money, class, or prisons. And since Morris, there's been a long tradition
of transforming the political into the fictional to give the struggle a motion and purpose.
Fiction allows the reader or viewer to step into another world or another person's shoes
and feel the result. As Professor of English Patricia Valderrama writes,
fiction can transmit information really effectively in non-technical language.
Troy Vitesse and Drew Pendergrass tap into this tradition in the last chapter of their book
Half Earth Socialism. After mapping out the political technicalities of Half Earth Socialism
through discussions of planning algorithms, transitions to renewable economies, and creating
a decolonial and biodiverse world, they paint a very tangible narrative of a person waking up
in a future that has achieved some level of Half Earth Socialism. While the world the protagonist
inhabits does sound beautiful, Pendergrass and Vitesse attempt not to romanticize their vision.
The solar factory workers in their world still want to go on vacation, albeit in this future
world that that vacation is furnished by the community. Edith mentioned the extra vacation
time, and I do like taking the train to the beach and staying in one of those fancy houses they
converted into a resort. And there's still cafeteria arguments, but this time it's about
what the cap on energy usage should be for the community. I can't believe those self-righteous
people you hang out with on that farm are pushing for a 750 watt quota. I'll just be voting for a
little more energy. 1,750 watts is not luxurious, and you know it. And characters still put in work
harvesting at local cooperative-owned farms that service the regional area. But at the same time,
it's a completely different future from our present. There's no fossil fuel extraction,
and the economy is democratically and ecologically planned. There are shared communal living situations,
not unlike very nice dorms, where families can raise their kids together, share and community
meals, and enjoy quiet or rowdy games of cards after a filling meal. But this future lays out
just one vignette of a political possibility. In contrast, the YouTube channel Prolacult
shows something radically different, a world built on hemp-based production, an economy that
sequesters far more carbon than it produces due to the fast-growing and carbon-sucking properties
of hemp, and builds a socialist and ultimately a communist world in the husk of a capitalist one.
What we require is the reindustrialization of the globe with a plant-based economy. We must
increase the production of goods using a combination of the natural sciences, engineering,
and carbon-negative raw materials like hemp. All of these worlds, from the coastal waters of Hawaii
to the deserts of Anaris, reveal the energizing possibilities of a post-capitalist, zero-carbon
world. But these are just possibilities. To make the many worlds of our imagination real,
we need to join the struggle of building liberatory, zero-carbon, and anti-capitalist worlds right
now. But where do we start? Everybody's afraid of daydreams. Daydreams are dangerous. Daydreams
are pieces of imagination. They're bits of poetry. They're the balloons that fly up in history.
That's Murray Bookchin, a political theorist who believed in the importance of developing
an ecological vision of the world that seeps into the unconscious minds of the masses and sparks
change. And hopefully the glimpses of the future worlds we've just witnessed do just that.
But daydreams can be a double-edged sword. They can change us, but they can also paralyze us.
Trapping us in the comfort and beauty of an unrealized future. So the purpose of these speculative
fictions is not to numb the pain of the current ecological and capitalist crisis. It's to ignite
a fire under us by revealing that other worlds are possible. We only get to live in those messy,
complicated, but beautiful futures if we struggle for them in the present. This means building those
decolonial farmer's collectives like the Seven Sisters Farm right now. It means for some in
Atlanta defending their largest remaining urban forest from destruction. It means organizing your
workplace to demand stronger control of production, and it means developing ecological, post-capitalist
solutions like regional environmental planning of half Earth socialism or hemp-based production.
This work of building those visionary fictions today is exemplified in the anarchist practices
of Naotopias. These political spaces develop more ecological and just pockets in the world
right now that seek self-administration, DIY attitudes, and a strong relationship with nature.
The free town of Christiania, right in the middle of Copenhagen, is a perfect example of this
Naotopia model. After a group of anarchists and ecological activists squatted in an abandoned
military base, the Danish government ceded the rights to that growing community. A community
that, while still having to navigate the realities of living in a capitalist economy,
is carving out ecological and anarchist organizational models that are reminiscent of Ursula
K. Le Guin's Anaris. But on some fundamental areas, we've tried to work on being independent.
We collect our own garbage, we do our own roadworks, for the younger children we have our
own children's institutions, a lot of stuff is done independently. Christiania is just one
future world, realized that there are so many other communities out there, like the 2500 strong
Catalan integral cooperative in Spain, that are struggling for worlds beyond ecologically
destructive capitalism. So I invite you to dream, take a moment out of your day and sculpt a beautiful
ecological, post-capitalist, decolonial, and just glimpse of the future. Write it down if you want
to, draw it if you can, but most importantly, start the work and struggle to make that world
possible today. And I did exactly that. I just made a whole speculative fiction bonus video which
envisions what would happen 100 years in the future if the city of Chicago defunded their
police department and invested in green infrastructure and jobs. Most of the green jobs created
after we divested from the police department were focused on universal aid and crisis management.
That video would do terribly with a YouTube algorithm, which is why I've uploaded it to the
creator-owned streaming platform Nebula. On Nebula, I don't have to worry about the algorithm or
video restrictions, because if you don't know by now, Nebula is a streaming platform built by and
for a growing collective of creators like me. It's where I publish all of my videos a month early
and release exclusive bonus videos regularly, like the one I just released about Chicago's
ecological future. I've already produced over 20 bonus and extended videos that are only available
on Nebula, like one on the problems with carbon capture or another on how the wellness industry
preys on your climate anxiety. You can even watch next month's OCC video on whether China is the
blame for the climate crisis right now on Nebula. In the eyes of the world, and especially those in
the US, China is the boogeyman of climate change. Because on Nebula, I'm always one video ahead.
Signing up for Nebula using my link, and this is crucial, you need to use my link,
is the best way to support our changing climate. It's like Patreon combined with Netflix,
but better for me and you. Because when you sign up, you don't just get access to my videos
ad-free, you get to watch all the insanely well-produced Nebula exclusive videos from your
favorite creators like Second Thought, who has an ongoing series on the history of fascism,
and how fascism so effectively became the way of life for an entire country,
or Wendover Productions, who made an hour-long documentary on sea-level rise in the Marshall
Islands. And there are hundreds of other Nebula exclusive videos and creator classes
available for your consumption. And if you sign up for Nebula using my link on screen right now,
or in the description, you can get 40% off per year, which is just $2.50 a month. Signing up
for Nebula is the single best way to support our changing climate. And in the process,
you can watch my videos a month early, get access to all my ad-free exclusive videos,
and support a blossoming collective of educational creators.
