I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know
What I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
What I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I love it so much, let me turn that down.
Hang on one second, that was way louder in my ear than it was on the desktop.
Well now I've screwed it all up, oh my god.
What a nightmare.
Okay, well either way, we're back, round two of this Google proceeding.
Hey, cut that off, hey, cut that out, cut that out, okay.
We wanted to get to the lawyers, the lawyers doing the stuff and here we are.
So we are going to go ahead and get started with this.
Right about now.
Oh, it's on mute, oh it's quiet.
If there are any audio issues, I look a little loud actually, hang on, I'm going to meet
myself like an adjustment.
Okay, that might be a little bit better as far as disturbance goes.
I'm going to lower myself up the audio here and the issues, let me know.
Such distrust is intensified by the fact that the moderation practices used to suppress
or amplify content remain largely a black box to the public.
Over the public explanations given by the platforms for taking down or suppressing content too
often seem like excuses that have to be walked back after scrutiny.
And due to exceptional secrecy with which platforms protect their algorithms and content
moderation practices, it's been impossible to prove one way or another whether political
bias exists.
So users are stuck with anecdotal information that frequently seems to confirm their worst
fears, which is why I've introduced two bipartisan bills, the platform accountability and consumer
transparency or the PACDAC.
Well, I don't know what bills he's going to talk about, but that is a good point.
That is a major concern that people have not addressed.
Well, I mean, I guess they're trying to address them now, so maybe it's unfair to say they
haven't addressed them, but that is the major concern, right?
Is that people don't know how things are being moderated and why.
In the last episode, the last part, we saw that the real Dorsey, our boy Jack, was recommending
three ways that Twitter could become, excuse me, Twitter could more transparently moderate
content.
Those ideas sucked.
One of them made a lot of sense, though, which was you get to choose your own algorithm.
I don't know what this guy's proposing, but either way, that is the major concern that
people have not had addressed.
So I appreciate him bringing it up.
Oh, I clicked on OBS, it's not going to work.
And the filter bubble transparency act to give users, the regulators, and the general public
meaningful insight into online content moderation decisions and how algorithms may be amplifying
or suppressing information.
So I look forward to continuing that discussion today.
My Democrat colleagues suggest that when we criticize the bias against conservatives that
we're somehow working the wraps, but the analogy of working the wraps assumes that it's legitimate
even to think of of you as wraps.
It assumes that you three Silicon.
That's a good point too.
That's a good point too.
I'm going to rewind that, actually, just because I want to hear that said again.
Oh, God, I'm still getting used to multiple.
Values.
Nope, shut up.
The bias against conservatives that we're somehow working the wraps, but the analogy
of working the wraps assumes that it's legitimate even to think of of you as wraps.
It assumes that.
Yeah, that's a good point.
So the idea that was built into section 230 that I've talked about before, by the way,
and that I've mentioned in a number of different videos, is that there was this policy that
was removed at the last minute to get this passed in a way that was, you know how, if
you don't know how American Congress or the Senate or whatever works.
So bills are written and proposed, and then someone from the opposite party will come
along and say, well, we'll vote on this if you add this part, right?
They'll say things like this.
And what this guy, I assume, was talking about is that there was a part of section 230 that
was removed the last minute, presumably, to get it passed, which was that these guys had
to be the kings of the Internet, the real Dorsey, Chuck, sucker, turd, and the Google
guys.
They had to be neutral, politically, in their moderation of content, but that part was removed
at the last minute.
So another video I've shown of people, of someone saying that, but obviously it's not
this video.
So I assume that's what he's referring to.
You three Silicon Valley CEOs get to decide what political speech gets amplified or suppressed,
and it is...
Also, he's saying three.
There are two Google guys.
Am I wrong about that?
Let me look that up real quick.
I mean, I just, he might be just, there's only three people there.
Oh, I'm totally wrong.
Okay, there is currently only one CEO of Google, and I apologize for that mistake.
I must be thinking of the founders of Google.
Yeah, that's right.
Okay, so there were two founders of Google.
In the last video, I criticized both of them.
I apologize for that.
There are two founders of Google, Larry Page and Sergey Brin.
The current CEO of Google, though, is one person.
So I said four kings of the internet.
I really meant three.
There's really only three kings of the internet.
If you just count Sundar Pichai, the current CEO of Google, who's quite young, 48, is pretty
young, I would say, for the CEO of Google.
Count him as the replacement for both Larry Page and Sergey.
So there you go.
Assumes that you're the arbiters of truth, or at the very least, the publishers.
Are arbiters.
Does anyone pronounce it that way?
It's obviously Arbiter, you moron.
Taking editorial decisions about speech.
So yes or no, I would ask this of each of the three of you.
Are the Democrats correct that you all are the legitimate referees over our political
speech?
Mr. Zuckerberg, are you the ref?
Senator, I certainly think not, and I do not want us to have that role.
Oh, our boy Chalk is loud.
Mr. Dorsey, are you the ref?
No, come on, Dorsey.
Mr. Pichai, are you the ref?
Wait, did Dorsey just say no quietly?
Let's listen to Chalk's secretary's answer versus Dorsey's.
Hang on a second.
The ref.
Senator, I certainly think not, and I do not want us to have that role.
Mr. Dorsey, are you the ref?
No.
Mr. Pichai, are you the ref?
Senator, I do think we make content moderation decisions, but we are transparent about it,
and we do.
Okay, so no one cares what Senator is saying.
Anyway, that's amazing.
That's exactly.
I can't help but laugh.
As I've said before, my thoughts, the reason why I'm so mean to Chalk Zuckerberg is because
I think he's a piece of trash.
He's not intelligent.
He has stolen all of his ideas from people from the Winklevoss twins who were so intelligent
and so innovative.
I don't like them either, but they were so intelligent and so innovative that despite
the fact he stole their idea, they went on and made a billion dollars doing something
else.
So they're not morons.
You have to at least admit that no one makes a billion dollars twice.
Well, very few people do.
The Winklevoss twins are a great example of that.
However, I've always spoken highly of Jack Dorsey.
Highly, that's unfair to say, I haven't spoken highly of him.
I've said, I think it's unfortunate that he's in this position he's in, and I understand
why he's in it, which is he did this coding project his mom could put on her refrigerator,
which is Twitter, someone, Jason Calicanis, Chris Saka, they invested a billion dollars
in it and he said, well, I can't turn down a billion dollars.
So here he is.
I mean, how could he say no to that?
It wouldn't have made sense to.
So now he's stuck in this position of supremely powerful CEO who sometimes has to, I guess,
speak in front of Congress and you can tell he hates it.
He's clearly just some weirdo who wants to do ayahuasca and sit in the desert for the
rest of his life.
He'd rather be a yogi in Tibet than be a CEO in Cali.
And so it's just, it's unfortunate he's in this position.
I've spoken highly about him and poorly about Chalk, and that's why I wanted to bring it
up.
Sundar, I didn't even know about him.
I thought he was one of the founders.
I thought he was Sergei.
When I heard Sundar, I just assumed it was Sergei, and that's the name I was micking
up because I knew Larry Page, but apparently this is the CEO of Google now.
So I don't know that much about this guy, but because he's the CEO of Google, and Google
of course owns YouTube, we have to respect him.
We have to say our father who art in Cali, Google be thy name, and we will just move
on.
But we really believe in support maximizing freedom of expression.
Jesus, shut up.
I'll take that as three no's, and I agree with that.
You are not the referees of our political speech.
That's why all three of you have to be more transparent and fair with your content moderation
policies and your content selection algorithms, because at the moment it is, as I said, largely
a black box.
There's real mistrust among the American people about whether you're being fair or transparent.
And this extends the concerns about the kinds of amplification and suppression decisions
your platforms may make on election day and during the post-election period if the results
of the election are too close to call.
So I just want to underscore again for my Democratic friends who keep using this really
bad referee analogy, Google, Facebook, and Twitter are not the referees over our democracy.
Now, second question, the PACDAC, which I referenced earlier, includes provisions to
give-
Okay, so I guess I should comment on that.
I guess that was a good point.
I don't know the Democrats who are referring to these guys as the refs.
I understand the analogy, of course, which is you have these CEOs of these major organizations
that are, I mean, so heavily involved in content moderation on the Internet that what else
could you possibly call them?
But they're claiming they're not.
So I guess I get the point there, but at the same time it would be nice if he had actually
mentioned who is mentioning that other than just saying my Democrat friends.
I just don't know.
I haven't heard it before as an American citizen.
I haven't heard that argument before until he mentioned it.
So I don't know what his, I guess what I'm trying to say is I don't know if he's just
kind of like making that up, but I don't want to think that, but maybe that's true.
If users do process and an explanation when content they post is removed.
So this is again, I should remind that because it was unfair to him.
He was in the middle of saying something when I started the PAC DAC, which I refer our democracy.
Here we go.
Now, second question, the PAC DAC, which I referenced earlier includes provisions to
give users do process and an explanation when content they post is removed.
So this is again a yes or no question.
Do you agree that user?
Great lawyer move by the way is all of you, everyone listening will know that yes or no
questions are not yes or no questions.
There's all kinds of gray area and being a human.
So you have all these caveats to yeses or noes and he's going to do a great lawyer move
by saying, by priming them, by priming the three most powerful people on the internet
by telling them this is a yes or no question.
Let's see how it goes.
Users should be entitled to do process and an explanation when content they post has
been taken down.
Mr. Zuckerberg.
Sorry, I should start that over.
Here I am.
I'm trying to talk over this guy, but apparently he's always talking.
Post is removed.
Clues provisions.
Now, second question, the PAC DAC, which I referenced earlier includes provisions to
give users do process and an explanation when content they post is removed.
So this is again a yes or no question.
Do you agree that users should be entitled to do process and an explanation when content
they post has been taken down?
Mr. Zuckerberg.
Senator, I think that that would be a good principle to have.
Thank you.
Mr. Dorsey.
Christ.
Absolutely.
We believe in a fair and straightforward appeals process.
Mr. Beshai.
Yes, Senator.
Really, thank you.
Okay.
So actually, Daddy Google had the best answer there, which is the most few words possible,
but actually, let's re-listen to those.
They were all yes, but.
The ball to have.
Senator, I think that that would be a good principle to have.
Thank you.
Well, actually, that wasn't a yes or no, was it?
That was just our boy, Chuck, saying, let me, whatever.
I'm sure his teleprompter told him to say, God, what a nightmare of a human.
Mr. Dorsey.
Absolutely.
We believe in a fair and straightforward appeals process.
Okay.
Dorsey saying the human thing.
Great.
Mr. Beshai.
Yes, Senator.
Really, thank you.
Okay.
Beshai had to stop himself.
Old Sundar there.
It looked like he was about to go into some rant about how awesome Google is and how
daddy Google is our Lord and Savior, and he had to stop himself.
So I guess I can appreciate that.
Mr. Zuckerberg, Mr. Dorsey, your platforms knowingly suppressed or limited the visibility
of this New York Post article about the content on.
Okay.
So we're finally getting to the point, this entire hearing, the entire reason this hearing
was called.
If you aren't from America, you won't know this.
We have an election that's going on right now.
It's still going on.
It should not.
Well, I guess, depending on who you ask, it shouldn't be going on right now, but excuse
me, I'm sorry.
It is still going on right now, COVID.
But when this was filmed, when this was live streamed, I'm rewatching the live stream.
When it was live streamed, there was a serious concern that social media platforms were suppressing
certain content that would affect the election.
And that particular story, that particular story was the Hunter Biden, who was the son
of Joe Biden, a new story about him that was highly negative.
So that was being suppressed for reasons that have been attested to by these companies on
their platforms, not here yet.
We haven't seen their attestation yet as to why they blocked or censored those posts.
We're going to see that soon.
But up until now, we're an hour and 20 minutes into a four hour hearing, and it hasn't been
brought up yet.
So we're going to see this right now.
Let's rewind it a bit and we'll see exactly what's going on here.
Mr. Zuckerberg, Mr. Dorsey, your platforms knowingly suppressed or limited the visibility
of this New York Post article about the content on Hunter Biden's abandoned laptop.
Many in the country are justifiably concerned.
How often the suppression of major news...
Well, he did say justifiably.
That's a bit of a tell there, isn't it?
Well, anyway.
Newspaper articles occurs online.
And I would say, Mr. Zuckerberg, would you commit to provide for the record a complete
list of newspaper articles that Facebook suppressed or limited the distribution of over the past
five years, along with an explanation of why each article was suppressed or the distribution
was limited?
Now, I know he's not going to get a straight answer.
Of course he's not.
But that's a really good question.
I don't know who this guy is, by the way.
They're blocking his name here.
I can't see who it is.
Assuming he's a conservative, I guess it goes to show you about that meme about stupid Americans.
I don't have a clue who this person is, but that's a really good question.
The answer...
Let's predict it, because I haven't watched this part yet.
Let's predict it.
The answer is going to be, we will get that to you or no, we can't provide it.
But he will not, of course, mention any platforms or newspapers that they've blocked, even though
they have done, by their own admission, blocking of particular URLs from certain sites.
Let's see what happens.
Senator, I can certainly follow up with you and your team to discuss that.
Okay, so, we have to give him a chance to continue, but as predicted, we'll get back to you.
Let's see.
Why is Zuck so loud?
Every time he comes on, I gotta turn it down, hang on a second.
We have an independent fact-checking program, as you're saying.
We try not to be arbiters of what's true ourselves, but we have partnered with fact-checkers around
the world to help assess that, to prevent misinformation and viral hoaxes from becoming
widely distributed on our platform.
And I believe that the information that they fact-check and the content that they fact-check
is public.
So I think that there's probably already a record of this that can be reviewed.
Okay, so not a terrible answer, can't be mad about that.
It was a very diplomatic answer, but the first part, as we predicted, was...
I'll have to get back to you on that, of course, we don't know.
My God, look at this guy.
Is he human even?
Either way, diplomatic answer, but the first part's exactly as predicted, which is...
He's not gonna give an answer, even though he knows there's URL blocking done.
Jack, later, I've seen some clips of this before, of this hearing before, and I know
Jack, later, addresses the real Dorsey, later addresses URL blocking, so we'll see how he
handles it, but of course, Zuck is gonna avoid it.
Chuck, secretary, he's an absolute nightmare for person.
But if you could do that as it applies to newspapers, that would be very helpful.
And Mr. Dorsey, would you commit to doing the same on behalf of Twitter?
We would absolutely be open to it, and we are suggesting going a step further,
which is aligned with what you're introducing in the PACDAC,
which is much more transparency around our process, content moderation process,
and also the results, the outcomes, and doing that on a regular basis.
I do agree and think that builds more accountability and ultimately that lends itself to more trust.
Great, thank you.
That was just a regular answer from Dorsey, unimpressive, very normal.
Not much to say about that, I guess.
A lot of time, either, but I often hear from conservative and religious Americans
who look at the public statements of your companies, the geographic concentration
of your companies, and the political donations of your employees,
which often are in the 80 to 90% to Democrat politicians,
and you can see why this lack of ideological diversity among the executives and employees
of your company could be problematic and may be contributing to some of the distrust
among conservatives and Republican users.
I guess the question that I would ask is, and Mr. Zuckerberg,
my understanding is that the person that's in charge of election integrity and security at Facebook
is a former Joe Biden staffer.
Is there someone that's closely associated with President Trump
who's in the same sort of election integrity role at Facebook?
And how do you all respond to that argument that there isn't sufficient backing?
So if you're not from America, this will seem very strange to you.
Well, I think it will, maybe it won't.
Like I said before, earlier in the stream, and I'll say again now,
the Section 230 bill that gives these people what they call a liability shield
between, or rather from, being targeted for things users say on their platforms
has to do with being a neutral party politically on these platforms.
That part of Section 230, though, was removed, explicitly removed.
Now it's been kind of, the version that exists now is watered down to where it's,
well, basically it doesn't mention that at all, so it's just kind of understood.
And so what this guy is trying to say, he's trying to get at the fact that
Section 230 needs to be removed or repealed or amended in a way
that actually highlights this problem by bringing up the fact that,
hey, look, at Facebook, a private company,
you have people who worked for Joe Biden now working on a platform that promotes political content,
but you don't have a Trump, I guess, counterpart to that position.
And so that's his point here, which is, if you think about it from like an American capitalist point of view,
it doesn't make a lot of sense because they have a private company that can do whatever they want.
But if you look at it from the, how Section 230 was supposed to be initiated,
it makes a lot of sense, which is why this argument is being brought up.
In terms of the political ideology or diversity in your companies,
and how do you deal with the lack of sort of trust that creates among conservatives?
Let's see if we can have about three brief answers there.
Who was that?
Who are you?
Senator, I think having balance is valuable, and we try to do that.
I'm not aware of the example that you say of someone in charge of this process
who worked for Biden in the past, so we can follow up on that if that's right.
Follow up on the record for the rest of this answer, please, Mr. Zuckerberg.
All right.
Who was that?
Who was that guy?
Mr. Dorsey.
Well, this is why I do believe it's important to have more transparency around our process and our practices.
And it's independent of the viewpoints that our employees hold.
We need to make sure that we're showing people that we have objective policies in enforcement.
And Mr. Pekai.
In these teams, there are people who are liberal, republican, libertarian, and so on.
We are committed, we consult widely with important third-party organizations across both sites
when we develop our policies.
And, you know, as a CEO, I'm committed to running it without any political bias,
but happy to engage more in answer.
Thank you, gentlemen, and thank you, Senator Zuckerberg.
Oh, that was Mr. Wicker.
I'm sorry.
So from the previous episode, that was Mr. Wicker, who apparently is the speaker for the Senate.
I didn't realize that.
He was leading this meeting, and I apologize for forgetting that voice.
Oh, God, now I didn't see who you recognized.
Thank you, gentlemen, and thank you, Senator Thun.
The ranking member has now deferred to Senator Blumenthal.
Sir, you are recognized.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the ranking member.
I want to begin by...
Okay, we're going to skip this.
We're going to skip this.
The reason we're going to skip this is because everyone wanted to see Teddy C., our boy T. Cruz,
roast the real Dorsey, and I have to give it to you.
I have to, because, yeah, Thunberg will get back to you, whatever your name is,
but Teddy C., T. Cruz, roasting the real Dorsey has to happen this episode,
and I have to get off in 30 minutes anyway.
So we will...
Well, about 30 minutes.
I could go a little bit longer.
Anyway, we're going to see T. Cruz roast JD, the real Dorsey, Jesus Dorsey,
and we will...
Well, if we can see him roast the real Zuck, too.
That would be awesome.
Chairman, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing.
Oh, perfect.
God, I'm good at that.
That was awesome.
The three witnesses we have before this committee today collectively pose,
I believe, the single greatest threat to free speech in America.
Jesus.
And the greatest threat we have to free and fair elections.
Jesus.
Yesterday, I spent a considerable amount of time speaking with both Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Pichai.
I have concerns about the behavior of both of their companies.
I would note...
Okay, so I didn't know that before watching this,
because this is the first time I've seen this,
but apparently he talked to Pichai and the chalk secretary before,
and that's apparently why he decides to lean in on the real Dorsey.
Again, I haven't seen this before,
but I've been told that the roasting he gives to the real here is pretty brutal.
So let's see what happens.
That Facebook is, at the minimum, at least trying to make some efforts
in the direction of defending free speech.
Google, I agree with the concerns that Senator Klobuchar raised.
Google, I would note that Facebook is, at the minimum,
at least trying to make some efforts in the direction of defending free speech.
Google.
Yeah, that change in lighting or that cut, whatever that was, that was not me.
This is supposed to be the live stream from NBC.
I don't know what caused that.
If that was a cut in the video, I have nothing to do with it.
If someone knows more about that, let me know.
I agree with the concerns that Senator Klobuchar raised.
I think Google has more power than any company on the face of the planet.
And the antitrust concerns are real.
The impact of Google is profound.
And I expect we will have continued and ongoing discussions about Google's
abuse of that power and its willingness to manipulate search outcomes
to influence and change election results.
In all honesty, I'm not saying this to give the guy a hard time.
He hasn't even gotten what the question is.
There's nothing to give him a hard time about.
But what is he looking at?
Is there actually a camera on the person he's talking to?
He's really like, he's zoned in like a hawk on whatever he's looking at.
But today, I want to focus my questioning on Mr. Dorsey on Twitter.
I knew it.
Okay.
So that explains it.
That explains why I've heard so many stories, so many legends already
about why T-Cruz leans in so heavily to Jack D.
Because apparently he's already questioned the real Zuck in Sundar.
So let's see what happens.
Three players before us, I think Twitter's conduct has by far been the most egregious.
Or I could just listen to his reason.
So I guess that makes sense too.
Mr. Dorsey, does Twitter have the ability to influence elections?
No.
Dorsey.
Dorsey, come on.
He didn't even say American elections, the real Dorsey.
Come on.
Okay, let's see what happens.
I mean, I'm...
That's shocking.
You don't believe Twitter has any...
Wait, did you see T-Cruz's reaction then?
Does Twitter have the ability to influence elections?
No.
You don't believe Twitter has any ability to influence elections?
No, we are one part of a spectrum of communication channels that people have.
So you're testified to this committee right now that Twitter...
Oh my God, T-Cruz is laughing.
Wait.
The channels that people have.
You're testified to this committee right now that Twitter, when it silences people,
when it censors people, when it blocks political speech, that has no impact on elections.
People have choice of other communication channels.
Not if they don't hear information.
If you don't think you have the power to...
Okay, that was the fault of T-Cruz there.
T-Cruz did not...
He was responding to the real Dorsey before the real Dorsey finished.
So let's listen to that again.
What happens is, the real Dorsey says, and pay attention for this, the real Dorsey says,
people have choice.
T-Cruz responds to, Teddy C responds to the statement, people have choice,
but the real Dorsey isn't finished yet.
Hang on one second.
Did I understand that right? Let's see.
That Twitter, when it silences people, when it censors people, when it blocks political speech,
that has no impact on elections?
People have choice of other communication channels.
Not if they don't hear information.
Yeah, so that's exactly what happens.
So the real Dorsey is saying, people can choose whatever communication channel they want.
Of course, he doesn't say that because he's high on ayahuasca right now.
He says, people have choice, pause.
Of other communication channels, pause.
And T-Cruz comes in and says, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
People don't have choice if they don't hear the information.
And that's where this is probably going to go.
And I haven't watched this, so I don't know where this is going to go,
but I know that from what I've been told, it devolves into Teddy Cruz
just really beating up on the real Dorsey.
Let's see what happens.
If you don't think you have the power to influence elections, why do you block anything?
That's a good question.
That's a really good question.
Well, I guess, well, no, it's not because there's other things he could be trying to avoid
other than affecting elections.
He could be trying to avoid real world, excuse me, I can't speak right now.
He could be trying to avoid real world violence, so I guess that's not really a...
At first I thought that was a good question, but it might not be.
Well, we have policies that are focused on making sure that more voices on the platform are possible.
We see a lot of abuse and harassment which ends up silencing people
and helping them leave from the platform.
All right, Mr. Dorsey, I find your opening questions, your opening answers,
absurd on their face. Let's talk about the last...
Was there a cut there I didn't see?
That wasn't a response to what the real just said.
Hang on.
It ends up silencing people and helping them leave.
Okay, so he's saying that they have policies that are in place because people get bullied
and they have to leave the platform for being bullied for whatever reason.
And he's saying, look, our policies make sure the most people possible are on the platform.
I don't know if that's true or not, but let's just assume it's true for now.
But he's saying, our policies ensure the most people possible are on the platform.
And listen to what T-Crew says.
All right, Mr. Dorsey, I find your opening questions, your opening answers, absurd on their face.
So, okay, is he just changing the subject or is that... Am I crazy?
Whatever.
Let's talk about the last two weeks in particular.
As you know, I have long been concerned about Twitter's pattern of censoring and silencing
individual Americans with whom Twitter disagrees.
But two weeks ago, Twitter and to a lesser extent, Facebook.
What if Twitter silences T-Crews?
I don't want them to.
I'm actually on the... I won't say I agree with Ted Cruz on everything, but what he's saying so far,
I'm like, yeah, they should prevent fewer people from being on the platform.
Bullying and harassment is one thing, but T-Crew isn't talking about that.
He's not talking about bullying and harassment.
He's talking about the propagation of news articles.
And I feel like Twitter should not play a role in silencing people who propagate news articles.
So, I've kind of been leaning towards what he's saying right now.
But for this particular point, well, I guess I just...
Let me just listen out to what he's saying.
Rewind.
Cross-State silencing individual Americans with whom Twitter disagrees.
But two weeks ago, Twitter and to a lesser extent, Facebook crossed a threshold that is fundamental in our country.
Two weeks ago, Twitter made the unilateral decision to censor the New York Post in a series of two blockbuster articles,
both alleging evidence of corruption against Joe Biden.
The first concerning Ukraine, the second concerning Communist China.
And Twitter made the decision, number one, to prevent users, any user from sharing those stories.
And number two, you went even further and blocked the New York Post from sharing on Twitter its own reporting.
Okay, so you can see the point he was getting at here.
The point he was getting at, the first, the opening question, if you will, was,
real Dorsey, do you think Twitter can influence elections?
And if the real Dorsey had said, of course we can influence elections.
We recently influenced the Ugandan election.
Then he would have said, oh, that's interesting, because you recently blocked news articles related to a presidential candidate's family.
There's debates, I guess, about whether or not a presidential candidate's family should play into whether or not you should vote for a presidential candidate.
However, that's the point he was obviously going to bring up, and now he's bringing it up again.
In spite of the fact the real Dorsey has said no Twitter plays no role in elections,
of course that's a ridiculous thing for Dorsey to say, I don't know why he said that.
It's obviously untrue, I think probably provably untrue.
Because you know how like whenever you do like campaigning, or I guess do campaigning,
whenever you are the subject, let's say victim of campaigning, you'll often see,
like if you get an email or if you actually do a survey, which you should never do,
if you actually do a survey, you'll see at the end like how'd you hear about us, tell us how you hear about us.
And an option is always Twitter, so I wonder if there's a way to prove that, well, it's just untrue.
I mean, of course Twitter plays some role in influencing elections because it's a place to advertise.
It's a place to make yourself known, make your policies known, to respond to people defaming you.
It's a place for all of that, so it's silly to say that they play no role.
I kind of got off, that was a tangent there.
My I guess overall point was that I see where Ted Cruz is going with this line of questioning.
I don't think it's going to work out, I think the real Dorsey is probably going to keep it close to the chest
and go with the whole, look, I'm just here to put Twitter on my mom's fridge.
I'm not here to influence elections or anything, let's see what happens.
Why did Twitter make the decision to censor the New York Post?
Okay, I should rewind because it's unfair, I know it's unfair, I'm sorry.
Rewind so that I see exactly the full question.
This is a long one though.
Americans with Twitter disagrees.
But two weeks ago, Twitter and to a lesser extent Facebook,
crossed a threshold that is fundamental in our country.
Two weeks ago, Twitter made the unilateral decision to censor the New York Post in a series of two blockbuster articles,
both alleging evidence of corruption against Joe Biden, the first concerning Ukraine,
the second concerning Communist China, and Twitter made the decision.
I have to pause it again, I'm sorry, before the end of it. I didn't notice that the first time,
but blockbuster articles, Communist China, it doesn't matter if you're a fan of Ted Cruz or not.
I'm actually coming into this as bipartisan, believe it or not.
But that's obviously inflammatory language is meant to imply the articles were,
I mean they were going to completely destroy Joe Biden, they weren't about Joe Biden,
they were about Hunter Biden, and of course bringing Communist China into it,
implying that he's a communist who works with Communist China.
Just something I noticed.
Number one, to prevent any user from sharing those stories.
And number two, you went even further and blocked the New York Post from sharing on Twitter its own reporting.
Why did Twitter make the decision to censor the New York Post?
We had a hacked materials policy.
When was that policy adopted?
That feedback is not from me, that's from the stream.
Okay, so he's saying they had a hacked materials policy.
That, I played that in the last clip and I remember thinking about it,
because in the last clip, part one, what I was doing was I skipped ahead to the Ted Cruz,
because I was like, this is what everyone really wants to see as a Ted Cruz,
and I just skipped to a random part and I played this part randomly.
But I thought about that and I thought, well, hang on, is that true though?
They have a hacked materials policy?
But we found out in the last part that they only flag things they literally see,
like a human sees, right?
So that's kind of concerning too.
Because when you think about it, in a hacked materials policy case,
it has to be a hacked material that's retweeted by or propagated by
someone they know or someone that one of their staffers are following.
Because in that last part, in that part one, they definitely pointed out
that, hey, look, we saw the president's tweet, we responded because we saw it,
that other tweet you mentioned that it took us two months to get to,
the reason why we didn't get to it was we didn't see it.
They clearly said that, right?
So, it's a weird thing to bring up.
I mean, of course, Dorsey's not thinking about all this in his head.
I got hindsight 2020 here.
He's not thinking like, oh, earlier I said X, now I've got hacked policy Y.
So I guess I understand that.
But a weird thing to cite when you don't consistently handle the hacked policy.
Anonymous is saying in the chat, like Snowden, it doesn't matter if it's a hacked policy.
Yeah, exactly right.
If that hacked policy is new, then it's new.
But even if it is new, reality winner, all of her stuff was propagated via Twitter.
So, I mean, this isn't like something that Twitter sticks to.
And it's an interesting thing to bring up.
Let's see what he says.
In 2018, I believe.
In 2018.
Okay, so he did say, I guess that's a fair point to him.
I should have let it play out.
Let me rewind that just to be sure.
But it sounds like what he's saying is they enacted that hacked stuff policy in 2018.
We had a hacked materials policy that we adopted in 2018, I believe.
Okay, so if it's adopted in 2018, that changes a few things.
That means reality winner wouldn't be a part of that, which makes sense.
However, is WikiLeaks still on the platform?
Let me check.
Let's see.
Oh, WikiLeaks is still on the platform.
Oh.
Dorsey.
Dorsey, no.
What are the last posts?
13 hours ago?
Dorsey.
Oh, no.
I'm looking through.
This looks hacked, Dorsey.
Dorsey, this looked hacked.
Oh, there's a clip of Noam Chomsky.
He's looking rough.
He's becoming Denim Santa Claus.
Well, either way, I guess that policy doesn't apply to people that they like.
But anyway, let's move on.
In 2018, go ahead.
What was the policy?
What was the policy?
Limiting the spread of materials that are hacked.
We didn't want Twitter to be a distributor for hacked materials.
Another thing they don't actually lean into, which they should, is what a hacked material is.
Because of WikiLeaks, I'm assuming the reason why WikiLeaks gets a pass is because they're a publisher.
I'm assuming that basically what's happening there is Twitter is saying,
WikiLeaks, where'd you get that stuff?
And WikiLeaks is saying, we can't reveal our sources.
And they go, okay, fine, you're a publisher or whatever.
I assume that's the issue there.
But then again, that would contradict why they would shut down the New York Post in this exact situation.
We found that the New York Post, because it showed the direct materials, screenshots of the direct materials.
And it was unclear how those were attained, that it felt under this policy.
No, okay, that was a bad...
Ted Cruz, I'm going to let you get to it.
You're going to get to it, Ted Cruz, you're a bulldog here.
But that is not a good response, the real Dorsey.
That's a bad response.
So he's saying it was unclear how the materials were ascertained.
So we flagged it under a hacked materials policy.
Now that's obviously, obviously, a policy they only enact or if they want, right?
There's no way they carry that out 100% of the time.
There's no way.
It was unclear how the materials were ascertained.
Every day you can find people from the InfoSet community on Twitter who post documents.
I'm not going to name who the Twitter account is.
I shouldn't do that.
I don't want them to get in trouble.
There's a Twitter account I follow that I use a lot for resources that what they do is their job,
I guess they consider it their job, is to find like AWS, like IPs or I guess VPSs,
that have documents that are exposed to the public internet.
Just pull them down and go, here they are.
And that's common.
So again, that's fine.
They can enact the policy however they want, but it just comes back to the point that people have been making,
which is you only target people you notice, which is the president, big names like New York Post.
You're obviously targeting people based on the reach they have, not on your policies.
And during an election cycle, that can be considered, well, we'll go on to see what Ted Cruz considers it,
but if you ask me, it could be considered tampering with the election.
In your view, if it's unclear the source of a document, and in this instance,
the New York Post documented what it said the source was, which it said it was a laptop owned by Hunter Biden
that had been turned into a repair store.
So they weren't hiding what they claimed to be the source.
Okay, I didn't see that.
I don't remember that part of the story either.
So by the way, everyone listening to this in the future and now,
I said in the last video, I haven't reiterated it enough this time, but I'm not like pro any of these people.
I'm trying to approach this as objectively as possible.
And just right now, it sounds like Dorsey is trying to defend a policy they don't ever, ever enact unless they feel like it.
And so that's why I'm kind of saying what I'm saying about Dorsey.
And Ted Cruz is a good point here, which is, hey, look, you can call that computer hacked, sure.
But if you say you couldn't verify the source, we can verify the source.
So let's see what Dorsey says.
Is it in your position that Twitter, when you can't tell the source blocks, blocks press stories?
No, not at all.
Well, then why would you say that, Cruz?
You just said they could tell the source, you dummy.
Did I miss that?
Did I just get that backwards?
Don't contradict yourself, Cruz.
Come on.
How those were attained, that it felt under this policy.
So in your view, if it's unclear the source of a document, and in this instance, the New York Post documented what it said the source was,
which it said it was a laptop owned by Hunter Biden that had been turned into a repair store.
So they weren't hiding what they claimed to be the source.
Is it in your position that Twitter, when you can't tell the source blocks, blocks press stories?
No, not at all.
Our team made a fast decision, the enforcement action, however, of blocking URLs, both in tweets and in DM, in direct messages, we believe was incorrect.
And we changed.
Okay.
So that's something I didn't know.
That's pretty brutal.
That's not a very good question.
But I think we should be able to understand the source.
We should understand the source, but there's no way we could understand the source.
we believe was incorrect, and we changed.
Okay, so that's something I didn't know.
That's pretty brutal.
That's a pretty heavy testament to the action Twitter can take.
That's the real Dorsey. That's heavy.
I did not think, I guess I should have known
because you shouldn't trust Twitter anyway or Facebook,
but they have the ability to block URLs and DMs.
Holy shit.
That's crazy.
You can't DM something.
Twitter doesn't want you to DM to someone you want to DM it to.
Okay, so he is at least saying that was a mistake,
but he's clearly played out.
And of course, you might be saying to yourself,
hey, Stack, of course DMs are monitored by these companies,
but you're missing the point of these companies
have been leaning into the idea that they don't control your data.
That's what Facebook owning WhatsApp is all about.
That's what it's all about.
They don't just own WhatsApp randomly.
I've been saying for years that you shouldn't trust WhatsApp.
Other people do.
In fact, it's one of those popular apps worldwide for messaging.
But I mean, for this reason, like what he's saying is,
I mean, can that happen at Facebook?
Can that happen at WhatsApp?
I don't know.
But he just clearly admitted something I did not know previously,
though I assumed, which is if we don't want you to tweet something,
or I'm sorry, DM something on Twitter, you won't do it.
And he is saying it's a mistake, which is nice.
I appreciate that.
But that's heavy, man.
That's a tacit admission.
I mean, it makes me want to get to Ted Cruz questioning Zuckerberg.
He said he won't do it on this panel, which sucks.
But I wish he would because I want to know that.
Like, hey, man, is that something you can do?
Can you block URLs in WhatsApp messages?
I mean, I know they can because I know that their messages are decrypted at their server
and then re-encrypted and sent to the person they're meant to be sent to.
That's not uncommon knowledge.
It's just something people don't quite understand.
So they definitely can do it.
But hearing it said here in this context where they're under oath,
it makes a big difference.
Today.
I got to rewind it again, Christ.
I'm sorry.
Team made a fast decision.
The enforcement action, however, of blocking URLs,
both in tweets and in DM, in direct messages,
we believe was incorrect.
Okay, I'm going to pause right there.
He's saying that was incorrect.
Thank you for saying that, Dorsey, but still scary as hell.
And we changed it.
Okay, right now the New York Post is still blocked from tweeting two weeks later.
Yes, they have to log into their account, which they can do at this minute,
delete the original tweet which fell under our original enforcement actions,
and they can tweet the exact same material from the exact same article,
and it would go through.
Okay, I hope everyone understood that because that sounded insane.
So I'm sorry, Dorsey.
I didn't mean to pause it on such an embarrassing picture of you.
You're actually my favorite of these three weirdos here in Congress.
So he's saying the material, because it was blocked by their initial policy,
to fix that issue, they have to go in, delete the tweet,
type the tweet exactly as it was, and post it,
and their account will be reinstated with the tweet posted.
We'll listen to that again, because as you've learned by now for sure,
I'm not a credible witness, but that sounded like what he said.
And if that's true, that's stupid.
Just let them keep tweeting, just post the tweet as it was.
We know you have the power to do that.
Christ, you can monitor URLs and their DMs.
How could you not fix that?
Let's listen to that again.
We changed it.
Today, right now the New York Post is still blocked from tweeting two weeks later.
Yes, they have to log into their account, which they can do at this minute,
delete the original tweet, which fell under our original enforcement actions,
and they can tweet the exact same material from the exact same article,
and it would go through.
So Mr. Johnson, you're a bit...
That is what he's saying.
He's saying they just re-type the tweet with the same URL and everything.
It would go through, but they have to go into their account and delete it first.
I'm not saying that they can't do that.
They should do that.
In fact, if they want to get back on Twitter as quickly as possible,
they should do that.
But clearly, that's not their responsibility.
You're saying you changed the policy and you're still blocking them from an old policy?
That can't be right.
I mean, Jack, come on.
We're friends, buddy.
Jack, the beard, the nose ring, the ayahuasca, we're friends.
Why are you doing this?
The ability is you have the power to force a media out, and let's be clear.
The New York Post isn't just some random guy tweeting...
Okay, so Ted Cruz is bringing up a good point here, which is...
I hope this is the point he's bringing up.
I guess I should let him finish what I'm not going to.
I assume...
Well, I will let him finish.
It's not right now.
I think what he's going to get out of here, which he should get out, is...
You're saying you can implement policies that stop the New York Post or any news outlet from tweeting,
and then we just have to wait for you to correct them or for the news outlets to correct them
based on your arbitrary decisions after the fact?
That sounds pretty crazy, which it does sound pretty crazy.
Let's see what happens.
I'll put everyone to that.
Media out, and let's be...
So, Mr. Dorsey, your ability is you have the power to force a media out, and let's be clear.
The New York Post isn't just some random guy tweeting...
The New York Post has the fourth highest circulation of any newspaper in America.
The New York Post is over 200 years old.
The New York Post was founded by Alexander Hamilton, and your position is that you can sit in Silicon Valley and...
That feedback is not mine.
That's all done.
Sorry.
And your position is that you can sit in Silicon Valley and demand of the media,
that you can tell them what stories they can publish,
and you can tell the American people what reporting they can hear.
Is that right?
No.
This was a...
Oh, gosh.
That hurt me to hear.
As everyone listening will know, the real Dorsey is my favorite of the kings of the Internet.
And I don't like kings of the Internet.
I don't like the real Dorsey, but he's my favorite of them.
And so hearing that...
Did you hear that?
No.
He just gave...
That was like...
His mom was disappointed in the science fair project,
and she tried to explain it to him, and he was like,
No.
No, it doesn't work like...
No.
Listen to that again.
That you can tell them what stories they can publish,
and you can tell the American people what reporting they can hear.
Is that right?
No.
This was a, you know, every person, every account,
every organization that signs up to Twitter agrees to a terms of service.
Boom.
That's it right there.
Everyone's favorite argument from all of Silicon Valley.
You agree to the terms of service.
Fuck you.
I hate that argument more than anything else on planet Earth.
It's unfair.
It's brutal.
It denies consent to users, to end users.
It's absolutely...
I'm going to say something crazy here.
A violation of human rights.
Term of service.
So media outlets must genuflect and obey your dictates
if they wish to be able to communicate with readers.
Is that right?
No.
Not at all.
We...
Well, wait.
He should have said that is right.
Wait a second, Dorsey.
No, you should have said that's right, because that's the law.
It's a flawed law, which I've always argued against,
but that is the law.
So what is he saying here?
That organization that signs up to Twitter agrees to the terms of service.
Right.
The terms of service.
So media outlets must genuflect and obey your dictates
if they wish to be able to communicate...
Oh, did you see Dorsey Twitch there, his eye?
Look at his left eye.
Yeah, outlets must genuflect and obey your dictates
if they wish to be able to communicate with readers.
Is that right?
Yes.
No, not at all.
What?
We recognize an error in this policy and specifically the enforcement.
What are you talking about?
No, that is right.
That is a totally right.
That's 100% right.
But now you're talking about the policy again?
Dorsey.
You're still blocking their posts.
You're still blocking their posts.
Right now, today, you're blocking their posts.
We're not blocking the posts.
Anyone can tweet.
He is from the New York Post on their Twitter account.
If they go into their account?
No, is your answer to that.
No, unless they genuflect and agree with your dictates.
Let me ask you something.
You claimed it was...
Okay, so I don't know if that was the...
Okay, so we can all tell Ted Cruz is a lawyer here.
Again, I've said before, I will say again, I'm not a fan of Ted Cruz.
I'm not a fan of the real Dorsey.
He's my favorite of the Internet Kings, but I'm not a fan of his.
So I have no dog in this fight, right?
But we can tell Ted Cruz is a lawyer here.
He's doing lawyerly things.
But he's kind of stepping over Dorsey's answers,
which doesn't make sense, because in my opinion,
Dorsey's answers are incriminating him.
I mean, he said already, we have a published policy
that everyone agrees to use his Twitter, which of course is false.
People do not consent to company policies whenever they use an account
on the website.
We know that to be true.
All kinds of studies have pointed that out.
It's misdirecting consent.
It's circumventing consent.
And it's going to be a problem in the near future.
All these people will be looked at as villains in the past or in the future.
We know that's true.
But then he says, no, no, no.
Wait, I'm not dictating what they can against it.
We just said you were Dorsey.
And then Ted Cruz, Teddy C goes, well, hey, look,
can they tweet or can they not?
And he goes, yeah, they can't if they go into their account.
And then Ted Cruz, he overpowers him verbally,
because I think there might be a delay also in kind of the live stream.
If this was done live, like in person,
it'd be more lawyerly professional, I guess I should say,
than what it is right now.
But, you know, T Cruz is overpowering him saying,
no, look, okay, your answer to that is no.
Of course, the real Dorsey has no opportunity to respond.
And then we get what we're getting at right now.
So I'm going to rewind that just to tag so you can see that.
If they go into their account.
No, it's your answer to that.
Unless they agree with your dictates.
Let me ask you something.
You claimed it was because of a hacked materials policy.
Is there someone feeding Ted Cruz information off of the side?
Did you see that?
I thought he just kind of randomly went to a different question like,
hey, let me ask you something.
But that actually looked like he was getting some information.
Let's see that again.
Unless they agree with your dictates.
Let me ask you something.
You claimed it was because of a hacked materials.
I might be wrong about that.
Never mind what I said.
I thought he was reading something, but it seems like he's not.
I don't think they agree at all.
That's your answer to that.
Yeah.
Policy.
I find that facially.
Highly dubious and clearly employed in a, in a deeply partial way.
The Twitter block,
the distribution of the New York Times,
a story a few weeks ago that purported to be based on copies.
it wasn't that was rough Dorsey come on man that was rough it's reporting about
the material not reporting the material let's see what he has to say I'm
genuinely curious where this is going but that was a bad defense buddy it's all
rewinded a bit for fairness because it's reporting about the material it
wasn't okay so his point was which I what I should have let him finish saying
was it's reporting about the material not distributing the material now of
course as Ted Cruz is going to point out that is not true the material was
distributed in fact I have a copy of it if that's illegal I'm sorry I'll delete
it anyone who's listening daddy Google I'm so sorry but that you know that was
a story that came about and then you know those materials were distributed and
they were distributed on Twitter which is where I got it from so I'm curious
about his point here I assume his point is that they justify the blocking of the
New York Post article by saying the materials in question were distributed
in the article but it's not what he said before it's not what he said before is
it because what he said before was it was a hacked materials policy that
implied not propagated well maybe that is what he's saying because when he said
they weren't trying to propagate hacked materials on Twitter I assumed what he
meant was like the Podesta emails they learned from 2016 and they said hey look
the Podesta emails was a nightmare for Twitter we never want to do that again
but it sounds like it's not what he's saying what he's saying is no literally
if a picture gets hacked and a news article shows that picture on their
site we will block the URL of that well he apologized for blocking the URLs but
we will do our best to suppress the spread of that URL on Twitter I think
maybe I've misunderstood what he was saying at first so let me again rewind it
just for clarity's sake for the entire question and let's listen to what he has
to say and Trump's tax returns which we're we don't find that the violation of
our terms of service in this policy in particular because it is reporting about
the material it wasn't distributing okay I got a point out did you see that
Kermit move there we're like he's looks like a sock puppet because they say
this is about he like picks his his head up like someone's trying to dramatically
move him because it is reporting about the material it wasn't distributing okay
well that's actually not true that they posted what they've reported to be
original source materials and federal law federal statute makes it a crime a
federal felony to distribute someone's tax returns against their knowledge so
that material was based on you'll have to delete some some stuff sorry about
that I don't think that was distributed in violation of federal law and yet
Twitter gleefully allowed people to circulate that but when the article was
critical of Joe Biden Twitter engaged in rampant censorship and silencing and
again we recognized errors in that policy we we changed it within 24 hours this is
wait a second wait a second wait a second Dorsey the real so the real is
saying the that was a flaw in the policy but then earlier he was saying okay let
me show you this time right I don't mean to be the guy who's calling Dorsey out
live but I might have to hear so we're at 140 31 but just a second ago what's it
was it 138 43 this was this was a you know every person every account every
organization that signs up to Twitter agrees to a terms of service
here we go unless they agree with your dictates let me ask you something you
claimed it was because of a hacked materials policy I find that facially
highly dubious and clearly employed in a deeply partial way did Twitter block the
distribution of the New York Times's story a few weeks ago that purported to
be based on copies of President Trump's tax returns we didn't find that violation
of our terms of service in this policy in particular because it was okay so he's
saying they did not find a violation of that policy in particular right he did
say that but we zoom ahead to 140 and again we recognized errors in that
policy we changed it within 24 hours I must have missed something because there's
no way he's contradicting himself that I mean that was only a few seconds
apart it must have been something I missed let me rewind because there's no
way Dorsey's that dumb statue that makes it a crime a federal felony to
distribute someone's tax returns against their knowledge so that material was
based on something that was distributed in violation of federal law and yet
Twitter gleefully allowed people to circulate that but when the article was
critical of Joe Biden Twitter okay that makes more sense censorship and
got it and again we recognized errors in that policy we okay so he's saying the
Joe Biden article is or the Hunter Biden article I don't know why Cruz is
saying the Joe Biden article other than he's a lawyer from Texas the Hunter Biden
article is what inspired the change in policy I misunderstood that that makes
way more sense Dorsey did not say something that's stupid we changed it
within 24 hours this is the New York Post you haven't changed it well they
have okay so Ted Cruz is being done you forced a political reporter to take
down his post about the New York Post as well is that correct within that 24
hour period yes but we you know as the policy has changed anyone can treat so
bitter okay so Dorsey's in some trouble here the real Dorsey that's that's rough
so this guy this guy's obviously a lawyer T Cruz is on it so he's referencing the
Politico reporter who was told well I guess he was banned and then he had to
remove a tweet to react to his account he was suspended whatever the phrases so
he removed that tweet and Dorsey is saying well yeah that happened in the 24
hours where we were thinking about changing this article we were this
policy we did then change it now he can retweet the same thing and he'll be fine
but Ted Cruz is not gonna let that stand so let's see what he says yes but we you
know as the policy has changed anyone can treat so bitter thanks for the New York
Post your political presumably you can sense of the New York Times or
that mr. Dorsey stop and we're the hell elected you and put you in charge of what
the media are allowed to report and what the American people are allowed to hear
and why do you persist in behaving as a democratic super PAC silencing used to
the contrary of your political beliefs let's give oh mr. Dorsey a few second
weaker
well we're not doing that and this is why I opened this hearing with calls for
more transparency we realize we need to earn trust more we realize that more
accountability is needed to show our intentions in the show the outcome thank
you so I hear the concerns and acknowledge them but we want to fix it
thank you senator Cruz okay so the real Dorsey you know sticking to his guns I
guess if you want to call it that that was it wasn't as rough as I imagined it
would be from what I heard I thought it'd be more rough than that but that's
still pretty rough I mean Dorsey was caught in a trap where he knew he even
admitted first thing he admitted was yeah we made a mistake that policy sucked
we changed it within 24 hours after we realized how badly it sucked but Ted
Cruz kept hammering him on it and he was just was forced to say like we changed
it man what do you want what do you want let's just go smoke ayahuasca on the
back porch or whatever it is Dorsey does come on man so I feel him on that I
really wish you know T Cruz said he had questioned Sundar and Chalk
Zuckerberg before I wish he had questioned Zuckerberg during this
hearing maybe he does I mean I guess I can kind of cheat ahead and see that's
someone weird oh everyone's ramming Dorsey there's some more counts take a
sneak preview of what's gonna happen on the next live stream all content that we
are trying to address so terrorism child exploitation incitement of violence
pornography different oh god it's like a grocery bag with milk poured into it
this man whoof shark teeth on the bottom all right well anyway I'm gonna wrap up
now next time I guess we'll see whatever's going on over here with these
people that wasn't as exciting as I hoped it would be but it did raise a couple of
really good questions I mean Twitter has a lot to work on all these social media
platforms too it looks like if you aren't paying attention to the American
election what you should be actually let me check on that right now because it's
still going on while I'm streaming oof it looks like Joe Biden is pretty much
locked in I mean it looks like he's locked in pretty heavy there that would
be it would be really weird if he lost right now well then again no it wouldn't
be because he only has to lose one state and it's 8,000 votes different oof okay so
it's not that weird it's just they're reporting it like he's one so anyway as
I've said before if Joe Biden wins if Trump wins doesn't make a difference for
this argument that I'm trying to have over here on YouTube because they both
hate section 230 and want to either repealed or amended if they want to
amended then that's kind of what this hearing is all about and Jack Dorsey
just clearly stated hey look we don't know what we're doing we've got some
problems we have to fix thank you for pointing them out we'll do our best to
fix them and if they want to repealed then all these guys will no longer be
important except for Sundar Facebook Chalk Zuckerberg and the real Dorsey will
be irrelevant they'll just be I guess more homeless people in San Diego or
Silicon Valley where we're there so anyway that's it it's all I got to say
about this until next time well then the real trick is I've got to figure out how
to end it all right there we go
