The Stoa is a digital campfire where we cohere in dialogue about what matters most at the
knife's edge of what's happening now.
We are, wow, this is a double header today and we started at 12 noon Eastern time with
a great session on the ecology of, an ecology of communication with Nora Bateson and Diane
Musho Hamilton and today, and I'm going to ask them to write their correct name.
I don't know why that happened, but our guest today this afternoon is Zach Stein and Daniel
Smoktenberger, for some reason the default is my name, but I did not do that.
So I'm going to hand it over to Greg, and let him take it from here in terms of setting
the stage.
Amen.
Well, it's a real honor to be here.
I'm super psyched.
I get to touch with my good friend Zach Stein and get to have a hear from Daniel Smoktenberger,
one of my real leading forces and leading edges in society as far as I'm concerned right
now that I follow.
So I'm super excited for us to talk about the we, the I, the it.
Think about what it is that we are doing as a collective, reflect on our epistemics and
our values and the direction of our education.
And so I'd like to welcome Daniel.
Thank you so much for joining us.
I'm just enjoying the comment thread.
It's actually really great right now.
Cool.
Cool.
Good way to start.
Everybody here.
Thanks for having me.
I rain that today.
It's good to see you.
Cool.
Cool.
And Zach.
Welcome to you also.
Yeah.
Thank you.
I'm excited.
This is a hell of a jam we've got set up here.
Absolutely man.
So what I'd like to do is play a clip from Daniel's recent conversation with Brett Weinstein
along conversation, a three hour conversation, but there was a portion that just jumped out
at me because it reflected on the very theme of our session.
And it's within two minutes, but as Daniel does, there's a lot packed in that two minutes.
So I want to play that.
And then, and this is similar to what we did earlier, Daniel, you frame the song, but
first we're going to start with comments by Zach, double G, Greg and Regas and myself,
and then have you come in.
So you're going to hear us sing on your song.
And then you come in.
How's that feel?
I like it being facilitated by a jazz guy.
Cool.
All right.
So let me screen share and let everybody see what I'm talking about.
And the only answer out of the oppression or chaos is the comprehensive education of
everyone in the capacity to understand at least three things.
They have to increase their first person, second person and third person epistemics.
Their third person epistemics is the easiest philosophy of science, formal logic, their
ability to actually make sense of base reality through appropriate methodology and find appropriate
confidence margin.
Second person is my ability to make sense of your perspective.
Can I steal man where you're coming from?
Can I inhabit your position well?
And if I'm not oriented to do that, then I'm not going to find the synthesis of a dialectic.
I'm going to be arguing for one side of partiality, harming something that will actually harm
the thing I care about in the long run.
And then first person, can I notice my own biases and my own susceptibilities and my
own group identity issues and whatever well enough that those aren't the things that run
me?
When I look at kind of the ancient Greek enlightenment, the first person was the stoic tradition.
The second person was the Socratic tradition.
The third person was the Aristotelian tradition.
There's a mirror of all those in modernity.
We need a new cultural enlightenment now that where everyone values good sense making about
themselves, about others, about base reality and good quality dialogue with other people
that are also sense making to emerge to a collective consciousness and collective intelligence
that is more than our individual intelligence.
And with so that we have some basis of something that isn't chaos, but that also isn't oppression
because it's emergent more than imposed.
So it's like it's cultural enlightenment or bust as far as I'm concerned.
All right.
So I don't okay.
It's cultural enlightenment or bust.
So I would like Zach to riff on that.
And then double G Greg Enriquez and then I'll say a little something something and then
we'll go from there.
Totally.
I mean, this is the core of the, you know, almost the year long work Daniel and I've
been doing with the conciliants project and in many ways the root of our collaboration
and the root of a lot of the work that I do as an educational philosopher.
I didn't put it in terms of cultural enlightenment.
I put it in terms of that we're an educational crisis.
And so yeah, it's a deep diagnostic point and reason for hope, I think for the future.
And so yeah, there's a lot of things to say specifically, I will say that a cultural enlightenment
doesn't mean the modern enlightenment, right?
So it's important not to mistake it for what Greg calls men's, which is the modern enlightenment
natural science, which would be one third of what Daniel spoke to, right, that we need
actually a different kind of more comprehensive cultural enlightenment, which, you know, there's
historical precedent, the when Daniel speaks to the education of everyone, right?
This is one of the great dignities of modernity.
And I attributed to Johnny, most communious, who I've spoken about on the stove before and
spoken with Greg about, and it is that notion of the basis of new social reality, beginning
with culture, specifically with the life of the ideas that live between us.
So yeah, and the first person, second person, third person framing, of course, is resonant
with my Meta Psychological model, with development, and placement, and transcendence and the notion
that there's a kind of a, for lack of a better shorthand and up leveling necessary across
each of those three naturalities, which needs to be facilitated by kind of like techno,
social, education-centric reform at a very broad scale.
And so that's a big project,
but it begins with realizing that this is the project to do,
that it's fundamentally educational work
that needs to be done first
in the interest of something like an Enlightenment.
And if you look around,
these are the times in which Enlightenment arise.
Liminality, times of chaos,
when convention both breaks down
and is reified and locked in, right?
So this is the age of Communius,
was that the Thirty Years' War
and that route between the Renaissance
and what we call the Enlightenment.
So it's a deep, it speaks to me,
if I'm thinking of a song,
this is a deep, deep set of chord changes,
which are,
yeah, deep enough to bring multiple types
of collaborative elements on top of.
And this isn't a narrow thing that's hard to improvise with.
This is actually a large statement
that can galvanize a bunch of different endeavors.
So yeah, so I'm glad you guys started with that.
I'll leave it there,
because there's much, much else to say.
So I think Greg would go next, double G.
Yeah, there is a lot to say.
It's a beautiful clip.
I think if I now at the days
think about the educational process,
I tend to think about it as skill development
and soulmen and transcendence,
which is another tripartite that I know
that Zach has educated me on
in ways of thinking about our own development.
When I place it in my own context,
I'm embedded in American psychology.
And I talk often about the problem of psychology,
and really it's a problem of American psychology.
And I believe that the problem of American psychology
actually can be traced back to the enlightenment
and its fundamental confusion
about the first person, second person, and third person.
The process by which we generated
a third person matter in motion epistemics
and how that scientific message
and epistemology got dominant,
and then how we didn't know how to sync it up
to a first and second person way of being in the world
is absolutely essential.
And I think in relationship to this enlightenment,
if we are going to be so bold,
is to fundamentally create an opportunity
to educate around all three perspectives,
to appreciate which each of those epistemic frames is about,
and to begin to generate sense-making systems
that allow us to cohere.
And I did, just as you know,
I think that failure to do that is deeply,
deeply dangerous.
Thank you.
Thank you both, Zach and Greg Doublejean.
So I'll put it in terms of an idea
that I have been developing of late cultural intelligence.
So in the course that I actually taught
through the Aligned Center just past fall into winter,
there were three parts.
The first part was cultural literacy.
So what is culture?
What does it mean?
What does culture do, right?
I also decoupled culture from race.
So the course was actually called
Cultural Intelligence, Transcending Race Embracing Cosmos.
And I did that move specifically
because mixing up race and culture
has gotten us into all kinds of trouble
since at least late 1600s.
Also, cultural literacy has to do with understanding
certain developmental models,
both for a person and for societies
and civilizations and groups.
I'll just leave it there.
But I know almost everyone on this call
knows what I'm alluding to.
There's different names and different models.
Then we need some case studies.
And in the course, I used Western culture,
American culture and Black American culture
as the case studies of culture in action.
And then in the last part,
I made it into the personal,
the more I part of the I-We-It.
And to deal with certain issues
with cognition and emotions.
And then with shadow and cultural somatics
and need for us to deal with the reality of trauma
and integrating that so that we can move forward
and develop in various ways.
And then our spiritual vision,
your insolment, Zach, I think is a key part of that,
where we embrace a more cosmic vision.
Now that may sound woo-woo,
but I mean it in more of a philosophical sense,
like rooted cosmopolitanism.
We can have a rooted identity or a rooted identities,
but we also at the same time can be citizens of the world
and citizens of the cosmos.
That's where we come from, we're star stuff.
So I think cultural intelligence,
what I'm calling cultural intelligence
is a part of this cultural enlightenment
that I totally agree is necessary.
So that's my comment.
And now we hand it over to the man himself
who made the statement, Daniel.
I don't think I said anything particularly original
in that statement, but maybe it was a good starting place
describing the need for a philosophy
that is first, second, and third person.
I think many people have done,
I heard it from Ken first,
from the college.
The couple of thoughts that come to mind first is that
the thing that I'm saying is necessary
is actually not all that lofty.
Like an integrated metaphysics
that actually gets beyond the,
or properly addresses the subject-object distinction
and the limit of the distinctions
between first, second, and third person
and formalizes all that.
Like that would be nice, but that's not needed, right?
Talking about second person epistemology,
I'm talking about some very basic shit,
which is can I try to get where someone else is coming from
and do a decent job of actually trying to inhabit
what it's like to be them
and how they're seeing things?
Can I try to steal man it rather than straw man it?
Like this is a very basic capacity,
but almost completely non-existent
in the public sphere currently.
When I talk about the first person,
very, very deep nuanced phenomenological insights
are not that needed.
It's like, can I pay attention
to where I have motivated reasoning?
And I really want the answer to be one thing
as opposed to something else.
And I want to be right.
And like I'm not that earnest.
Can I just pay attention to
and value my own earnestness enough?
And then with third person, again,
it's like before I share something on Facebook
about the virus, do I know what a virus is?
As opposed to a bacteria or an exosome,
like just do I have the basic shit
about what I'm talking about?
And if not, just study more a little bit.
So I would like an integrated metaphysics.
I would like to move in that direction,
but I would like more people that can hold uncertainty
about the hard questions
while being able to advance the basic stuff well.
I think sometimes the desire to be able to formalize
the metaphysics actually comes from a certain uncomfort
with uncertainty and wanting to be able to have
some perfected or totalizing knowledge.
And I'd rather people who are like,
I don't know lots of fundamental things
about the nature of consciousness
and its interaction with matter.
And if it's purely computational or not or whatever,
but I can try to get your perspective
and then I can try to synthesize the partial values
and the perspectives to see how to move forward.
When the famous saying by Von Klausowitz
that war is politics by other means,
the key is actually the opposite side of that statement,
that politics is how you sublimate warfare
for people who actually want different things
and value different things
and have different sense-making of reality.
So, and warfare is so nasty
and people who haven't lived through it
have such a bad intuition about how nasty it is.
That to get, that coming to compromise
is actually a really important thing.
So I want to be able to understand,
I can't just demonize the other people,
try to get a short win and keep driving cultural arms races
and actually get anywhere good.
I've got to try to understand where they're coming from
well enough that we can find some common ground
because all the other answers suck.
And that for us to be able to remake
home in society institutions
that derive their power from the consent of the governed
that the governed in order to consent
have to understand the issues.
And so that means that there has to be a culture
that values understanding these things enough
that we invest in it enough that that's possible.
And that's what I mean by a cultural enlightenment.
That's great.
That's great.
I love how as abstract and detailed as you can get,
I love the fact that you're like,
this is basically what it is.
And we can put various labels on it,
but if we can get people to steal man,
if we can get people to, as John Varvakey says,
do self-correction, question their own shit.
And look at what you call base reality.
That's where it is.
But like you said, in the public sphere,
in the public square, this is so little there,
though there are, as Zach implied,
there are various movements going on
in groups of people that are doing this.
So one of the things we tried to do for this series
is actually start with conciliants.
We started with a session called From Matter to Life,
to Mind, to Culture, where we had a physicist,
an evolutionary biologist, a psychologist,
Greg Double G, and myself dealing with culture.
Usually those domains don't engage in conversation.
So that was our attempt to actually model that.
What I like to ask you and Zach, Daniel,
is for the conciliants project
that you've been working on for a year,
and that should be seeing the light of day pretty soon.
What can you tell us about what we should be looking out for
and what we can expect?
Because it's a real big deal,
and I wanna honor you and Zach and others
who work on this project for having the courage
to take a heroic step to not only analyze,
not only what's wrong, but how civilization
is going down the tubes,
but taking the step of trying to do something about it
to make sure it doesn't happen.
So I wanna thank you for that.
Yeah, I think one just theoretical thing I wanna say,
because I forgot to say it,
and I think it's a bit important.
I just got off speaking with a group of retired congressmen,
and they were talking about not just the breakdown
in education in civics,
but any kind of cultural value in civic engagement
or the moral development that's associated.
And when you read the founding documents here
and any kind of thoughtful open society philosophy
we'll say something similar is that there is a moral education
along with the epistemic education that's required
because a democratic system of governance
means a process of collective choice making
where we all participate in making some choice
as opposed to have some ruler make it for us.
And the choice is informed both by what we value
and what we think is and the effect will be.
So the epistemics is what is,
what will the effect of the injunction be
or the activity be, but there's also the values part.
And every system had some way of being able to bind
the well-being of the individual
and the well-being of the collective at various scales.
Tribes obviously had to have that.
And religion was a method of doing that.
And patriotism was a method of doing that,
that my sense of being able to have honor was bound to duty,
that there was a connection.
And obviously for a bunch of reasons,
unfortunate, some legitimate things like religion
and patriotism have kind of waned deeply
as have local community identities.
And the market idea, the kind of Randian idea
was just pure greed creates the greatest good for everybody
because I only get ahead in the market
if I produce a good or service
that other people really want that benefits their life
at a better value that the rational economic actor consumes.
And of course, behavioral economics showed us
that that was utter gibberish
because we can manufacture demand for nonsense
and it's way easier to make money through extraction
than actual production and lots of other things.
And yet that meant the idea of binding
the way the individual gets ahead
with some kind of collective value was broken.
And the kind of market ideology said
the invisible hand will just magically create good
and it doesn't.
And so that kind of values base of culture,
you can see that it's missing, right?
Like right now, neither the left nor the right
have a value on understanding each other.
They just have a value on appealing to their own base
and demonizing each other.
I was just one thing I wanted to add.
Well, thank you for adding that.
I mean, our second session was values
as energetic transcendence.
So we are really trying to play the core changes
that are really needed.
So thank you for that addition.
Zach, would you like to come on in back?
Yeah, absolutely.
And to get your question, Greg.
I mean, generally when one is writing a book
and it hasn't been released to it,
one doesn't speak too much about it,
but I can say that in that sense.
I don't wanna jinx it, but at the same time,
there are some things that can be said in general,
which are that it's an education
and educational project aimed at the foundations
of our shared social understanding.
And so the focus is in many ways,
the media and the news and what's happening
in the context of the way that the world
and its complexity is staged for us by the media,
that the media gives us resources for sense-making
and these resources are insufficient.
And so some of what we're doing is pointing that out,
but only in the context of equipping people
with ways to both ask more of their resources
in terms of like what they're getting
and to actually put a different kind of demand on the media,
but also to allow for the convergence of a movement
around this shared sense that we're in an informational crisis,
akin to like an ecological crisis.
And so-
And there is an information ecology, of course.
And there's an information ecology precisely.
So the idea would be that there's kind of a founding move
that needs to be made here in drawing attention
to the crisis in the information ecosystem.
And there are a group of people who already identify
as those who are seeking to save the informational ecosystem
to save reason and truth, goodness, beauty,
things of that nature and discourse communication,
perspective taking, the simple civic virtues
that Daniel was speaking to, which are not a given,
which do not necessarily emerge with each new generation,
they must be educated for.
And so, yeah, so it is that.
It is part media literacy,
part advanced situational assessment,
but larger part education and capacity building
and model offering to make that first move
to create a catalyst that can ramifications
into something like a broader cultural enlightenment.
Not a lofty new metaphysics,
but in fact, just new forms of civic virtue
that get us out of this death spiral, basically,
which is what we're in as a culture.
Absolutely, when you say new forms,
will they be new or will they be,
is it a question of like what from what is in the past
that we need to take forward?
What do we need to let go of?
And then what innovative forms can we come up with?
Because certain things that we have let go,
we need to reclaim.
I mean.
Absolutely.
We're in like a post-conventional,
post-institutional moment
where we are exactly being asked to vet those aspects
of convention for what they're worth.
And so it's not that we're creating something
whole cloth new, we're in fact,
rescuing the virtues of modernity and pre-modernity.
And jettisoning those that need to be,
like because they didn't have computers,
printing presses and other things,
but the virtue in a sense was basic.
And so again, convenience, right?
Bishop of the Bohemian brethren, it's deeply mystical,
but ecumenical, uniting,
trying to bring a sense of resilience during the war.
So yeah, so there's a very deep educational catalyst
that's trying to be created.
So I'm positive.
Great, come on in at any time.
Yeah, actually, Daniel, I was wondering
if you would just share some of what you see
as really hopeful about the concealing.
Where do you see, there's a lot of catastrophic risk.
Where are you seeing some of the most hopeful opportunities?
I think it's been getting kind of surfaced here that
there are things already happening
that are signs of a nascent movement to a cultural enlightenment
that just doesn't recognize itself yet.
And so if you look at Tristan Harris
and Center for Humane Technology
and all the groups that are looking at the way
that there are unhealthy aspects
of how the information ecosystem works,
social media, et cetera, and working to address that,
that's already a movement to identify
how sense-making is broken,
how the fourth industrial revolution
is not being rightly directed for open society
or even a networked society.
But it just thinks that it's focused
on the social media problem.
And then there are other groups
that are focused on perverse incentive in journalism
and trying to fix some of the perverse incentive
in journalism to not have to have click baby titles
and really short, salacious things.
And there are other groups that are focused
on how to get better education and civics to high school.
But they don't all realize
that they're part of the same project, right?
That those are all focused on where there is,
where there are things that are actively damaging
public sense-making and or where there's a need
for further development of it.
So one of the things we're seeking to do
is to identify all the groups that are doing good work
that is ultimately around that
and to be able to curate and up-regulate the signal
to those and reframe them as not just education
or journalism or social media
or identifying Twitter botnets or whatever,
but as parts of this cultural enlightenment
where you move away from the kind of SDG focus
of here's all the stuff the world should do, right?
World should coordinate to do these things.
And you realize, well,
we should have done nuclear disarmament
and we have not ever done that.
And we should have done the SDGs back
when they were called the Millennium Development Goals.
We couldn't do them.
Like why do we suck at doing big global things
that are critical?
And as we move into increasing catastrophic risk,
that's more problematic.
Upstream from the question of what should the world do
is how do we coordinate better at all?
The really critical things at scale.
And upstream from how do we coordinate better
is how do we make sense of reality
and communicate effectively prerequisites?
So what we're looking at is,
what are the missing prerequisites
that make coordination possible,
that make all of the goals worth having possible?
That's great.
That's really great.
One of the things that I'd like to bring
to our discussion is what was mentioned before
regarding civic values.
I am very strongly influenced by the work
of Ralph Ellison and Albert Murray,
both of whom were very high modernists.
And I think proto integralists,
and you can even say proto metamodernists.
And both of them had a strong allegiance
to the principles of American democracy
based on what Ellison called our sacred documents,
Constitution, Declaration of Independence, Bill of Rights.
Now, for some who hear that,
who perhaps are from the postmodern progressive perspective,
there may be a cynicism that arises
because you can talk all that you want to,
but we know that that stuff isn't true,
hasn't been true,
particularly for certain groups of people.
And I happen to look like the group of people
that they're referring to.
But Ellison and Murray not only acknowledged that reality,
they also had the consciousness and the awareness
that having that beacon of light,
that beacon of possibility that's represented
in those documents and the values and virtues
of those documents is an energetic force in and of itself
to move you towards it.
So even if it's inch by inch by inch,
and then there's regression and then there's that's the reality,
you still have something to agree upon
that we're moving towards.
And if you can agree upon that,
then we have somewhat of a common ground.
Then you also have a need for a higher ground
based on new developmental and post-conventional reality.
We have that too,
but we need to think common and higher ground.
And they were really aware of that.
So we're gonna have to re-embrace some of those
whole liberal values.
And I don't mean liberal, I mean classic liberal,
you know what I'm saying?
So I just wanted to bring that
because I think that is really important to voice.
Zach, Daniel?
Lovely.
It's, yeah, I mean, there's so many directions to go with that.
Well, the first thing I'll say is that there's a,
I'll go theoretical, because it's easier for me anyway.
There's this issue in developmental psychology,
which can be kind of like transferred on
to the scheme of historical development,
which is like transitional and enduring structures
and development, that there are these themes
which emerge over multiple developmental levels
over multiple years of your life,
which continue to be perennial themes
which you actually deepen, right?
So like fairness, on the playground,
fairness is about how many M&Ms does each kid get?
Like literally count the M&Ms or Johnny will freak out.
And he does because it's not fair if he gets fewer,
unless there's stipulations,
because he's smaller or whatever,
but there's a greed upon fairness.
This thing emerges all the way through adolescence.
And then if you study philosophy and you read John Rawls,
you get a principal conception of fairness, right?
So this issue of as history unfolds,
there is going to be in retrospect a lot of hypocrisy
because earlier renditions of a perennial theme
were understandably limited in their first or second
or third or fifth or hundredth articulation,
because this thing will not stop being unpacked,
that the things we think constitute justice now
in medicine now and science now,
50 years from now, they'll look back on it
and be like, whoa, dark age, yikes.
And yet they will still be pursuing something like
science, justice, right?
Human flourishing, hopefully, if we succeed, right?
And so there's this question of,
yeah, how do we retrospectively render to our ancestors
trust in the judgment that they had,
that they were actually doing the best
with what was given to them?
And then how do we see when in fact, that wasn't the case
and there was evil and there was mistakes, right?
And so, and that's a polarity, but there's all of these,
it's great in between about the complexity
of rendering moral judgment to the past
and also the relationship between generations.
And so it's a deep issue that we are now grappling with
part of becoming, I think, hopefully
a more mature species is that attempt
at the full remembrance of who you are,
similar to what happens when you mature as a person, right?
That like at a certain point,
you've got to start dealing with your shit.
And if you don't, do you limit your future possibilities
by a lot, your future relationships,
your development of future capacities?
So there's a reckoning that happens with maturation
and with capacity development and a bunch of other things.
And so I'm kind of superimposing that as a historical lens
but it's useful, broad brush strokes to think like, yes,
we, this is apocalyptic in the sense of everything
being revealed, that this is a time when we're trying
to grapple with the full extent of history, right?
It was a joy waking up from the nightmare of history.
And so yeah, so I don't think it's trivial
but I, to say that one believes in the founding vision
of the United States, but I think it's important thing
that we're going to have to figure out what we,
meaning people who live within the geometric,
you know, who are United Statesists
and what we think about that kind of phrase
because that kind of phrase is actually tearing us apart.
And yeah, so I'll leave it there, but it's a deep,
again, you hit a deep chord there
and one that's going to like resonate
across a whole spectrum of response.
And someone in the chat put our declaration
by Danielle Allen, Harvard political philosopher
who's one of my very favorite, she's incredible.
And I want to thank that person for mentioning that
because I want to voice her.
I'm also wondering Zach,
how does your meta psychology fit
within the educational project?
I mean, it's, in so far as I'm having an impact
on how the conceiving and executing of the project is going,
it's completely woven in.
I don't think it will ever be something
we explicitly teach.
I mean, I don't know, but I doubt it,
but it is certainly part of the way
we're thinking about it.
Yeah, I mean, you know, for example, image, right?
Visual literacy as an aspect of media literacy is huge.
And this is something I talk about with our editor-in-chief
a lot is the nature of the imagery
and the way image captures personality, right?
Words capture development, mind, skill,
image captures personality.
That's why the image of a man being kneeled on
so much more powerful than just the words
of a man being kneeled on, right?
And so the repetitive, repeated,
re-traumatizing playing of the image
in the media landscape is like
kind of like a psychological torture
that we submit ourselves to because we're addicted to it.
And so there's a lot of things in the aspect of installment
that actually are being addressed,
but not head on before not like we're working on installment,
but we're actually working on personality, character,
value, and some of that will be not in the words
but how the words are presented
that the medium becomes the message
that the nature of the design and imagery
and those kinds of choices
as opposed to it just being a cognitive,
linguistically mediated project.
And then of course, because as Daniel was saying,
we're curating the space,
we're trying to bring in the best
of what we can find and build a movement.
A lot of my concern as a psychologist
is it has nothing to do with what people are thinking
and everything to do with what people are feeling
and the way they're processing their emotions
and relationships.
And so I'm gonna be trying to pay a lot of attention
to those groups that are looking at the psychological
and emotional precursors too,
even being interested in civil conversation,
you know what I'm saying?
Like, so yeah, so there's a lot to do in these arenas.
So in that sense, I think it's very much informing
the project, but it's one of many models
that are being used to shape the project.
Daniel, I was wondering if you could talk a little bit
about, you know, sort of how you're thinking
about ethics and values and relationship to the project.
And is it fair to say, I noticed your conversation
with Brett when you got on this,
wove in and out with sort of foundational issues of values.
So if we think about the three points of view
and also then think about the foundational values
that we can be guided around,
that to me always seems to be a super important place
to find and create common ground.
And I see my friend, Mike Moskolo here has built a frame
around how to understand need and value.
So I just wondered if you could offer some reflection
about value-based discourse.
I'll start by taking something that Zach was just saying
where he was discussing how media is affecting people
dramatically or emotionally in addition to the cognitively
and just a decision that we had to make around that
and how it reflected the value that we hold.
And then I'll get into the deeper question.
Early in the process, there's a branding team
that came on to help us and they're like,
what emotions do you want to evoke with the site?
And I'm like, not, I don't want to evoke emotions.
This is the whole point is that that's actually the thing
we're trying to cure is figuring out how to use
scientific split-tested optimization of images
and whatever to evoke emotions for some kind of purpose.
I actually, if anything, I would want to evoke an emotion
using a technique then show people how we did it.
Just like do the magic trick and show them and say,
this is what is happening to you all the time.
Here's someone on the left doing it.
Here's someone on the right doing it.
Here's the market doing it.
Here's a religious leader doing it.
Now fucking go look for this everywhere
and have more immune system
to this kind of memetic manipulation.
So cultural engineering, the goal of it usually
is how do we control the thinking, feeling, values
and ultimately behavior of a lot of people
towards some specific vested interest.
Our goal is cultural engineering of a different type,
which is how do we make all of that
first type of cultural engineering not work anymore?
Our goal is to obliterate the effectiveness
of narrative, memetic and info warfare.
And in order to do that, it's how do,
and it's an asymmetric war currently.
It's trillion dollar companies against a person
who doesn't even realize they're engaging.
So it's how do we equip people better
to recognize when those things are happening?
How can we equip them to notice
when Russell conjugation and Lakoff framing is happening
or when statistical cherry picking of data is happening,
when conflation is happening
and also when the right kind of imagery
and evocative dynamics are being used.
So there is a value embedded in that for us,
which is seeking to increase the,
I mean, it corresponds to when Greg,
you were saying liberalism earlier
and what the core of it means
that the idea of promoting liberty
and the sovereignty of the individual,
how do we actually increase the sovereignty
of the individual against asymmetric forces
seeking to co-opt it?
Because to the degree that we can get better and better
causal mechanisms to affect other people's choice,
we're actually debasing the reality of their choice.
And an ethical system, however we figure it out
is a system for making the right kinds of choices,
but it doesn't mean we take away other people's choices.
So to the degree that I compelled someone
into an ethical choice is no longer ethical.
So our goal is how do we actually help nurture
the growth of people who think and reflect deeply
on these things and want to talk with
and listen to other people who are also thinking on them.
And we don't have to have an absolute ethical system.
Like, most ethical systems have reducto
ad absurdum applications that show
where they become nonsense.
If your goal is a negative utilitarian
and you want to minimize suffering,
you should kill the universe
because they're suffering universe, right?
And there's each of those different,
every form of utilitarianism has some weird edge cases
like that, so do values, ethics.
And so again, there's a fundamentalism I'm not seeking.
I'm seeking people who can ground abstractions
and felt sense and have a certain trust of their own reasoning
and a trust of other people's reasoning
to come to what the best emergent thing
they can move forward with is.
We were talking with Nora Bateson today
and I'm sure this is what Greg would want to hook you up on,
but her narrative around warm data
and the context of the influence that you have
inside of it in relation and attending to not the formulaic
but the echoes of impact and the capacity to have grace
and sort of participatory flow
in whatever that kind of system is
that rather than prescribing some complicated ethical code,
you have to be very, very wary of those kinds of things.
So I'm hearing you infuse that aliveness
and reflexivity in the best sense
in terms of the kinds of propagating values
that would enable us.
Nora's work with warm data is one of the things
that I hope we can signal boost
because she's looking at complexity
from the embodied standpoint,
so not kind of the mathematics
that are studied at Santa Fe Institute,
but the complexity of how many different contexts
and perspectives and nuance people can inhabit
in the way they approach anything.
And I think it's more relevant to actual choice making.
Specifically though, any ethical system
that gets formalized and optimized,
I believe becomes a paperclip maximizer.
And I'm particularly concerned with,
as people pursue enlightenment ideas
and they go more rational,
you get instrumental rationality
and utilitarian or consequentialism,
and you can do the worst evil things
in the name of utilitarian ethics.
Because if I'm sure that the trolley's gonna kill
100 people if I don't do anything,
then of course I'm justified in making it
for sure kill one person.
But the real trolley problem
that we're trying to make decisions about
have way more uncertainty.
They involve complexity where we say, okay,
well, I'm sure that AGI is gonna emerge in 20 years
and I'm sure that it's going to get rid
of all hydrocarbon life based
on the von Neumann Morgenstern decision-making principle
and blah, blah, blah.
Therefore I need to chip people's brains right now.
And so we will make choices that risk really terrible things
or are willing to cause harm because of a worse harm
that we're actually over-weighting our certainty on.
Right.
And so bad epistemics combined with fear of the unknown
and a desire for excessive certainty,
driving instrumental rationality
is the name of a lot of well-intentioned evils.
And so we have to be careful with that.
Daniel, I wanna push back on one of the things you said
before Greg Double G asked you what he did
about Norbetson's warm data.
And the pushback is the idea that you can actually create images,
a model, a process that is not going to involve the emotions.
I know you didn't say it doesn't involve the emotions.
The implication of what you said
is that you don't want to manipulate people's emotions.
And that's very admirable.
And that's ethical.
But what we know about embodied cognition
and for e-cognition is that you don't have cognition
without your emotions.
So one way or the other, you're gonna have emotions involved.
Therefore, you have to make some choices.
What type of fruitful emotions do you want this to evoke?
And if the emotion has to do with the kind of awareness,
what I think is an application
of what I'm calling cultural intelligence,
the ability to discern certain distinctions
and how various forces are trying to get you involved
in their narrative schemes for their purposes,
and being able to look at that as an object
rather than being subject to it,
there's gonna be emotions involved.
So I mean, so I think, you know, I don't think that's realistic.
That's my pushback.
I don't think that's realistic at all.
So I can try to report on the Amazon Rainforest cutting
in different motivated ways,
where in one way I want to make it seem like
the world is gonna come to an end tomorrow.
If one more piece of rainforest gets cut
and the Bolsonaro is doing it out of like
baby blood drinking evil.
And I can make an evocative thing
that will just make utter horror and outrage.
But I can also do the thing that Bolsonaro is doing,
which is to show how much fucking jungle there is
and these few indigenous people in there,
and then all these poor farmers in Brazil
who don't get to actually make any money
because all the stuff is protected for no reason
that's keeping them from being able to access that land.
And I can invoke outrage at the exact opposite thing.
And both of those are very partial perspectives
and evoking certain kinds of responses for political reasons.
I would like to help make the clearest overview
of the thing that we can.
It's not unbiased.
It's bias corrected by trying to take all the biases, right?
By trying to take the various perspectives,
trying to inhabit them,
trying to see what we can verify or see as true in them.
And then also what we can falsify
or see as missing, unwarranted or whatever.
Basically a scientific process.
I mean, that's an element is the scientific process.
Yeah, and earnest,
because it's not science in that
if I'm asking what someone's perspective is,
it's not measurable, it's recordable.
It's an earnest endeavor into inquiry.
And what I want people to feel
is whatever the healthy natural emotion
comes from seeing reality is,
maybe they feel sad, maybe they feel some anger,
then hopefully they come to some inspiration
or hope or responsibility, right?
But I want them to feel the real thing
that comes from seeing reality clearly, naturally,
as opposed to some manipulated emotion
that I'm intending them to feel.
And then I'm manipulating what I show them
to achieve that emotion.
I'm not trying to prevent them from emotion.
It's just the emotion isn't the outcome I'm seeking
so that what I'm seeking is their clarity.
And then there is a healthy emotional response to clarity.
Beautiful.
So you're trying to use third person,
I like your term base reality,
to then evoke first person awareness
of that base reality.
And then that's gonna impact second person,
we space into subjective interpersonal dynamics
in a certain way that hopefully,
now this is my bias.
I have a bias towards tipping a tipping point.
I have a bias towards a group of people
and groups of people who will as happened
in other enlightenments,
achieving a certain level of consciousness
and culture together so that their thought, words
and behavior were aligned in a certain way
that it can move the entire culture in society forward.
That may not be realistic,
but I think that with a critical mass, it can happen.
Is that something that you can gravitate
to Daniel and Zach?
I'd like to say something about the previous point
with what we've been calling
the pedagogical atmospherics of the site, right?
That the longstanding mistake
of the kind of like sciences of learning
was to commit Descartes' fallacy, right?
Which is to separate emotion from thinking
and to believe that it is emotion
that gets in the way of thinking in.
But in fact, it's thinking doesn't take place
in the absence of emotion.
It takes place in the presence of the right kind of emotion.
And so what good teachers do is create these types
of emotional environments that are non-coercive.
So the experience of the website
isn't one of an absence of emotion.
It's the experience of not having your emotions manipulated.
Which is not a non-emotional experience.
Sorry, right.
It could be a novel emotional experience.
It could, so that's why people like therapists.
So Greg probably gets this,
like therapists are also able to create a space ideally
where you have a situation of not,
it's not that there's no emotion,
it's that you're not being manipulated emotionally,
but you are being presented with reality
and concepts and images and other things.
And so I think the trick ends up being
not to make it devoid of emotion
as if you can't do anything without emotion,
but those, the right emotions to accompany
that kind of thinking emerge is what Daniel said.
And so, if you're trying to teach a child
about moral development and you read them a story
that you think should evoke a moral response
and it doesn't, like they're just not moved
by the heroic gesture of ethics,
you don't then force them to feel something.
You find a story that resonates them
until they're actually moved by the story.
And so that question that the teacher knows
how to not manipulate your emotion,
but get those materials in front of you
in such a context that you experience
the non-manipulated emergence of emotion.
And so this is again, this deep questions
at the basis of what we're doing have to do with
non-coercive forms of teacherly authority.
And a subclass of that is non-coercive forms
of emotional relation.
And so very touchy stuff in postmodern contexts
where for the most part, there is no such thing
as legitimate teacherly authority.
And there is no such thing as emotional relation
that isn't basically with a downside power dynamic
in some way.
And so the ability for the therapist to hold more space
and give you room to express your emotions
is seen as actually potentially manipulative power game,
which it is power, but it is the power
of teacherly authority, which can be granted.
And so this is a very one of the things
that is being nuanced in the pedagogical atmospherics
is that we are toying with this deeper issue
of how can you have something emerge in our culture
as it is, which becomes a potential focus
for a legitimate distribution and dissemination
of teacherly authority.
And that's one of the main things is the reason
teacherly authority fails is because it got localized.
And we need to find a way to distribute
the teacherly authority.
This is something I'm passionate about.
And I'll just say quickly, yeah, so from my vantage point,
I am working on a broad descriptive systematic metaphysics.
And part of that comes from exactly this point.
And that is enlightenment did not produce
a coherent metaphysics basically.
And part of the postmodern critique,
which then seeps into the authority.
Some of that is glorious in relationship
to kinds of authorities that emerge,
but some of that undermined the concept
of good teacherly authority in a particular type of way.
And there are ways I believe to restore that both
in terms of the kinds of process and structures
that we engage in at a process level
and at an analytic level that would bring some clarity.
But anyway, I just wanted to say that.
So one thing very quickly, Daniel, I promise,
and Rain, we're gonna be bringing people in shortly.
I just wanna say that this process reminds me very much
of Ellison and Murray's perspective on the blues.
So the blues can be viewed as third-person base reality,
the reality that as Murray says,
life is a low-down dirty shame.
But at the same time, you have to make a choice.
Are you going to, and this is gonna be an existentialist
or are you gonna basically cut your wrist?
Or are you going to go out and swing?
Are you gonna engage?
Are you going to have what Kenneth Burke called
a frame of acceptance, of struggle, of life,
of all the things we, or are you gonna have a frame
of rejection where you say, well, that's wrong,
it's unjust, it shouldn't be that way,
which I think is an immature way of looking at it.
So there's some aspects that's in the Black American
blues idiom wisdom tradition that aligns very strongly,
and I just wanted to voice that.
Okay.
I appreciate that, please.
Oh, go ahead, Daniel.
Daniel, go ahead.
Yeah, so I wanted to add something.
How we are addressing this teacherly authority topic,
because we don't have any authority
that anyone doesn't grant, and we don't want,
like ultimately, we don't want anyone to trust us
and defect on their own sense-making to us.
We want people to develop better sense-making
that they can trust on their own.
So how we're handling that is, say we do sense-making
on a particular piece, we're trying to make sense
of what's going on on the India-China border
or whatever it is.
So we have the piece, but then we also have
how we came up with our sense-making on it.
So what data sets did we look at?
What epistemics did we apply?
What are the other views,
and what was our sense-making on their views?
So we actually make our epistemics crystal clear,
and then we allow people to criticize them.
So we can say, if we miss something,
if we included some data that was false,
or we missed some critical data, tell us.
If we find out that you're right,
we will publicly update it and credit you if you want that.
If not, we'll show the position.
So we're not attached to a position,
we're attached to the best earnest process we can,
we're making it transparent.
If you want to take this process, fork it, modify it,
somewhere else you can, it's public comments.
And so the goal is to help people develop,
so it is developmental, right?
It is to help people develop better capacity,
but where they get to have full transparency
into that process.
And then the other part I want to say about emotions
is insofar as there's an emotion I'd like to induce
beyond just the emotion that naturally arises
from seeing what there's to see.
I think there is a kind of epistemic nihilism
that is pretty ubiquitous,
where people don't feel like they could make sense
of what's going on.
And so it's hard to make sense of what they should do
with their life, or how to vote,
or how to apply their time or anything.
And if someone was to have any experience reading,
where they start to see the possibility that emerges
of making better sense of things,
that they have a certain kind of epistemic hopefulness
start to emerge, an inspiration,
not an inspiration in some answer out there,
but an inspiration in their own capacity
to increase the basis of their agency,
which is their capacity to make sense of the world.
If there's any emotion specifically
that I would hope would come about, it would be that one.
That's great.
Can I interject here?
Because the teacher-lead authority bit is key.
Like one of the signs of legitimate,
healthy teacher-lead authority
is that it is trying to make itself obsolete.
Like the good teacher is trying to give you
exactly the skills you need to no longer need the teacher.
And the good therapist is trying to give you
the skills you need to no longer need the therapist.
They're not trying to keep you addicted to them
as the authority.
That's not teaching.
That's something else.
That's not actually teaching.
That's just the authority.
And one of the ways to think about propaganda,
you'll never actually know all you need to know
to replace the propagandists by design.
So long problems with so-called conspiracy theories.
In any case, the broader point there is that
there are many indices.
How do we tell the difference between legitimate
and illegitimate teacher-lead authority?
And that is one of them,
that it seeks to make itself obsolete.
And so this is precisely what the Consilience Project
is seeking to do.
That in fact, we're trying to show you
under the hood exactly what we're doing.
So you can have that sense of being empowered
to step into your own sense-making.
And rather than just having to keep to come to us.
And so I think that's one of the dynamics
that you find in the media currently.
Is that you're addicted to the trough.
Like you're go keep going back to eat more
of the like high fructose news stuff.
And that's just an egregious violation
of the obligation that the media has, which is too.
Yeah, go ahead.
Sorry.
So you would like to, in my own words,
increase people's sovereignty,
not to become rugged individuals,
but to become self determining in their own sense-making
in terms of like what they actually think and feel
not based on the manipulations that are all about them
in the media sphere, including advertising and PR,
but to really take a look at, what do I think?
What do I believe?
And why?
And that's powerful.
I also want to say that that goal of the teacher,
you know, teaching the students
so that the student goes beyond the teacher,
that goes back a long ways, doesn't it?
I got that from Dewey.
I got that from Dewey.
Cause Dewey was like, all right, y'all you,
cause people were inspired by Dewey
and they made all these crazy schools
where they just let the kids do whatever they wanted.
Basically the absence of teacher authority
in the wake of a very strong critique of teacher authority
which created chaos and kids who never learned to read
or do you, anyway, so he was like, okay,
what constraints on freedom are legitimate?
He was like, those constraints on freedom are legitimate,
which basically set you up for greater freedom
if you hadn't of had the constraint put on you, right?
So the idea is like, you don't want to allow for freedoms
that end up putting the person in a situation
to have fewer freedoms, right?
So it's about that dynamic and the eventual,
you know, graduation of the student
into the lifelong learning journey
that the teacher puts them on,
rather than being locked into a set of ideas
which just holds them the rest of their life
and they're basically caged in these ideas
and those ideas come with an identity
and then the ego becomes attached to the worldview
and then you're in that place
where for a long time, psychology thought
that brains didn't change after the 20s and 25s
and that people didn't change
and in part it was because there was a calcification
of the identity and cognitive architecture
as a result of, I think, certain forms of schooling.
This would be Dewey's,
I'm basically recounting Dewey's argument here
about why we cease to continue to develop and grow.
So yeah, what you learn from your teacher should be
that you can go on to have many teachers
and to move up and out and up and through.
So yeah, there's a beauty to that way
of thinking about constraint and authority, right?
That in fact, this is the very stuff
of intergenerational transmission
and cultures that can exist in perpetuity
have figured this out and we are in a crisis
of teacherly authority and intergenerational transmission.
Rain, there are some questions, I think.
Yeah, maybe we'll go to questions, I'll be great.
I've got some good questions in the chat.
I'm gonna jump around a little bit
to kind of follow the thread we're on.
So since we were talking about teacherly authority,
Rob Hart has a question which I'll repost in the chat here.
Rob, do you wanna ask your question
or Zach spoke to it a bit?
So if you'd like to modify it at all, please go for it.
Yeah, I think Zach did start to answer this
and I would love to hear him kind of deep
in one of the ideas he said about freedom,
but the question I originally said was,
what do you think is the best thing
that a teacher can want for the student and the world
and use their teacherly authority
to produce in the student's journey?
So I have really enjoyed your use of the tripartite model
and I've kind of seen each lane of this tripartite model
of our psychological development
as a way that we approach sovereignty
or a way that we augment sovereignty in our lives,
the sovereignty of sort of the way that Daniel uses it.
And I'm curious if that relates to what you mean by freedom
and if the whole panel could sort of weigh in
on what they believe to be the highest good
that a teacher can seek for the student
using their teacherly authority.
I'll begin and I'll try to be brief
because I think I've spoken a lot.
So Margaret Mead wrote a book called Culture and Commitment
and in this book, she suggested
that there were three kinds of cultures.
There were cultures where it never really changed
and you were basically gonna inherit what your parents had
and their lifestyles and their ideas and things.
And in those situations,
it was very actually easy to know
what as an elder one should teach the youths.
It was precisely what they needed to know
to do what had been done for centuries, right?
And then there's the second form of culture
where there is some change, but not that much change
and enough change where you can actually teach kids
to how to expect certain kinds of change.
And there there's a more collaborative relationship.
This is what the era that Margaret Mead believed
she grew up in, right?
Which was like World Wars.
But she came to realize that there's a third form
of culture where in fact,
things begin to change so rapidly
that it becomes very, very, very difficult
if not impossible for the elders to know
what to teach the students.
That the students will inherit a world
that the elders literally do not understand
and they become aware of that fact.
And so there's like this weird reversal.
And this is actually the root of the youth rebellion
and the intergenerational crisis is the fact
that this something like this has occurred
and we don't know how to negotiate this as educators.
But what it means I think is that
the educators responsibility is to allow the student
to find the problem that is theirs to work on.
It's very vague.
So you need to allow for enough freedom
such that and enough support such that
the project of their life, right?
The image of their life
to get to the meta psychology aspect of it
that you're working on, who will you be in the future?
And the elder says, I cannot imagine.
And the youth says, now I can
because you've given me the resources to imagine, right?
Beyond what you're capable of imagining.
So that's the responsibility.
It's not to determine for them
or to pick out of some slot of jobs
that we're aware of now or something like that, right?
It's actually to give the resources of judgment
and discernment, resources of imagination
because we're in that situation
of not being able to imagine what it will be like for them.
Those who come after us who will not be like us
who inherit this world that we've created
with the type of objects and its risks.
So yeah, I think that in that sense that freedom is there
but it's a letting go, which many parents know
but which we're having to exercise
at an intergenerational level, which is very complex.
So that's, I'll leave it there.
I'll very quickly say, I think we need to teach
young people how to improvise
because when you're dealing with double binds
and you're dealing with uncertainty,
you're gonna have to improvise, but I don't mean winging it.
I'm talking like jazz improvisation
where you've got to have the chops.
You gotta have a lot of knowledge.
You gotta have a lot of grounding
in base reality, in history,
in knowing, know thyself and go back to that
because at certain points,
you're just gonna have to in the moment
make choices that one hope is the wise spontaneous choice
in the improvisation.
That's part of a model that my wife and I,
through the Jazz Leadership Project,
we look at improvisation as wise spontaneity.
So I would just say that.
And for that, you've got to not only support
but you've got to challenge them.
You've got to give them structure
but you've got to give them a certain amount of freedom
within the structure to express and to experiment
and to make mistakes and then learn from those, all of that.
So I really think it's a balance of those elements.
Hey, let's jump to Tyler Wakefield.
He just asked a question that got some plus ones.
It's on the topic of education still
but a different angle when it comes to the institute,
the institutional aspect of the Academy.
If you'd like to ask your question
and open to Zach or Daniel to respond.
Hi, yeah.
If anyone wants to respond to this,
I was just,
we've been talking about,
and maybe an educational enlightenment
but I'm wondering when a lot of these processes
that are developed,
whether it be journalism or other sorts of propaganda
come out of the university structure,
people educated within it.
I was interested what's to be made of the Academy
or is this a movement that is going to exist outside of it?
Is that the expectation?
Because the institution simply can't be repurposed
to do this type of interdisciplinary thinking
or is there an idea that this movement
will eventually permeate into the Academy
or is that necessary?
What a great question that we need about two more hours to.
I'm not touching that, I'm not in the Academy
so I'm gonna let those that are
or have more proximity to it to answer that, please.
Well, I'll just say I'd like to hear Daniel's take on this.
I'll say briefly, if somebody has two professor parents
in the audience even and grew up in the Academy,
my hope is that there is a zeitgeist of awareness
maybe spurred on by COVID
that we are in a major cultural shift
and that the structures of modernity
as both terrifying and glorious as they were,
I think there is the hope of an increasing conscious awareness
that maybe transformation could happen.
That's being in some ways very optimistic
because I also have a pessimistic side
that sees an enormous amount of inertia and static and stasis.
And indeed, I find myself in these circles now
following Jordan Hall and Zach Stein
and Daniel Schmackenberger as opposed to
my sort of standard academic friends
precisely because of the mentalities
and the structures that are at place.
Certainly my own work in the context of what I call
American psychology, what it became,
how it was established and what it might become
is very much something I'm passionate about.
And I believe that if the consciousness raises
in the sensibilities that emerge
and we start to cultivate a wisdom commons
about how to educate folks for the new next generation,
there may well be a very, very strong impact,
a wave of impact across the Academy
so that they begin to restructure.
It's definitely needed and it is my deep hope
that that potential might emerge.
I'll go ahead and say something
and then we let Zach end with it
since this is his topic in more depth.
I don't think we can consider the restructuring
of any of the major institutions in isolation
because they are all inter-affecting.
So obviously if the purpose of schooling
is to prepare people for a workforce,
then that's a very real constraint.
How much of the tax money
can actually be invested into the education
if most of the people are gonna be laborers?
Like what education is relevant to be a laborer?
Well, with technological automation
creating a massive amount of job obsolescence
in the next while, largely in the labor fields,
that's both a risk and an opportunity.
What could it portend for different kinds of education?
So also things like what is it?
What is education in the information singularity?
Post information singularity
when you've got something like 100,000 peer review
journal articles in each field per year come out
and there is no such thing as an expert
in any domain anymore.
And so to be an expert has to be increasingly
hyper-specialized microfields,
which also means increasingly poor understanding
about any of the kind of broad topics.
But the broad topics then end up having those who focus on
have the problem of a lack of the depth
where the devil in the details ends up mattering.
And so then we start looking at how can
the right kinds of computational infrastructure,
machine learning, et cetera, not replaced
but augment human capacity.
And what do we wanna train people to do
both when we don't need the people for labor
in the same way and we also don't need the people
for all of the compute.
But there are things that people are uniquely good at
and it happens to be that the things
that they're uniquely good at
and that we have intrinsic motivation
around largely coincide.
So factoring the change in the technological
and economic base in association
with the educational base is the way I would say
is the beginning of starting to think about this.
And I mean, we definitely don't have the answers.
We have a lot of design constraints and some of the answers.
And this is why the goal of a cultural enlightenment
of more people starting to think deeply
about all of the institutions that need restructured
and how to do that has to happen.
But it's like, okay, well, how do you go
against the direction of market incentive?
Well, the market isn't gonna incentivize anything
that goes against the market incentives.
Well, the state could,
but the state ends up getting captured
by the market interest it's supposed to regulate
if it's not regulated by the people.
So ultimately, if the market incentive is not flowing
in the direction that you want comprehensively,
where is the change gonna come from?
It can't come from the market alone.
It can't come from the state that isn't grounded
in the people.
It actually has to come from culture,
which means people valuing something
other than what the market currently values enough
to reform institutions that can guide market type dynamics.
And so the thing we're interested in doing right now
is how do you actually even just take the people
that are already sympathetic to these ideas
and gather them somewhere?
Which obviously this is one example of,
provide better education, resource information processing
and the ability to work on these problems
in more collaborative and effective fashion.
And I think that is kind of what a cultural enlightenment
that ends up leading to the reformation of institutions
usually looks like.
I'll say a couple of things.
One is that, well, it depends what you mean by academy
because there's at least two things happening.
There's higher education,
which is sometimes just an extension of high school
as a necessary upper stack on the public education system.
And then there's the academy where there's something like
supposedly ongoing knowledge production, right?
And these two things are often happening
in the same so-called university,
which is this massive, especially at state schools,
this massive research complex
that is doing both higher education and academics, right?
Academics being independent research
in the humanities and science, et cetera.
So these two things, right?
Both of those are in radical crisis right now.
COVID really complicated
an already debt-ridden higher education complex
in the United States.
So we're actually, no matter what we do intellectually
over here, we're looking at a very different
higher education coming in the coming years.
Higher education, I said higher education.
This is about what we do with those people
who are exiting high school, right?
The question of what's going to happen
to high level knowledge production
is also extremely interesting.
And this is where we're getting to Daniel's point
about computational assistance to human judgment
at the edge of expertise
and a whole bunch of other things
that are coming at the Academy pretty fast and hard.
And the radical de-incentivization of the humanities,
like that's another crisis in higher education
is the absence of, from a market perspective
and even political perspective sometimes
doing really solid work in the humanities
like ethics and political science and stuff of that nature.
So yeah, so I am kind of avoiding answering the question
in a concrete way and saying like
there's so much indeterminacy right now
in exactly that region that it's not clear.
I could see a mass homogenization
where you get like 12 big brands of higher education
who've consolidated all the little players
and you get kind of a centralized
probably state subsidized system.
But I could also see just a radical fragmentation
Wild West market driven pseudo higher education
with pockets of amazing stuff.
So I think the answer is we'll see.
We'll see.
There's certainly not right now from where I sit
anyone knocking on my door from the Academy
telling me that there's a groups
in the Academy organizing around this.
I see them hunkering down trying to preserve
the old system and business model
which is I think going to fail.
Thank you.
Can we get one more?
Daniel, yeah.
Chris D, I just reposted your question.
If you're here, feel free to unmute yourself.
Yeah, hey guys, thank you so much for this conversation.
My question has to, and my attention is
the Concellions project challenges legacy media.
Legacy media gets a lot better at being ethical
and delivering high quality information.
So where do you see the best case scenario
for the Concellions project on its impact on legacy media
and how are you going to deal with backlash
from let's say not only the traditional institutions
but also the memetic tribes as well.
Thank you.
Do you want to go first?
All right.
This document I want to write and put on the side.
I'm not sure if we will, but I like the idea
that it's called something like predictable responses
and it identifies the predictable responses
of the various memetic tribes.
And you know, if you are in the QAnon tribe,
you think that this is part of the deep state cabal
because somebody in our advisory councils,
three steps connected to Epstein.
If you are part of the woke crew,
you think that we are giving voice to racists
rather than cancelling them by hosting dialectics
with people on the right, you know, those kinds of things.
And then say, if you had a response arise
that was anything like these
and that you're kind of adjacent to that group,
you're not actually thinking you're just a memetic propagator.
Like there is a stimulus response process happening
and you should be concerned about that.
Like you should want to know that you're actually thinking,
see if you can come up with a response
other than the one predictable by your social sphere.
So that's one answer on...
By the way, I could just feel that there were people
triggered by what you just said.
And if not in this group, on the video, you know.
You know, so...
But I mean, hey, you need to get a response,
but I wonder, and please don't lose your thought,
but I really wonder if another way of going about that
is not just the presumption
that you should not be caught by a particular narrative
but the steel manning, maybe this is what you...
The steel manning is so powerful
if you can voice with integrity, the perspective,
and maybe lawyers do this naturally,
of others you disagree with,
seems to me that's such an incredibly important step.
Yeah, I mean, it's pretty straightforward to argue
that the political opponents that you disagree with
don't stop existing because you cancel them
or because you ignore them
or because you call them idiots or terrorists
or communists or Islamophobes or whatever it is
to dismiss them.
They don't stop existing
and they don't stop being political actors.
And if you polarize them against you,
they're also smart in paying attention to what works.
And if you win, they reverse engineer the tool
that won and use it next time.
So if you wanna keep driving cultural arms races,
keep doing that, but just do the math on where that goes
with exponential tech.
If you want something other than a cultural arms race,
don't be so myopic,
temporally myopic that you think winning this time
actually matters very much.
And then say how can we actually...
The respect for these humans is actually obligate.
There is no way forward on a shared planet
without getting rid of them and we can't get rid of them.
So how do we handle that?
So yes, you can explain those things.
I think actually making the point
that I don't think most people want to think of themselves
as being more predictable than a GPT-3 algorithm.
And yet most of their tech speech
is more predictable than a GPT-3 algorithm.
Most people's text response
wouldn't even pass a good Turing test
because they're so following certain memetic tropes.
And to have people think about that
is actually a valuable thing.
Now, the mainstream media question.
An analogy that I think is an interesting one is
it was supposed to be that the market worked
by people having demand for things
that would actually increase the quality of their life,
creating an evolutionary niche for supply.
Supply would emerge and you'd have competition
of who could provide the best product
or service the best price
and then everything gets better.
But of course, as soon as supply side is organized
and demand side is not organized
and it can exert force to be able to manufacture demand,
manufacture demand broke the intelligence of the market.
And so you can't say,
well, let's use demand to change supply
because demand isn't coordinated.
So it's an asymmetric war and the supply side wins.
So sometimes you have to use supply to change demand
to change the rest of supply.
And that's what I see that Elon did with Tesla
and electric cars.
Before Tesla, there just was not a big demand
for electric cars.
And so he was able to make a car that was interesting enough
that demand went up enough
that now all the other car companies
are making electric cars faster
than they would have been otherwise.
Our goal is to show what good media could be like,
what good news could be like
in a way that makes demand for something
that doesn't currently exist
that people know that actually creates an incentive
for other news organizations to do better news
because there's a better educated populace
actually demanding it.
Where right now they have an authentic market incentive
that's been erased to the bottom
because people actually click on
the more salacious click baby stuff.
And so we're hoping to be able to educate
consumer patterns of media enough
that it actually changes the topology of the markets
to make the supply side have better incentives.
All right.
Rain had to sign off.
So I'll manage a few more questions
as long as we don't maybe do one.
I think it was Jason Killinger.
Is Jason?
Yeah, hey.
Hi, so I asked the first,
the first, second and third person development
that Daniel you spoke of
that Greg played at the beginning
also speaks I think to values.
And I'm wondering if while we're waiting,
I mean, obviously we have major leaps
that we need to take in media and in education.
And I'm wondering if there's kind of like a fast track
base level that we need to get to
that's on, that speaks to those around values
that if that's like the kind of place
we can immediately go.
And I'm wondering if you have any thoughts on that
and kind of like movements or people
that are getting us that are kind of like
taking care of that level right now
that we can kind of put support behind.
I don't know that I understand the question exactly
but I think I understand a part of it.
So what are the values that are involved
in what we're talking about
and what could be done or is already being done
on values development work?
Oh, I guess I mean like finding this coherence
like on the basis of values.
Like a thing that keeps coming up for me is like,
I keep asking people like do you love,
how far do you extend your circle of care?
Like those kind of things that I think are kind of
like a ground floor towards like a cultural enlightenment.
Yeah, I think the process you're describing of dialogue
that looks at things that are shared rather than different
first and build some kind of shared life experience
commonality value, I think super valuable.
One thing that we're doing early on
is the second person sense making is largely about values.
It's what is, so let's say for instance,
there's some issue where there's a polarization
around whether or not this particular proposition
should go through and it seems to be around something
that if it does will benefit the economy
but damage the environment.
And if it doesn't, the environment will be preserved
but the economics won't get ahead or whatever.
So we can identify, well, what are the values
independent of the strategy?
Fuck proposition A, yes or no.
And the values are, I actually want my kids
to be able to get a better job.
And then values over here are,
I want to have this last little bit
of old growth force protected.
When we identify what everybody's values are first,
almost everyone can empathize with everyone's values
if they aren't bound to a strategy
where they're in a theory of trade-offs
where valuing your value requires
going a particular direction in a proposition
that messes up the thing I'm more directly connected to.
So can we separate the values that we're seeking to serve
from a proposition of how to serve them?
Then can we all hear everybody's values
and then say, is there a proposition
that would serve all of them better?
That's a key reformation of the democratic process.
And it was actually the goal of a town hall
on scale just messed it up,
is before you get into voting on a proposition,
was it even a good proposition?
Did you do sense-making to help bring that about?
And a big part of the sense-making is not just what is,
but what are all the things that people care about
connected to this?
So one of the things
when we're sharing different narratives
is not just what a different people think is true,
but what is it they care about
that is ultimately motivating them
that can engender the empathy of each other?
I really think that's a very, very key shift in move,
is foundationally, you do this all the time in therapy.
What is the care?
What is the value?
And how do you hold multiplicity of different values
and then look for adaptive synergies
across them in some of the solutions?
So, but that value piece,
and then empathizing with it,
steelmaning it, honing it,
relating to it is a crucial process.
I know Forrest has been here and spoke before
and he's done the best work I'm aware of
on what that democratic-like system could be
of getting all values to inform.
We're not doing anything that advance
in terms of trying to actually formalize
the governance system here.
We're trying to actually just at the communication layer,
can we even understand the values
where other people are coming from?
Are we seeking to do that?
And in the media pieces we're putting out,
are we helping make explicit
when we steelman the positions,
both the partial epistemic truth,
but also the values that they're holding.
Yeah, great.
I think you said Forrest,
I think you're talking about Forrest Landry, correct?
Forrest Landry, correct.
And that sense-making is ultimately an ethical
and value-laden process that,
and this is Habermas's point ultimately,
that there's this thing rationality,
which you can do by yourself on a desert island,
which is just about manipulating the world,
but then there's this thing called reasonableness,
which is about how reasonable you are
and how balanced and comprehensive
and how much respect basically you show
to those who you're in discourse with.
And so there's this key base,
and Daniel said it like,
respect for other humans is obligate,
like not because you'll go to hell or whatever,
but because if we keep amplifying the cultural war,
we will create a situation
of inevitable self-induced extinction.
So yeah, there's this base notion of reasonableness
rather than rationality, for example.
And the reasonable includes the emotional, right?
It's unreasonable to exclude emotion,
although it could be rational
for a little bit of time to exclude emotion,
but it's completely unreasonable
to make continual demands on the exclusion of emotion.
So there's a deep basis of values
at the root of sense-making.
And in my model, of course,
you get the installment and development and transcendence,
but you begin with the root of the value of self and other.
I like the word justification a lot, but.
So let's do one more.
Yeah, I think we have one more question.
Evan McMullen is on deck,
if you wanna unmute and ask yourself, Evan.
All right, thanks.
Can you guys hear me?
Yep.
Cool.
So this goes back a bit in the conversation
to when you were discussing teacherly authority.
And so my question has to do with,
I'll just read it.
So my question says
that it seems that one of the thorniest issues
related to this issue of teacherly authority
is that the fact that most of us were coerced
into an educational system
where the source of teacherly authority
was ultimately not epistemic,
but the threat of physical violence and coercion.
And so this seems to have created a trauma
surrounding the teacher-student dynamic
and many, if not most people in our society.
And so I wonder if you have any thoughts
on how we might address that
as individual small groups and as a society at large.
I can handle that.
Daniel, do you need to run?
If you look like you needed to run
like you were bowing out.
I can handle this if you need to go.
This will be the last question.
Unless you're interested in what I'm gonna say,
but you can probably predict it.
Yeah, you're absolutely correct.
That in fact, the crisis of teacherly authority we're in
is not contrived and artificial
and kind of like made up.
It's a legitimate crisis of teacherly authority
that for a brief period of time,
the modern nation-state was able to instantiate
a form of teacherly authority
that was unprecedented just world historically.
And this was what Comenius was cooking actually
back in the 17th century.
But that was just a window of time
when it could be sustained in an American particular
by something like a civic religion
where in fact, your high school teacher was
a potentially inspiring like put there by the state
who was this admirable thing that you were supposed to like
those days are gone.
Like the screen won and schools lost.
And that was just the nail on the coffin
of teacherly authority that had already been degraded
for a long time.
In part because of the inability of the school systems
to demonstrate their problem-solving capacity,
which is to say no child left behind
and a few other things,
which made it clear to all the students
that like this is not working.
Like we can tell you adults actually don't know
precisely how to run this enormous urban school district
in terms of the way you're distributing money
and other things.
So it became very transparent
and the most reflective intelligent middle school
to early high schoolers usually either strategically
manipulated the system in order to advance themselves
or just cynically checked out essentially.
And so that means we're in a situation
of having to deal with the downstream consequences
of a multi-decade long crisis of teacherly authority
in the schools.
And so that means people wouldn't recognize
good quality teacherly authority if they saw it.
And that's why people are actually susceptible
to pathological forms like cults and spiritual teachers
that are corrupt and things of that nature.
So yeah, so I don't know how to kind of de-traumatize that,
but I do think that some of it has to do
with those pedagogical atmospherics on the site
that there needs to be explicit and clear
just how much we're putting in your hands
and that we've got nothing under the table
or under our sleeves or somebody behind the curtain
pulling the strings on us that in fact you are seeing it.
And then it's all on the table
and you can enter like peers into a relationship.
And that's what every child would have liked
to have been able to do.
When they reach a certain age of self-reflection
would be able to say, hey, who do I and how do I?
And they begin to ask their questions
and they begin to pursue it instead of being forced
to sit in an uncomfortable desk for six hours a day
being talked to by a woman who's not smarter than your mom
who is only there because her issues paid
and you know what I mean?
So there you are.
So it's kind of a cynical note to end it on, right?
Right.
Well, and on that note,
now I know you've got to go and we're getting there.
Daniel, do you want to offer any sort of summary thoughts
or reflective thoughts for us to show on as we?
I think I talked plenty.
I would just say thank you for having me here
for hosting these dialogues.
And I hope it was something in here was useful
for the people who were here.
Absolutely.
Thank you so much, Daniel, for coming
and joining us and sharing and you also, Zach.
And of course, Greg Enriquez, my partner in this endeavor.
And we want to thank all of you who have been here
sharing in the chat, asking questions explicitly,
the listening in, just being a presence
and a part of the field and container that we created.
So we want to thank you all.
And I want to say that our final session
will be next Monday, the 22nd, featuring Jordan Hall,
Zach Stein again and Jamie Weill.
And we'll be looking at once again,
the issue of a commons
and hopefully we can get to a wisdom commons.
So we hope that folks will share and we'll also come back.
Amen. Thank you, Greg.
Thank you guys so much for everyone coming,
sharing that really appreciate it.
All righty.
Thanks everybody.
Take care.
