Okay, well, thank you all for coming. I'm John Dupre, as it says on the board, and I'm
visiting here from the University of Exeter. So, let me start off with a very kind of general
comment about the kind of thing that I'm doing. Actually, as a sort of background, a lot of
people I work with call themselves nowadays philosophers of science in practice, which
sometimes means philosophers of science in practice, and sometimes means philosophers of
science in practice. But either way, people are supposed to be doing something relevant,
connected to science. And I have to say, some of my colleagues sometimes will say,
metaphysics, what's that? Why do we care about that? I thought we're supposed to be
concerned with science and engage with science. Well, so I would just start off by saying that I
think there are there are many reasons in my mind for being concerned with very general, very abstract
accounts of what we're talking about when or what indeed science is talking about. And so I'm
interested as a philosopher of biology, which is my sort of primary job description, in giving or
offering at least a very general account of living things. And I think that this is
is really important for biology, that that this is in my way of doing things, it's supposed to be
what we sometimes call a naturalistic account, that's to say, a metaphysics grounded in the science,
but also one that feeds back into the science. So we look at we try and find out what the world
looks like from the point of view of the best science we're currently doing. And then we might ask
whether some bits of science need to pay more attention or perhaps are using a kind of an outdated
or not very defensible view of their subject matter. And we could perhaps set them back onto
the path of truth and goodness and beauty. And I guess another, you know, apart from all that,
as this quote from a much maligned 20th century philosophy of biology, Joseph Henry Woodyer
says, you can't avoid it. You can't do science without a general picture of what you're talking
about. And the general picture of what you're talking about is what I call metaphysics. Okay.
So, so I think there is a constant interaction between metaphysics, ontology, what there is,
what exists, and empirical science. Okay. So let me just start off with a very brief bit of history.
The topic I'm talking about is a really ancient one that goes back to the pre-Socratic Greek
philosophers at least. And here are two kind of archetypal figures from that period. Parmenides,
who is famous for saying, change is an illusion. There is everything is just what it is and stays
that way. And, you know, we kind of, from our very limited perspective, see all kinds of things
happening. But really, you know, from, from a broader point of view, there is just the way things
are. The complete opposite view perhaps was expressed by famously by Heraclitus, the sort of
patron saint of process philosophers who said something like nothing endures but change. There
is only change. And this is, I guess, you will realize the view that I think at least some version
of which I would like to commend to you. Now, of course, I just say change is an illusion is
probably not a very fair, you know, certainly for a philosopher of science in practice,
is not a very fair characterization of the alternative to process metaphysics. So that's,
we should go rather to Democritus, who allegedly said, nothing except exists except atoms and
empty space. Everything else is opinion. So why is this? This is, is, is close to the Parmenidian
view because all the really is, is a lot of atoms. And the atoms are defined as being unchanging.
Nothing happens to them. The only thing that changes is their relation to one another. That's to say,
you know, the atoms move around and then they come together and form you and me for a, for a
tiny instant in eternity, but they don't really change. All that changes is, is their relations
to one another. Okay, so moving on a millennium and a half or so, we come to sort of dawn of
Western science. And my basic message is Parmenides or at least Democritus one. And, and we have,
and he sort of quotes from, I know I got these separated, from Robert Boyle, one of the better
known scientists of that, of the scientific revolution. The naturalist in explaining
particular phenomena considers only the size, shape, motion, or want of it, texture, and the
resulting qualities and attributes of the small particles of matter. Basically, something very
close to the Democritian view. They really are just atoms moving around. When we want to understand
the things that seem to change the sort of complex structures we encounter, we really just need to
find out what the atoms are doing, how they stick together. Perhaps they nudge one another and
things like that. But, but the things that we encounter at our kind of spatial and temporal
scales are, in some sense, not really real. So what I want to say in this talk is that
Parmenides' victory was a very disastrous one for the future study of biology. Because
it's much better to think of the living world in the Heraclitian view as composed of processes,
change, as always dynamic, and in no way should we think in terms of the kind of
Parmenidaean, basically there's just atoms moving around in the void
way of seeing things. Okay, so that's about it for history. So what am I going to do in this talk,
moving into the future? So the talk is that all living beings are processes
rather than substances. This is kind of rather technical term in the history of philosophy
that I shall avoid on the whole. And I just tend to talk about things. Now, of course, there's no
really good word that, you know, that's why we have technical words like substance. But I'll
say a bit what I mean by thing. So, I mean, don't just take it absolutely as any interpretation
you might have of thing. And I shall use this to contrast with processes, and I'll explain this
more. So, I'll say I'll start off with saying about something about this difference. And then
I'll talk about why I think organisms as one kind of paradigmatic example should be thought of as
processes and not as things. I should mention in passing, I just probably mentioned this again,
I am actually very strongly drawn to the view that its process is all the way down, that, you
know, even down to subatomic physics, it's all processes. But I'm not, I don't feel
comfortable defending that view. I mean, it obviously would take one into some fairly technical
bits of physics. I'm pretty comfortable down to the level of macromolecules. But if you want to go
down to, you know, quarks and things, and, you know, some, and you have physical, physical expertise
as a physicist, which tells you that quarks really are atoms, as democratists might have thought of
them. I won't argue with you, though I could if I really had to wheel up a few physicists, or at
least philosophers of physics who would disagree. But, but that's not my, so if you want to take
this, this is, this is really a talk arguing that life, living things are all living things, it's
very hard to avoid the word, which tells you something, that living beings, living systems are
processes and not things. And I'll talk, after talking about organisms, I'll talk more briefly
about how we might incorporate some other levels of biological organization and form a general,
might we say, metaphysics of life. And then at the end, I will just say a few things rather
briefly about why this matters. Some of them I'll say a bit more about in further lectures this week.
Okay, so first of all, things and processes. Okay, so what's a thing? So I think this is,
this is the philosophical orthodoxy that the world is made up of things. They are,
and they're things specific with properties we have. And that, that's, I say, as a kind of basis
for a great deal of contemporary philosophy, the world, there are these things in the world and
they have various properties. Particularly, they have, and this, this is, of course, is, is a,
is another big area that I won't go into a great detail. But one kind of properties that's very
important in, in this metaphysical tradition are essential properties, the properties that make
the thing a particular thing, either a particular kind of thing or the very specific particular
thing it is. And, and there are reasons why it's quite hard to make sense of a ontology of things
without appealing to some kind of essential properties. But again, I won't, I'm happy to
talk about this later, but I won't say much more about that now. Things are autonomous. And this,
I think, is something that is really very important to the tradition of thinking about things. If
you have a thing, it could be the only thing in the universe. I mean, it's, it doesn't depend on
anything else for its existence or for its relations to anything else for its existence.
Now, of course, there are maybe some things that contingently do for reasons of, you know, for kind
of for, for specific reasons, a thing of that kind wouldn't actually continue to exist if it
didn't wasn't related to something else. But in general, the interesting things, the most
important things that we're going to talk about and, and assume in our philosophy of things are
things that are autonomous in that sense. And finally, a thing has reasonably clear boundaries.
Now, of course, you know, as always, one can have a bit of fuzziness, but not too much fuzziness.
I mean, there's we really ought to be able to, to see where roughly where it begins and ends.
And this is actually important for one for another reason that a lot of the discussion of
why we should think about things has to do with counting. We want to know how many things there
are. And to be able to divide the world into a definite number of things requires that we know
roughly where one ends and the next one begins. Okay. And I guess I've actually rather oddly
arranged because I've gone back to essential properties. I'm sorry about that in the slide.
I don't know quite what I was thinking. But when I say other properties, what I mean is
essential non essential properties can change. And, but crucially, when other properties of
things change, we typically want an explanation, because the default for a thing is to stay the
same. And I think this is a very important point for understanding what attracts the interest of
scientists. They tend to be interested in why things change, giving explanations of change,
typically by giving causes of change. Okay. So the default state of a thing is stasis.
Now, I've got to, you know, here are some examples of what we classically think of things. As I said,
in my true view of the world, these are all probably processes too. But,
but I'm not going to argue that today. So I'm going to take, you know, these very, you know,
bit of furniture is very thing like it certainly has clear boundaries, doesn't seem to depend on
anything else, and so on. Okay. So the question, of course, is whether, you know, maybe this is a,
is a thing. And I guess in traditional philosophical thought, this is a standard,
certainly in, if one use the technical word substance, this is a paradigm example of a
substance. And I think it's tends to be thought of in a thing like way. So what about a process
for a process philosophy being is dynamic, everything is changing all the time. And what
we thought of as things, certainly the biological things are, as I like to say, and not not the
only process philosopher who has had this kind of paradigm for this, eddies, things are eddies
in a flux of process, what you think of the world as at its most fundamental level, just
stuff happening. But somehow, and that's the great challenge to understand the world,
somehow out of this flux, emerge structures that have more or less stability, never complete
stability. And the stability they have is maintained always by changes, by things happening. And
my kind of definition here of a process is for it to continue to exist for a process to carry on,
it has to change, things have to happen. So here's one of my favorite paradigms is I had
to actually, Jupiter was one of my examples of a thing, here we have the red spot on Jupiter,
which you might have thought was, you know, an island or some kind of, but actually, what we
know is that it is a storm, essentially, it's a storm maintained by by winds, very high velocity
winds. And the reason I like this example is ever since we've had telescopes big enough to see it,
the red spot has been there on Jupiter. It changes its shape, you know, but that's about 400 years,
I think, that we've observed this entity, which as I say looks from a distance, it might be a thing,
but is actually a process. If it stopped, if the wind stopped flowing around it, if the activity
stopped, it would rapidly dissipate. And then here's some more typical kind of examples of processes,
a river, which I guess was Heraclitus, most famous example, you've probably all heard the
saying from Heraclitus, which I won't try and discuss, though again, we could bring it up,
that you can never can't step into the same river twice, he didn't actually quite say that, or
nobody knows what he quite said, but he probably didn't, nobody actually thinks he quite said that,
and so on. But that's what he's the most famous for. And then of course, finally we move on to the
most un-thing-like processes. I have an example of a battle, which clearly, if everybody stops
fighting, there's no more battle, right? So this is a very clearly fits this definition. And again,
of course, we can ask, you know, whether these paradigmatic organisms are processes, which of
course is my thesis. Okay, so just to summarize, we have a conception of a thing as integrated,
I didn't actually talk about that, but I guess it's almost implicit. It's always so obvious to say,
things, and perhaps follows from the boundaries, independent, not dependent on for its existence,
on anything else, stable by default, and has definite boundaries. And none of these is necessary,
or even typical for processes. Processes persist through activity, i.e. they are not stable by
default. And this is the strongest contest I make, where as against things for which the
default condition is stasis. And again, this is something I think has some real practical
implications for how we should think about some scientific problems. So just a quote from one
of the, well actually, two mentioned here of the most prominent contemporary defendants of
process philosopher, Nicholas Resher. And then the Stanford Encyclopedia, his article, was updated by
Nicholas Resher, as by, by, sorry, Janusciped, as process ontologists see it, enduring things are
never more than patterns of stability in a sea of process. So that's really the thesis. And by
process, I understand again, something, and I often notice the embarrassment that in English,
one can't help saying something, anything, everything, all the time when one's trying to
say there are no things. So please forgive this linguistic annoyance. Some entity, which just
doesn't work in English, for which change or activity is necessary for it to continue to be
the kind of entity it is. Okay. So one last sort of preliminary note, many people will associate
process philosophy with Alfred North Whitehead, who is certainly the most famous recent
advocate of process philosophy. And I certainly don't want to, to demean the contributions of
Whitehead, which were, you know, many including this. But I really want to bypass Whitehead
in my work for a couple of reasons. One is he is notoriously difficult to understand,
possibly obscure. He also has some views tied in with his process philosophy that I don't want to
endorse. I mean, I guess, panpsychism, maybe sometimes I feel a little tiny pull in that
direction, but it's fairly small. I'm not comfortable with it, certainly, or theology,
which, again, as I suppose is quite widely associated with process theology, but with
process philosophy, but not in my view of the world. And I guess finally, to be rather mean to
Whitehead, I don't really think he's a process philosopher. And that's because I think he has
an atomistic view of processes. So any of you here who are Whitehead aficionados, he has little
things called occasions, actual occasions, things which look to me a bit like unchanging atoms,
which make up the processes. And I don't think we need or want such things. Anyhow, again,
no disrespect to an important contributor, but I find it easier to reinvent wheels sometimes
than try and figure out where the wheel is underneath all the mud in a very, you know,
overused kind of vest. Oh, this is gone much too far. Okay, right. So organisms and why organisms
are processes. So I think there are three reasons for thinking organisms a process,
each of which is sufficient. And together, we really, really shouldn't have any debate about this.
So first of all, organisms, we all know, are dynamically stabilized. They are systems far
from thermodynamic equilibrium, right? That's, it's, you know, one of the puzzles for understanding
life has always been how something so thermodynamically improbable stays around. And of course,
we know the answer to this is through, I mean, in outline, there's a constant turnover of matter,
organisms take in matter and energy, and they process it, and they process it to maintain
their structures and their functions. And so, so it is the very nature of such a system far from
thermodynamic equilibrium, that it's doing stuff to maintain itself as what it is.
Second, organisms have life cycles. They, they are not even apparently constant structures.
In fact, they have a sequence of different stages, sometimes quite dramatically different from
one another. And third, and this is, I think, is actually the thing that, that the aspect
that really led me into process thinking was realizing the omnipresence of symbiosis,
and that actually organisms stabilize themselves not merely by what they do,
their own taking in energy and processing it, but through their relations to many other organisms,
cooperative relations, which I guess, you know, we mostly, we know, perhaps best through what we've
all learned recently about our gut microbiomes. But of course, we have lots of other organisms
we're related to in many other different ways. And I'll say more about all of these. So, so let
me just go through these quickly, not much really to say more about this. Organisms are thermodynamically
open systems, far from equilibrium. And this implies that they're not independent, they require
constant input from the environment, sorry, type of the, nor stable by default. I, if an organism
doesn't do anything, I mean, if nothing happens, you know, there's trillions of things happening
inside all of us. And every second, if those stop happening, we cease, we become dead organisms.
And if we stop taking in matter from the environment, we also more slowly become dead
organisms. In fact, if you count oxygen, we quite quickly become dead organisms. So, it's, it's,
they're certainly not, you know, independent autonomous entities. Secondly, they are developmental
processes. And I just give an example, which will all be quite familiar, possibly not the
wonderful sea creature. I don't know what that is, Medusa. On the bottom, there are some sea creatures
just have wonderful life cycles. But my point is that properties change dramatically over the life
cycle. They were all very used to the idea that the egg and the caterpillar and the pupa and the
adult, the same organism. But if we were trying to understand how that could be the same thing,
and there could be some essential property that said this is some same entity going through all
these drastic changes, it's quite a struggle. And I don't know if I might say go to this later.
But people sometimes think we may be answered to that with the genome. Happy to talk about this,
but just let me, just two things. Genomes are highly dynamic, of course. But also,
there are lots of genomes in an organism, and they're not all the same by any means,
and for various reasons. I could, I can certainly talk more about that if anybody
would like to become a genome essentialist and defend the, that is a way of saying an organism
is a thing at least against this objection. So, organisms don't persist by default. But as quite
often happens for process, they persist, well, sorry, as always happens for organisms, they
persist by some kind of causal continuity. But this is consistent with going through drastically
different stages. And somebody in the seminar this morning brought up the example of a party
as a process where parties can be lively at one point, and then most people can leave and they
can be really desultory and nobody's really saying anything. And, you know, nobody thinks the party
is absolutely ended because it stops being lively or people stop dancing. You know, we're
used to the idea that processes can go through changes. These are rather more dramatic changes,
perhaps. I mean, from a, from a pupa to an adult insect is about as dramatic a change as you could
easily imagine. And yet we have no trouble in the idea that just the causal continuity of the process
leads us to say that this is still the same organism. Finally, symbiosis. And I just got some,
you know, a few randomly selected illustrations here. But, you know, the basic point is that we
now think pretty much all organisms, you know, there are some, some sort of a few things floating
around in the oceans that maybe don't have much to do with anything else. But on the whole,
organisms are symbiotic. It's the famous one that, you know, has heard of humans. And there
there's a debate whether, you know, something between 50 and 90 percent of the cells in a human
body are not what we used to call human cells, they're microbial cells. Trees have amazingly
complex, or plants generally, relations to bacteria and fungi. There are whole these
amazingly complex systems that interact with the roots. The fungi actually kind of live inside
the roots and then through and out into, send their hyphae out into the surrounding soil where
they interact with consortia of bacteria, all processing the materials going in and out. And
indeed, as now quite famously, passing material down the hyphae networks to other plants in their
vicinity, sometimes plants of different species. So the degree of interconnectedness in complex
botanical systems is stunning. And I guess, you know, we often see the mushrooms that come
out of these systems. But if we once thought that they were kind of independent autonomous organisms,
now realizing their very complex, intimate relations to the plants, they live around,
see something quite different. And I don't think I'll go into the insects. That's another
nice system that's been much studied. So, autonomous is not a word that really applies well to
any or any bit of very small minority attenuated organisms. Okay. And so I just, you know, I like,
I like this a lot. So I just give one example, which leads to a thesis that I like to kind of
use to illustrate the significance in one, one significance of this process, your perspective.
So here's one of the most successful organisms in a typical forest environment,
leaf cutter ants. I won't go too much into the biology, but you can see here's a picture of
them carrying off little bits of leaf into their colonies, where they go various different casts,
some carry the leaves, some defend the colony, some look after the insides of the colony in
various different ways. But more interestingly, the inside the colonies, there are things that
you can think of as the stomach of the whole system, whether leaves are processed by specialist
fungi, actually by specialist fungi, and that depend themselves on consortia of bacteria.
There are different consortia in other parts of the system. And it turns out actually that I
mentioned insects and some of their obligate symbionts while back here are very well known when
they actually also involved in these ants, and kind of rather interestingly, in some cases,
the while back here determine the sex of the ants. So if you're looking for some
organisms that's running the system, since it's really quite important, which what the
sex of the ants are, and the cast of the ants, it may be the while back here that are really
running it as little micro reduced bacterial symbionts inside the ants. I don't think anybody
studied the role of viruses, but almost certainly viruses are involved. I think they're involved
in pretty much any system. I'm not sure if I can mention that further today. And so what I want to
say is there's lots of ways you could sort out an organism here. People will often say the colony
is a super organism, sort of technical term, but it's a very well integrated whole. The individual
ants look most like organisms, but people will often say, well, they're so far from autonomous.
I mean, they're most of them are not sexual, so they can't reproduce themselves, but also
they can't. I mean, there's nothing they can do to survive on their own. You might think of the
fungal stomach as an organism that just a specialized organism for living inside and colonies,
because I mean, it's nothing. It's not related by descent to the ants. It's a collaboration
that's come together over time, and so on. So I mean, there are many ways you can carve,
and of course, there are questions at each point whether you include the
obligate microbial symbionts as part of the organisms or not. There are many different
ways you could carve up this flow of biological activity into organisms, which I call this
thesis of promiscuous individualism. And I won't go into some of you may know I have a
somewhat similar system view, which I call promiscuous realism about kinds.
But basically, this thesis is just organisms are abstracted from this flux for particular
reasons according to what you're interested in, why you're doing it. Okay, so processes,
and I just want to say this is quite characteristic of a lot of processes, processes intertwine with
one another in quite complex ways and have quite indeterminate boundaries. This is quite natural
for processes, very hard to understand things as entangled in this sort of way with one another.
And I come back to the sort of example famous from Heraclitus of the river,
and I think the way rivers keep constantly changing, merging, separating is actually
remarkably similar in some ways to the way organisms, particularly the evolutionary
flow of organisms, but also just the flow of organisms in a complex system like the ant colony
can be thought of. Okay, so biology is all process. And another crucial thing to understand
is that this process has multiple time scales. So evolution, I guess, being the slowest time
scale, which can be we can think of in terms of, you know, many millions of years, development,
which can take from minutes to decades. And I guess something that maybe I should say,
I hope it's obvious, in a sense, it is the developmental system or cycle, which is the
entity that evolves. So you couldn't evolve just, you know, an ant caterpillar, I'm sorry,
a butterfly caterpillar. You could, what has evolved is the system, the caterpillar can't exist
except as part of this flow of process through the various stages. Metabolism at a much faster
rates is a great number of processes that keep the parts of the system running, keeping them in
stable, in non thermal, far from thermal equilibrium at many different rates.
So all of the entities that one might think of in a hierarchy of biological systems are processes
at these various time scales. And one of the really fascinating things in trying to get a
big picture of biology is understanding how these time scales interact, how the processes at
these different time scales build up or down to interconnect and maintain the stability of the
whole flow. So what is an organism? Now it's a horrible thing that I think I've never done before,
which is that philosophers sometimes do is when they want to break up words into bits,
put little subscripts on them. So I apologize, but it just did seem it's a natural way of doing it.
So if you ask most biologists what they mean by an organism, they will say something like,
I think, what I said by organism, by organism sub one. So there are bacteria, which are single
celled organisms. And then there are multicellular organisms, which typically, or perhaps always,
come about from a starting cell, which divides multiple times, differentiates, the cells
differentiate, and we end up with a multicellular organism. Basically all cells with roughly the
same genetic constitution. I say roughly because that's problematic. But when we actually look
at the systems that I've been looking at, we see that actually a real organism moving around
contains cells from many different sources that combine to form a functional system,
or the one that really interacts with the rest of the biological world. As I call this an organism
two. And I have to say living systems typically involve a complexly intertwined interaction
between many distinct organisms one. And this of course is why defining the boundaries of organisms
two, which I think is the most fundamental sense, is very difficult, undetermined and
interest relative. Because there are different levels of interconnectedness between the various
processes that interact. But it is these very roughly defined systems with somewhat indeterminate
boundaries that I think what we mean when we refer to organisms. When I point to a cow, I don't mean,
as I say, that's a cow. I don't mean apart from all the bacteria in its four stomachs. I mean the
whole thing that walks around and processes grass. And this is actually something that
I formulate in a particular way as what an organism or what indeed a biological system is,
is the intersection between lineages and the metabolic intersection of various biological
lineages. Produces these stable thing like organisms. And the stabilization
facilitates of these processes in turn facilitate the persistence of the lineage. I haven't really
talked about that. I'll get onto that a bit later. So here's a sort of picture. In the middle of the
picture we have a traditional kind of thing like view of how I think it's still very common to think
of the biological world as a hierarchy of things that are put together to form bigger things. So
molecules making cells, cells making tissues, organs, so on. What I want to say is that these are
actually all processes, processes synchronized between different time scales and crucially
processes that the synchronization is both from above and from below. So the traditional picture
that I'm arguing against tends to be really bottom up. The molecules explain how the cells work
and then when you know how the cells work you can put them together to form tissues and so on.
But I just, you know, looking right in the middle, I look at something like the heart.
We all know actually that of course the heart has a physiology. It's made of certain kinds of cells
that, you know, oscillate in certain kinds of ways. But we also know that if the organism doesn't
take its proper exercise and eat its five portions of vegetables a day, that it won't function very
well. So actually the persistence of the organ depends entirely on its positioning within
a more complex system that it's part of. And of course we could also say, well the organisms
would not persist if they were not part of lineages that keep throwing them out and so on.
So all along I think that we should look at not only the way the components at the lower level
interact to get the behaviors of things at the higher level, but also the way the embedding
in the higher level systems actually helps to explain the properties of the components themselves.
Okay, so I guess what I want to say is that that's basically it. That's my summary of what the
difference between a thing and a process is and why organisms and in fact everything along the
hierarchy of biological complexity is really best seen as a process. I just want to now
just say a few things about some implications that this has for what we should,
how we should think about some quite significant problems. The first one to say is medicine.
It's I think extremely standard to think of medicine in relation to the organism as a mechanism.
A mechanism that has the set of parts that interact with one another to produce healthy
existence and something gets broken. So what we do is first of all figure out what the broken part is
and figure out how we're going to fix it and of course sometimes that works very well. If you
break your leg and you can't walk we quite rightly think the best way forward is to try and get the
leg to join together and restore its structural integrity and then you could with luck walk again.
So it's not that there's nothing right about this it's just that it's I think a very limited
perspective because I think from a process perspective the central mission of medical
research is rather to understand the processes that stabilize human life cycles at these various
time scales and develop interventions that maintain fortify or of course sometimes restore
these processes. I remember years and years ago somebody told me and I don't know whether it's
true or not and it didn't mean much apart from being memorable at the time that in Chinese medicine
you pay your doctor as long as you don't get sick. If you get sick then you stop paying your doctor.
That came back to me later and said that is quite wonderful that is exactly how medicine
should work. Of course you know and I guess you contrast it with you know the power the opposite
paradigm which I guess I think lived in the U.S. American medicine is desperately trying to invent
sicknesses so that you could be paid to pay somebody to say you don't have them anymore.
I'm a bit simplistic I know. But it does seem to me that if you accept the view that
the default of a process is actually ceasing to persist I mean that that processes persist
by doing things then you shouldn't have this you know that this is very different in its
implications from the mechanistic view. And I think my favorite illustration I mean sounds
if I love this stuff I mean I don't mean this in a I like it kind of way but I think the
illness that makes this clearest to me is cancer. So let me just say a little bit about this.
So when you think about human development which is by which I don't just mean you know like
zero to fifteen I mean minus three quarters to however long you live is a process of human
development. And as we we certainly know the this process involves this constant and massive
division differentiation and disposal of cells right. We you know the all through the life cycle
we are our cells dividing at various different rates and at certain points differentiating
so that we have different organs and and and so on. And and there's also we we we now know
they're a process of time times at which cells are disposed of they've outlived their usefulness.
Now if you just try and imagine how exquisitely this process is timed to enable a human to
go through a life cycle. If it goes wrong if this doesn't happen right a lot of the things
that go wrong are things we call cancer i.e. cells are not being disposed of as they should or cells
are dividing when they shouldn't or cells are differentiating in ways that they're not supposed
to. I don't know if you've ever seen some of these appalling cancers where you have little bits of
organs in a tumor a little bit of yes or yeah yeah quite quite one seed never forgotten but
yeah that sort of thing feet and near here and bit of yeah but I mean it's it's once I think you
you you get your mind around the the perfection of this process in a certain way I mean obviously
it's there's much more to be said about that too. It's the amazing thing is that most of the time
we don't have you know seriously harmful cancers of course actually we all we do have you know
incipient cancers all the time throughout our bodies but most of the time we manage to
suppress these and carry on through the normal life cycle. So cancer we should assume as we of
course now know is multi-causal there is no you know cause of cancer there are countless things that
make us more likely to to to experience cancers and the way this is so I'd say the general problem
is is to explain why we often don't get cancer rather than why we sometimes do and how we maintain
our developmental process on something I'm putting quotes because normal is such a terrible
word in biology but on something that let's say a healthy path. So and I think there are
conclusions for this that that there is unlike I don't think we're going to find a cure for cancer
I mean this seems like this would just be extraordinarily improbable because as if somehow
after you know evolution has spent all these billions of years refining this system
we're suddenly going to say something okay but it's a bit unreliable here's something that's going
to make it a hundred percent reliable that's not going to happen but but there may be many
cures for many cancers which of course is rather the way we're going and I think it at least provides
a perspective that could help us think about this question in new ways and I'm not a cancer
scientist so that I need to throw that out as a general optimistic view. So here's another one
that I've I've done a little bit more on too viruses now viruses are for me a kind of paradigm
process if you hear people talking about viruses I think they often imagine that there are these
little things floating around the world that are viruses and you run into one or two or maybe a
bunch of them and then they do something horrible to you well there's something true about that
there is a stage in the viral process which is the very inert stage the virion which is a little
thing that gets you know churned out by a virus reproducing in a host and can start that process
in some other organism but actually if you follow the life cycle of a virus the virion ceases to
exist for the active part of the viral life cycle i.e. it goes into the cell all kinds of biochemistry
happen you know the the the protein manufacturing mechanisms get co-opted they make proteins
for new viruses and eventually the cell typically dissolves and a bunch of new virions comes out
so the virions then don't do anything until they hit another suitable cell that they can
and they can infect so there is nothing that runs through the life cycle of a virus even actually
you know you might think that even the genomes don't always do this they for example switch between
DNA and RNA forms sometimes they sit inside the host genome for periods when is that a virus if
there's a little bit of the host genome doing nothing that's just sitting there as DNA which is
waiting to turn into an RNA virus at some time in the i mean anyway it's it's extremely improbable
to try and think of a thing undergoing changes there's a there's a thing like entity that then
initiates a very un-thing like process at the end of which is a bunch more thing like entities
but the virus is surely the whole life cycle not just the inert stage of its operation so
i think instead we should think rather of a flow of DNA passing through organisms sometimes
sticking and actually i think since i wrote this slide and this is another one coming which is
in which case i'm sorry if i'm anticipating i don't think i it turns out actually that some
things that i didn't know make this perspective actually even more appealing which is that it
turns out actually that the infecting virus very often isn't a single virion it's actually people
talk about viral clouds quasi species and a lot of times it turns out that the infectivity of a
virus depends on properties of the population of viruses by which you're infected and actually the
variations across the population are what defeat the immune system in a very complex
set of interactions which has a huge evolutionary history and and so actually i mean and and i
guess this this made me understand it was kind of been a little puzzling if you have the sort of
simple view of the virus as you know one particle gets into your cell and then releases all these
other virions you think one one virus would be enough to get you sick one virion now sometimes in
some cases that's true in others as as we i think learned in covid um actually it's very important
how large a dose you get and that's actually to do with the probably the diversity within the
population of viruses that infects you so actually the process of viruses interacting with hosts
can often be a population level phenomenon rather than an individual level phenomenon
again something that's a much more natural thought in terms of this flow picture i think
than in terms of a thing with nasty properties and i guess the final thing that i that i think is
you know it's now becoming increasingly clear and again i think is within this broader picture
should be totally unsurprising is that viruses mostly of course are harmless but actually many
of them are probably functional and essential and in fact maybe the outnumbering the cells in your
body are the viruses that you require for the function the stability of your system in particular
one obvious way in this they do this is by regulating the bacterial populations most of the
viruses in your body are phages that's to say viruses that um that um the hosts of which are
bacteria and the numbers of phages in your body makes it seem very likely that they have important
roles in um stabilizing the different the relations between the different sorts of organisms in your
body i just lost the okay so some conclusions um i think i'm argue that our thinking about life
is actually hampered by is grounding in the worldview that since the scientific revolution
has driven a great deal of scientific thought basically a picture of things pushing pulling
one another stuck together to form mechanisms machine like connections of these entities
so life isn't you know like this sort of put all the bits together and the machine starts to go
it's this really hard one constantly maintained moment of structure and stability that emerges
somehow and of course it doesn't emerge you know the moment you're born it's emerged over billions
of years of evolution from the surrounding ocean of broadly directionless activity and i think
realizing this should give us a very different view of many aspects of life and even of ourselves
and that's what i will hope to convince any of you who come back for more
in the course of this week in the next and the rest of this series of lectures
but for now i just end with if you are interested in this here's a place to go and find out more
and i'm happy to do this because this is an open access book anybody can read it and so i'm not
trying to make money off royalties or anything that is sad sorry thing state for an academic to be in
if i were but but this is this is where to look for more on many of these topics
right so i will take questions i'm i'm i'm instructed to ask if you could make your
questions as short as you can because i've been asked to try and summarize them before
answering them so yeah i saw you first and then yeah so thank you for the wonderful talk so
i think i'd buy the picture when we're looking at biology and then the question is how would the
dialectic with your non-process opponent go concerning other things and
and one one way to phrase that would be to say whether one could somehow
eat some of what you get from process philosophy within a thing ontology but with processes
so he would be distorted on on the t-shirt of that view so it would be organisms
involve processes but they are not processes so they involve processes but they're not
so you have this sort of thing view there are various processes going on and you say these
processes connected with the organisms which is their thing and the difference between draw view
and that view seems to be that you identify that organism trick for the with the processes whereas
this the acknowledges that they have multiple processes all these things that you don't talk about
just resist the identification we don't go into the reasons why there's the resistance but what
would you say to this series um okay so i i i um i have some sympathy with that question and i guess
the sympathy i have is um that i can see why one might want to just introduce a new term
right so so i think there's that you know the things i contrast it with things
substances really carry philosophical baggage that has really been unhelpful in thinking about life
so i want i want to suggest that the reason that that that what unites this unhelpful baggage
is its kind of statusism the fact that it's it's doesn't adequately involve the fact that the the
properties we're interested in are outputs of all kinds of activity now you might say but now we've
got um and i think this is earlier today it's somewhat similar you might say well okay so so
organisms um are very unlike traditional or or or many of don't share many of the properties that
have traditionally been paradigmatic of things substances in the philosophical tradition but
on the other hand they're not terribly like what we used to think of as processes i um your example
actually was that i mentioned was the party or i had a picture of a battle um or when you know or
the erosion of a cliff or you know there there are sort of processes that um seem as if they are
necessarily happenings that happen to things so maybe we should have maybe we should have the
things but then of course if some of the things aren't at all like traditional things maybe we
don't want to say that we don't want to say the organisms are things we don't want to say their
process so maybe we can call them something else you know we can come up with a word for them
my personal feeling well for i guess for two reasons one is it's always a kind of uphill struggle
um you know inventing a whole new category and saying that um you know we need to start thinking
in terms of a kind of category of an ontological category that we didn't really know existed
before but the other thing is there is a tradition here i mean i you know i i may have sound as if
there was basically hieroclitus whiteheader than me um and i certainly don't mean to say that um i mean
and for example um one of the things my collaborator on this book Dan Nicholson has done a great deal
of work on is the um early 20th century biology which was um was inspired actually by whitehead
people like waddington um and various actually wooja who i mentioned at that point um was involved
with it so a bunch of of um biologists who have tried to articulate a process ontology and i think
there's a there's a little historical story that actually if you look at the 20th century up to
about let's say 1953 you have um you have a lot of theoretical biology that's process directed
and then 1953 as everybody probably knows with the structure of of dna was um published and this
initiated an extraordinarily productive but in some way misguided um his chapter in the history
of biology we found out a huge amount but that also embedded um a lot of really misleading views
notably the view that biology was basically just all you know run by these little bits of dna
which we now know is completely wrong the wonderful molecules dna but it doesn't it's not a blueprint
it's not a master molecule it's just part of a complex system um and um and i think so so
so i don't think we need to go outside the tradition and invent something new i think we need to
you know reclaim a lot of the pre dna biology and then and and and actually and it's easy to
do that in a way because we know much now we know actually lots of things about dna that make us see
it's a thoroughly active molecule that's constantly doing things changing um changing its shape
changing its chemical structure um you know it's it's as dynamic as i mean there are aspects of
it that are importantly very stable but even them they're not stable because it's a very stable
molecule they're stable also because there's a whole host of systems that stabilize it that
repair the sequence when it gets damaged and so on so i think um that picking up this this thread
and saying actually you know these these process oriented biologists prior to i say the second half
of the 20th century were so right about the basic metaphysics even if you know the quite different
view has been very productive we should pick it up and and reassert the processional nature of of life
right uh yeah i i've got lots of questions but
thanks for a brief talk and it's all right if anything might be
having a little bit of fun in some ways so this is a relatively simple thing but um
basically i was wondering why i don't think they can't be more affordable means that they're
so let me illustrate what i mean um i use this distinction that you can be quite helpful in
plus your medicine so it's something that i call sort of contributing causal factors and then
realize some causal factors so um namely you may have lots of different not things
but lots lots of different causes contributing to the occurrence of some sort of phenomenal
whatever but then it could have and this is maybe where this might be useful in some ways
you could have a process that kind of instantiates the thing if you like so namely realizes it in
the system um and so uh you know one of the most promising paradigms for something like cancer is
this framework that i mentioned earlier briefly um so based on vision and in that kind of framework
you may well have various you know a whole range of reasons for this bioelectric communication
to break down right but the ultimate sort of realizing thing for infant target would be
communication breaking down right and so in that case as long as you manage to kind of
weave um re-establish it you would be getting rid of cancer right so i mean basically i definitely
think that cancer being multi-posal in the sense of contributing causal factors means that prevention
would have to be multiple multiple in that sense right like you couldn't just
decide on one force of action and prevent cancer but treatment seems to be rather different
because i think in in most cases the target's something closer to realizing causal factors
so yeah i absolutely agree well i think it probably depends how broadly you interpret
communication breaking down um and if you interpret it sufficiently broadly um i mean
that's always the case where you's where with with um sort of pluralistic arguments i mean
you could you can make the terminology sufficiently inclusive to include all the things that a
pluralist would like to break down but it seems to me that taking as i hear your question that there
is one particular kind of relation that um the failure of which is what we call cancer
i mean so that that's the the monistic reading of that and if i took it that way i would say
that seems really improbable for the reason that i i tried to give that the articulation
of all these cellular divisions differentiations and deaths that constitutes a healthy life cycle
is not constituted by one single kind of relation it's i i'm i'm pretty sure constituted by or and
maintained by an awful lot of relations now if you say you know those relations are communications
between cells yeah perhaps that's right i mean messaging between cells determines whether they
do these things but that seems to me more almost like just describing cancer rather than
than providing an etiology for it and that's why i say i mean and that's why i say in a sense
you've avoided the pluralism by taking a sufficiently wide-ranging definition of what's
happening that you just say it's this not working anymore i i i did see a lot of hands before so
we may have a chance i'm sure etiology better for prevention okay yeah i mean that that's yeah
um yeah so so yeah so i was wondering that um there can be an in-between case which is neither
just things or just processes but if the stability which you think can be achieved is
achieved in a timescale which is important for humans then i think one might think then in
that case we can use substance but when the stability is not achieved in the in a we can just
say which is the timescale then there is only processes so there is one option which is not
everything is seen but very few things is seen and more things are processed than we thought before
and that would be closer to your view but to be like because the stability for you is very important
and if we would say that when the stability is stable we achieve then at least we can call it
same then uh the kind of contrast between process and something else still can be maintained which
might be useful yeah no i mean i that that's that's something actually i'm i'm very happy to do in
in many cases i mean i think again for those of you who are here earlier i mean that's that's how
i would explain why mechanism is often a a successful strategy because the things that you
identify as the parts of the mechanism are stable over the timescale you're interested in
understanding so i i'm and of course that's just that might be a very short one and there might be in
everyday life you might say you know a certain degree of stability is sufficient to count as a
thing um and of course that wouldn't have any that wouldn't in any way i think fundamentally
contradict anything i'm saying i'm happy with that great what kind of mathematics would you
suggest for process based modeling in biology this is a classical question because in urbanism
addition in the reticent biology so that question has been discussed since maybe
would you are going to be wanting to on rene at home uh robert rosen uh say what would be your
answer um my answer would be to i'm afraid to to refuse to try and answer i i mean you know i i i'm
i'm um i'm not a mathematician um and you know i i'm um so i'm i'm not going to adjudicate between
somebody um i can't understand at all like rozen and somebody i can't understand very much like
butter lampy um i i think these the i i have greatest respect for this kind of work but it's
not my pathway into the subject i i'm afraid to say um so yeah i saw you say yeah um yeah yeah
and then what um yeah you then then then okay so what can you tell us about these similarities or
difference between your approach and also biases and the extended competition
um so extended cognition i think is is relative i mean i think it's it's very congenial but i
think it's it's in a different um here i mean it's it's debate a different arena i mean it's
arguing with different people i say i'm very very sympathetic to it um and i i think i i buy a lot of
it but um but i don't think it's um it's kind of a competitor i think it's just a an ally
though obviously i don't mean that all people in that line of work would necessarily agree
autopoiesis um i have a i mean a lot of similarities i think um the the only
trouble with autopoiesis is well the biggest trouble that is the word autopoiesis um i mean
the notion that organisms make themselves i find very unfortunate um and i think you know an awful
lot of what um you know varela and machirana actually say seems just right and i'm totally
sympathetic to but the framework of um you know things allegedly making themselves seems to be a
pity but but that's that's probably just a little bit of a semantic quibble i think there's a great
deal um in common um and i think i would mostly say um i guess again rather like whitehead they're
not always the easiest um people to understand and and i mean you know the this is this sounds
like laziness on my part and probably is but um i do think that you know there's a you know i mean
whitehead i think in all honesty does has done quite a lot of harm to process thinking and not
by getting things wrong so much as by making people think oh my god if i if i get interested in
process i'll have to read a process in reality and that's um i know nobody wants to do that i mean
i i i obviously exaggerate but but um but i and i and i do think um so so obviously one of the one
of the aims of this project is to try and suggest actually it's i mean and obviously i leave others
to judge whether i'm succeeding in this but really one ought to be able to say this sort of stuff
in a perfectly straightforward understandable way it's it's really easy to understand and i think
you know um i think i think you know vralla maturana sort of often make it seem harder than it is
and come up with and and i guess the production of of of weird and slightly misguided terminology
is part of that so i i so i would say definitely an ally definitely right about lots but also
slightly a little bit of the whitehead thing of making people think it's much harder to understand
probably not worth the trouble um so that it's not it's not a i'm not very happy with that answer
but it'll maybe do for now uh yeah um as i understand the merit of this process
that it's also a family of problems kind of the issue of thesis
in biology like where are the boundaries is say more good as a master
the backflippers the embargo and the progress stages okay but um i remember for my studies
i think cell biology and molecular biology but you need it really of these subjects are
studied quite mechanistically we were interested in like different gates and triggers and the
movement of molecules themselves so it seems that this process metaphysics is helpful for
framing like when you talk about cancer and viruses and completely but the integrity of it seems to be
then the mechanistic view is very it's been very fruitful yeah so do you think that these two kind
of somehow can coexist absolutely and this is comes back to i just alluded to in in in the
question i want to go i that i don't think it's not that i want to say all this mechanistic
explanation is completely misguided at all i think we've we just go and this is why i say you know
that the the very mechanistic um biology that that followed the kind of analysis of dna and and the
processes of of you know of translation and and although i mean that's wonderful biology
looks kind of mechanistic and you know the last thing i want to do is to say that's all rubbish
right so so absolutely so so the but there's two levels the first is is uh there's two two
kinds of reply the first is yes i i think it's perfectly intelligible within a process framework
simply by just recognizing that when you're talking about a mechanism you're not talking about
you know fixed parts you're talking about parts that are sufficiently fixed for the time frame
that you're interested in but but there are also other other perspectives in which these parts are
changing these parts maybe you know are doing other things um you know there are other perspectives
that you might if you if you think too much in terms of biology as being about finding mechanisms
there are things that you're not going to notice or you're not going to focus on i'm sorry again to
people who who've been here in this morning but i will repeat one um one kind of line of examples
here i'm fascinated by the parallel histories in some ways of um genomics and proteomics
that um you know that that they start out with so here's the genome here are all these genes
lined up what they do here's the gene for this here's the gene for that you know and maybe the
gene for is just the gene for making a particular protein it doesn't have to be the gene for aggression
or something really silly but at any rate we've got all this this stuff similar with you know protein
studies we used to have the protein that catalyzes this particular reaction the protein that makes
muscle fibers you know there we look at this thing we identify them see what kind of mechanism
we can fit them into and then we gradually find that this is hugely simplistic that this stretch of
DNA not only isn't the gene for aggression or homosexuality or some nonsense that that you
know sociopathologists might have come up with it's it's actually not even the gene for making a
particular protein that it's really just a resource that can be used to make often many
different proteins then i mean and and then of course you know we we also find you know epigenetics
and so on that makes um all of this um even more complicated same thing with proteins that it's a
slightly um you know more you know it's a slightly more complicated actually i think a deeper problem
that people you know would think what's the function of this protein that's a bad question
because what we find is of course there is a system which we can call a mechanism in which
this protein does something and helps us to understand but then we find and as i again sorry to
repeat myself but but one of my favorite bits of giveaway language in biology is we found these
things were moonlighting right this is we have moonlighting proteins that were doing something
other than their job in their spare time and you know and then they finally do 10 different jobs
and what you what you realize is that the notion that you have this set of parts that fit into a
mechanism in some way obscures something really fundamental about how biological systems work
that they make multiple use of the parts and and the parts actually become different parts
in different uses so having first of all moved on to the moonlighting process proteins we now
find at least half of them are the the um the idp's they i'd never know what it stands for the
that's right the intrinsically disorder proteins which actually exist in a whole bunch of different
structures and only settle on a structure in a particular context so i mean the the diversity
of these resources the fact that the system is the system and this is i think is a kind of downward
causation is able to use these resources in multiple different ways in different contexts
is i think absolutely fundamental thing about how life a is possible and b is very unlike
anything we uh or at least any traditional way of thinking about mechanism and it's not so so we
can look at the particular mechanisms and if we if we start with a particular phenomenon a how does
a particular um you know a molecule gets synthesized we can look at a mechanism but if we then start
thinking okay so now we've located the function of all the elements involved in that mechanism
then we've shut off all kinds of thoughts that we might have about um what these things can do
so again it's not it's it's not that there's anything wrong with all the mechanism
understanding we have it's just that it can provide a framework which discourages us from
looking at at certain things and pushes certain directions over others i mean there's an awful
lot to find out in biology and and mechanistic thinking has enabled us to find out an awful lot
of stuff but but it's also i think comes at a cost in terms of of kind of channeling thought
in some directions and tending to channel it away from other directions um sorry you you
i have a somewhat more big question about the boundaries of the boundaries of
okay and do you think that there will be a way to draw the boundaries so so for example if a human
rises in the deck the human with the bacteria on the skin do not die at the same instant right
you could say that there's a boundary right here so everything that died together instantly
is within the boundary there's a clear outside um well but why would you say that i mean i so i
guess two reasons i would be skeptical about one is i mean no death is ending is i think is easier
than beginning so you've um but but supposing supposing that you putting that on one side
why would you why would you i mean so if you have um you know absolutely um required
bacterial um symbionts um they don't necessarily die with the i mean they might carry on with
you know the next thing that ate you after you died um or they might you know i mean typically i
guess they mostly die but by no means always or necessarily so i'm not sure why you would why you
would want that to be a criterion you can't distinguish between living organisms you know
there's a boundary for living organisms in that in that scenario might take it the idea would be
you decide of the living organism whether something is part of it on the basis of whether it dies
when that organism dies is that is that the so yeah i mean i suddenly um it's an interesting
suggestion um but i i'm not sure i can really i'm not sure i can quite see the motivation for it
apart from it being a criterion that you could apply and that would give you some um answers
sometimes but but even then does it i mean i i i guess i don't actually know the the sort of
empirical facts about you know what the probability of of a random part of your you know skin bacteria
i guess they've probably got a good chance of living and they tend to be quite transitory
so let's say your gut bacteria i don't know what proportion of them die when you die i mean i think
a lot of what happens is the proportions of different kinds change dramatically and some kinds
find themselves very happy living on your corpse and become others and not so happy and become less
so um so maybe and maybe maybe you want to say i don't if you're gonna eat my corpse you're not
part of me um but but more seriously i i just i don't really see a motivation for it um i mean
am i is the apart from i mean again depending sort of on the empirical facts it could turn out
that there was a really nice cut off and certain obligate symbiotes um did pretty much all go
when you went but i'm not sure if that's true and i wouldn't and it wouldn't be very surprising
if it were not true right i mean if if if lots of obligate symbiotes tended to carry on just fine
eating you for a bit and waiting till somebody else ate you i mean
well i think the prime of these two binders is the characteristic of an individual
that's the which the sorry having clear boundaries
yeah i mean i i but i guess i suppose it's it's um i don't know that's what's your i think you say i
mean temporal boundaries yes i mean you know lots of stuff dies but but why that should
why that should be an answer the question of spatial boundaries when you're not dead i guess is
is the question that i don't really see a strong motivation for but but it's a um yeah
carry on uh the morbid subtlety uh i'm just wondering uh do you regard death as um as a
process or an end of or end of process or would i fit in well it's an interesting one i mean i
guess something i don't talk about much at all are events um which are in many philosophers
ontology is very important um i tend to think events are just very short sharp processes uh
but but um but i guess you know one differentiation that a lot of people would make would say death
is an event of course but then i guess i would also say not necessary a slow lingering death if
we're going to be morbid is much more like a process you know a bullet in the head pretty much
an event but sorry sorry again legally it's still very difficult to say one someone is technically
dead because what is there is complicated is that the cardiac arrest we can pinpoint the moment of
the cardiac arrest is that the moment when the brain is too damaged to be started again we
have to hurt again so even having to pinpoint on that is really really difficult to medicine
and especially in the question of organ transplant the moment where we can uh our best I would say
organ of someone we choose this person is dead is still a tricky part because of the absence of
brain stem reflexes it depends on the legislation of the country in France you have to be branded
with certain measures for at least 20 hours and i think that in fact it's a legal definition
more than legal health like science but more it's more a legal definition and it's probably
driven yeah it is driven more by pragmatics and opera and you know operationalizability
i think rather than any deep kind of philosophical um inside i mean obviously people would sometimes
like that to be a deep philosophical truth but uh but i think for just the sort of reasons you're
saying it's kind of hard to to locate one and certainly yeah you could be brain dead and
your symbionts would live happily for for years while you were in a permanent vegetative state
which some people might say was not was a state post death um so yeah that's actually
okay one last question is anybody wanted to ask a question just just okay so
so you describe yourself as a from viscous uh individualist yeah i mean i i i want to just
bracket that little bit um i i i i said i did a philosophical position that i call
so i'm just wondering about the non-promiscuous uh process here is here because um the promiscuity
here concerns a kind of of way of different ways of abstracting all movements from this
flux so in principle that could be a position which was much like worth in terms of the underlying
ontology to some degree except that they were more more of a quining or you know more more more sort of
of a hardliner about uh processes of individuation and abstraction what would the consequences be
because it seems to add some onto the logical there is some agreement about underlying flux
but then you're abstracting individuals in this promiscuous way which you're aware is about
but they want to be deflationary about the abstraction process as it was
yeah um i'm not sure what to say about that um i mean i'll say one thing which may be a bit
tangential i mean i think sometimes people get into some of the more bizarre views in philosophy
by by feeling the need to assert um you know firm boundaries and one example i think of is
and and you know some some some um kind of analytic metaphysicians that i in many ways
would respect um who argue that the human life begins when twinning is no longer possible
um now i mean basically because if twinning is possible then they they're led into the contradiction
that you might become two non-identical people and that would mean a contradiction so so life
has to begin at the moment whenever that may be when it is no longer possible in theory
and i mean that strikes me as um kind of you know a kind of reductioid absurdum of
metaphysical argument of the most extreme kind i mean you know that that's their problem not the
problem for you know the the perfectly happy um non-twinning embryo that is part of the same
process as the you know the non-twinned fetus that it becomes um it's just whereas again you know i'd
say you know if you're happily kind of promiscuous processualist i'll say no it's a process that's
divided i mean that's um we don't we don't you know that this is this is um so i don't know if
that exactly answers your question it probably doesn't i'm pretty sure it does because you
you're sort of saying that this this kind of abstraction in fact empirically goes with the
angel of the phenomenon which requires some sort of like a package yeah and i think as i said i think
i think the the i mean i think you know if i were looking for um you know a kind of reductio of the
assumption that somehow one has to draw the boundaries around an individual that would be
um a nice place to go at least because actually you know it's just the process process is split
and and you know all these all the the industry of split brains and all of that is is just um
a an industry of self-destruction for substance theorists in my world for which i have no i don't
think i have any problems with at all so
