So we are here today to discuss, I believe the title of this will be called something
like the psychological drivers of the metacrisis and what possible responses might look like.
And so I'll start briefly with what do we mean by metacrisis and then ask you to share
some of the short version of the models that you have shared at great depth and your writing
and your work and ask you to also share opening frames so that people who aren't already familiar
with your work can sort of come along, though everybody should, if they're interested in
this, go deeper. There's a lot of resources to go deeper. I'm also not assuming, since
we all just know each other a tiny bit, enough to have a sense of shared interest, but not
enough that we've already done this. This is extemporaneous, which is part of what makes
it very interesting to me. So I'm not assuming that either of you share the exact same assessment
of the metacrisis. That's not implicit in you being here, but I know from our conversations
you both share a sense that the state of the world has problems and impending risks that
are serious, that are not automatically resolving themselves, that are novel in history. So we
can just say the challenging state of the world, what in the nature of human mind, the nature of
human conditioning experience, we might even find that the term psychology or cognitive drivers are
insufficient, which is fine, has brought us here. And what might a different relationship to human
mind, psychology, cognition look like that might allow a more viable, better future. So just briefly
on the metacrisis frame, before World War Two, there was no risk that we could very quickly
destroy the entire habitability of human civilization that was brought into being with very
powerful technology, nuclear weapons. And for the first time ever, we had the ability to make a
series of bad decisions and radically change the possibility space of the world. Before the
Industrial Revolution, we didn't really have the capability of destroying the biosphere at scale,
that's not as fast, that takes a few hundred years, but we're at the place where the planetary
boundaries in terms of species extinction, in terms of chemical pollution, in terms of many
planetary boundaries are being crossed. The Stockholm Resilience Center published its update to
the planetary boundaries framework just a few days ago, that showed of the nine major boundaries
they've identified, we've radically crossed six already, which means who knows if we were to
change the direction already, what would happen. And that was the result of the Industrial Revolution,
and the technology that it made possible, moving us from half a billion people before the Industrial
Revolution, to eight billion people, and increasing the resource consumption per capita by about 100x
in the industrialized world. So 16 times the population, 100 times the resource consumption
per population, obviously without advanced tech, we couldn't do that. So there's something about
the crises that we're facing, and then obviously AI, and synthetic biology, and drones, and cyber
weapons, and the radically complicated six-continent supply chain, that is all a very novel human
technological development that wasn't true in any previous age. Without human technology, there is
no global existential risk that is human-induced, there might be a meteor or something, but not
anthropogenic catastrophic risk. So we're in a unique position in time. The poly crisis is a
frame that a lot of people have heard that says rather than just focus on climate change, or just
coral, or just species extinction, or just nuclear, we have to focus on all these issues,
and we have to recognize that they can inter-effect each other, that one of these issues getting
worse can cascade into other ones, and that sometimes the solution to one can make other ones
worse. So the answer in World War Two to how do we not have nuclear war was mutually assured
destruction, and the Bretton Woods Global Financial System, and a whole bunch of like the
whole post-war order, which did mean we didn't have nuclear war between superpowers. But it was
also part of what led to this six-continent supply chain and exponential growth connected to a linear
materials economy that have pushed us to the planetary boundaries. And so we can see solutions
to some problems can end up leading to other ones. The metacrisis frame, the slight distinction from
that terminology from the poly crisis, is that we're not just looking at the mini crises and how
they can cascade, but that there are underlying dynamics that give rise to them. Obviously humans
are animals. We're part of nature. We're also pretty obviously unique when you fly into London or
into New York or whatever, and you look at the world, you see the Anthropocene in a way that
you know the next most environment modifying creatures are things like beavers. This is
obviously a radically different scale of environment modification. And so there's something about human
technology that arises from something about human mind, both our capacity to create it and then also
how we utilize it. So some people look at the origin of the metacrisis starting with stone tools.
Some look at it starting with the agricultural revolution and the plow, or the industrial
revolution, or various places that I think they're all interesting. But if we simply say
we have a bunch of risks to civilization's ability to continue, to continue well, that are real,
worth considering, and different than they were historically. It's also worth stating that most
early civilizations don't still exist. There is no more Egyptian, or Ottoman, or Byzantine,
or Mayan empire, and the collapse of those civilizations has been academically studied,
but they weren't global civilizations. So there is some precedent that civilizations
have a life cycle. We have the first six continent global civilization, meaning the tech that is
recording this can't be made in any country in the world. The internet that is broadcasting this to
people requires this global civilization to produce. So metacrisis. I think everyone is aware of
there's a lot of risks that we face. And we can look at the economic drivers in terms of
perverse incentives and externalized costs. We can look at the game-theoretic rival risk drivers
in terms of arms races and tragedy of the commons. We can look at the theory of technology, the way
that technology itself ends up shaping mind. We can obviously look at things deep in the nature of
human psychology, our value systems, our cognition. It's pretty clear when we look around that none
of the other animals or plants are causing possible self-induced extinction of planetary systems,
right? There's no planetary boundaries as a result of the activity of deer or algae or oak trees.
So there's something unique about humans. Is this innate to human nature and there's no way of
escaping it? Is this something that human nature can do, but it's not the only thing it can do?
It can be conditioned. It could be conditioned differently. This is what we're here to explore today.
Ian, obviously your book, The Master and His Emissary, kind of answers this question in a way,
which is, though it's coming from a different angle, getting the master and emissary wrong
would be said to be the cause of all the crises that we face, the situation we're in.
For those who don't already have that framework, do you want to share
your introductory thoughts on the human condition that has brought us here?
Yes. I agree with you wholeheartedly that we need to look for underlying causes of a whole pattern
of events that are not just unfortunate things that happen to happen. We were doing very well and
suddenly people said the climate was changing and the seas were polluted and so forth. There's a whole
range of events that can be traced back to the inevitable consequence of a certain way of looking
at the world. That way of looking at the world is, in my view, associated with and driven by
a model of the world that is present to the left hemisphere in a way that is not the case with the
right hemisphere. In brief, the right hemisphere seems to be more in touch with presence, with
what actually experience comes to us and what we inhabit, whereas the left hemisphere is
providing a representation, no longer the presence, but a map, a program, a theory, a diagram,
but something abstracted, categorical, removed from and not having the characteristics of the
world that it is intending to map. I should say that to anybody who doesn't know my work,
you've probably heard that everything to do with hemispheres is wrong and that it's outmoded and
science has got past it. This is not true. If you don't know my work, then forget almost
everything you think you know about hemisphere differences. They're not the ones that you were
told, but there are, although we got the differences largely wrong, not entirely wrong, but mainly
wrong. That doesn't mean to say that there are no differences and it wouldn't be important to
find out what those differences are. That's something I've researched for about 30 years.
In short, the difference comes down to ultimately a mode of attention which is an evolutionary
development that goes back pretty much as far as we can trace it. We think back to trilobites
and possibly even beyond. This is something in which there needs to be two ways of attending to
the world that are both very important but appear to be mutually incompatible. One is that with
which we grasp things. We need to get things in order to survive. We need to get food. We need to
handle twigs to build a nest or sticks to build a shelter, whatever it is. We need to be able to
latch onto something, precisely target it and get it. That's so important that, in a way,
one whole half of one's brain is largely geared to this particular end, that of power.
But if you pay only that attention to the world, then you will be very vulnerable because you
won't see the predator. You won't see your conspecifics. You won't see everything else that's
going on of which you need to be aware. Effectively, this is a difference in which
one hemisphere pays a very narrowly targeted, precise attention to a detail in order to grab it
and another kind of attention which is broad, open, sustained and vigilant and on the lookout for
everything else. Putting it very simply, those two kinds of attention change what we find.
No neurologist in the world will dispute that the two hemispheres
attend differently. It's very clear they do. No philosopher will dispute the fact that attention
changes what it is you see. At the end of this, fairly obviously, if we attend in two different
ways, we see two different worlds. I'm going to grossly simplify here. But effectively, in one,
that of the left hemisphere, the world is made up of little bits that attract attention
and they're things that we're already targeted on because we know we want them. They're isolated,
they're decontextualized, they belong to categories, they're abstracted and effectively lifeless.
Whereas in the right hemisphere, it sees that everything is ultimately connected. It's connected
obviously to the context of things that are immediately around it or particularly powerful,
but it's ultimately connected to everything beyond that. The world is never fixed in the way
the left hemisphere needs to fix things in order to grab them. It's not built up out of slices or
pieces, but is in fact a whole seamless flow, a very important word. In this right hemisphere,
where implicit meaning is understood because that's contextualized and part of the context of that
is emotion, the body, other people, the world at large. You've got a kind of mechanistic reductionist
world, subtended by the left hemisphere, which is just a representation or a useful diagram,
and you've got a living complex world, on the other hand, which has characteristics which
are very much harder to pin down, but involve all the richness and meaning in life. What I believe,
and in the mastermind, as I'm assuming earlier, what I traced in the second part, a sort of path
through the history of the West from the ancient Greeks to the modern time, in which there were
rises and fallings of civilization, and in which what happened was that in each civilization,
the two ways of seeing the world were used fruitfully together, and this is not a difference
just between science and the arts. Science needs both kinds of attention. The arts need both kinds
of attention, and this is how they flourished to begin with, and were highly creative, but over a
length of time they overreached themselves, they became too big, they became stereotypes, they needed
global administration that could be rolled out to parts of an empire, and so we entered into
a world very much like that of the left hemisphere, and very soon the civilization, either the Greek
or the Roman, collapsed after this moment appeared. I mean, a complex story, but that's it in our play.
And I think that we're in another, a third wave of this, if you like, in the West, which began
in the Renaissance with an incredible flourishing, and almost unequaled anywhere in the world at any
time, of everything, of interest in the sciences, in the heavens, in art, in sculpture, in music,
in poetry, this is an incredibly rich time. And then from about the end of the 17th century,
very roughly, with the scientific revolution, we began to believe that we could understand
everything in terms of mechanisms. And this was a useful way to think, and indeed, let me be the
first to say that we have benefited from it in many ways. We have developments that very few of
us would wish to be without as a result of it. But unfortunately, it led to a philosophical error,
and it's not just, as it were, a philosophical error in an abstract way. It's one that runs deep
to the nature of how we experience the world. That is, we believe that the world is made up of parts,
and that we find reality by going down and down and down until we've got bits that are almost
identical to one another. Whereas, in fact, almost the opposite is true, that everything happens out
of the coming together into complex holes. Now, when I say coming together, I'm suggesting that we
do actually temporarily start from, or temporarily, from parts, but we don't. In our minds, in the
left hemisphere, we start from parts, but in reality, things are whole. And what we call parts
are holes of another level, and they can't be understood only by the parts. This is a theory
which is sometimes called a Gestalt theory, because the Germans have this word Gestalt,
which we don't have an exact equivalent of, which means a hole which cannot be accounted for by
the sum of the pieces, the parts. And we've lost that insight. And I think that what has happened
is that a combination of factors, and it's not exhaustive, but the rise of capitalism,
the development of empires, both geographical empires and commercial empires, thinking in terms
of global generalizations have led us away from the reality, which is always unique, implicit,
wrapped up with value, not just being sort of facts on their own, which is not to say,
by the way, that I don't have any track myself with the idea that we all just make it all up to
suit ourselves. No, that's not the case. But nonetheless, our reality is something we experience
as a relationship between us observing and whatever it is that it's observed. And this goes both
ways. We are affected by it, and we affect what we see. We literally change what there is there to
see. Now that vision is quite different from the one we have, that if only we can master more and
more using left hemisphere kinds of mechanism, we will achieve power. And power will make us happy,
but the roots of happiness are very other than that. I'm sure we'll come on to that. But effectively,
we think we've accounted for everything when we think in terms of matter, but much more important
are values, a sense of purpose. And as far as I'm concerned, the sense of the sacred. So that's
really where we're at. And I think recovering some of what we've lost is critical to making
any progress. We can't just stick sticking plasters on the cancer, we need to eradicate the cause
and change the way in which we think about ourselves, the world and how we relate to it.
Before we move to John's opening comments, for those who aren't familiar, would you
explain why you use the term master in emissary? Okay, this is a kind of a fable
in which there is a wise spiritual master who looks after a small community so well that it
flourishes and grows. After a while, he realizes he can't look after all the business of the community
himself, not just because there's now too much of it, which is part of it, but also because if he's
to maintain his overall vision and to see the whole, he mustn't get distracted by detailed
bureaucratic concerns. So he appoints his brightest and best to be his emissary and go about and do
the administrative stuff, a high level assistant. And unfortunately, that assistant is hubristic,
knowing much less than the master he thinks he knows law. And he thinks in fact, of course,
he is the real master. And because of his lack of knowledge of what it is he doesn't know,
he, the master and the civilization fall into ruins. And that obviously is an allegory,
which could be applied, I believe can be directly applied to the idea of the relationship between
these hemispheres, because one of them actually sees much more is wiser. And I'm not just using
figures of speech. We know, and in the book I demonstrate how we know that the right hemisphere
is not just more emotionally and socially intelligent, which many people might assume is the case,
but also more cognitively intelligent. So that where we have some evidence about what has happened
to somebody's IQ, we have measurements before and after say a stroke, where there has been a
significant drop in IQ, the insult is almost always in the right hemisphere. So it's very
important that the right hemisphere should remain the position of the master. And as long as the
emissary follows the direction of the master that sees more, it's very helpful and useful,
it's a good servant of the very poor master. So the question of why in the global
civilization, the emissary became dominant relative to the master is something I want to
get back to. But thank you very much. That was a great opening. And something I should have shared
in the opening is I have tremendous respect for both Ian and John's work. Both have done these
kind of very deep histories of Western philosophy and very meaningful worldviews that address the
nature of mind, the meaning crisis. And yeah, I'm very honored to be in the conversation. It's why I
wanted to get both of your perspectives on the underlying drivers of the metacrisis that are
inside of human mind experience and cognition. So John, similarly, I would love to hear your
opening thoughts. You've done very deep presentation of what you call the meaning crisis.
Yeah. And what I'd like to do as well as I'm doing my presentation, I'd like to show some
deep lines of convergence with Ian. Ian and I have spoken before and we've often realized that
there's a lot of convergence. And one of the things I'm hoping to do is in this with you,
but for us to unpack that even more because we have more limited conversations in the past.
Yes. So I'm going to start, I will get back to the history in a minute. I want to start with the
present. And we're in the UK in 2019, a national survey, very comprehensive survey, 80% of people
found that their lives are meaningless. Interesting. 43% think that's because of financial reason. And
that goes against a lot of the data that we have that once your finances get you out of poverty,
they do not contribute very much to meaning in life. 34% seem to be getting a little bit closer,
at least in an intuitive way, when they attribute their lack of meaning to anxiety.
And let's just be very careful about this. Anxiety isn't the same thing as fear. Fear,
you have a definite object, something the left hemisphere would very much, there's the definitive
thing. I can point my attention to it and focus on it hard. Anxiety tends to be more atmospheric.
It is generally associated with the right hemisphere. And so what you've got with anxiety
is you've got a negligent sense of disconnection. And this brings with it a sense of concern,
arousal stress. And of course, horror is exactly the aesthetic of when you feel like you're losing
a grip on reality. So anxiety is on the same arc as horror. Most of our horror movies are not
actually horror movies. They're just startle movies where something jumps out at you and
scares you. But genuine horror movies, they give you a sense of what I'm talking about. No,
anxiety is low grade horror in that sense. So people are drifting along. And then what we can
ask is, well, does that have significant consequences? And we know from the extensive
literature on meaning in life, not meaning of life, which I'll make a distinction in a few minutes,
meaning in life or a related psychological literature, especially the work of Kelly Allen,
the sense of belonging, you don't have meaning in life if you don't have a sense of belonging,
you're in serious trouble. You're in serious trouble psychologically, physiologically,
socially, probably predictively, your overall health, probably your social economic status,
it's predictive of lots of stuff going bad. Of course, it's ultimately predictive of
anxiety and depression, which by the way, are flip sides of the same overall disorientation,
disconnection problem. It's predictive, of course, of suicide. Although Tatjana
Schnell has found evidence that people don't have to go through clinical depression,
contrary to what we think, they can just experience meaninglessness and go right to suicide without
going through clinical depression. So just on its own, it's predictive too. So 80% of a population
has the state that we have pretty comprehensive evidence is very deleterious to their health.
And then you have a lot of sort of cultural sense that this is happening. So the book I did with
Christopher Master Pietro and Philip Misovic on zombies, what did zombies become so prevalent?
The idea is zombies are a mythgram that has arisen to sort of express, not necessarily
articulate or explain, but express meaning crisis. We'll think about them. They lead
by definition meaningless lives. They've lost intelligibility. They can't speak. They move
in collectivities, but they form no communities. They drift aimlessly. Unlike other monsters,
they don't have any supernatural connection. They're just us decayed and perpetually decayed.
They're a perversion of the Christian myth of resurrection because they do not come back to
the fuller life. They come back to the lesser life. And then they got linked to another Christian myth,
the apocalypse, which was supposed to be the renewal of the world. But instead, it's the ongoing
endless decadence of the world. So the zombie mythology is a cultural expression of this.
And you can also see all kinds of symptoms. Of course, we have the mental health issues.
Death of despair in the United States and the UK are becoming serious, serious problems.
Related phenomena, the UK has set up this Orwellian thing called the Ministry of Loneliness,
which is like, because the number of close friends we've been having has gone down.
And Eberstadt has shown in her book, How the West Really Lost God, is this also has
what you might call philosophical, even spiritual consequences, because there's a direct correlation
between how much people live atomically and alone and how secular the society has become,
and how sort of shallow people's ontology. Yes. I'm not sure about her causal picture,
but the correlation is just undeniable. So this is having huge effects. You get it in
the virtual exodus. People want to live in the virtual world rather than the real world. They
express this as an explosive thing. And I think we can get a bit of insight into what's going on,
what's missing in the mean processes. What are they finding there that they're not finding here?
But let me just finish a couple more symptoms. We've got the weird political paradox that
everybody feels disillusioned and disenfranchised, but the political sphere has been has been now
reappropriated and filled with religious fervor and symbolic religious behavior,
and we've given over identity and meaning in life to our political ideologies,
even though we've lost faith in all of the institutions. This is a weird thing. You have
positive symptoms, though. You have the mindfulness revolution. People are seeking fundamental
transformation in attention, awareness. You have the rise of ancient wisdom philosophies.
There are more stoics now alive than were ever alive in the Roman Empire. And of course,
you have the ongoing thing basically from Schopenhauer on of the increasing investigations
into Asiatic philosophies in which philosophy and spirituality, knowledge and wisdom were not
separated. And so that whole symptomology. Let's go back to the video game. Well, what are they
getting in a video game that they are obviously lacking in the real world? Well, what they have
is they have a narrative structure. There's a narrative structure that tells them what the story
is and what part they play in it and orients them towards a purpose. So purpose. They have a
nomological structure. What do I mean by that? They have a sense of there's a set of rules,
laws and rules that make sense of that world. So they understand how that world works. This is
intelligibility of coherence. Second, that purpose coherence. Third, what else is going on in there?
Well, they have a normative structure. They know how to self transcend. They can level up.
There's a way in which self transcendence is available to them. And fourth, they get into the
flow state. They get into a state where they feel dynamically coupled and connected to their
environment. So what do we have? These are the four factors of meeting in life. These are the
things that you have when you have meeting in life. And contrary to what our culture says,
purpose is one of them, but purpose is not the synonym for all of them, nor is it the most
important of the dimensions. You need to have purpose, but it's not the same as meeting in life,
nor is it sufficient for meeting in life. The next, coherence. The world can't be absurd to people.
Third, you need significance. What that means is you need something that gives you a normative
staircase, something that gives you a way by which you can get in touch with the really real.
We've got from the psychedelic renaissance and the work in mystical experience and I'm involved in
that, that people seek out for its own sake this relationship with the really real, the more real.
And once they get it, they will, they're willing to change their whole lives so that they are in
deeper contact with that really real. And Yadin has shown their lives actually by many objective
measures get better. So that matters. The third one, the flow state. The flow state is a very
powerful, and Chik-Sent-Maha has done a lot of work on that. We can perhaps talk about that. The
flow state is a very powerful version of the fourth factor, which is mattering. People need
to feel that they are connected to something that has a reality and a value beyond their own
individual existence. So you can define this out, you ask somebody, what do you want to exist even
if you don't? And how much of a difference do you make to it now? You could grab all of these
things together and they all fold into this connectedness in sense making. We're connected
to the world. We're ordered to the world. The world makes fundamental sense to us. We are
fitted to the world. We belong in the world, belonging, sense of belonging, sense of meaning,
and love. My proposal is that that can ultimately be understood as reflecting
sort of the core of human cognition. I talk about the core four. I think we've split them up for
analytic reasons, which is attention, consciousness, working memory, and fluid
general intelligence. But I think they're all just four different dimensions of an underlying core
thing. And there's good functional evidence, behavioral evidence, and anatomical evidence
for that claim. I won't review all of that, but I'll just take it that that could be agreed without
much controversy. What I think those, that general ability, that general intelligence
reflects is it reflects two metaproblems that you have to solve whenever you're solving any
problem you're trying to solve in the world. And I understand there's two kinds of problems.
There's problems that are solved by having something, controlling it. And there are
problems that are solved by becoming something, problems distinction, which maps on a lot also
to the left and right in many ways. And we'll get back to that. But what I think these two
metaproblems are, and think about your intuition, we tend to attribute intelligence to a creature
the more we can see reliable evidence that it can anticipate its world. Because, of course,
the amount of prevention, the more you can anticipate the world, the more powerful your
causal intervention. If I can avoid the tiger, that's way less costly than fighting the tiger.
Just to put, right. And so the thing is, as you push out sort of the light cone of your
anticipation of the world, what you get is you get an explosion of the amount of information,
all the possible alternative pathways to get into your goal. This just explodes in possibility.
So even to take a very limited case, here's my initial state, I'm starting a game of chess,
I'm trying to get to the end, all the number of alternative pathways outnumbers the number of
atomic particles in the universe. And this is one of the core problems going back to Newell and
Simon that is at the heart of the AGI project. And so this is what you can't do. You can't
check all that information. Think about all the things I could pay attention to.
It's overwhelming. Think about all the things I could remember. Think about all the different
combinations of sequences, of sounds, and movements, and yet what we're all doing
is we're zeroing in on it right now. And what that means is it's not that you check everything.
You can't. That would take the rest of your life. Somehow, and this is really important,
you ignore most of what's relevant. Sorry, you ignore most of what's irrelevant.
You ignore it and you zero in on what's relevant. Now that's not cold calculation.
This is a matter of care. We're different from AGI still,
how long is something we could potentially talk about. We care about the information
we're processing. Computers don't. We care about whether or not it's true. Computers don't.
So it's not just that relevance. It's not just a calculation. It's a matter of caring.
It's a matter of commitment because whenever I'm doing this, I'm taking a chance.
I have to commit to this because when I'm paying attention to Ian,
I'm not paying attention to what's behind me. There's a cost. There's always a cost.
So there's existential risk at whenever I'm doing it. So there's caring, committed, connectedness.
And notice relevance is a connecting relation. It's like biological fittedness.
Relevance isn't in the object. It isn't in the subject. Relevance is that would bind
this objective and the objective together. I call it transjective. The name for all of that I use
is religio, the sense of binding that carries with it a sense of profound meaning. And I put it to
you that when people have access to profound meaning in all of these dimensions, they get
a sense of the sacred and inexhaustible fount of intelligibility that is not just
an intellectual affair, but this connected living affair. But here's the problem.
The very processes that make you intelligently adaptive
make you perpetually prone to self-deception. This is my reinterpretation of the First Noble
Truth. Because the very process that gets me to be adaptive by focusing in and binding myself,
I mean this seriously. This is normative for me. I'm bound. This is what I should do. I should be
paying attention to Ian. It means I'm ignoring so much. And very often what we ignore can turn
out to be the relevant information that we actually need to solve whatever problems we're
facing. So we are perpetually prone to self-deception. And I want to talk just a little bit about this
is at multiple levels. But what that means is, and this is a trade-off relationship,
whenever you try and solve one way in which you're being deceived, you open yourself up to
an alternative way in which you can be. So I should pay attention to that. No, no, no. And then I'll
lose the... I'm always in a trade-off between what should I foreground, what should I background.
And so it's this very complex process. It's very complex. It's very dynamic. It's co-created by the
world and me and also me and other people. Very complex, very dynamic, very adaptive, very prone
to self-deceptive, self-destructive behavior, both individually and collectively.
So cultures across the world have had to deal with this really tricky problem.
How do we ameliorate the self-deception without undermining the adaptive connectedness? Because
we can't just shut it off. And we have all these trade-offs. We can't just pursue simple panaceas
that will just do this. So we have to get this complex, I call it an ecology of practices,
that intervene in our cognition, our attention, our awareness in multiple places, you know, checks
and balances. Think of the eightfold path of Buddhism. It's this complex set of practices
and they're represented by a spoke wheel because they all interconnect and they're all self-organizing.
And when you do that, you need to set that within a community that homes you
because you need people who have been practicing it because this is not a matter just of theory.
This is a matter of transformation and they need to be able to guide you along the way.
And then that community has to be set in a worldview that legitimates it,
a worldview that legitimates it. So another way of understanding the meaning crisis
is that unlike most cultures, we don't know where to go to cultivate wisdom. We don't know where to
go to ameliorate that self-deceptive, self-destructive behavior, foolishness. We don't know where to
go to enhance the connectedness, the religio. So it gets us into deep connection. And we used to
have a worldview that gave us both of that. This is how you connect deeper and this is how you
overcome your fallenness of all use of metaphor. And that was the sacred. The sacred canopy,
the religious frameworks were the places that gave us worldviews, traditions and ecologies of
practices for addressing this. And because of the Protestant Reformation, the scientific revolution,
actually I would even start it in medieval nominalism.
Yes, I agree.
Thank you. And a lot of things. And then this has just been put on methamphetamine
basically since the advent of some of the hyper technologies. We are in a position where we don't
have a sacred canopy. We don't have a... I asked my students, where do you go for information?
They have their phones. Where do you go for science? They're sort of hesitant, postmodern
concerns, but I guess... I go to science for knowledge. That's the reasoning what the words
can't say. I actually just meant was knowledge. Then I ask them where they go for wisdom and
they don't have an answer. And they know that without wisdom, meaning in life is tremendously
at risk.
There are so many things in that that I would love to respond to, but I don't... I mean,
perhaps Andrew, you would like to talk.
Yeah, I mean, I think we get to play with relevance realisation in real time because
I would like to go into zombies and video games and all kinds of things, but feeling into the
highest useful... The questions on my mind, I'd like to hear what's on yours is. So,
thank you. And both having shared kind of opening frames, two top questions for both of you is
etiology. So, how did we get here? How did we get to ubiquitous meaninglessness and nowhere to go
for wisdom? How did we get to the master and the emissary backwards culturally? And what is the
relationship between this interior psychological phenomena and the objective environmental
catastrophes, nuclear risk, AI risk, economic issues that we have in the world? So, how did we
get here? And how does the interior and the exterior relate? What are the kind of causal
dynamics, both directions? I would love to hear.
Perhaps you wouldn't mind if I don't immediately address those questions, but you've got somewhere
else? I think there's some more burning things that came up and we can come to that as you've
announced them and we will come to them, I'm sure. I mean, one was a reflection on what you were
saying at the end, John, about a, we can only attend to so much, we can only remember so much,
and we all need to balance the benefits and risks of everything we do carry as
Heidegger said, you know, every revelation of truth is the hiding of something. And I think
that is really important. And what this brings to mind for me is a couple of things. One is that
filtering is, is creative, that if you like filtering of light is how we get colored patterns,
we get films and so forth, life like a dome of many colored glass stains, the white gradients
of eternity, Shelley. So less is often more. And part of shaping and intelligence is knowing
what to get rid of because if you tried to take too much and it wouldn't benefit.
The other thing about it is that it's not just a trade-off in the sense, well, we need a bit of
this and we need a bit of that. That is kind of true. But everything contains within it, if viewed
in my mind, anyway, if viewed as a whole, it has a relationship with its opposite. And it only exists
because of the being an opposite. So it's like the two poles of a bar magnet. So you can't have the
north or the south because they coexist and co-create. And so what what is trying to do is rather
like in the magnets or in a taught string of a musical instrument or the taught string of a bow,
is to hold two things together that both need to be held, not just go flabbily to a point
in the middle, because then the string goes slack and you've got no power for the arrow to fly or
the note to take off from the loot. So I think that's something important that we ought to bear
in mind is this relationship between the thing and its opposite. It actually also, if I may say,
because I was listening to your talk last night or the night before, to the Consilience Conference.
Yes. And one of the things I think there was this idea that, well, you made a lot of interesting
points, but one of them was to do with, I've forgotten it.
What was it? A transjective relating the subject of an object.
Yeah, there's a bit of that. Well, there might have been something and maybe because,
let me try, maybe there's a wrong. One of the things I was trying to emphasize and one of the
things that a recovery of Neoplatonism, especially given Filler's work on it, can give us is a
re-emphasis on the polarity rather than the poles. And I was talking about this, I try to use the
Greek word tonos rather than tension. I do too. Yeah, because the English word tension is almost
purely negative now, of course. Yeah, that's right. Tonos, like Heraclitus, the tonos of the bone.
The tautness of the string. And without the tautness, there is no energy. That's right.
And whatever it comes out of the tautness is orthogonal to the tautness. So the
arrow flies off at right angles and notes come out in a way. So it's a very important
aspect of creativity. I just wanted to reflect on that. I wanted to comment very briefly on what
you've said about anxiety in the hemispheres. I don't think anxiety and depression, in my
experience, are just parts of the same thing. I think they're actually, they can coexist,
but they're not the same thing at all. And they don't need to coexist. Anxiety, I think,
is not lateralized. So I think there is anxiety created by the left and by the right hemisphere
and each of them holds it. Depression is a complex one. And I don't want to go into it in
any detail, but some depressions seem to me to be due to an unbalanced overactivity or
unopposed activity of the right frontal cortex. And that can be unopposed either by the left
frontal cortex or by the right posterior cortex. So it's slightly complicated. I just want to
put that on record because people may go away and say, well, I thought he said, you know,
and that's not what I said. I was just trying to, yeah, I was trying to indicate that the
phenomenology tends to be much more atmospheric in both of those, depression and anxiety, rather
than narrow focus. It's white focused and ambiguous rather than, to that extent. Yes.
But actually, in terms of where they originate hemispheres, I think it's hard to be more specific
in the way you seem to be saying. And then there are just a couple of other things that I want to
pick up because we don't have to exhaust them, can't exhaust them now, but we would want to
sort of perhaps come to them. One is about purpose and its nature. And the other is about
values and meaning. So I agree with you that meaning and purpose are not the same thing.
But it's very important to make a distinction that will be familiar to all three of us, but
may not be in the minds of some people watching or listening. And that is the difference between
what I call extrinsic purpose and intrinsic purpose. An example of extrinsic purpose is a
photocopier. Its purpose is it was created to copy a sheet of paper and make another image.
But the other thing is that the purpose doesn't lie outside itself, but in itself. They are in
themselves purposeful. Actually, I believe the prayers of this kind, it's in itself valuable,
not because it produces a result, but also very obviously things like music and dance are not
pointless, but they're not validated by a purpose that comes out, we have better health for it.
No, they have value in themselves. And the last thing I just wanted to raise, and so that when
we're going forward, we can come back to it and preference these things, is that very often people,
I mean, you said that we need meaning and we need to be directed. And I believe that values are things
that draw us from in front rather than push us from behind. And purpose also beckons to us from
in front and draws us forward. And of course, all our models are pushed from behind because
they're mechanical. But very importantly, these things exist as it were at the same time as
our striving towards them and actually cause us to strive towards them, not by pushing us, but by
calling to us evoking a response. And that we ought to be careful not to think that because of a frailty
of the human spirit, we must find meaning in a basically meaning as cosmos, we must paint values
on the walls of ourselves. I know you're not saying this, I'm not, but I just thought it would be
worth clarifying. We don't have to sort of cheer ourselves up by painting pretty pictures on the
walls of a hermetically sealed cell. I reject that completely, and I imagine you do too.
Indeed, we are contacting something which is real, and I actually think that those values and purpose
are essential to the cosmos, they're not things we made up.
So I don't want to exclude Daniel from the conversation, but I feel called to respond,
but I want to make this a place for you. I have some questions I'll follow up with, but please go
ahead. So yeah, I mean, that distinction you made, and this is just to provide convergence,
it's well-established in the lit, but you know, Amobile talked about intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation, and then the intrinsic motivation is much more predictive of creativity and insight
than extrinsic, but you actually need a bit. Optimal creativity is to have a mixture of the
two, because you need the extrinsic when you're painting the cysteine chapel and you're painting
the blue of the sky, and you just got to keep going, right? And it also gives you corrective
feedback, because if you're just intrinsic, you don't have external judges and things like that.
But yes, I think that's important, and I think that brings out an important difference. I think
the things that we think are intrinsically motivating are precisely the ones that get us
into that state of connectedness, religio. Optimal intrinsic motivation being realized as a flow
state, you do the flow state to be in the flow state, you don't do it for any other reason,
right? And in that sense of it, one meant that sense of super salience, that's the beginning of
the taste of the sacred as well. And so I think the sacred is how does reality disclose itself to us
where we're in that mode of not work, but serious play, that we're doing for its own sake, because
all we're doing, like playing music or going to a play, we're playing with relevance realization
in this serious sense. We're playing with it, and we're playing with salience, and we're saying,
if I play with this, what kind of world is available to me? And I agree. I think, especially
given the work of L.A. Paul and Agnes Calard and Aspiration, that we need to bring back the
aspirational dimension, that we are bound, right, and we have to bind ourselves to the future in
the right way. And what's come out of this, and this allows me to make another point,
and I know we have different language about this, but I think we converged, it's interesting.
It's part of what's come out of, the way to do this is to quickly describe an experiment.
Okay, so you go into a bunch of academics, and you say, you give them all the evidence,
all the arguments that they should start saving for retirement right now.
Take any challenges, any questions. You come back in six months, none of them are saving.
And that's to do with what's called hyperbolic discounting, and the way our evolutionary machinery
makes distance, things in the distance, much less salient to us than currents. And that's why
you procrastinate, it's why you eat the chocolate cake when you're trying to lose weight, right?
And it's very adaptive, because you don't even get that, you're just overwhelmed by possibilities,
right? But now you come back to them, and you say, okay, what I want you to do is I want you to
practice this every day. Notice this is a practice, not just a belief. I want you to practice every
day. I want you to practice like imagining, and we should talk about two kinds of imagination
at some point, but I want you to imagine your future self as a family, a beloved family member
that you've always cared for, and you need to continue caring for them, and you have a lot of
compassion and love for them. And I want you to do that every day. And you come back in six months,
and you find two things. Now they're saving, and the ones that do the practice more regularly,
and more vividly imagine it. Save more. You see what this is showing? That the imaginal
augmentation of the aspiration to do something actually is a constitutive part of being rational.
Descartes reduced logos, since making rationality to computation. And we lost the fact, no, no,
if I'm actually going, and this is Agnes Kellert's argument, if I'm trying to become more
rational, that's an aspirational project. That's me trying to become somebody other than whom I am.
I have to bind myself to my future self. This is religio again. I have to get religio with my
future self. And that's not something that I can do just inferentially. I have to do this using
imagination. I have to use this with, so I agree with you profoundly that even the even the attempts
to be more rational require an aspirate. So aspiration and rationality have to be rebound
together. One thing I'd want to push back on, but just because I know you've got,
see I'm hesitant around the word value, because the notion of value comes up basically in the
enlightenment, and it's part of the is, ought distinction, and things like that. Okay, you want
to challenge that. Because you don't have this notion sort of predating the idea that value is...
I think we're talking about terminology. Okay. It would be hard to say that Plato had no allegiance
to the values of beauty, goodness, and truth. I don't call those values. Well, you can call them
what you like, John, but you know, let's not... No, no, what I mean is all relations.
Logic shop would use different words, but you know what I mean by values. Well, I do and I don't,
but I want to do what you did with one of my terms. I think most people don't hear. See,
Plato doesn't think we value them. Plato thinks we love the transcendentals. And value is a statement
of choice and preference. This is how Locke introduces it and makes... And you can actually
see him change from, we are called by the world to we choose, and he introduces the notion there.
And what I want to say that is because I want to make the argument again, and this is part of
the overall... That love is not a purely subjective matter either. Love is not a feeling. Love is not
an emotion, right? When I love somebody that can make me happy, it can make me... I miss my partner
right now because I love her so deeply. It can make me angry, frustrated. Love isn't an emotion.
It's a way of binding myself to another person. And I think when most people hear the word value,
because of its enlightenment history, they hear choice and preference and what they want.
And I don't think... If we think we can choose the true and the good and the beautiful...
Okay, so clarification is worth making. Yes. We don't understand that... We don't choose them.
We are called by them. We are called by them to ask to aspire. Now, I understand you're not using
the word that way, but I think most people, when they hear value, are using it that way.
Well, thanks for clarifying that. Yeah, that's not what that was mean.
And there's an important relationship between love and value. Both Pascal and
Shaila said that you can't actually value something until you love it. And most people
would think you don't love it until you know how to value it, but it's an interesting alternative
way of thinking. Anyway. But I would say that what I want to bring in, that people don't usually
hear when they hear value, is like Murdoch's point, like in the sovereignty of the good.
Love is the painful recognition that something other than yourself is real.
There's a connectedness to realness that's important if you're actually loving something.
Yes. Well, you know, perhaps we should go to love already, but it's a huge story. I mean,
and I don't want to lose whatever Daniel was saying. Yeah, but I think this was valuable
because I think we took a lot of sort of the common language of modernity and even of postmodernity,
subjectivity, objectivity, all this stuff, and we sort of put pressure on it and shown that
the presupposition that this is just the natural way thought unfolds needs to be challenged.
No, no. And above all, on the subjective, objective divide, which is not to say that the
terms have no meaning, but just that I like you believe that everything comes into being
out of a relation. It doesn't ever just that or just in here, but it is the coming together
and encounter, in fact, which is the root cause of our experience and of our love and our valuing,
actually, but anyway, yeah. So there's something challenging in what we're trying to do here,
which is, as we've seen, what we take words to mean, which words we use, what ontologies, what
references, what epistemologies, we haven't had time to all sync these. And as we've probably
all experienced, I certainly have, when I want to do generative work with someone that has a
different background, that's where we have to start and realize some of our disagreements are
because the word means something different. And that takes a long time. And so I'm noticing
that you mentioned intrinsic and extrinsic purpose. You said purpose and meaning are not
identical, but you didn't make the distinction. John responded talking about intrinsic and
extrinsic motivation, which is not the exact same as purpose. And then there was a conversation
around values, there's a conversation around love around beauty. So these are all related,
but not exactly synonymous topics. They all obviously indicate something that we value,
but we're wanting to speak to value being intrinsic to reality, not just something we make
up, which is you saying we're not just painting values on a meaningless universe. There's something
about the ontologies that give us a meaningless universe that are part of the problem that we
want to come to, that I think is core to the meaning crisis, core to the place we find ourselves in,
and why you have to say something like, hey, it's not that the reality is a meaningless universe
that we have to paint meaning on, but that reality has something like intrinsic purpose to it.
So I'm just acknowledging all the really fascinating topics
that I'm not going to ask questions about or say anything about, because in the short amount of
time we have, feeling into what has the highest meaningfulness, beauty, worthiness of love,
purpose, value, without making further distinctions on which of those it is.
You said something about the intrinsic versus extrinsic purpose that I wanted to click on a
little bit, because extrinsic purpose being an instrumental or utilitarian concept, the purpose
of X is defined by its utility to Y, and we're assuming Y has value. So when someone takes
that definition of purpose, they take purpose first, rather than meaning or value or beauty or
love, they take purpose as the thing that we're looking for, which is itself a very interesting
question. They take the relative utilitarian extrinsic definition, then they ask what's the
purpose of it all. It's obviously a meaningless question, because there's nothing outside of it
all to say it is relevant with respect to. And so it's easy to say, oh, there's no purpose to
anything and come up with nihilism, as opposed to just recognize it was a category or you were
using too small a concept. Now you're talking about intrinsic purpose or intrinsic beauty or
intrinsic something, intrinsic something that is worth something. And you were saying that it also
has a pulling quality or a telos, right, that all that is has something like purpose that is not
defined with respect to anything else, maybe hard to define it all, which the Tao would say,
sounds very much like the Tao, it has a nature, right? So does the direction of reality or universe
reveal something about its nature that we that is worth aligning ourselves with, I think is very
interesting. I want to ask, I want to propose what I think is the generator of the metacrisis in
your framework and hear your response and then hear you build on it. But I want to just hear
first the thing, the definition of purpose as extrinsic, that the philosophy of science can
orient to. So you have a big bang where the laws are why they are, because who knows and the constants
are what they are. And at some point consciousness pops out. And it's very easy to get nihilism
in that model. One could say that model is left hemispheric dominance epistemically.
And that the left hemispheric dominance can't understand purpose or meaning. Is that how you
would say it? When you talk about or I talk about values, I'm thinking of a hierarchy
drawn up by by Max Schaler, the German early 20th century philosopher, in which he had a
hierarchy of values, the base of which was utility. And this is the lowest level of his
values. And then there came things like he called them values of life. But these were
values of fidelity, magnanimity, generosity, bravery, and so forth, a lot of which seem to have
gone out of fashion. And then above that came beauty, goodness and truth, the spiritual or
geistic avatar. And then at the top of the apex of the pyramid was the sacred. And I think that
structure has been incredibly helpful to me in seeing what we're getting wrong, because the value,
the only really driving value of the left hemisphere is utility. It's evolved in order to
serve utility for us. And of course, we need it because it's very useful. But we mustn't think
that this answers our questions or these this sort of level of value is going to give us the
fulfillment that is promised to us by our culture, which is all about acquisition and greed and
competition, typical values of the left hemisphere. So when we come to talk about purpose and its
relationship with meaning, what I would say is, first of all, to make the distinction which we've
really made, but it's the distinction between castes, finite games and infinite games. Finite
games have a purpose and when you've achieved it, the game is over. Infinite games are things that
have the value in being performed at all and therefore eternally have that value. We've got
locked into the type of belief that everything is a finite game, which it very clearly can't be.
And the things that give us meaning, I think, are for very obvious reasons, not
specifiable as extrinsic goals. We should try and do this and make that and so on. There's a level
at which we have to guide ourselves and think, well, we need to make a conscious effort to
shift our values. But in the end, these things are not going to be of that kind. They're going
to be openness to an attractive force. And those attractive forces are many, but they can boil down
in some ways to three incredibly important things that give meaning to life, each of which has been
more or less trashed by our current civilization. The first is our relationship with society
are being bound to one another in the sense of religio. The business of sharing one's life
with people who share your values, whom you can trust, whom you can confide in, whom you can eat
with, play with, and generally share a culture which may be based on a religion, but has common
rituals that we all understand. That is one thing. And it is extremely difficult to find any such
coherence in modern society for a host of reasons, which most people will be able to fill in for
themselves. But we don't have that kind of cohesion anymore. And we're increasingly isolated,
partly by technology. And we live lonely lives. The UCLA loneliness index has
shut up in recent years. And I think we mentioned loneliness already. And it's one of the key
things that people say when you ask them about their lives, they say, they're lonely. Now,
meaning can't come from any purpose in being with others and belonging in the social world and
contributing to it in some sort of obvious extrinsic way. You can't specify ahead of time what that
value will be. You only know it in the experiencing of it. This is the problem. It's the swimming
problem. You can't have a manual that tells you how to swim. You sit on the bank of the river
reading. Now I know how to swim. You had to get in the water. The second is our relationship with
the natural world in all its complexity and beauty. So for most people until very recently,
it was almost impossible for their lives not to be enmeshed with the surrounding natural world.
Only in the last perhaps 150 years also have we become isolated from nature. And this is a
really important divorce, a very, very important one. The divorce from one another is very important.
The divorce from nature and the sense of it as an environment, which is a technical term for
something that surrounds you, but not what you are born out of, which is what nature really means
and what you return to. And the third is the relationship to a realm of something beyond
this. Again, we've mentioned this, I believe, but it is the transcendent realm or the realm of the
spiritual or the sacred. And this to a lot of people now, they've been trained to think that
this is a rather negligible issue, that it really is a kind of vestige of something that
hangs over from a primitive time when people weren't properly educated and they invented
superstitions to try and explain life. And I mean, that is such a terrible, terrible
diminution and tragedy of what it is, travesty of what it is I'm talking about. And it is
attracted. So those three things are what I believe, fundamentally, are most important
for bringing meaning to our lives. And I can't specify obviously what the meaning is,
you know, what is the meaning of life, a question you cannot answer, although I believe it's 43.
But that's what I would say about that. And it relates to the hemispheres in this way,
that the left hemisphere is designed only for acquisition and pleasure,
getting stuff, having fun, it's more doping and energetically driven than the right hemisphere.
It's more associated with addiction than the right hemisphere. And it's certainly more associated with
getting a kick out of power and acquisition. Whereas the right hemisphere is more able to
open itself to the sacred and to these other higher values that I specify, when we cap them now.
So I think there is a very important thing there that we've guided by something
that literally doesn't see what it is that's pulling us or should be pulling us forward,
that sense of direction or purpose in life, and the values that call us forward.
So I want to say something about this that I feel like is me restating
how the hemispheric model ends up getting imbalanced, almost obligately gets imbalanced
in a way that leads to the world situation we have and see if you agree with that.
And I'm very much curious to hear related thoughts. So you mentioned that the primary
left hemisphere value is utility. And you also mentioned the word power,
which is very important for because then civilizations have a relationship with each other
that we can use social Darwinism to describe where there's a selection process defined in war
and defined in population growth and things like that. Where if a civilization has a relation,
has our relationship to each other, our relationship to nature and our relationship to the sacred,
all maximizing utility. So we think of human resources, we think of natural resources,
and we think of religions as kind of narrative weapons to be able to coordinate.
Then the culture that has those utilitarian power oriented views in all those areas will
win that war. It will basically seeing nature as a commodity extract more from nature
to grow its population to increase its resource consumption per capita to grow its technological
base to utilize humans to use the Norbert Wieners, the human use of human beings in the
development of cybernetic systems that are then seen as inexorably in competition with each other.
So they're going to, so we have to kind of mentality. And then there's either no sacred,
there's just that which is good as that which doesn't lose, which is kind of,
I think it's very interesting that game theory was developed by von Neumann at the same time we
developed the bomb, at the same time we developed AI, and it was game theory and economics as kind
of the height of the reductionist experiment saying, based on a kind of is-ought distinction
that you'll negate, which I'm very interested in, that says since philosophy of science is going to
say what is and can't say what ought, then our best basis for ought is that which doesn't lose
in an assumed competitive dynamic. So game theory is the only thing guiding. And I would argue that
if your only ought is game theory, and you have the ability for recursive technologies that turn
into exponential technologies that are in an exploitative relationship with the environment,
which even the term environment or natural resources of crazy term, and in arms races with
each other, that that civilization is self-terminating. But it's also hard to, it's easy to see how
it won, right, how it emerged that way, because any civilization that oriented itself that way a
little bit more was going to grow its population more, was going to advance its tech, was going to
win wars, and then other ones kind of had to do similarly. So what the values or the sense of
sacred or the connection to nature or each other that the Native Americans had before
colonizers went there didn't matter that much if they're weaponry and technology and whatever
was not going to compete. So the left hemisphere might be less intelligent in some very important
ways because wisdom, I've never actually heard anyone give a good definition of wisdom that
doesn't involve restraint. It always ends up involving restraint and binding in some ways.
And but the utility emphasis of the left hemisphere is very good at game theory.
And then it creates almost an obligate trajectory. And then nobody wants climate change, but nobody
can stop it. Nobody wants species extinction. Nobody wants desertification, but nobody can
stop it. The overall topological features defining our world, nobody wants. But the game
theoretic relationship between we can't price carbon properly because if the Chinese don't,
they'll economically beat us. Therefore, we have to externalize the cost. That game theoretic
relationship creates a topology that is actually driving us in a self terminating
direction and nobody's steering because there is no sacred. There is no we're very good at
solving problems and not very good at defining is this the right problem to solve, right? Is
this the right goal to achieve? That's actually why I was so drawn to your work is because that
I wasn't thinking of it in terms of hemispheres, but I was certainly thinking of it in terms of
capacities and predispositions of mind that the nature of mind that oriented to parts
was very good at technique and was very oriented to power and the power technique together
was going to win over the other ones and then create this kind of obligate trajectory.
I would love to hear you respond to that.
There's very little in what you said that I would disagree with at all. We're in a bind which is
to nobody's benefit really. Gain theory explains why we get these things wrong and we
need to find a way out of this which involves restraint. Actually, I loved what you said about
that and in fact it's our lack of restraint that means that we're not wise. It's very unwise.
There are two levels to that. There's restraint in general and self-restraint and the idea of
self-restraint used to be intrinsic to the rise of most civilizations. They were founded on a
generation or several generations that were prepared to make sacrifices on a personal level
in order to achieve something greater. That has moved out of the picture because the value
now is about our personal gain but sometimes if we can restrain ourselves from just pursuing
personal gain we could produce an outcome which would be far more beneficial for all.
Of course this is very famously a difficult thing to achieve because some people defect
from the program. We're in a situation where we need everyone ultimately to come around to a
certain way I think if it's a survive. Now how can we do that? Can we do it at all? I don't know
but I believe that if enough people are committed enough and model their lives on the shift in
relations with society, with nature and with the divine, if they can reorientate their values
and stop seeking fulfilment in a very simplistic and direct way which doesn't actually achieve its
goal and worse is distractive, then we could produce an outcome that would be satisfactory. I
don't know if we can achieve that. I don't know. It sounds like we'd have to convince everybody,
really if we convinced probably about three percent of the world's influential people
then we might be on to something. So I want to come back to why the world's influential people
might be the psychologically least likely to be able to be convinced based on what it took
to become influential. I'm going to come back to that in a moment because you said maybe we only
have to influence three percent but a moment before you said if we're practicing self-restraint
and anyone defects and they don't restrain so they do the more short-term power thing than
they win and then they create a world that orients to that thing. So defection, sociopathic
narcissistic defection is pretty key to this thing. It is. I'm really curious to hear your thoughts,
reflections on any of this but also specifically how do we, what are the criteria, what is the
evolutionary niche for the sociopathic narcissistic property to be selected for and how would we close
that niche? Because promoting wisdom where it will always lose game theoretically is not that
interesting. So there's something about the relationship of wisdom and power and I would even
say wisdom has to bind, it's a master emissary thing and I know this is very uncomfortable as
it should be but if the master doesn't bind the emissary then everything's broken and so that
which is power seeking has to actually be bound which requires power by something that is not
power seeking in the same way which is why Daoism says the one who wants to lead everybody
should run away from, the one who doesn't want to lead and everyone pushes into leadership maybe you
can listen to. So curious to hear your thoughts on wisdom binding power, closing the evolutionary
niche on power seeking those types of things. So much, yeah so the I mean I think the I agree with
first of all what you did was brilliant and I really appreciate it. I'm likely and I'm a very
significant agreement with it. John Keeks made a distinction between goals and ideals and the
word purpose equivocates between them. A goal is an end state that everything else is in the
service to and it's the utilitarian where an ideal is not an ideal is something that is a part of
the grammar by which you interpret and make sense of yourself in your life and I agree and we even
did that with the sacred. We took sort of transcendent imminent and then we made this world, this is
the Nietzschean critique, we only had a utilitarian value for that world and then when we stopped
believing in the upper world this world seems to have no value. That whole framework I think has
to be rejected which is not a rejection of the sacred. I just want to make that very very clear
and so why I'm sort of on that is because I think that this is part of the answer. You can break game
theoretic circumstances in which right you get people to remember certain things. So you can get
some very core ones like you go into a situation where you take $20, oh sure, in a situation where
you take $20 but here's two people but I got to give that person 40. So they're 60 and they get
40 and you get 20 will you take it and if you don't take it nobody gets it. No I won't take it. So
people there's a symbolic thing that they're oriented towards and it's something like they
want to they want to belong to a world that is a just world and that is more important to them
than their own individual immediate gain. That's the first thing. So there's a symbolic aspect
to and Robert Nozick made a good point about this that we we didn't put that into a lot of
and for good reasons. We didn't put it into a lot of the game theoretic modeling because it messes
up all that modeling in a lot of ways and then that connects to we don't actually super value
this is the sociopath right. We will significantly undermine subjective well-being if we have a
reasonable belief that we will get enhanced meaning in life. This is part of our evolutionary
heritage as mammals, we're also primates, we're also sociocultural and the prototypical instance
we do this is have a kid. When you have a kid all of the measures of subjective well-being go down.
Your health goes down, your sleeping goes down, your finances go down, your social connections
go down, your amount of sleep you're getting is going down, you're sick all the time, your partner
doesn't like you anymore and you're in a constant stress situation and you ask people well why are
you doing it? Like you couldn't pay most people. Well why are you doing this? Well because it's
making my life more meaningful because they're connected to something again and it has a reality
beyond themselves and right I'll use your term a value beyond themselves. He used another term
interestingly which was sacrifice yes which has related etymology to sacred of course and something
you can't say that you know something is sacred if you aren't willing to sacrifice for it so please
continue and this and this is another thing to remember that the arrow of relevance for us
does not point to just how are things relevant to me yes we do have to feel connected to ourselves
because if we don't we're dissociated our agency is undermined but as Ian said we have to feel
fundamentally not how I'm how are you relevant to me but how am I relevant to you how am I relevant
to us and how are we relevant to the world and yes how is are we and the world relevant to
something that grounds that world what Plato would call the good right and so I think that if we can
get people to remember this is what I would want to say I don't I don't even like the word remember
I want people to be able to fall in love with all of these dimensions of being again because
and this is one of the this was Spinoza's big insight right the way you overcome a powerful
motivation is what another powerful motivation is we can get people to fall in love again with being
within between and beyond we can we can we can break the game theoretic this is what Christianity
did in the Roman Empire Christianity went out and it didn't unlike Stoicism that tried I'm not
saying we shouldn't try and get the government but that tried right and it had some success too
but Christianity went and said there's a new way for you to love yourself you are not the
non-person the Roman Empire says you are here is a new way Agape is a way in which you can love
yourself and it's not a hedonistic egocentric parallel here's how we can love each other and
here's how we can love God and it captured the world and it captured a world that was one of the
epitomies of a world driven by power competition the lust for glory so we have a historical examples
of if you give people if you can get them out of meaning starvation so they're not in a scarcity
mental when you're a scarcity mentality you drop into left hemispheric I think Ian's right about
that your short term utilitarian right what do I need what right because this is emergency mode
but if you can get people out of a scarcity mentality and get them to fall in love with being
again connecting this to themselves and another then you can get you can call them to something
that gets them to remember that they actually do value trying to use your language right
connectedness more than success I really like the must fall in love with I want to
play with the scarcity thing for a minute because the people that are pursuing power the most are
not in any actual economic scarcity though they are in the perceived relative scarcity relative
to the next guy competing with them sure and there are plenty of people who under scarcity share more
I've always found fascinating that when there's a disaster the either the best or the worst of
people can come out and so scarcity can go either way and abundance can go either way
so there's something about what is sacred that is actually deeper than that even under scarcity
can have someone sacrifice and that even under abundance can still have someone totally self
centered yes but I did want when I was using scarcity that was talking about meaning scarcity
yes not economic that's what distinction and one of the things that happens for example as people
go up the this is an experiment as people go up a corporate structure and the and corporate
structures tend to favor people who have sociopathic tendencies what you also see is a measurable
decrease in the ability of them to take the perspective of other individuals yeah the ability
to take the perspective of others individuals is strongly predictive of how many deep connections
you can form in your life so they are actually suffering a very profound kind of scarcity
as they go up there a bit there can if you allow me to coin for their suffering's connectedness
scarcity in a profound way and you know what what what what I what I've been fascinated with is the
number and I sure this is happening to both you the number of people who are in these positions
and positions of power who have reached out to me and said I feel disconnected and there's there's
that element of almost of horror and absurdity I feel disconnected and I want I like and I want
to be and I don't and the people I talked to in solo condo I don't want my kids to go through this
I don't want my kids to go and this is what I mean there is alternative motivations to
and I think they have also an evolutionary provenance to the game theoretic motivations and
I don't think the game theoretic motivations are are metaphysically necessary I think there are other
ones that have an equal power to motive and because we have historical evidence we have
current evidence that we can tap into those but I think there's two poles to this for us to fall
in love with being again that's that's the agent pole but the world as an arena in which we cannot
it has to be sacred to us sacred is sacred is the how the world is to us when we are falling
in love with it okay I want to I want to go into sacred I want to say something about what you
said you said that as people move up in positions as we look at places where power is concentrated
and we move up the power hierarchy it is there are exceptions to this but it is generally the case
that the people who are at the top of the power hierarchies are people who are both attracted
to and good at power games yes and there are certain other things that are attendant and
deficient that tends to go along with that and power whether it's economic social or political
follows a power law distribution yeah so one of the things I find very interesting is that
I think there's a mistake that a lot of sociology makes where we look at certain human traits like
rationality or empathy or whatever on a Gaussian distribution yes and then say humanities the
result of this where realistically the actual power influencing thing says that a tiny percentage
of people that are three standard deviation psychologically different than almost everyone
have most of the determining power and then they create conditioning environments that everyone
else is conditioned by I think that's really important we'd you know hyper agency I have found
that like we had a term psychopathy and then sociopathy and now it's ASD in the DSM anti-social
personality disorder that there are types of people there that have higher and lower ability to take
others perspectives and so there are people who have sociopathy or whatever you want to call it
that have lower ability to take other people's perspectives but they're ones that have higher
cognitive empathy but lower embodied empathy yes yes and the higher cognitive empathy means I know
how to play you I know how to say what you want to hear in virtue signal good good is a good point
and it's a very important point from a hemisphere point of view because that cognitive empathy is
more based on the left frontal cortex it's the simulation of real empathy yes exactly yeah and
the real empathy or the the the emotive empathy is is more based in in the right hemisphere but
also we know that sociopaths have deficiencies in the right ventromedial frontal cortex which is
an area that's terribly important for forming any kind of emotional relationship with anybody else
whether this is a thing that they're born with or not is not finally concluded but I think it
particularly is something that they are born with it could be a result of a certain kind of
deficient parenting but what we're coming back to you there is that again there is this contrast
between a connected world a relational world in which the values come out of the relations
and another kind which is a linear world of target getting goal getting in which we think
that what is valuable will come out of completing that goal and it doesn't yeah
so I want to pick up on what you so help because I think that distinction is very important that
you made and and and here there's a there's there's an ambiguity in taking a perspective
you can take a perspective in that calculative way yes that's different from taking off a
perspective in which you care and you try to see the world from that perspective this is the danger
in teaching people to perspective take like the way rhetoric can do it yes because you can create a
very good lawyerly person like what I found is the people who are best at perspective seeking are
either empaths or sociopaths yeah right they're they're good at perspective seeking because
they really feel what other people feel and they're seeking to or because they actually
don't have any binding to anything real they can take whatever perspective happens have utility
without caring about it's relationship that's right right and so that's the thing one has to
really watch out for yes is the simulation of empathy and so and it brings up something so you
were talking about Christianity binding game theory yeah I'm not a Christian scholar so I'm
just gonna from the outside say the fact that under in the name of Jesus Christ who said let
he who has no sins cast the first stone we were able to do the Inquisitions is a really interesting
act of mental gymnastics yes yes and so I see that wherever there is a relationship to the sacred
that is authentic and it starts to develop the ability to really move people there's power in
that then those who are seeking power seek to capture it yes and corrupt it and so then all
the religions become these mixed bags of an authentic beautiful thing and the way power ends
up capturing them and if they don't orient to power then they usually lose in a holy war their
population doesn't become very big or something like that I would love to hear yes so because
there's how do we have a how do we have a proliferation of the sacred for which someone
will make real sacrifices and for which whole populations will that doesn't lose to other
populations that don't do that and that doesn't get captured by power and perverted and distorted
right okay so first of all agreed but I want to I want to I want to say
well the notion of restraint christeni was successful in pretty much keeping it as part
of the cultural cognitive grammar that people other than the male citizens were actually persons
it was successful at turning infanticide into an accepted practice into something we find
horrific so yes I'm not saying that you know the the power structures came in but there were
there was also enough I mean we we are running on the fumes of the christen sacred canopy and
it's been what has been still keeping some restraints on this otherwise Milwaukee and machine
that's running and I want to what I'm trying to say is
I want to I want to I want to give us a sense of hope about this that it's not the sacred emerges
and then it gets consumed the sacred emerges there is the there is the push back there's
the reframing there's the the power consumption but some of the underlying cultural cognitive
grammar has been fundamentally changed we haven't gone back to the Bronze Age we're still post-axial
we haven't gone back to the pre-christian age we're right that that's not what happened and so
I'm saying I'm not denying that right I'm not denying that there's the threat but what I'm
saying is but if we could be more clear about what gets preserved across the I don't know what
they're calling the re-entrenchment of the power dynamics and could we better more better this time
focus our attention there focus our our our cultural and even our political commitments
we could perhaps do it better this time I mean I think we must this is exactly brings up a question
I wanted to ask you is in the in the parable that you told of the master in the emissary
I might argue that the responsibility for the failure of that civilization or tribe or whatever
you want to call it was the masters not the emissaries because the master obviously misassessed
the person master would probably have agreed with you yes and so rather than say the master
was wise and the emissary wasn't so he did a Dunning-Kruger thing and messed it all up the
master was missing a certain kind of wisdom in his assessment of the actual realistic
capabilities of the emissary there was some stuff in his noticing the hole that he wasn't
noticing that was really critical for him to ultimately still hold responsibility
so there's a there's an uptick in the master capability that could have kept that relationship
right so there's something about needing to be power literate to be able to keep power from
corrupting a relationship with the sacred I mean most of them say that the master was
deficient in some way one would say that there was an important relationship here
which required a certain degree of vulnerability so the master couldn't remain invulnerable
because he realized that he needed to not concern himself with certain things if things were to
survive so there isn't a squeaky clean answer to this he had in a way to trust in some ways
it's very like the story of God and Satan that Satan was Lucifer the lightbringer the brightest
of the angels God's right hand and because of his power hungriness and his envy of God
everything fell to ruin but the end of that story isn't because Christianity again
I'm becoming more and more convinced during our conversation if nothing else comes out of it how
very very important the the sort of overarching effect of a religion such as Christianity is
for the survival of a civilization I mean I've always felt that but I see it more and more in
what we're talking about but what you what you've averted to averted to earlier was the the necessary
sort of supervision and that is a difficult balancing act as it is for the master and the
emissary and there's another fable which I tell at the beginning of part three of the
math of it things which is an onondaga legend they're an Iroquois people and they have the story
of how you know because creation was waning there were these two brothers who were sent to sort of
regenerate the power of the universe and these brothers are not equal like the master and the
emissary one of them is wise and he is called the one that holds the earth with both hands the other
is called hard as ice the flint and his value is that he he's got a tool that his father gave him
which is speech and the other is an arrow with which he can shoot now this is an extraordinary
just starting there division between as it were the writers but the story gets better and better
as it goes on I can't tell the whole thing but those are interested in recording on youtube of me
reading the the introduction of this chapter in which which we tell the story but effectively what
the good brother realizes is the bad brother tries to imitate the good brother because
envious of him he sees a good brother creating all kinds of wonderful things and birds and
beasts and flowers and he tries to create and he produces only thorns and flies and bats and
there's a sort of sense that he is dangerous left to himself but he must also not come too
close to the good brother because the good brother needs to preserve a degree of his independence
without which he is no longer himself so they can't fuse but one needs to be subservient to the other
the one that needs to have power over the other but that is not something that can ever be secured
a hundred percent right so you could never have the situation where the one that is wise has that
power because one of the terms on which wisdom exists is that it sees beyond power now I know
that you've made a very good point that there needs to be a certain degree of sort of watchfulness and
power awareness I agree about that but quite how this is managed in a way that doesn't actually
vitiate the whole business of wisdom because in most cultures wisdom is associated with
well in in in Chinese with Wu Wei within action in that the master does nothing but nothing is
left undone these remarkable and beautiful sayings of the Taoist literature so we have to somehow
find a way of making that work and I don't know what your idea is about how that could be made to
work a close friend and colleague of mine that you both know Zach Stein talks about the distinction
between power differentials and in educational setting versus in most traditional power settings
specifically he's talking about educative authority versus propaganda in terms of information asymmetries
and that the key distinction and this gets fuzzy but the key distinction is that
someone who has information asymmetry relative to someone else who could use that asymmetry
to maintain the asymmetry and grow it which is the impulse of power traditionally in the
educative example the educator recognizes that they have an information asymmetry but they're
in a kind of fiduciary relationship where their goal is to actually bring the student up to
symmetry with them and even beyond so their goal is not to maintain their power asymmetry they
use the power asymmetry to close it and whereas in most power dynamics if someone has an economic
asymmetry they use that increased economic power political power to both maintain it and grow it
and so we would say the first one is an ethically legitimate utilization of the reality of a power
differential the second one is not a legitimate one but what that also means is let's say that
the educator who's trying to bring this person up to competence recognizes that there's someone
else who's trying to exploit them the educator now has some ethical responsibility in their fiduciary
responsibility to the student to also do something over here to do something in that relationship
and that is where I think it's very interesting is if those who are pursuing the true the good
and the beautiful those who are pursuing a deep relationship with the sacred and wisdom
don't do anything and don't develop any levers of technological or economic or other types of power
low deceiving so to speak then they're leading the direction of the world to those who
maximally seek power orientation for the illegitimate use and so then you have to say is
it really wise to say I seed power I seed power of the world to the sociopaths including in the
risk of eminent extinction and the destruction of the sacred and and not just the future destruction
but the 10 to 20 animals go extinct every day from human action that there are two orders of
magnitude more mammals in factory farms and in the wild today like there's some ethical obligation
of those who give a shit about that to have that give a shit do something to be actual as you say
actual meaning that it acts so are our values actual if they're actual do they have a causal effect
yeah well they obligated to I mean if I may just respond to that I I'm not suggesting that we just
sit back and roll over and let everything go to hell in a hand cut that's very far from what I'm
saying but what I'm saying is that even if we were to find ways of reducing certain kinds of harm
unless they were accompanied by a growth in wisdom that really wouldn't achieve what is what we need
to achieve we would leave the psychopaths in charge actually so it is a difficult one I mean
your analogy is not meant to be perfect but for example with the teacher bringing the the people
up to his standard and maybe beyond which I like that idea and I think it's a real one
but if the if the student is in fact basically psychopathic then has he done good by doing that
I mean once you start looking at the outcomes of actions rather than the motivations behind
actions you get into famously into trouble there's three things I want to respond to
one is I'm hearing we've been talking a lot about the master versus the emissary but it
seems to me that we we're in a weird problematic here and I know this isn't an accurate representation
of your thought but I want to pose it and but I want to also state all three things because
they belong together one is yeah but that also requires that the left heaven atmosphere has
some reverence for the right hemisphere but reverence is properly a property of the right
hemisphere and so you've got this weird weird catch 22 thing going on and then I think part of
what how we how we have done this and this is why I'm bringing up the educator is important
is we've done this by saying oh but there's this there's another variable in here which is there's
not only individual cognition there's the collective intelligence of distributed cognition there's
something that comes out in a week like what's here right that is not not doesn't belong to you
or to you or to me right but it takes on a life of its own and of course this is the whole tradition
of the ecclesia and the tradition of the geist and the tradition of the logos and right and
the Socratic dialogue we follow the logos wherever it goes and what that what that does is this this
is Plato's pivot problem right because the the example you're talking about is exactly like
exactly the problem that Plato was wrestling with the Socrates and also by these here you have the
most attractive not physically but most attractive right representation of wisdom and here you have
this you know glorious figure who's attracted to Socrates but is ultimately properly you know a
psychopath also why he's is willing to screw anybody over for his own personal work and betray
everybody and Plato really is vexed about how why why doesn't he turn what what makes somebody pivot
towards that and and then Plato wrestles with this and he has sort of two answers one is there's a
there's a sort of seduction I hate to use that term in our charged atmosphere but there's a
seduction which is you basically get get sort of the left hemisphere really involved with the kind
of stuff it likes to do running arguments and discussions but as it's doing that you use that
as a way of getting it to pay attention to the non propositional right in very very powerful ways
and this is why Plato writes dialogues because the drama and the character development are as
important as the argument we did a great disservice that we just took the arguments out and stuck them
over all right but if you do that that's that that that's part of the answer and then in that
what what part of the seduction is and and and it's not look if you try to make somebody follow
the sacred it's not sacred right right but the the the seduction is like again how how we fall
in love right is if you put people into these circumstances where they can catch the fire of
the logos then they will often feel called to reorient themselves they will do the Plato's pivot
it's not an algorithm because it was an algorithm it wouldn't be the thing we need we can't make it
an algorithm and we're looking for something algorithmic we're fundamentally misapprehending
the ontology that has to be at its basis but I've seen this when we do these dialogical practices
people say and this is regardless of where they come from religious or secular they're saying
this is a kind of intimacy I've always been looking for but I didn't realize that sounds
like platonic anemesis right and then and then if they go longer right they start to they start to
move beyond the intimacy between they say there's the we space or the geist or the logos and they
start to feel intimate with and then they're called to that and then some people are called
beyond that they're called to through all of that I get a sense of intimacy with being itself
and they get the possibility of falling in love again but I can't argue them to that I can put
them into a place where there's exactation going on where there's conceptual reflection going on
but this thing we have to structure it with a lot of finesse so it takes on a life of its own
and can draw us in so we can get people to do the platonic pivot that's that's how I would address
logic has this compulsory kind of nature if you like that it's trying to compel a position yes
and what you rightly are pointing out is that the things that really matter like wisdom and love
can't be compelled in this way no and if they are they're no longer wisdom or love there is always
a vulnerability involved here that's terribly important in my view and it's not necessarily
anybody's fault if that vulnerability leads as it usually does eventually to some kind of a
downfall but without actually taking the risk we can't have the great things that we have had
so it has its own value and purpose even if we can't actually always guarantee what kind of an
outcome there's going to be okay but I want to pick up on the seduction I agree with what you're
saying yeah but what I want to say is can we get I'm trying to use your language because I want to
play with you can we get the left hemisphere involved with speech and logic and it likes to
play this this is what happens but it gets drawn it gets drawn into something that it is beyond
itself it doesn't that takes me back to a point you made early on that how can it ever be that the
right hemisphere and the left hemisphere have that right relationship yes because the left
hemisphere has this intrinsic loss of reverence or whatever yes but I don't think that's necessarily
the case because I think the problem comes when we give too much power to the emissary in that myth
so to begin with in civilization so the left hemisphere and right hemisphere work very well
together the left hemisphere is given exactly that kind of a job that it's good at and it
if you'd like to put it this way I'm being ridiculous the anthropomorphic but it's happy to
be in that role yes and to contribute but the problem comes when we start to lose I'm going to
come back to this thing about the value difference between the right and left because I think it's
absolutely essential to the situation we're in it's our complete loss of orientation towards the
right values and and what happens then is that the the values of the left hemisphere are encouraged
and the left hemisphere starts to see only its own point of view and it's it thinks itself in a
Dunning-Kruger-like way to be more intelligent than it is okay and I agree with this wholeheartedly
and I want to say something that overlaps with Daniel what he's saying because one of the things
that the Enlightenment why it takes off I would argue is it gets it gets a way of really clarifying
the difference between authority and power and this is one of the things you know so you've got
Kant right and then I want to correct it with Hegel but Kant is basically saying I know authority
is when I recognize you as being able to say something that I will fundamentally be persuaded
of as true so I recognize that you are you know this is a counting model his language is dangerous
but just let me use it for now right I recognize you as a rational being and therefore I should
acknowledge that what you say I should take it seriously and allow it to possibly persuade me
and then when I do something because you have persuaded me I do it because I have recognized
you and you have recognized me and then Hegel said oh but and but this reciprocal recognition
which is what you get in the student and the teacher that you don't get in because the master
slay this is Hegel you don't have reciprocal recognition no right but in this but and importantly
that is not the relationship between the hemispheres I talk about that exactly and this is exactly so
one of the things I think the one of the things why the Enlightenment takes off is because it
brought this tremendous liberating clarification about wait wait wait we want we want we want all
the governance even myself governance to be based on authority which is based on a reciprocal
recognition and Hegel says not only moment to moment but all of the people before you
and all the people that are going to come after you the biggest possible distributed
cognition machine you have you want you want to be like listening to them and you want to be
trying to get the future to listen to you and you get this tremendous model of authority and I
think that was tremendously liberating now and then what I see happening is that some of the things
that came along with that is how the the right hemisphere started to seed power or not realize
that power is getting seeded because once you give right this this priority to this right then you
start to give it's it's very easy to get into the idea oh but all the all that the reasoning is all
of the all that the rationality is it's not a way of being it's just a way of calculating Hobbes
proposes this right so right the enlightenment gives us something that is tremendously of value
and I don't I don't think we want to go back and give that back again we don't want to go back to
master's life right and you right and so we have to get to that that that point where no no no
reason isn't about calculation it's about being with each other in a way that we are reciprocally
responsible to each other so we are governed by authority rather than by power that's I'm trying
to answer you that that is that is possible for us it was two things in the enlightenment that
got inappropriately bound together I think the very legitimate understanding of the difference
between authority and power and then the illegitimate reduction of rationality not as a way of
being with each other but as a way of calculating each other's behavior which is in my terms
the handing over of reason to mere rationality rationality being the schematic logic as a way
of understanding things whereas the reason is a way of balancing rationality with the
intuitions that come from a life well lived from experience and that is what is reason it was always
thought to be the main purpose of an education for 2000 years in the west to produce a reasonable
person yes and that's what one would expect of a wise judge or a good politician but we don't have
that right so my language for that and I don't think it's in any way different I talk about the
ancient notion of logos and with Descartes you get it reduced to logic and and and and then we
reduce reason to just logical manipulation of propositions and we lose all the other we lose
the perspectival and the participatory notions yeah so you said something at the beginning I want
to come back to which is how can the left brain have reverence for the right if it doesn't have
reverence as a capability yeah and I think this is something I said to Ian when he and I had a brief
visit yesterday is uh what Gertl did with the incompleteness theorem was use math to show the
upper boundaries of math sure and that's the Socratic project that's what Socratic does almost all of
the dialogues and in a poria for that reason and it's what the Gyaniyog path and the Vedic tradition
is exactly of poems in Zen it's what Tarski did with formal logic using formal logic to show the
upper bounds and I think it's exactly what Ian is doing in describing the master emissary
relationship in a way the left brain can understand because you know I was saying earlier wouldn't
the master be the more responsible party I think they're both responsible right and so there is
a reverence the left hemisphere has to have for the right there is a recognition of the
developmental maturity capacity and relationship with the environment the right needs to have right
and we're of course using left and right hemisphere than the individual to also represent
forces in the world distribution of people and like that and I think the very best thing that the
parts-based one of the best things the parts-based mind can do is recognize its own upper boundaries
being insufficient to what is actually worth caring about in which case it has its own kind
of transcendence right it has its own recognition of something beyond itself worth listening to
so again evolutionary provenance for this right I think one way I would say of Ian's
histiography is like the what should be properly opponent processing and I'll explain what I mean
by that has become adversarial processing and this is also the problem at the level of our
distributed cognition if you look throughout our biology you have opponent processing going on
opponent processing is when you have two systems that have complementary biases and then you
lock them together so that each is the best corrector of the other so non-controversial example
is the autonomic nervous system you have the sympathetic system biased in one way it views
everything as a threat and opportunity the parasympathetic is everything is right and they're like
this and so your level of arousal is constantly evolving and there's doesn't have to be any king
or emperor over this because it is a self-correcting system your attentional system the task focused
default you're constantly moving between focusing your attention and bearing it opponent processing
opponent processing between foregrounding and backgrounding and I can go on and on why does
nature keep coming to this because it is how you solve the no-free lunch there every heuristic
has a complementary bias this is a mathematical theorem or proof but and this is one of the things
I put in my original 2012 paper but if you put two complementary heuristics together they can
toggle between each other and you don't fall prey to to the no-free lunch you can escape the trap
that you you have to constantly fall into the bias from your heuristic nature figured this out
and I think I would put it to you if if we understand it the way I've explained it to you
that the proper relationship between the hemispheres could be opponent processing
rather than adversarial processing if each hemisphere could come to see the other hemisphere
as a valuable source of self-correction because as you say they solve different
sets of problems well-defined problems left hemisphere very ill-defined gestaltish problems
in the right hemisphere but this is also something not at the individual level democracy
history democracy requires this commitment which is not game theory but it is has evolutionary
provenance you are the best possible entity for me overcoming my self-deceptive bias because you
have alternative biases and I am the best for you and if we both commit to the geist the logos
between us we can get the best self-correcting system which is what democracy is supposed to be but
not just for individual cognition it's supposed to be for cognition distributed cognition but again
I'm trying to offer you the theme you have that I keep wanting to answer is there's evolutionary
provenance for the alternatives that are being discussed here that can be tapped into
to that land yes I want to propose something in relationship to this in here your both your thoughts
one very simple way I would sometimes describe a the generator of the meta crisis is that humans
have radically beyond evolutionary capability via technology development and still using
relatively close to evolutionary motivations that you can't apply apex predator theory to sapiens
and have a biosphere that doesn't self-destruct because a polar bear can't make nukes and an
orca can't kill all the fish in the ocean but we can do both and so we're obviously not an apex
predator we're we obviously are something well beyond that because the evolutionary process
having most of the adaptive capacity and the other animals be corporeal and very slow evolving and
so evolving through processes that create co-selection creates a symmetry of power whereas
the orca gets faster so did the tune and they get away and as the polar bear gets faster the
walruses get bigger and all that kind of thing and with the complexification of all our cognitive
processes that could start to do techni and I would say I'm just going to call it techni in
general both physical technologies and language capitalism etc that our adaptive capacity and
our predate of capacity increased rapidly faster than any of the rest of the environment increased
its resilience or relative capacity and so I would put the origin of the meta crisis not with
evolutionary processes but with the beginning of stone tools right and it's stone tools were
a pretty slow evolutionary curve and so then with the agricultural revolution we got a big bump
and then the industrial we get a big bump I think we get a big bump in the upper pillar
with the transition and that's my response to which is we get a big bump in the upper pillar
of the transition in which we seem to get the advent of the appreciation of the sacred that
goes along it is sown into some of our biggest cognitive advancements so you have the technology
like you said is like this right and then we get this bump and we get projectile weapons we get
calendars we get but we also get music we also get representational art we've seen it here here's my
argument actually it's you're you're making it okay humans have been a very mixed bag in from a
ethical perspective of the only creature that really scientifically optimized tortured of the
most subjective suffering possible but also the only one that will sacrifice itself for other
species and that can make the vow of the bodhisattva right our abstraction allowed us to search a very
wide search space so the most kind of beautiful numinous stuff and the most kind of horrific
stuff what I'm arguing is that that mixed bag that we have been with exponential tech near
planetary boundaries self-terminates and that we don't get to keep being that mixed bag and this
now comes up to the vulnerability of if the relationship to the sacred is forced or compulsory
it's not actually a relationship to the sacred if you remove choice it's not ethics anymore it's
mechanism and so there's a vulnerability in the recognition of actual choice and in the
honoring of choice but we have to do that and fundamentally differently than we've ever done
because if you say how well have we stewarded our power historically if you ask the other
species that we inhabited the planet with or the lower classes within civilizations or whatever
that mixed bag stewarded it pretty poorly in many places but we couldn't split atoms and we
change genomes and we couldn't make AI so the question comes and so let's take AI for a moment
because splitting atoms takes G8 nation-state level capacity to do it actually does and the G8 has
made sure nobody else gets to use it through the IAEA and making sure that if anyone even
tries to bomb them preemptively because we don't want the power to get distributed and yet we're
distributing the power of synthetic bio and AI rapidly that is every bit is destructive to not
just other state actors but anybody in a way that is unmonitorable so when you have decentralized
catastrophe weapons and things that can create the catastrophe even by the intentionally good use
but with mistaken externalities from doing too much narrow problem solving and not enough is
this a good goal is this the right problem orientation and anybody does the AI weapon
everybody has to do the AI weapon or they lose by default those types of dynamics I would argue
that that our abstraction capacity exploring that whole search base the power sides of it
end up and you know Robert writes non-zero of course you have in you have a selection for
increased coordination within an in group that can do sometimes coordination with an out group
that we call trade but sometimes zero some or negative some competition with an out group
so there's a shelling game where I'll coordinate with you when it's in my benefit while reserving
the right to defect on you and that's in our benefit and if anybody does that then everybody's
in that kind of game theory and if someone says well we'll just sacrifice ourselves comprehensively
great then there's just no more of those people those people are gone and the people who made it
through or the people who won the game theory thing so what I'm saying is that both through
conflict theory people who want to do messed up stuff with this much technological power
and through mistake theory people who are just I don't want to cause climate change but I want
to do stuff that requires energy multiplied by the content imperative of there's eight billion
people all wanting to do the same thing we go extinct in all those scenarios where we at least
radically lose civilization any definition of civilizational progress anybody could want to
argue I would already say when you talk about the enlightenment that if you ask how was the
enlightenment and how was civilized how is generally the narrative of civilizational progress
to the Native Americans or to any of the indigenous species that works you know indigenous people
that were extincted or any of the other species or whatever the progress narrative is a very
challenging narrative and I'm not going to throw out all of the baby with the bathwater but we have
to hold the complexity of it sure but the question that I'm really curious about is given the amount
of technological power that we have and that we're rapidly getting and given how much that power has
already eroded the biosphere to the point of tipping points and given how distributed all the
people are and there is no one king of the world I'm not saying we would want it who can make choices
can we imagine a humanity that has the wisdom to steward that power reasonably well well here's
my challenge back to you because you've made this argument before and I find it compelling but
I also find it frustrating because the argument is set up but it basically says we have no examples
from the past that we can rely on and then asks us to imagine the future where how can we possibly
imagine a future without relying on the past examples it's a request to do and I know you're
not trying to do that you see what I'm saying I would argue that we have examples from the past
temporarily that we're able to use restraint via wisdom via a relationship to the sacred adequate
to have their own population in some relative sustainability with its environment and some
reasonable quality of life producing I would I have indigenous scholar friends who've said that the
early indigenous wisdom traditions we're talking 40 000 years ago actually emerged in relationship
with human extinction of megafauna and that they had already messed up and we're like whoa
we're too powerful to be this dumb we have to be a lot wiser men are not the web of life we're
astrand within it whatever we do to the web we do to ourselves that the first wisdom traditions
were already their response to the anthropogenic crisis and so then they might have had a while
of relatively good binding of that level of tech then someone else got a higher level of tech
didn't have the same binding and then those people got wiped out or had to join the thing so
I'm not saying we have no precedent of people doing a wisdom binding power thing I'm saying we
have no adequate precedent to the current situation because obviously we have a totally different
power dynamic and so but it's okay to say that new stuff is required right like so this is an
innovative question it's innovating in the domain of wisdom question that of course draws on but
is not limited to what we have done so far so to my ear this is sounds like an exacted proposal
can we take stuff totally that's been working one way and repurpose it and so like the way the tongue
has been repurposed for speech is am I am I understanding you correctly so you're not you're
because sometimes I've heard it has to be exacted right okay so it is I don't think we were evolutionarily
selected to wisely steward ai no I don't think anyone would argue that okay so we were evolutionarily
selected to have hemispheres that do this stuff and it created in the same way I don't think we
were evolutionarily selected to cause the Anthropocene and all of the problems and cause climate
change right so I think the problems and the solutions are both exacted to the evolutionary
capacities right okay excellent now that's a good reframing because then the question is
how much hope can be placed in the sapiential the wise oriented exactations compared to like
let's call them the power dynamic exactations the technological power dynamic expectations
and it's difficult to know what where we I'm not trying to be difficult I'm just trying to say
for me it's like where would we stand to ask that question what like what would be the place in which
you see us being able to like where are we standing such that we can look at these two and say I can
make sort of I don't want to want to say objective but a relatively neutral evaluation of these two
and say here's how we can place hope here because you're not just asking people to play so I hear
you saying can you give me good reason to place hope is that is that fair I think so you know my
process coming to this with regard to global catastrophic risk obviously involved recognizing
none of the other species were causing global catastrophic risk and people with stone tools
couldn't cause global catastrophic risk and people with bronze tools couldn't so it was a
relationship to human mind our minds ability to create vast economic industrial communication
educational governments technological systems the way those systems in turn reinforce patterns of
mind they lead us to a novel situation of self-induced global catastrophic risk that is
increasingly eminent and then saying what do all these different risks have in common in terms of
the patterns of human experience and behavior individually and collectively particularly
collectively they give rise to them because if we can identify those generative dynamics then we
can say a future that is not described by these catastrophes has to deal with these generative
dynamics and so we talked about the third attractor of like neither a future defined by increasing
catastrophe nor a control response that gives dystopias what's left and so really it's a what
are the necessary criteria of a civilization that could steward the amount of technological power we
have well so then this is great this is helpful I think Ian and I have been trying to point out
what some of those underlying generative dynamics are exactly and then propose and I don't mean to
put words in your mouth so if I say something inappropriate please intervene but but propose
that you know these ideas of wisdom correct interest cerebral intra psychic relation correct
distributed cognition replacing adversarial with opponent bringing back love of virtue love of the
transcendentals pointing out that those aren't just every fairy they have an evolutionary
covenant so we can depend on deep motivations to empower them but I sense that you're still
sensing an inadequacy in this well I think at an individual level these are good thoughts right
at the how do you have those define the way AI is developed and rolled out and the way
synthetic biology is developed and rolled out and the way that NATO and Russia engage over Ukraine
is different so one is saying what would more why like is there a basis there's a
philosophic questions is there a basis in reality for intrinsic purpose or meaningfulness or sacred
is there are there different capacities maybe hemispheric orientations within humans to
understand that better i.e. are there ways of developing wisdom that could steward power better
that's like the philosophic and then developmental at the individual level but then it's the
you pointed out the word defection earlier right which is the defection from the wisdom
that is directing the power that can end up leading to these kind of slippery things and
you can never totally close that but in the time of stone tools or bronze tools the worst thing it
could do was way less bad than the worst thing it can do now so I'm asking for better thoughts
on what would it take to develop wisdom at the scale necessary to actually have a human
a continuing human presence on the planet that doesn't destroy itself or totally suck well
I've offered an answer to that I thought okay but my proposal is we need to basically co-opt
and exact the machinery of religion because religions have been able to do they've shown
that they are proper distributed cognition collective intelligent machines that can
fundamentally reorient civil at a civilizational level they have a they can do that for good or
for ill right and that what we need is something like that and and I'm not proposing that I'm
going to start a religion because that's a ridiculous proposal but I that so I'm saying
we have done this in the past yeah and and of course nobody makes a religion there's not an
algorithm there's a way in which and I'm sort of a hide and gary about that the sacred has to
somehow break through the way the complicated has failed in the face of the complexity of reality
and speaks in a new way and something is called to that and then we have something like but but it
can't be like the it can't be like the axial religions it has to be as different to the axial
religions as the axial religions were to the bronze age religions this is the proposal I'm
making okay great so this relates to what Ian said a few moments ago when he said if I'm getting
anything out of this conversation it's how powerful something like Christianity must be so
so you were speaking to this hierarchy of values and the utility values at the bottom
which obviously is not how the world is oriented currently and some sense of the sacred at the
top we mentioned wisdom being something that has a concept of restraint bound so that utility is
not always maximized that power is not always maximized in service of something that is other
than utility you're proposing that religion has served this function before and that something
like that is probably needed what obviously we know the history of why church and state have
been separated we know all of the critiques of religion that are worthwhile what do we imagine
the relationship to some sense of sacred that is developable that creates something like wisdom
that creates something like restraint and power binding that creates something like increased
felt meaningfulness increased sense of coordination that is other than game theory
what might that look like because it probably won't be
just religion as its own domain it'll probably be how it relates to the educational system
and to media and even how it's encoded in economics and what are some of your thoughts on
what the criteria of such religion might need to be and what it might look like and what the
transition from here to there or its development might look like so i really want to be really
clear that i am not proposing the founding of a religion or anything ridiculous like this because
relevance is not subjective it has to it has to be co-created by reality and thus
religio has to be co-created by rail there's a sense in which the reality has to disclose
something to us so i just want to reiterate that contextualization now within that what
i've been trying to do are two related projects one is to try and look for what can be exacted
from the past and and i want to use that language very carefully and see some of the central things
that come out of that one is sorry these are both very long arguments so i'll just be very
it'll be very compressed one is you take a look at what becomes pretty much the spiritual backbone
of the west and arthur busluis i think has argued this very well which is something like
neoplatonism neoplatonism has this has this tremendous capacity to enter into reciprocal
reconstruction with Judaism with Christianity with Islam with science it does this at the
beginning of the science so it has this tremendous thing and then and i think filler in his wonderful
book in his series of essays has made a very clear case a very good case that what neoplatonism is
trying to get us to do is give up a substance-based ontology and i mean substance not just in the
Cartesian sense but the Aristotelian sense like that we think of the world the most real things
are our physio space uh you know spatio-temporal physical things to which properties bind and
that relations emerge out of these things and that what neoplatonism is trying to say is no
reality is ultimately about intelligibility uh or we can use something analogous from
our modern thinking we have to play with it though information and this is inherently relational
intelligibility information right are inherently relational and that so reality is fundamentally
primarily relational but it takes a lot of transformation of individuals for to get them
into seeing the ground of being as uh that the relations have ontological don't think about this
temporally because that's a mistake but they have ontological priority over the velata the things
that are bound in to the relations and that way you can ground intelligibility and information as
fundamental uh um well i don't see any word i use in appropriate but fundamental features of real
even that word is inappropriate and then what you see and it's this sort of grand unifying
field theory of western spirituality then you see zen gathering together elements of Taoism
Buddhism Confucianism and Shintoism and also coming to you know a very convergent kind of
no no underneath it right is it right it's it's actually the interconnectedness and the interconnectedness
and time which relationality is the is the deepest ground and you have you have like a philosopher in
the west like Heidegger trying to open us back up to that and then you have the Kyoto school in
right in japan trying to bridge between this and then what that brings back it what that brings up
is the possibility of what i call the philosophical Silk Road the Silk Road belonged to no one and
it allowed people to commerce not only a commerce of things but a commerce of ideas but they needed
a lingua franca and it was sort of neoplatonism from the west and zen from the east and then
there also seems to be interactions with Vedanta and other things and and and and what it gives you
is it gives you right nobody owns this nope just like nobody owns english but it gives people a grammar
right a deep grammar by which they can like they can enter into these large scale recreations
of fundamental understanding of human being in the world and so i think that's a real possibility
for us and we by the way there's a there's a there's a long history of trying to bridge between
there's there's a there's like 40 years of history in the west of what's called zen Christianity
where people have been mapping zen this is something that people are are are now i'm not
saying that the religion of the future is zen no platonism i'm not saying that what i'm saying is
these two could be brought brought into because they have important differences they could be
brought into a profound opponent processing that could be that from which the expectation
can occur that's that side of the project the other side of the project is can we build
ecologies of practices can we build networks of communities like what happens in the early
christian church can we can we and can we get them integrated with our best understanding of
meaning making of religio can we build these communities can we build these ecologies of
practices can we network them together and i'm invested in involved in creating that and trying
to get can we get this and this going together and the hope is out of that can emerge the possible
expectation and it has to be as different from the axial religions as the axial religions were
from the bronze age religions that's the proposal it's a project even now notice what i'm not saying
i'm not saying i'm going to make this what i'm going to say is can i get can i get the very best
what drew everything together draw together put it into a living community living ecologies of
practices so that there's a possibility that the sacred could speak to us again that's what i'm
proposing i think the sacred is beginning to speak to us again that's my observation yes and
and i noticed one of the nice things for me is that a lot of young people are very interested in
my ideas and they're extremely dissatisfied with the thin gruel of if you can call it a philosophy
by which our civilization now lives or fails to thrive and so i think there's a thirst for it
and i think it can't be compelled in any way i i don't believe we can invent religions at will
at any rate i think they grow organically and or are founded by communities in in a way that
we don't need to think about reinventing religions there are religious traditions
wisdom traditions spirituality traditions and that are very robust i've become less enthusiastic
about um a kind of spiritual sense that is sort of made up to do with you know
i don't want to sound patronizing but there are some kind of almost pseudo religious cults that
are growing up but i think could be quite worrying actually because a religion carries with it a lot
of power that's why we it's one of the few ways in which we we can exert power not we can exert
but power can be exerted through us for good i i'm not saying it couldn't be for bad as well i
that that is part of what i'm saying but if we're to think of the things that we really need like
this closely or more closely bound society in which we learn to trust one another and share
values that's extraordinarily important i can't remember his name but i think a third century
chinese emperor said for a civilization there are three things that are important guns food and trust
if you have to give up one give up guns if you have to give up another give up food but if you
give up trust you cannot survive and that is what we are losing very very fast there's a sort of
way in which people now think which is that if i can get away with it i should so in other words
we're relying on external pressures external constraints external restraints on us and if they
aren't there when we can just do anything which is not obviously it's not any kind of morality but
it's also very dangerous because at some point faced with that kind of philosophy it will be
impossible to constrain and restrain everybody who wishes to do wicked things so i i think
i want to just say a few things so it may take a few minutes but
so i think it will provide many things it will provide a kind of structure philosophical framework
a sense of a tradition through which we can re-experience something very beautiful
beautiful good and true in my view which is what the greatest art of of our civilization
has produced and i'm not here excluding other civilizations as anyone who reads my work will
know i derive a lot from chinese japanese indian and other kinds of cultures so there's that
and i think also there is something highly motivating which is i'm i think it's very
important that we get away from the idea that we are simply passive here in this world that we
come into it and certain things sort of are blasted at us and we are receptive or non-receptive to
them rather like a photographic plate or a or a sound recorder i don't believe that's the way it
works um on a whole number of levels the first is that i think we have we have responsibilities
on several levels and this needs to be said because it's not known anymore one is and i know you would
share this that the way in which we attend to things changes what there is to attend to
and that means that we are whether we like it or not we have a moral responsibility to be careful
about how we use and how we dispose our attention because we can create bad things by attending
in a certain way or we can produce a good result by attending in another way with a different
disposition of one's heart and mind so i think that's one i think another is that we may actually
in some sense help to bring about at a for the more cosmic level
um a turn for um for good for promoting the sacred so i didn't think my model of whatever
it is that we mean by the divine ground of being is not what it's just sort of sitting there passively
but it is interacting with its creation the creation that it has grounded and it is coming
to know more of itself and its creation is coming to know more of itself in the dance of evolution
that the two do together this is really a whiteheadian idea but it's one i find compelling as i find
much of whiteheads philosophy deeply compelling and i think there are other ways too that we can
help prepare things in a way which is even if we don't succeed is a fine project to devote our lives
to so in the lyrianic cabala there is a story of creation which is rather different from the one in
genesis but it begins with the divine being the ground of being ends off um bringing something
into existence because ends off is essentially relational the foundations of everything are
relational and i believe and i think you have said this too that i i certainly think the
relationships are prior to relata relations are the foundations of everything and the relata come
out of the network of relations at the intersection points we see things that attract our attention
there's a thing so if that's the case then anyway you'd expect this divine being to want to create
something that was other than itself in order to have a relationship with it and if god is as
is held in almost all spiritual traditions love then love needs to have another and it needs also
not to compel that other because it cannot it cannot love something that is under entirely
predictable and under its control otherwise it's not other at all so that view of the cosmos of
which i think is in wonderfully developed in christianity through um the idea of a god that
makes himself vulnerable by a creation that is free either to reciprocate his love or not to
reciprocate it i want to come back to the cabalistic story so the first act of this creative god
is not to stretch out a hand and make something happen it's to withdraw it's it's it's to reign
itself in so that there's a space for something other that's called sim sum which simply means
withdraw and then the second phase is called shephard her kellion which means the shattering of
the vessels because in this space that's been created there are 12 vessels and a single spark
comes out of ends off and lands on the vessels and shatters them in fact it only shatters eight out
of the 12 so explaining why would take me too long so let's just accept that and then the third
phase in which humanity according to the judae tradition has a particular role that only it
is capable of carrying out which is to repair the shattering to quen repair and the idea is that
we are tasked with creating again these vessels so that they are more beautiful than they were
before they were shattered and the image that always comes to mind for me here is the Japanese
art of kintsugi whereby a piece of ceramics that is broken is repaired sometimes with lines of gold
and is considered more special more precious more beautiful afterwards than it was before now
if it is true that we have the capacity to see how to repair things and no other beings can see
that and I think that is probably right it's no disrespect to to the the rest of animal life
that probably we have this ability to see other things and see beyond and foresee things in a way
that they probably don't so I think if that's the case then we have a special role there and we may
even have a role in bringing about the existence of God because that may sound very strange
and possibly blasphemous but the way in which I think this works is like this we all know
Pascal's wager and Pascal's wager with a simple one either there is a god or there isn't if there
is a god then it's very important that we should recognize and reciprocate our relationship with
that god if there is no god then it won't do us any harm to behave as if there was a god
but I think there's a third possibility which is McGilchrist's wager and it has the first
two of Pascal in it but there is a third one which is that maybe we play a role in the development
the evolution the furtherment the fulfillment of whatever is divine and if that's the case then
once again we have an incredibly ennobling obligation which is to make sure that we do
help that good progress in the world so on various levels to do with how we dispose our attention
the role we play in repair the role we play in furthering and bringing about the divine we can
influence things and we may not be able to stop certain specific wars or whatever but that's never
been part of what is imaged here that the part of what is imaged here is that we like it or not
are gathered up into something that we have to respond to and I believe that the reason for the
being life at all and especially human life is because whatever it is that is the ground of
being needs response it needs that response and while it can be satisfied by the response of the
inanimate world up to a point what life brings because I believe all life is is sacred but also
the inanimate is sacred as well the difference is not that one suddenly is involved with consciousness
and the other isn't I think they're both manifestations of consciousness but the thing about life
is that it can respond enormously much faster and to a greater extent so that things can move
instead of having to wait for this very slow slow process with creatures like us there can be
an acceleration of the the evolution of the cosmos and the divine being that grounds that
cosmos together so all in all there is an enormously optimistic in my view and real and I know I'm a
skeptical person in many ways but I'm also skeptical of skepticism when it rules things out that should
we should open ourselves to and if I'm honest about my my my thinking my reading my experience of
life as a person as a doctor and so on I do believe that there this is the way the cosmos is and how
we relate to it and that is surely something that brings hope brings dignity to the human condition
and it also takes the burden of us of having to solve certain specific problems I'm not saying we
shouldn't try to solve those specific problems we must but it's in a sense secondary it's it's like
the role of the the the emissary is to get on and find ways of you know purifying the oceans this
is terribly important but it mustn't stop there because as I say you could purify the oceans
you could save the rainforest and the only reason we did that was because of our own economy
and for our own flourishing we would have lost the main reason which is because these things are
powerful beautiful rich complex entities that have their value in themselves they are intrinsic
in their nature not of extrinsic use to us
first of all I share that vision in a lot of ways as I mentioned Kabbalah comes out of the
intersection of Neoplatonism with Judaic thought but what I what I would like to try and afford
and not make and there's a big difference you don't make wisdom you cultivate it you don't do
nothing you cultivate the conditions and it has to take you in and it has to flower right I would
like to afford something that can work at the global level that needs to be addressed here given
the novelty of the global level of the problems that Daniel just so I'm trying to find something
that is properly pluralistic so running through Whitehead and running through Kabbalah and running
through Sufism is this Neoplatonic framework and then running through many things in uh
for lack of a better word I don't like the word but the east right is is its end sensibility
absolutely and and then there's ways in which really helpfully they converge but they differ
so proper opponent processing between them is possible and and then the idea is this could
take on a life of its own such that something could well it exact out of it emerge out of it
that that's what I'm proposing and so I think that's needed because we need something where
like the Silk Road everybody can like everybody can participate in it but but the the Christian
can go on the Silk Road and then return with their Christianity enriched the Buddhists can go on the
Silk Road and return and their Buddhism but there's also something that's alive
like at a global level that is also affording something new to be born that's the proposal I'm
making I agree with you and and there was nothing in what I said that suggested that it was restricted
in its scope yes in fact I was talking about the the way in which we actually have her which is not
mechanistic and therefore to do with the effects of individual actions in human beings but it was
a relationship with with the cosmos in fact and you know one of the great sayings of course is
to live the change or be the change you wish to see and so in all these movements I think there has
to begin with one's own orientation and one's public commitments yes these two go hand in hand
and you can't create wisdom you can't instill wisdom it's not like that but you can follow people
or admire people or model yourself on people we all do this whether we realize it or not we have
people that we have thought exceptionally inferential and and venerable that we we don't
somehow have rules about how to be that kind of person but we know intuitively there is this kind
of a person and we get moved towards what that is and so sorry do you want to come in well there's
two things about that one is yes there's empirical evidence supporting this yeah that the that the
singularly most predictive of people aspiring and carrying out an aspirational project properly
aspirational not utilitarian but I should be better than I am yeah is the degree to which
they have internalized a sage internalized model absolutely that's the thing and that's the
perspective exactly and then the second thing is right you know what tichnot han said the next
buddha is the sangha I think there's a way in which the role model doesn't have to necessarily be
an individual it can be a community in a powerful and new way that is also something we also need
that yeah and if there's going to be regeneration and you know tomorrow I'm going to Bristol to
take part in the local futures symposium the idea there being that if there's a future for us we
must generate it locally we mustn't rely on the global everything to supply us we must start growing
our food locally and trusting and using the the contributions and gifts of those around us not
just through an abstract machine like amazon now I mean that may be difficult but it's a it's an
important aspiration and I think it's necessary too so we need to be balancing in the sense of
opponent processes yes we need to be able to pick up the things that need to be done at a global
level but we also need to be modeling that at the local level this and and what we need to do is
create the circumstances in which wisdom can grow because it can't be made to happen all you can do
is stifle it or permit it it's like a gardener cannot make a plant the gardener can either
permit the plant to flourish or stifle it this brings up a place where I was wanting to go which
has to do with more local religion yeah first I just want to acknowledge you were kind of reifying
choice that we're not just receptive beings here but we have choice and inherent to reifying choice
was obligation and that obligation was not imposed from the outside but was the result of the kind
of recognition and I really like that I think that's an important thing that obligation wisdom
restrained I think are all going to be critical topics yeah and as you said we can't impose that
on people we cannot mechanistically make it but it can be cultivated to your project the idea of
a deeply respectful giving the benefit of the Tao inquiry into the previous religious
philosophic endeavors that had some success and some kind of synthesis not homogenization
but a synthesis that recognizes that they might orient towards different but meaningful things
and holding those together useful I think this is really good and I am appreciating that you
said western and certain eastern things but what comes to mind is that both what we call the western
and eastern traditions are very new relative to most of sapient history yes and there's a reason
I'm saying this it isn't just kind of like the obligate point to point out there is a global
south and there's you know things pre-civilization there's actually a really important reason I
bring it up is if we've had you know some hundreds of thousands of years of sapient existence
and we've only had these kinds of religious philosophic structures for some small number
of thousands of years most of human experiences and this other thing and a big part of it was
that it was always local and that means that it wasn't trying to create a memetic structure that
scaled and there's something intrinsic to memetic structures that scale that goes along with
techno economic military structures that scale that I think is worth exploring a little bit
you were mentioning in one of your talks that intelligibility is not just about abstraction
where all the differences go away that's able to notice uniqueness and instantiation and distinction
difference has to be as real as sameness and that's the fundamental challenge to reductionism
reductionism says only what things haven't shared as the same counts as real so there's something
about scale standardization and reduction that go together very well this has been pointed at like
this is deep to the post-modern critique and wisdom cultivation is always unique to the moment
it's not trolley problems right it's instantiated what is a good choice in this moment utilizing
all of the capabilities left hemisphere right hemisphere all the chakras whatever you want to
think about it and also unique to this person unique to this time and context so I find it
interesting that like almost every indigenous wisdom tradition that developed in much smaller
contexts where everyone had much more intimate relationships to each other rather than abstract
relationship we're all christian we're all hindu whatever that they were all animistic and
so in terms of like the catholic and hindu conversation around is god transcendent or
god eminent they if anything aired on the eminent side right that the creator is in dwelling within
the creation yes and if the creator is in dwelling within the creation maybe also beyond any part of
it so transcendent not meaning elsewhere but beyond any aspect but in dwelling in each aspect
then any destruction of anything is sin is a violation of the sacred there's something about
airing in the direction of eminence that is less dangerous um there's something about also at the
small scale like we're talking we're having a conversation a lot of people are going to get
to see but we're not necessarily taking people through a practice that is inducing the kinds of
states the right hemispheric state where the numinous is there that's right where the sacred
is there where the intimacy is there and I don't want to violate something I'm intimate with no
there's something about the small scale that has high intimacy high touch in which I'm not relating
to the abstract concept of their christians they're on my side they're not hindus on the other side
or whatever I'm relating to this unique person and this one and this one it is inherently I think
hemispherically different I was also thinking about so I'm curious how much you see hemispheric
dominance having to do with scaling is one question I'm also very curious about and I've had other
friends want to ask you this um if matriarchal and metrophocal cultures had any difference
in this particular way given the uh is there a evolutionary difference in um tending the babies
intending life at warrants in this way and and then we come back to the challenge that we have
global scale problems that have global drivers if the chinese are the us has to and because the
us is the chinese have we have to deal with that but scaling if it involves standardization
abstraction and a loss of instantiation is inherently part of the problem so how do we
get something that is profoundly instantiated profoundly unique profoundly local and also
cultivate that in a way that has the distribution that it needs
yeah um I I'm sympathetic to animism and um one interesting thing here is if you
experimentally suppress the left hemisphere um for say 10 or 15 minutes people describe things
that they would normally consider inanimate as animate so they see the sun as animate moving
across the sky giving energy and so um and if you do the opposite and suppress the right hemisphere
they see things that we would normally think of as living as not so um people are like bits of
furniture or like zombies or simply machines so there is a clear difference now I'm so fascinating
I'm a panentheist um and I think that's an important analogy um if you like but it goes
further than animism and it manages to bring together eminence and transcendence so pantheism
simply says god is all the stuff that there is panentheism says god is in all the stuff that
there is and all the stuff that is is in god now I think that is a maybe we don't need to
explore that too much but I would say that is a very to me important and sounds to me feels to me
a wise way of thinking about the world and would also if taken seriously um stop us
fighting between religious groups and would stop us just spoiling the natural world
and would instill the sense of proper reverence and there's nothing of course in religion that
says that we've got we've got to see ourselves over and against other people in fact in in many
religions your first duty is those who are not of your kind I mean I I know that's part of um
zoroastrianism actually but it's also in Christianity and that doesn't mean that the history
of these religions has not been a war between those who really understood the mystical meaning
of it and those who used it as a lever for power and influence and and for
adversarial approaches, paragraphs so all of that now you said something else
how do we what was the first thing that you scale scale yeah the thing about scale actually brings
me to something that I was thinking when I was listening to your talk to the conciliants project
or conference um which is that you made the important point that um what gives something
a sense of reality and tells us something about itself is in the differences not in the same that
says but of course we need to be able to aggregate things in order to be able to live we we can't
experience everything as new and original and unique of course have to generalize and both
hemispheres generalize actually but in different ways so the left hemisphere generalizes by um
there's a feature here that they have in common whereas the right hemisphere um generalizes by
there being a sort of what bitkenstein called a family resemblance so there being a general
um holding together of things but what's it really intriguing is people think that because
the left hemisphere is focused on detail that it must um somehow um not involve generalization
and that because the right hemisphere sees the whole it's neglectful of the individual case
it turns out that to understand the unique case is very strongly dependent on the right
temporary parietal region it's the right hemisphere that understands uniqueness the left hemisphere
doesn't understand uniqueness because it's already categorized things as I see it's another one of
those and goes in that box so and there's a huge literature on that and some of it that I reported
in my various books but the point there is that there are two ways of thinking of the small if
you like one is the tiny part that is a detail the other is the uniqueness of something which
is not strictly measurable it's how big is the uniqueness of your wife you know excuse me this
is not a sensible question and also in generalizing the right hemisphere doesn't generalize in the
sense of trying to find a way in which it all fits a known schema but sees the bigger picture
whereas the left hemisphere manages to get that wrong by not seeing the bigger picture but seeing
lots of examples that can be generalized so the conflict between sameness or oneness on the one
hand and difference and multiplicity on the other crosses the hemispheres in a recognizably different
way and I think what's important about union and division is that we need them both not just one
but we need them to be unified not divided so at the meta level union trumps division but it must
not abolish division so we need in our in our ontology to be able to at least distinguish
but that distinction doesn't mean there's an irreparable separation and unfortunately the
way we talk we often think that if we differentiate we've completely divided and sundered whereas it's
very important to realize that distinction is enormously important to be able to discriminate
differences is what we have a mindful functioning of and how we come to experience the multiplicity
of life but it doesn't entail us in in in a sort of abandonment of a sense of the togetherness as
well well I'd like to reply to that and reply to both of you and again and the argument I was
making at the consilience conference is that intelligibility is actually the complete togetherness
of the integration and the differentiation if you have the difference you have exactly so that's
good yeah but it like there has to be both for there to be intelligibility we would read then
right and then in the neoplatonist we're very much on about that the one is that it is not the one
of the numerical sequence they're only using that word because they're so they go on and on about
this is not the numerical one this is not we're talking about the oneness of of integration
and differentiation which are very hard there is no logical oneness between them there is the
deeper oneness of intelligibility upon which logic rests logic logic presupposes that deeper
thing and therefore we're called to it and then what they get to see we we were cartesian and we
think the appearance reality distinction is just the inner outer the subjective objective the ancient
world has had a different way of understanding the appearance reality distinction it was the
one mini which is the problem we're talking about and it and what it did is it said there's a deep
reflection of neoplatonism on intelligibility and the one in the midi the emergence up the
emanation down to completely enter penetrating right what it came to in like the coincidence of
the opposites is this idea right that skiancia intuitiva right that you have to be able to see
the whole and every part and the part as properly participating in all over the whole you get the
same thing in the zen not the same thing sorry wrong word that's a logical word you get something
convergent from the zen tradition in indra's net how everything is the center of everything else
and and that it's a different way of framing things and i would also say the transcendent
and imminent have to be completely interpenetrating and you see late neoplatonist like nicholas of
cusa and like aragina proposing this i'm worried about our category of animism because for me it
sounds like us trying to capture this transjectivity and this transjectivity and then stick it into
substantial things which i think is i'm worried about that for example i don't think life is a
property of an organism i think it's a property of an organism in relationship to its environment
in a profound way and so again i think we're agreeing and i'm just trying to say that i think
that if we can teach people sets of practices that get them to realize this is a deep ontological
truth then they will be called to new ways and like we can't say what they're going to know
exactly but they can be called to new ways of bringing the small and the large i'm not happy
with even those words the immanence and the trans i don't be called to new ways beyond our current
grammar for how to bring them into relation that would be that would be for me evidence that the
new religion is emerging what do you think about that well i'm curious because the term new religion
is provocative and i especially right especially in the presence of there being existing religions
that have billions of people in them i don't think you mean uh that has to replace or supersede
those existing ones i think it can reify them yes and i think uh you know we we probably all agree
that all of the religions have different ways of interpreting them some of which lead to holy
war and some of which lead to sacred responsibility in different ways and so the question of uh
because it's very interesting obviously zen and baedanta and loreanic obelism and christianity
are culturally different historically methodically but you could say that there might be certain
underlying structures they all have to have to orient the human adequately there's almost like
a meta metaphysics that is necessary exactly where does it get the relationship of the one in the
mini does it get the relationship of the determined and the free does it get the all of those things
and um and it might be that those meta dynamics have both the capability of giving rise to new
philosophic inquiries as well as reifying the versions of the existing ones that are
capable of being in harmonious relationship with the other ones and capable of being able to
understand and steward the power of our technology well which i would say if if a religion doesn't
do that it's not adequate for the purpose of being able to orient humans in the world today
to steward the world you almost sung that it was beautiful that's yes sorry i got it so then my
so then i think one question i have for you since you've been thinking about this project but for all
of us is um how might we imagine the reification of the existing religions in a direction that allows
them to have something meaningful to say about ecological overshoot and planetary boundaries
and ai and synthetic bioregulation and the war in ukraine and whatever like to orient them to be able
to play a role in the stewarding of the world to the in the development of the wisdom individually
but the stewarding of the world locally and not just locally because it's all that how how might we
see the reification of those religions and the development of new ones or at least new
philosophic metaphysical systems the interface of and then how do we see the interface of those
with the other systems of human coordination if i value things differently does my economic
system change if i if i have a different relationship to what is a good problem to solve
does my tech design change how does education and media change since those are affecting the
nature of human mind so profoundly so the reification of the religions the development of
new philosophic traditions but also the development of those when we say you can't force it but you
can garden or nurture it how do you imagine being able to garden and nurture the type of adequate
wisdom moving forward in all these ways so can i just ask you a little terminological thing
use the word reify and reification as well use it positively i know but do you mean validation
because reification to me means making it a thing and of course that's what we don't want to
make it so i mean um signifying okay so when i was saying to reify i mean to be able to interpret
the religion okay in a particular direction that is commensurate with what it must be
for you given the constrained humanity faces so there's kind of like a pragmatic forcing function
on the metaphysics it's like ray in the respect looking at it probably right that's how that's
how i was getting it and you're nodding so i think that's lining so so what is the real
interpretation is what the scholars will argue on so there's an interpretation of what does this
really mean that can be different and also as you said we're not just painting meaning on the walls
of a meaningless universe but there is there is a no there's actually something intrinsically real
they're pointing to there is but there's no one way as you were right that's very important that's
what i was saying is that there's something like almost like how every personality very healthy
psychologically healthy people don't all become the same right as we become psychologically
healthier we don't become the same cultures also wouldn't become the same no but they would be
and the culture is almost like the psychology of the many the religion could be thought of that way
yeah but that's how a proper that's how proper pluralism differs from the relativism like think
about let's use a biological right there are universal principles of evolution but evolution
doesn't say that all the creatures are going to be the same it in fact tells you that all the
creatures are going to be very different and contextually sensitive not only spatially but
temporally right so there can be universal principles that predict why you must be contextually
sensitive yes and and i think that's the kind of thing i'm trying to point us towards and then
what you can do with i mean i think ennis said this week off camera and me too i got a lot of
people that come to me and say you've given me a language so that i can go back and re-home myself
in the religion i was brought up in and then you can think of and you can think about that
homing process is a much deeper kind of education than what we now have it's closer to what zack is
talking about when he's talking about education as installment etc so let's talk about that kind
of education and then we could properly empower people let's let's do a concrete example okay
let's see the proposal i've been making not just me people at filler a whole bunch of people cars
i think we all these people are wrapping into this in powerfully but filler makes this argument
and one of his reasons for focusing like really try to get really really try to get that the
trinity within christianity is saying that relationality is primordial really get it don't
think of this as three guys stuck together think about them completely interpenetrating
interconnecting relationality intelligibility the logos the the reality the indwelling in people the
spirit see all of that is deeply profoundly relational go back and start to practice your
practices that way live that way and then people are going to find different things
relevant and salient in the world and their relationship to the world and it could open
up the like it could switch switch people from the having mode to the being mode it could make a
difference in right in their in their in their relationship to their spouses but also in their
relationship to economic systems like and you understand okay so i want to yes the pragmatic
question i'm asking is so let's say the vatican calls you up or and says we agree we would like to
have a uniquely catholic version of this and maybe we're stoked if there's a uniquely muslim and
uniquely hindu kind of enlightenment of similar types but we would like a kind of catholic version
how would you change the way we approach our practices philosophy etc or let's say that the
minister of the department of education reached out and said we want to implement k through 12 a
wisdom development process i'm very interested to hear your thoughts on how could the institutions
start to actually implement wisdom development practices practices insights philosophies
such that rather than just we're compelling the person on youtube see so this is where i think
it's different from zack i think we have to create enough enough ecologies of practices within
the community before a reformation of education becomes possible because unless the lived normativity
of the culture changes attempts to change the education will just be co-opted by the current
machinery i've been signed education long enough to see how that works right everybody gets you
got to do stuff with the parents and you got to do stuff with the culture if the kids are getting
trained for the market that has inherent limitation so it becomes tricky because to change anything
you have to change everything so there's some sequencing start with one thing you've got to
do lots of things together exactly which if you change the grounding that has led to the problems
we have will lead naturally to these things flourishing exactly at the at the slightly higher
level and but but how we do that has got to be through an implicit process because if we try to
as i'm constantly saying if we try to instigate the things we think are valuable into people we
have not instigated those things instead we've instigated a kind of chain of of thought which
is actually contrary to the way in which this is your very first book right yeah yeah yeah exactly
cannot make implicit things explicit without damaging them yeah that's right that's against
criticism yeah but a pulania's argument was but right but you can and this is play does argument
too you don't you can't make people wise but you can't you can properly again seduce them
so that they can come to love wisdom but yeah but i was getting on to say that really i mean
all i was going to say is we can't do it by a direct approach but we can do it by a more implicit and
less direct approach and that approach is actually sadly um not original but it is actually to start
re-educating i mean or educating what i'm trying to say we i think we stopped educating children
about 40 50 years ago we started indoctrinating them and giving them information and testing them
on how much of that they retained but we didn't do the really important things which are relational
all the people who really inspired me and taught me did so by their being who they were and by the
way in which the spark jumped across the gap in the way that Plato describes in the seventh
epistle that this is how philosophy is done not by writing it down i mean mysteriously Plato could
particularly be trained socrates in the doing this but um so we we need to reimagine what an
education is that would mean freeing up teachers from a dead weight of bureaucracy in fact that's
one of the very practical things that could be done tomorrow which would you go around universities
go around hospitals go around them schools and look very critically at all the superstructure
of management and so on and i reckon about 80 percent of that could go tomorrow and nobody would
suffer in fact there'd be a lot more money for doing the things that we really want to do we've
become we've become sucked by a parasite if you like which is the externalization of the
left hemisphere's drive for control which is administration and so i mean that's a that's a
practical answer to the question but also we need apart from freeing up teachers to teach in a way
that is individual responsive and alive rather than just the carrying out of procedures we need
actually to i'm sorry give people back their their cultural tradition they need to read literature
that it's not fashionable to say this but they need to understand the last 2000 years otherwise
they don't know what they're doing here they have a very shallow rooting so we actually do need to
teach history literature philosophy music all our health not just it not just um procedural
learning but actually creative empathic understanding of other people not sitting in
judgment on our forebears or on other cultures but in fact trying to see our way into how they
saw the world because i mean i'm stupider than we are and they might actually have seen something
we've lost okay so i have a proposal specifically more practically about this which is uh first i
mean first of all just i'll put a pin in something the problem we face of course is the bureaucracy
has wrapped itself around a pseudo religious ideology that justifies this absolutely tremendously
and that so that's a problematic it's a pseudo religion yes very much and what i what i would
don't want to say is i don't think we should have teachers in any one institution so if you look
i'll just take the west but there's parallel things elsewhere you had the university you had the
monastery and you had the church and they were all interrelated and one is a knowledge institution
but it has reverence for the wisdom institution or that's the monastery and then you have the church
and the church is oh but all of these ideas and all of these philosophies have to be have to
transfer to real lives and they're right i may just add also hospitals yes yes yes and you and
what i think we need is we need to have teachers in multiple kinds of institutions that are acting
again in this this opponent processing with each other not adversarial part of the problem is you
know and the department where formation comes in and splits them from each other and we get all
that all that but the proposal is because what we have is we have we have this idea that teachers
are only legitimate if they're in this one institution and that and we have anybody out
i face this but the stuff i do outside of the university is like why are you doing that why are
you doing that all right and i know lots of excellent teachers that can't find a home in
the university because they want to do the kind of stuff that universities don't any longer do
right so i think we need to think about uh we need to think of a living system of teaching
institutions where you've got people sort of but they they're they're bound together in a field
again where the relationality is important we this is the pole of knowledge the pole of wisdom
and this is the pole of life and they have to all and we and we have that and i think that's
also something that we need to think about bringing back in terms of institutional structures that
can actually transform society in the way we're talking and i'd like to just add sorry yeah um
we need to encourage and provide institutional support for people who are bright to oversee
the whole picture to some extent yes that doesn't happen in our culture anymore it used to happen
and it used to happen in this university but now everything has shifted here as everywhere else in
the western world towards ever greater specialization now while we need specialists of course we do
it's not one audio that we need people who also are able to take the broad right hemisphere view
and see crikey look what's happening here and you know i believe that what i've done if i've
done anything in my writing is to open people's eyes that's what i'm talking about of course once
you see it you see what's going on here and we we don't have any institutions that do that but
back in the 60s i think the rand corporation and others sort of put money behind people that they
they thought were going to be good and they just gave them a desk in an office and a
xerox machine and said you know do what you want and out of that came a lot of um you know
genuinely innovative creative thinking and we need to bring that back could i respond to
just one thing so because this this is dear to my heart because i represent
i i represent the the uh a discipline that is all about the synoptic integration of
cross the disciplines cognitive science right and trying to create the lingua franca between
neuroscience and information processing machine learning psychology linguistics anthropology
philosophy trying to do that and and and the i mean there i i there has been a turning
an increasing recognition by some about the value of this because the specialization went into
psychology in which we we incentivized people to innovate something that nobody else had
discovered before finding the effect the new effect right and this is one of the driving
motivations of the replication crisis because if you don't pursue synoptic integration you
don't work out your theoretical grammar well your conceptual vocabulary is vague and equivocal
and what you and then you're the fact that you get empirical data is almost irrelevant because
if you get a vague enough construct that isn't bound responsible to anybody else's work of
course you can find empirical verification and so the replication crisis has basically started
put up a flag some people are recognizing it that we need the synoptic integrators
as much as we need the specialists so that's i just want to put that you both made this point
and i think when people look at the arguments about all the things that are supposedly getting
better in civilization some of which are they relate to things that specialization does well
and when we look at the things that are getting worse and heading towards global catastrophic
risk they look at the lack of integrate they arise from the lack of integration across specialty
areas i think that's actually very important so you were speaking to that the existing educational
institutions have a history that we actually want to revive some things from and that we've
like we've actually lost some very important aspects you are also speaking to not just the
educational institution as a single thing but lots of them you didn't mention guilds but also
there that education needs to be many institutions and maybe in light of the current situations of
the world some new institutional design as well but you said something else that i found really
interesting when you talked about cutting some of the bureaucracy and administration which was
almost like an externalization of left hemispheric dominance what david graver calls bullshit jobs
that there's this recursive relationship between kind of left hemispheric process
and building a world that is the result of that that in turn conditions that and that kind of
recursive relationship means we're not just asking how can we develop things that will give people
more wholeness more integration more numinous more sacred but also how can we undo some of the things
that are excessively making us hypertrophic on the wrong modes of mind and i think we have to do
both well one good thing that might come out of a scarcity crisis is that we find quickly what are
the things we can dispense with and what we can't at least if we maintain enough right hemisphere
overview of what's going on but i fear that now the power is concentrated in the hands of frankly
mediocre people who occupy administrative jobs and that they are not willing to really relinquish
that power and will you know it's their their validation but we do desperately need to do it
and you're quite right but what happens is in a culture like that people are trained to go into
jobs like that and the people who fit the role best are not the people you'd want to be making
big decisions about our lives but they go into it and the thing is a positive feedback loop
so how do we break the positive feedback loops that orient us towards the futures nobody wants
and how do we or at least weaken them and how do we simultaneously develop other positive
feedback loops because they have to have some positive feedback where they won't be able to do
anything that move us in a recognition of the sacred wise individual and collective governance
we did not answer that question in full we we spoke to different elements of what it might need
to entail but the clock is saying that it is time that we must wrap yeah um well there are
questions that we can answer questions that we can offer a direction for and questions we
simply can't in the nature of things answer so i think we've done the best we can yes and um i'd
like to think that we could shout this from the rooftops and people some people just a few might
listen so this is my kind of closing question is um if some people do listen and respond and
there's interest maybe we'll deepen this conversation and explore some of these how
do we weaken the existing positive feedback loops how do we deal with the fact that power
is entrenched in certain ways currently like there's a lot of very interesting open questions we
could get into um further but in closing thoughts i guess now for the listeners who have made it
through all of this any closing thoughts that might give them some sense of orientation or
agency in the relationship to all these topics
well i'd say don't despair that is achieving nothing whatever and it's bad for the soul
so we have a a duty to see what is hopeful and do we're not asked nobody is asked to do the
impossible we can only do the bit that we can and that means doing things in our own life and with
our own life and uh furthering larger causes in the way that we are best in a position to do
but we all have a role and i think one of the things i tried to emphasize was that although
the materialist reductionist picture results in a vision of the cosmos as a heap of junk
with no meaning beauty or purpose and that we have no role here i would you know i'd go to
my death to defend the opposite point of view that actually it is beautiful is rich and it is our
pleasure our duty and something we should be grateful for to help further that
yeah i like that you said i would go to my death that's the sacrifice and service of the sacred
i would want people to hear that the love of wisdom and the love of being are real possibilities
that there are already people of good faith and good talent doing this individually and
collectively and that that opens up a possibility for a kind of transformation so that as you fall
in love with being again instead of the reciprocal narrowing that we've been just been talking about
and how we get addicted because that's what addiction is reciprocal narrowing a reciprocal
opening is equally possible this is what Plato proposed with the anagagi and that that is still
actual and there are people and communities and practices that you can go to to actualize that
to realize that and there is nothing stopping you from doing that right now may make a hemispheric
comment the left hemisphere closes down to a certainty the right hemisphere opens up to a
possibility and so what you've really said is we need to further the processes of the right hemisphere
which are always expanding and exploring rather than those that close down to the
arid bit of something we think yeah i don't want i'm not proposing cognitive closure i want continuity
i know you yeah that's why i said it yes yes i think the religion the concern about religions
that many people have actually has to do with people orienting to certainty with them and then
close-mindedness and holy wars and whatever as opposed to the exact opposite holding the mystery
at the center holding the unspeakable the unknowable but the real and so there is a
epistemic humility that is built in forever yes we spoke about this yesterday and you said don't
despair we actually i i liked in our conversation you're saying when we are
actually open to the beauty of reality there's a sense of awe and a gratitude and
humility that comes with that exactly but when we're open to the beauty of reality being harmed
which is in the factory farm and on the war field and whatever we're also
feel the suffering of others it's such that it's overwhelming and the overwhelm in the suffering
and the overwhelm in the beauty are related because if the reality wasn't beautiful you wouldn't care
and both of them make you transcend your small self and both of them motivate
the sacred obligation yeah so there's something where the sacred obligation just comes from seeing
clearly letting yourself be moved by the beauty of reality and associated with that the meaningfulness
to protect it yeah and the role of the new religion philosophy whatever in so far as it
can help people be more sensitive to both the beauty and sacredness and thus a protective
impulse towards reality is what i am hoping people take away excellent well thank you both yeah
likewise this is joy it has been a great pleasure really enjoy the end of you
you
you
you
you
