All right everybody, thank you so much for coming out.
This is a really interesting, unique event.
There are people here who have flown here from different states.
There's more than five people who flew here just for this.
It's not just, thank you man, I appreciate that.
Of course that's flattering, but thanks man.
We might need that about an hour in.
That's very flattering and all, but I'm not crazy.
No one's flying several hours because of me.
I'm pretty fucking smart and cool, but I'm not that smart and cool.
But you're sweet Justin, you're very sweet.
Well thank you Curtis, I appreciate that.
The reason I'm commenting on this before we even begin is because people really need
to understand that there is an extraordinary demand out there for true, radical, dangerous,
intellectual thought and expression and discussion.
There is an unfortunately constrained supply.
There's an artificially constrained supply of true intellectual life.
People should not have to fly hundreds of miles to come listen to someone like Curtis
Talk.
There is a huge demand for it, it's not being met and unfortunately the way things are working
out right now is if you want this kind of thing, you have to make it yourself.
DIY baby, punk rock culture dude, get a venue where you live, put on things like this.
The institutions aren't going to do it for you, academics aren't going to do it for you.
Almost everyone out there right now who is kind of representing some sort of intellectual
posture, let's be honest, at least 90% of them are utterly fake, absolute, absolute fakers.
And if you want real intellectual life, no one's going to give it to you necessarily,
but if you build it, they will come.
Look at this, I'm not that famous people, like I'm really not, I do not have that big
of a following and yet I do this little event and people will fly across states.
So my exhortation, I want to start essentially with an exhortation.
If you think this is cool, if you enjoy this talk, if you were excited to come to this
and if it lives up even halfway to what you wanted it to be, the type of intellectual
kind of community or dialogue, the exciting kind of dangerous, edgy intellectual experience
that you want it to be, which I think Curtis and I are both committed to making it that
for you, then go home and do it yourselves, provide this for the other people around you.
People should not have to fly this far just to be a part of this, so that's just a little
exhortation.
Unfortunately, you're watching this on YouTube in porn mode.
You can hit record now, we're going to start.
We're good?
Yeah, yeah.
You sure?
Okay, cool.
So okay, that's my little exhortation, because people should not have to fly this far to
be a part of something like this.
Welcome to this little event that we've put on.
This is my first live show of my podcast.
The podcast is called Other Life and it's pretty much all about me trying to find true
intellectual life wherever it exists and today that mostly means on the internet.
So most of the people I interview for my podcast are bloggers, kind of strange, interesting,
unique, idiosyncratic, and very courageous people typically, or just weird people who
are out there pursuing some type of independent intellectual life that is escaping this kind
of institutional apparatus that is so constraining on so many people nowadays.
That's what my podcast is all about, that's why it's called Other Life.
It's about a different kind of life.
I started it when I was an academic and I needed to find people to actually talk about
interesting, real stuff with.
So that's my podcast, Other Life, and this is the first time I'm doing a live show.
So yeah, this is a milestone for me and I'm very happy to have you all here.
So enough on general introductions.
I would like to now introduce our special guest here tonight, Curtis Yarvin, aka Menchist
Moldbug.
And I'm going to pick his brain about many things.
I have some questions that were actually submitted to me by other people.
Fuck.
But Curtis has told me anything goes.
He's told me there's nothing off limits.
Luckily, I'm a fairly friendly interviewer.
I don't have any hard balls for you.
What are you thinking about now?
So I'll give you a little bit of introduction.
Most of you are here, you probably already know, Curtis is shtick, but what I think is
most...
Good word.
Come on in, guys.
What I think is most, Curtis is mostly known for being a reactionary blogger, and of course
a brilliant startup founder.
But in these circles, you're probably most known for being a rather reactionary blogger.
But what I think is most interesting about you, Curtis, is not primarily your reactionary
qualities, which are interesting for sure, and we'll get there.
But primarily, you're a computer scientist or an engineer.
Is that...
What would you say, engineer?
What's the label you would use?
I like to think of myself as a computer programmer.
Computer programmer.
There you go.
Old school.
I like the modesty.
I tend to see your writings mostly through that lens.
I see you as your blog, which we're going to dissect over the next hour or two.
Shit.
To me, the defining characteristic of your worldview and your political theory is not
so much your reactionary qualities, but I see your reactionary qualities as downstream
of your engineer mentality or your computer programming type of mentality and experience.
I see you as, Curtis likes to, I think, hack into the source code of a lot of conventional
wisdom, in particular, the politically correct wisdom.
Then once he's hacked into your source code, he wants to bring you places that maybe you
don't necessarily want to go, but he wants to lure you there.
That's a fairly insightful comment, Justin.
I would say something a little close to that, which is just that I like to think from first
principles.
When I see a large system or a complicated system, I'm like, okay, what would this look
like if you designed it from scratch?
Clearly, this is a product of history.
It's spent a lot of time evolving.
As I record, there's a lot of Americans concerned about the 401Ks, and so I'm like, what is
this stock market thing?
Where did this come from?
How does this work?
This is a very interesting question to me, and I think that that approach can be used
by a lot of people for a lot of different things.
Excellent.
My intuition there is not wrong.
Mostly.
I think that's enough of an introduction.
He's a computer programmer, a well-known blogger, and a founder of an enigmatic startup
called Herbit, which we might have some time to get into a little bit, too, now that you've
formally walked away from Herbit.
Are you now a little bit more free to discuss it or?
Yeah.
I'm a little bit more free, but I'm also more distant from it.
What I say should not be taken as gospel.
Anyone can read my resignation letter, and I'm using the enough sort of unusually for
Silicon Valley, everything I wrote in that is true.
Cool.
Great.
Then, I don't think you need much of more of a warm-up.
I think we can get right into the interesting stuff that people are probably here to hear
you talk about.
I see you as very interested in, well, you're kind of a pill dispenser, aren't you?
Yeah, sort of.
You like dispensing pills, whether they be red pills or most recently, clear pill, is
a recent idea you have?
Yeah.
I have questions about that as a marketing concept, but I'm pretty sincere about it.
Right.
I take that as sincere.
In fact, to my understanding, you actually popularized the term red pill in the political
context.
Is that right?
Yeah, that's actually true.
I can tell you actually where I was when I came up with that, which is in the Hade Ashbury
at Hadeon Masonic.
I was in the People's Café, and the People's Café is the decor in the People's Café
is entirely like 60s revolutionary stickers, so it's a very kind of positive place.
To those who have seen the Matrix, it's obvious that the red pill is this kind of left-wing
analogy, but what if you made it a right-wing one?
Wouldn't that be interesting?
Right.
So what I thought would be a good exercise to kick things off is maybe you could dispense
a kind of pill right now.
And I was thinking, I was thinking a really-
Can you be more specific?
Yeah.
I was thinking a really good place to start would be on the concept of democracy.
Oh, sure.
Okay.
Let's talk about democracy for a second.
I actually have a nice little line prepared on that, which is people are very fond on
Twitter and so forth of these political quadrants, and one way you can draw a political quadrant
is to say, you can ask two questions.
Is your country a democracy?
And should it be a democracy?
So the set of people who answer no to both of those questions, that's a relatively small
set, and it's a pretty freaking weird set.
So yeah, I'm kind of part of that set.
So that's my perspective.
The reason I wanted to start with democracy as a good test case is because it's arguably
one of the most universally applauded concepts or values right now in kind of mainstream
culture, right?
Well, I was going to stop you before you said, you know, right now, actually, it's pretty
much universally reviled, but it's only universally reviled if you consider all historical periods
as equal.
Hmm.
Right.
For most of the history of the term, it was a bad thing.
Yeah, because people saw the history of Athens and so forth, and the history of Athens basically
is an independent principality, basically ends with democracy, and the history of the
Roman Republic ends in a very turbulent way.
And so who is it?
John Adams, the greatest American political philosopher, of course, second president.
I'm trying to recall his words on democracy verbatim, but he's like, you know, this is
the worst political system ever.
And this is one of the founders of, you know, like the main philosopher of, you know, the
main person who's kind of political writing still holds up from the American founding.
Yes, that's right.
I mean, for most of the history of the term democracy, it essentially means what we now
think of as something like anarchy.
It's just kind of seen as synonymous with chaos, something to be avoided.
Or if you're familiar with the word populism, used as a pejorative.
You know, so one simple example that I sometimes use is, let's take two words, politics and
democracy.
So you'll notice that when you think about those words, you have very different associations
with either.
So suppose you were to say, oh, we're going to politicize this.
We're going to politicize U.S. foreign policy.
We're going to politicize the State Department.
We're going to politicize the coronavirus.
That's clearly a very bad thing to do.
But if you're going to democratize this, you know, if you're going to bring democracy
to China or whatever, wasn't there that great Guns N' Roses album, Chinese Democracy?
Can you buy that in China?
You know, I sometimes wonder, oh, man.
So you know, if you're going to democratize something, you know, there's absolutely no
question that democracy has a completely positive set of associations.
And politics, you know, like office politics is bad.
You know, anything political is bad.
And yet you look at these two words and you're like, wait, they're synonyms.
But one of them is good and one of them is bad.
You know, and if you can explain that, you know, basically, I don't think you have any
need for any of my pills.
It's almost like in your grand narrative, democracy is sort of the root of all problems
in some sense.
Oh, that would be going too far.
I mean, you know, democracy is a very legitimate, it's one of the many like one of the three
basic political systems.
And you know, as a political system, even more, it's basically a form of political energy.
You know, even in a country like you're in the Soviet Union, there's no real democracy.
Maybe there are fake elections.
But you can say, does democratic power still exist?
Of course it does, because it's what overthrew or what helped overthrow the Soviet Union.
So you know, this basic force never at least abstractly disappears and no one, certainly
no one has refuted the categorization of Aristotle into three political systems, democracy,
rule of the many, oligarchy, rule of the few and monarchy, rule of the one.
Real quick, not to digress too much, but when was the last time you did a public talk, IRL?
2012.
2012.
Without being cancelled.
Well, I did, I mean, I did, I've done technical talks like once or twice, but yeah, I've never,
I mean, I don't usually do public appearances, so I'm kind of a virgin here.
Okay, interesting.
Okay.
You'll have to excuse me if I feel, seem a little nervous and weird.
No, no, you seem great.
I was only asking because I'm kind of, I'm thinking a lot lately about kind of the shifting
tides of the culture wars.
It seems to me that something like this would maybe not have even been possible a year ago.
The protest energy might have been too great, threats of having it shut down or whatever
the case might be.
Because now I have this kind of sense that, personally, that we're kind of turning a corner
where this type of thing is now more possible.
I was just curious if you have any similar type of intuition.
Well, you know, that may be true in a sense.
The one thing that I try really hard to do that has been sort of the perennial kind of,
if I may use the term, shitshow of the last three years is that I feel like a lot of people,
when they create heterodox content, do you know the origin of the word trolling, by the
way?
I'm not sure that I do.
Let me tell you the origin of the word trolling, then I'll tell you why I don't troll.
The origin of the word trolling, first of all, if you've ever, has anyone ever trolled
in fishing?
Any fishermen in the room?
I can see.
Okay.
Yeah, that's good.
Slowly.
Yeah, yeah, slowly from the back of the boat, you're dragging basically this lure, right?
I have trolled, I have fish for bass, you know, it's lower class to fish for bass, which
is why I like it.
And you know, like people of quality, fish for trout, and they certainly don't troll.
Nonetheless, the word trolling, as we use it now, was actually a product of the Vietnam
War.
Did you notice?
I did not.
So what it was invented, you know, with a clear analogy to the fishing practice, basically
U.S., what we're called wild weasels, which were like an F-104, I think, outfitted with
some kind of electronic intercept category, would basically fly across surface-to-air
missile sites in North Vietnam, trying to get surface-to-air missiles shot at them,
so they could basically lock onto the launchers and destroy them with counter-missiles.
So anytime you're thinking of the word trolling, you should be like, where are my radar-seeking
missiles?
They're just like out there basically trying to attract fire.
You should really question why you're doing this.
And of course, that question could be asked about the whole Vietnam War, right?
And so, you know, when people basically go, you know, there were like, if you remember
in like an early 2017, there were like these provocations in Berkeley, like these Antifa,
Breitbart riots, you know, it seems like something from like the 15th century now.
The whole thing, you know, was really quite, it was very larpy, if you know the term.
It was very kind of pretend.
And the thing that I dislike about it most, and the one thing that I would basically caution
all heterodox thinkers about, is that the one thing you really don't want to do is inhabit
the stereotypes of your opponents.
So basically, you have, you know, anyone who's kind of, you know, working in some direction
has people working against them, right?
And those people who are working against you see you as a certain kind of person.
They imagine, oh, this is what our enemies are like.
And because their frame is so dominant, it's really easy to inhabit that caricature.
Because basically, you've been taught by them, oh, this is what, you know, our enemies are
like, they believe this, they believe that, they do this, they do that.
If you basically get that so deeply into your head that you're like, you know, oh, I oppose
you, I do this, I do that, you don't really have your own frame.
You're still operating in their frame.
And you're operating in a way which is much more valuable to them than if you even supported
them.
So was this type of strategy behind your blog, Unqualified Reservations, were you thinking
about these things proactively when you first set out to do that blog?
No, it was crazy.
I should never have written anything at all.
You don't mean that?
There's part of me that means that.
But there's part of me that doesn't.
You know, when I think about the problem of being a dissident, I'm always reminded,
do you know the writer, Ryszard Kapoziński?
I don't.
He wrote mainly in the 80s and 90s, I think he died in the early 2000s.
He was a journalist and he was a correspondent for the official Polish Communist News Agency.
And fortunately for him, he was also an amazing writer and he got sent to Africa.
So Africa is kind of relatively tangentially related to Polish communism.
So he could not really exactly write whatever he wanted, but he could write stuff that was
actually worthwhile content.
There's some controversy over whether there's any actual truth in his books or whether they're
just wholly made up.
But even if they're wholly made up, they're pretty good.
And so he wrote this but one book called The Emperor, which is about Ethiopia.
And so he went to Ethiopia and everyone here has heard of Haile Selassie, right, you know,
like from like Bob Marley songs or something.
So Haile Selassie was this emperor of Ethiopia and he was kind of a nutcase.
He had pet lions, he used to feed dissidents to the lions.
It was a little weird and so eventually it was sort of weird enough and what we now call
civil society, you know, got started to kind of organize against him and, you know, he
was overthrown.
The same thing happens.
It always happens.
He was overthrown by the Liberals and then the Liberals got stabbed in the back by the
committed Marxist Leninists and they established this regime called the Derg, which was about
100 times worse than Haile Selassie ever was.
But so in the early days of the Derg, Richard Kapasinski, this Polish journalist, goes to
Ethiopia.
And he interviews all kinds of people who are basically part of the old regime.
Ethiopia, you know, as you may or may not know, is in some ways more of a Middle Eastern
country than an African country and it has this, it's a Christian country.
It has this very old nobility and this very old elite.
And so these people were, you know, the former employees of Haile Selassie.
So there's this one interview from this book or maybe completely fake interview, I don't
really know, that sticks in my mind where he goes and interviews a couple who are part
of this old government service class who have basically had a son who has become a dissident
and subsequently comes to, of course, a very bad end.
And he's interviewing this couple and he's like, you know, tell me when you first suspected
that there might be a problem.
And you know, the wife was like, well, you know, one day my husband came to me and he
was like, we have a problem.
What is the problem?
The problem is Tesfaye, the son, Tesfaye has started to think.
And as a parent, I really relate to that, you know, and, you know, in a way like, you
know, the, you know, anyone who is interested in actually getting ahead or succeeding in
this world would be very well advised not to think.
And if they start thinking they should, you know, and I'm serious about this, they should
keep it to themselves.
You know, they should hide, you know, there's a great term hide your power level, hide your
power level.
By all means, you know, if you start thinking, don't be like a 15 year old Ethiopian boy who's
going to end up being shot in a month and a half.
And so, you know, that, that's, I think, certainly, you know, is a valid perspective.
You know, on the other hand, you know, you know, what was this line of Shaw, you know,
reasonable person adapts himself to society and an unreasonable person insists on adapting
the world to himself.
Therefore, all progress depends on unreasonable people.
And what about people who are cursed with this drive or this necessity to think despite
the odds?
There's a great line.
There's another writer I really adore, which is the writer Freda Utley.
So she was writing in the 30s and 40s and she was a communist.
She was a communist in the 30s, in the 30s, basically anyone who was smart or cool was
a communist.
The list of smart, cool people who were not communists is an interesting list, otherwise
they were communists.
And so, Utley was a communist and she was so committed to the cause that she went and
married a Russian, you know, a bright young Russian guy who was, you know, part of the
revolution and actually moves to Russia with him.
And she moves to Russia with him and then in the, like, the mid-30s, then shit goes
bad, he disappears into the gulag, she never hears from him again.
And she has, like, a baby son.
So she comes back to the U.S. and she has all these chic friends, right, because communism
has always been this very, very chic movement.
And she's like, friends, help me, like, because the Soviet Union really cares.
I bet it's friends, bro, sorry.
And, you know, of course, her friends are just like, do I know you?
Do I know this person?
Who is this anti-Soviet person who's knocking on my door?
They're like, fuck you.
And so, you know, of course, she gets nowhere with this, right?
Sorry.
And, you know, she goes and talks to her friend, Edith Hamilton.
You know, Edith Hamilton, the great writer and mythology, great 30s writer, she talks
to Edith Hamilton and she's like, why are all my friends like stepping me in the back?
And Edith Hamilton is like, well, you know, you really shouldn't expect the material rewards
of success to come along with the spiritual rewards of telling the truth.
You shouldn't expect that.
And I think that's true today, and you've experienced that, right, Justin?
I'll let you talk for a second.
Yeah, sure.
So you're, I mean, you know, I think some, it's possible, you know, one thing you didn't
do, Justin, was introduce yourself.
And I think it's possible that there may be some people watching who might know who I
am, but don't know who you are.
I wouldn't be so presumptuous to introduce myself.
I mean, you can if you want.
All right.
Well, you know, I, unfortunately, I don't know that much about you.
But what I know is, let me, let me, let me just say what I know about Mr. Murphy here.
I can't, I can't if you want.
But go ahead.
No, I'll tell you what I know.
So, you know, Justin Murphy is a, I would describe him as a defrocked academic.
Is that right?
I take issue with that.
They couldn't fire me because I quit, baby.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's right.
I was about to be defrocked.
Yes.
But I'm, I'm a proud Irish Catholic man and I just didn't want to give him that pleasure.
Many people advised me actually to let them fire me, let, let them go through with the
I would have advised you.
The big stink.
I believe you did.
I believe you emailed me actually.
I called the email to you actually.
Yeah.
I thought long and hard about it, but I decided ultimately, and this is the only thing that's
actually interesting about my case.
It's not me per se, but what I do think is interesting about my particular case is my
phenomenology of going through this conflict, my kind of cost benefit calculus at the time.
I was a professor for six years, a successful professor.
I'm a political scientist by training.
I was based in England at the University of Southampton.
And I was doing very well.
Everything was going pretty much according to plan.
Is that what they call a red brick university?
Yes, that's right.
As a matter of fact.
And pretty much I bought into this myth that I was always kind of conducting my life on,
which was that if I play by the rules in academia and I publish in good journals and I climb
the ranks and I establish myself and prove myself and get tenure, I had the British version
of tenure, I was set.
Then finally there would come a time when I could speak freely, where I could really
do what I want and I could be free.
That was what my advisors, that's what my PhD advisors always told me.
That's what I thought from the day that I set out to pursue an academic career.
And I guess I was the only person stupid enough to actually take that promise literally.
I mean, I'm not kidding.
Once I really got arrived, I got the British version of tenure, I had good publications
and top journals, I literally said to myself pretty consciously, OK, now I'm going to start
being free.
I started the podcast, I'm like, I'm going to actually start blogging about whatever
I want.
I'm going to start talking about whatever I want and I'm going to really let the chips
fall where they may because this whole academic game is only worth it, but paying all of
those dues over 10 years or more was only worth it to get that freedom.
That's what I was in it for.
So I decided to take it and immediately I started getting flack.
It was very clear, very apparent that that type of freedom was never going to come.
And at the same time, the academic institutions were getting more and more oppressive, more
and more annoying.
The amounts of paperwork you have to do, the amounts of red tape, the political correctness,
all of the costs of being an academic were increasing at the same time that all of my
creative, independent intellectual work on the internet was gaining more and more traction
and it was more and more fun.
And the ability to do that freely and independently on the internet seemed to be increasing at
the same time that my academic career seemed more and more miserable.
So that was when, at that time, I'm realizing all of this.
When my administrator comes to me and says that I'm not allowed to use the word retard
on Twitter, I was like, fuck you, I'm going to say whatever I want on Twitter.
And yeah, it was clear that push was going to come to shove.
They probably would have pushed me out.
But honestly, I just didn't want to deal with the hassle.
And I genuinely decided that I had better prospects as an independent intellectual
pursuing a full-time intellectual career for the rest of my life.
Because I'm still young.
I still have piss and vinegar.
I was like, I can carve out a new path.
I can make a new model.
I think I see it possible.
So I was like, peace out.
And I decided to do my own thing.
I didn't need them to fire me or whatever.
So that's my little intro about me.
Yeah, sure.
So kind of my theory, I dropped out of grad school in computer science for somewhat
different, but certainly not political reasons.
But I think I came to the same realization as Justin.
But somewhat sooner than Justin that essentially here was this form and this kind
of form of science.
And I come into this and I'm like, I take it at face value.
I'm like, this is what it appears to be.
And then you get in there and you basically discover that you're actually
training to be a bureaucrat.
And my parents were bureaucrats.
So I kind of know the experience pretty well.
And I'm like, I'm actually what I'm trying to do here is make alliances.
What I'm trying to do here is make friends who will scratch my back when they
scratch theirs.
I'm trying to be popular.
I'm trying to be a team player.
I'm trying to be with the program.
And I'm like, this is like, I'm sorry to be arrogant, but was Isaac Newton a team
player?
Isaac Newton was a weirdo and a nerd and just an impossible person to deal with.
And the kinds of people who created the science and academia and literature
that we know could never have succeeded in these institutions and cannot succeed
in these institutions.
And unless they have just these amazing talents, and I've seen people who can do
that, I wouldn't try like political science as crazy.
But like computer science, sure.
There are people who are amazing computer scientists in a very fundamental sense
and also amazing bureaucrats.
And those people are very successful and they deserve all the success they get.
But they're an exception.
Yeah, definitely.
So I want to talk about unqualified reservations.
Your notorious blog that you wrote in the late 2000s.
You seem to have some misgivings about ever having gained any type of recognition
or readership for your blog.
You seem to have mixed emotions.
I'm kind of curious about that.
Well, it's always very difficult when you have two, I hesitate to say careers.
I have zero careers.
But the two very different directions you're pursuing because they can easily
interfere with each other.
It's like one of my favorite historical figures or artists generally.
Do you know Wyndham Lewis?
Of course.
And so Wyndham Lewis is both a very, not just a legitimate, really a leading literary
figure and also a leading figure in painting.
And his paintings and his literary work are both, all of his writing actually needs editing,
but otherwise it's very good.
And so, but those careers didn't really interfere with each other.
There's another kind of thing that people will do where they make a career in some technical
field and then make a shit ton of money, which hasn't actually happened to me.
And then quit and go and be some kind of intellectual philosophical literary figure
or whatever.
But doing the reverse is very, very difficult.
Was the blog in your mind when you set out to write it, was it just for fun?
Or would you say you had intellectual ambitions to really kind of solve some puzzles around
political theory?
I would say that I had certainly intellectual ambitions, but of course I have no political
ambitions, but I was just not really that interested in who would read my blog.
In fact, I never even read the comments, which was probably a mistake.
And I absolutely hate reading about myself in any context whatsoever.
And many neurotic writers.
But I was just like, in a way, that era was kind of the last gasp of the old internet
way of doing things, where you basically, it's like I started posting on Usenet in 1989.
So that was some time ago.
And in that world, the internet was this weird thing that no one had heard of.
And like my own project, Urban Today, with which I'm no longer associated.
And having being something that no one had heard of, it just provided this really nice
intellectual quality, because you could not imagine it mattering.
I mean, I remember the first time that I saw the internet mentioned in the New York Times.
It may have been the first time the internet was mentioned in the New York Times.
It was the fall of 1988, and Robert Morris had unleashed the famous Morris Worm.
And so you're reading New York Times, and then you read up at the internet in New York
Times.
It's like your cousin was in the New York Times.
You write a lot about this, actually, how you're very specifically resigned from any
type of trying to have political efficacy of any kind.
You write about this throughout unqualified reservations.
You say this frequently.
And do you think that that's actually a kind of necessary precondition for pursuing a real
kind of long-term, original, creative, intellectual project in some sense?
Absolutely.
And let me, in a way, turn that question back on you.
I would say that you can't really be free.
Can I get all Buddhist on you?
What's that?
Can I get all Buddhist on you?
Yeah, go for it, man.
You can't really be free until you free yourself from desire, man.
And to free yourself from one of my big things, if those of you who've read my latest series,
The Clear Pill, featured in the Claremont Institute's American Mind, people have been,
my editors have been yammering at me for part three for about four months.
I'm working on it.
And so, you know, one of the things that I really tend to focus on is this word, themos,
which is a Greek word that can be translated in a number of ways.
I think the simplest translation is ambition.
But you know, in Plato, you see this explicit parallel between themos and eros, eros being
of course sexual desire.
And so, desire for power and desire for sex have always been, you know, very, very closely
related, especially if you're Harvey Weinstein.
And these are like, you know, these were always, you know, now, of course, we, you know, the
received wisdom has never turned down money, sex, or power.
But, you know, before the modern world, that was actually considered kind of decadent.
And the willingness to sort of resist desire, that's not just a Buddhist thing, right?
And so, you know, when I look at, say, Justin's experience in academia, I would say that he
expected to academia to be one thing, but he found it another.
And the way in which he found it another was he expected it to be something that was not
corrupted by power, but in fact, it was corrupted by power.
And so, in a way, the academic systems, even of a Redbrook University, like the University
of Southampton, these academic systems, I'm sorry, I'm just being derogatory for no reason
at all, and these academic systems evolved in a world where they were, the relevance
was very low.
I mean, even, you know, the first, of course, we had this, America had this amazing experience
where they elected Woodrow Wilson, who was a professor of political science president.
I'm sure that can never happen again.
But you know, before then, if you look at like America in 1900, the idea that professors
would tell the government what to do, as you probably know, being a political scientist,
was like, it was weird, it would be like hairdressers, suddenly took control of Washington, right?
And everything was about hair, and suddenly, of course, you know, academics have a much
better claim to rule than hairdressers, no offense to any hairdressers out there.
But what happened, you know, what led to this sort of kind of way of living that we
have now is that you had these, you know, people like the political science professors
of 100 years ago, you know, you know, I don't know if you've read any, you know, Charles
Francis Adams, Jr.
Not much, but at least I know the name.
You know, I recommend anyone read his 1900 American Historical Association address on
history if you're interested in history.
And he was basically like, look, you know, politics is, you know, conducted on this incredibly
crude level.
And you have, you know, when you look at what people are thinking about when they vote, they
just have no idea what's going on.
It's this incredibly long essay that was delivered as an address.
He goes through every presidential election between like 1856 and like 1900.
And he's just like, in this election, the voters had no clue.
In that election, we can see that the voters had no clue.
Finally, this election, they had no idea what they were doing.
And you know, he goes through basically both sides of each election were just out of touch
with reality.
And so, you know, this is kind of the anti-democracy of very early progressivism.
And so he's like, okay, you know, here's this ship that is not being steered.
It's like a ship without a pilot or a ship with a drunken pilot.
Who is capable of steering this ship?
And of course, the answer is very clear.
Now, Charles Francis Adams Jr., I mentioned John Adams, you know, earlier, Charles Francis
Adams Jr. is actually the great grandson of John Adams.
So you know, he's a, you know, this is as blue as American blood comes.
And so in a way, here's this kind of rising academic aristocracy that says, wow, here's
a ship with no pilot or a drunken pilot.
Someone should take control of it.
Someone competent.
Someone who just knows what they're doing, who can actually think.
This seemed like a great idea at the time.
And what people didn't realize is that basically, you know, this is kind of the great lesson
of Tolkien that somehow has really been missed, is that basically when you put on the ring,
you become something different.
It's like, you know, my son, who's nine, he just read Lord of the Rings, and I'm like,
you know, he actually asked me, he's like, why doesn't Gandalf just put on the ring and
fucking kick ass?
He didn't put it quite that way.
And I'm like, well, you know, that question is never really answered in the book.
And actually, the book never really tells you.
It's like, you know, like Bilbo puts on the ring, Bilbo's magical power of like a, you
know, he has no magical powers at all, so it just makes him invisible.
But for Gandalf, he could like turn a mountain into a swamp, right?
But he would be corrupted by that power.
And so in a way, like, you know, in a world where someone like Justin could just be a
scholar and just be like, oh, you know, I'm interested in some issue of political science.
You know, and it didn't matter.
That would be very easy.
But in a world where it does matter, what you're going to find is that it matters, and that's
going to attract people like your dean or whatever, who are going to be like, this guy
is not a team player, this guy is not with the program.
But do you think that because so much intellectual activity or supposedly intellectual activity
today is colonized by this kind of power hungry institutionalized kind of corruption?
Is it not in some sense a great moment for true intellectuals who want to just turn to
their blog or write books for truly radically disinterested truth seeking purposes is now
is not now perhaps one of the greatest times to be doing that precisely because so much
of what passes for intellectual activity has nothing to do with intellectual activity.
Well, you know, it's a great moment, but it's not an easy moment.
You know, you know, let me tell you about the time I was detained in the New Zealand
airport or let me not.
But the, you know, of course, as I said, you know, with Fred earlier, you know, if it's
easy, you're not, you're wasting your time, right?
But you know, it's certainly not easy, but you know, it's an interesting, you know,
promising time.
You know, it's like, you know, an answer this question, I had a little, I really don't
know Justin at all.
You know, I don't trust him, but the, I had, I had an email exchange with him where I
was like, you know, clearly what he's doing down here is pretty interesting and pretty
cool.
And you know, when I look at all of you in the audience, I say that you're pretty cool
people.
I'm also older than about all of you, you know, which is interesting and always a good sign
actually.
And so, you know, I was like, Justin, I think this is still available, but you know, anyone
who wants to, is interested in doing the same thing can go on YouTube and there's an old
PBS documentary about David Geffen.
So people in the room probably know who David Geffen was, right?
So basically, David Geffen, you know, I think he has a boat the size of the USS Nimitz or
something.
You know, David Geffen has done very well for himself and, you know, he hasn't done well
by, you know, being a, well, maybe a little bit of a parasite.
But what David Geffen did in this, this PBS documentary is very informative, is he basically
figured out how to sell the hippies.
And his procedure in selling the hippies was, I'm going to become a hippie, I'm going to
move into a hippie house, hang out with other hippies, listen to their hippie music.
And when I listen to their hippie music, I'll be like, hmm, these people are good.
These people, not so much.
You know, hippie music had varied a lot, right?
And then he's like, I'm going to take the good people and I'm going to stamp them on
wax.
And I'm going to sell them to the American people who, it's 1967 or whatever, believe
that like, Satan has come back to the earth in Southern California.
And, you know, of course, in the, in the shape of Manson, Satan does come back, which is
kind of part of the problem.
But I'm going to sell this to, like, all of America.
And I'm going to get incredibly rich.
And so, you know, and of course, you know, that even the stuff he recorded is some of
it has lasted as art, some of it has not lasted.
But, you know, he was seriously trying, like he was, he was actually trying to, you know,
here is something amazing that's happening.
Maybe he was a bit of a hippie himself, I don't know, but he certainly did drugs with them.
But I think.
But, you know, to sort of bring that into the modern world, there was a piece I read
in the New York Times about six months ago, or so, maybe six months a year or something.
And it was about the YouTube rabbit hole of radicalization.
You've probably heard about the YouTube rabbit hole of radicalization.
They're working hard on that one, folks.
And the, you know, I wouldn't be surprised just just because I mentioned this, you know,
like I've doubled your chances of getting demonetized.
But the, it was a good story.
It was really well reported, a really solid story.
And the, but there was this sort of interesting moment where they interviewed this YouTube
engineer who are like kind of comment from this engineer who'd done this kind of internal
engagement study on YouTube.
And he was like, well, you know, we don't usually think of this as a vertical.
But if you did think of it as a vertical.
I'm sure, you know, for his query purposes, he's defining this just incredibly, ultimately,
broadly, right?
But he's like, if you did think of it as a vertical, then basically, if you looked at
our top four verticals, it would be like gaming and, you know, music and sports and the alt
right.
And that's what the article said.
Now, now, you know, I mean, obviously, I'm reading this in New York Times.
So, you know, we have to discount this a little bit.
But the thing is, and this is sort of both the problem and the paradox, in a way, is
that there's a sort of enormous demand for heterodox content out there.
And what's missing is basically David Geffen to come and say, this is the good
heterodox content.
This other stuff is just crap.
And, and the thing is, so you really do get my project then.
I appreciate that.
Maybe I invented first, you know, and, but yeah, no, I think
that is your, you know, well, the thing is, you know, one of the things is, like, when
you're looking at anything that's like true or makes sense, what you'll see is that a
lot of people invented at the same time.
And, you know, it's only people like you who execute, you know, rather than me who sits
in my room and just scribbles, who actually gets things done.
I mean, you know, like, and so it's great that you create your own content, but you may
have more of a role as a David Geffen.
Interesting.
Interesting.
But, but, but yeah, that's, that's, in a sense, the level of opportunity.
And what's missing is, like, when you think about, I think when most people think
about, you know, there's sort of many meanings of this, you know, strange term,
alt, right, right, what it meant in 2015 is not what it means now.
As you're well aware, there are plenty of people in the world with the power to
change the meaning of a word, not individuals, but systems.
And so, in a way, that word has changed, you know, you might say now, if you're
casting the broadest possible net, you know, dissident, right, you know, deep,
right, you know, I tried to make this catch on, but totally failed.
You know, people only, you know, if you're coining things like almost
everything will fail.
And you just got to bear that in mind.
And so, in a way, you know, when you look at the breadth of that set, what's
really missing there is a really just savage quality filter, like a really
ruthless quality filter.
And that's not even going to be a filter.
And the one thing I do think, well, Justin gets many things, but one thing I
do think Justin gets is that that filter, when most people think about that filter,
they're like, they're still thinking these very conventional terms.
So they're just like, oh, you know, well, the moderate side of this is okay, but
then there are these people who go too far.
And I wouldn't say, like, thinking about it in those terms is very unproductive.
But there are certainly many, it's very, very easy.
There are many ways to just simply be wrong.
And you're just never going to win by being wrong.
I'm curious, what kind of traffic was unqualified reservations getting at its peak?
I never looked.
You never looked?
No.
Really?
No, I never looked.
Okay.
Interesting.
If you were writing unqualified reservations today from scratch, let's
say you were at the same age that you were writing unqualified reservations,
but it's today, would you do anything differently?
Yeah, I'd probably do everything differently.
I mean, for one thing, well, for one thing, the age of the blog is gone.
So, you know, a couple of things have changed a bit, the internet.
The age of the blog is gone.
It's dead, it's over, it's done.
You can't bring it back.
It's very sad.
The age in which the internet was sort of something special that not everyone
was on is completely dead.
You know, basically in Usenet in, you know, 1991, even you sort of relied
on the just the abstruseness of this medium to provide, you know, this kind
of passive gatekeeping function, which is the same kind of function.
Anyone here been to Burning Man?
Probably maybe one or two people.
It's the same kind of gatekeeping function that being out in the desert
provides to Burning Man, and it just provides this awesome experience of
being with people who are your people.
And that's why people go to Burning Man.
It's not because they like the fucking desert.
And, you know, if you could actually have Burning Man, well, I mean, the
first Burning Man's were on the beach, right?
You know, and in like Santa Cruz or something.
And then it started getting too popular, and that's what happened to Usenet.
So basically, when people were writing blogs in like, I started writing, I
started my blog in 2007, even, and that was very late.
And I always used this very old, old fashioned, ugly looking blogger template,
which was even more embarrassing.
Of course, there were no ads on blogs now.
I'm always embarrassed when I open someone's WordPress and I see like the
ads that they're earning like six bucks a month off of.
You know, I'm just like embarrassed for you that you have to like present
your content this way, you know, and you don't even have to.
And so, you know, furthermore, so the idea of there sort of being these
decentralized sort of pieces of the internet, that's not the real internet anymore.
That's not what the internet is.
That should be reality.
That should be what the next network is.
But that's certainly not what the internet is.
And so that's, that's dead.
Another thing that's dead is when you look at these big, you know, these
hosting services like blogger, which was once an independent company, but then
was acquired by Google, of course.
You basically, when you first started using the centralized internet services,
the way you thought about it was basically this was just kind of a more
convenient way of implementing the decentralized internet.
The ethos was still decentralized.
And so the idea that you would publish a blog on blogger and then you would get
like an email from like some Google staffer being like, oh, you can't write
this essay or like your Gmail account would disappear because you said the
wrong thing in your blog, that was unthinkable.
Like that you could not imagine that happening in 2008.
And maybe in a sense, maybe you had a, you know, an intuitive sense that
that era was ending, but it's certainly long since it disappeared.
Okay.
Yeah, that's interesting.
One of the things people often ask me is, Justin, you know, why are you so
interested in people like Curtis Jarvan or Nick Land?
Why are you interested in these kind of extreme right wingers?
And they often take this as evidence that I am there for an extreme
right winger, which I'm not.
Justin, are you going to high off for us tonight?
We get a, no, no, I wouldn't count on that.
And what I, what I tell people often is that people on the left should be
really interested in smart people on the right, even the extreme right, who are
smart and who are able to correctly and adequately kind of push away the dumbest,
most violent and nasty aspects of the right.
So someone like you, for instance, you're very explicit about having very little
interest in white nationalism, for instance.
Yeah, I keep meaning to actually go on like Nazi podcasts and argue with them.
I may actually do this, you know, and, and like, because these people are just, I
don't want to be arrogant, but I think they're just defenseless against me.
And, and, and it's not like, you know, the way, the right way, whether you're
arguing with a Nazi or a progressive or anything in between, you know, no, they're
very different, you know, whether, whether you're arguing with any of those, you
know, it should never be an argument.
You're not arguing.
Do not ever have political arguments as very bad, an unproductive thing to do.
It should not be an argument.
It should not be a fight.
What you're doing, whenever you talk to someone who doesn't share your beliefs is
in fact an intervention.
And so you're basically thinking of this person as an addict, and he's addicted to
the wrong drug.
He needs to give that drug up and start taking your drug.
I told you he was a pill dispenser.
But, you know, that's okay because the first step you're on, I mean, sure, I'll
say, yeah, I have something that's actually good for you that will make you
feel amazing.
But, you know, your first step is to get off this junk you're taking, right?
And so, you know, basically, you know, at one point in my, you know, vein attempt
to coin terms, I came up with the term a brown scare, which is like the red scare
but our fear of Nazis.
You know, there's this like Nazi hunters billboard just down the street from us.
Imagine if it was like the 50s and it was like commie hunters.
They actually made this great movie called I Married a Communist.
It's absolutely worth seeing.
Hollywood like had to be like had its arm twisted in order to make this
anti-communist movie.
But, you know, brown scare didn't really take off because simply people are ignorant
today and didn't know the brown is the color of Nazis.
But the which is I mean, that's just terrible.
Like you have like you're obsessed with Nazis and you don't know anything about
Nazis, you know, you know, the Nazi party headquarters was the brown house, right?
And so, you know, basically what happened, you know, I came up with this, you
know, I've admitted it, I guess.
So I came up with this stupid fucking meme, the red pill, right?
Or I stole it from the Wachowskis rather.
And I really just robbed them.
And I imagine how much they must hate hearing that shit, right?
You know, dear Wachowski siblings, if you're watching right now, I'm sorry,
it was not right.
And so basically, you know, I had this idea and I filled this, you know,
pill with all these like exotic ingredients and my pill like cost like,
you know, $500 or it was at least 5,000 words, you know, it was a very high
quality product and still is.
And then of course, you know, what happens to high quality products when you
put them on Amazon, they get pirated.
And so basically, you know, I mean, it's fairly easy to determine that I was
the first that was using the stupid meme, but you know, there's a kind of puzzle
that you don't really, can't really understand otherwise about this red
pill thing, which is it kind of seems to simultaneously appear among pickup
artists and Nazis.
And then, you know, so the question you have to ask yourself is who is copying
who did the pickup artists be like, oh, I like this Nazi thing.
I'm going to steal it or was it the other way around.
And, you know, the reality is they both stole it from me, but I stole it
from the Wachaskis.
And so, you know, basically, if you go out on the street and get a, you know,
you know, just go like, you know, down to the local corner and get a, get a,
get a red pill, what you're going to be getting is either a brown pill or a
pink pill that is certainly not a product I can endorse.
But, you know, you know, the story of Albert Hoffman, right?
Yes, that's the story I do.
So because still to this day, most of my audiences, more than half of my
audience listening to this now and in the future, it will be left wingers.
No matter how many people call me a reactionary or try to smear me in that
way, nonetheless, most of the people who listen to this stuff are themselves
just kind of on the more anti-woke wing of the left wing.
So I'm curious, you probably don't have too many opportunities to address
this particular cohort.
I'm kind of curious, you know, you wrote on people, people on the edge of being
like, you know, choppa heads and so forth.
You know, well, Justin, you know, what would be actually kind of cool is if,
you know, weren't you or aren't you or don't you have a past as a very, you know,
unironic leftist?
Can you tell us about the experience of being a junkie?
Yeah, I mean, in many ways, I'm still happy to identify as a leftist in some
ways. As I get older, I get a little bit more socially conservative in certain
dimensions. That's partially a life cycle effect.
It's a pretty robust phenomenon, actually.
But in many ways, my politics haven't really changed my kind of cultural
strategy for being a free person has changed.
I've had to update that a lot.
It was really actually, you might be interested to know this, Curtis, that it
was a blog post I wrote, the beginning of the end for me and kind of the
organized, institutionalized kind of respectable left was really a blog post,
a blog post that I wrote in around 2017.
I came to your blog very late, well after its heyday.
I just came across people like you and Nick Land.
I was an academic.
I, you know, I was holed up just reading only approved academic
literatures and, you know, just working in a cave on my academic research.
And I came across your blog.
I came across Nick Land's blog and my initial kind of intuition was just
like, Oh, I thought all these right wingers were supposed to be stupid,
but these are clearly smart people with serious ideas.
And I was just very, I was honestly kind of naively shocked to discover, you
know, some real intellectual horsepower on, on blogs such as yours and Nick
Land's, and I wrote, I wrote a simple blog post in 2017 as an academic, very
naive, just, you know, kind of a well-behaved academic saying, Hey, there
are some people on the radical right who are actually really, really smart.
And I actually read a lot of it, guys, and they're not necessarily, they're
not really, they don't seem that bad.
They don't seem half as evil as people say.
They're not endorsing any type of obvious harmful racism that I can see.
Many, many, you know, you and Nick Land are both at pains, actually, to
reject white nationalism.
And I was like, this is actually interesting.
Smart people on the extreme right.
That's actually a valuable thing to have in a genuine free ecosystem of, of
intellectual culture.
So I tried to write this blog post to my cop.
You got a lot of positive feedback.
Well, this was the beginning.
Yeah, this was the beginning of the end for me.
And so, yeah, I got, I got a lot of heat for that and pretty much make a
long story short.
That was when I pretty much, it was clear that wasn't allowed to just simply
say, Hey, this stuff is worth paying attention to.
And I think you'll find generally that if people talk about a Voldemort, they're
working for Voldemort.
Right.
Well, yeah, so in any event, since you asked, that's when I was pretty much
was like, you know, my politics didn't fundamentally change.
I've always been interested in a kind of a certain kind of radical left vision,
which I see as associated with transgression and freedom and, uh, you
know, a kind of cultural radicalism of the bait.
Yeah.
Well, in any event, uh, in any event, uh, it was, it was really then that that
was the beginning of the end for me.
And, uh, so since then I've been trying to occupy this space of not because in
some ways I'm being baited by the culture and I'm being baited by other left
wingers to become a right winger.
The more people call me, Oh, Justin, you're a reactionary, you're a racist
because you want to talk with people like Curtis Jarvan.
In some sense, I can feel psychological, uh, attraction to owning that, right?
I'm not a racist.
I've never have been.
I don't have many, even right wing attitudes or opinions, but, but the
sociology of it is pushing me into it.
And so I noticed that.
And I think it would be convenient.
Like it would be easy and self-serving to just join the right wing groups.
I'd be like, they wouldn't make fun of me or call me these nasty names.
I could just, I could just hang out with them.
But then I realized, no, someone needs to hold this ground of an actual radical
left that isn't on board with any of this woke bullshit and is actually just
interested in truly radically free intellectual life, whether it be on the
right wing or the left wing or whatever.
Uh, and so you asked me to kind of talk about that a little bit.
So that's, that's all that's relevant for here.
I'm curious from your perspective, because you don't get to address many
anti-woke leftists, presumably just because of how you're perceived.
And, and, and I think in many ways you're perceived quite unfairly.
I'm just curious if you maybe have a particular unique message to the
anti-woke left.
Well, I, you know, I do have a lot of these conversations, but they're
typically in private for obvious reasons.
Um, um,
one or two, um, um, the, um, um, but, uh, you know, I, I don't know,
friends is a strong word, uh, contacts, perhaps, um, um, the, um, but, um, yeah,
you know, um, the thing is when people use these words, you know, right and
left, these are very, very complicated, deep words.
And, um, you know, people throw them around.
You ever see that, uh, you know, fake, uh, viral video of the chimp with AK-47, uh,
you know, I mean, these, these are words that are full of 200 years of history.
And so to use them in a naive way, I think is somewhat dangerous.
Um, you know, certainly, um, you know, one of the things that, uh, I was
noticing back, you know, um, almost 15 years ago now that I think is, is, is
very commonplace is that, um, when people, uh, I think when you, you know,
when you talk about, say, you know, your anti-woke leftist, for example, um,
they'll have this wonderful word, the professional managerial class, um, you
know, which is, uh, you know, I mean, it's a lot of syllables, you just say the
ruling class, um, you know, or the governing class is a little less
pejorative.
Uh, I was certainly brought up in that class.
Um, my father was an American diplomat.
I went to Johns Hopkins and Brown and Berkeley.
Um, and so, you know, um, I wouldn't, I definitely wouldn't say that, uh, you
know, I have any, I thought of kind of committing treason to this class.
Actually, I love these people.
They're my people.
Um, culturally, you know, I can hang out with middle Americans, but I'm much
more likely to get along with elite blue state ruling class Americans.
Um, but, um, you know, one of the things about this ruling class is that I
think it's become very much kind of corrupted by power.
Um, I think it's kind of merits as human beings, it's intelligence, it's ability
to take standardized tests, it's cleverness.
Uh, these things have not dropped at all, um, but it's effectiveness and it's
wisdom, um, I think are much lower than they were in the age of Woodrow fucking
Wilson.
Um, and, uh, you know, that's kind of the tragedy that I think needs to be addressed.
And so in a way, when I look at, you know, the anti-woke kind of leftists in a
sense, even to be, even to have a political agenda implies that you're part of
the ruling class, you're like, this should be done, that should be done.
It's like thinking like a king, right?
You know, one of the things I really try to do is not to think that this way and
not to have, not to think in terms of, in terms of agenda politics, because you're
basically implying that you're a ruler in some sense.
Well, you know, you're either in the loop or you're not in the loop.
If you're in the loop, you know it.
If you're not in the loop, you're basically a sports fan.
And so you're kind of having this kind of embarrassing pornographic experience,
uh, you know, with respect to power.
Um, and, um, I really try to avoid that, um, especially in public.
Um, and, um, so in a way, it's like my, you know, message to these.
People is, you know, I think that they've, you know, it's like, if you look at your
average, um, you know, get even past the anti-woke leftist, if you look at your
average, um, I don't like to use pejorados, but I might say a Bernie bro.
Um, you know, so if you're a Bernie bro, basically.
You've noticed that there's something a little weird about the democratic party.
Um, and that's maybe it's not, you know, like Hillary Clinton is not like this kind
of pure angel of light that you used to maybe think she was.
Um, and, and so in a way, you know, what you've done is kind of taken this kind
of first, you know, skeptical step in a sense, but you know, one step is not really
a journey.
And so, you know, when you basically look at these, you know, when you look at the
DNC shitting on Bernie or you look at the New York Times shitting on Bernie, um,
and you're like, wow, this is, this is very unfair.
And then you go and read, you know, the next thing down in which you trust this
at institution, absolutely.
And it's like, once that absolute trust gets questioned, um, what you'll find
is that there's never really a point at which you stop stripping away layers.
And, you know, you strip away layers and layers and layers and layers and layers.
And sooner before you know it, you're like debunking the fucking American
revolution, right?
And, and so, which literally happened to me.
I mean, I can, I can debunk the American revolution for you.
You know, um, go for it, man.
Do you, do we need that?
If you'd like to, whatever you'd like, I think people would
be interested.
Do you want me?
Okay.
So, um, I'll try to be brief, obviously, very complicated series of events.
The American revolution is basically the Vietnam war in the 18th century, um,
with, um, Britain in the position of the US.
Um, it's actually a civil conflict in between two factions, kind of not just
kind of left and right, but, um, you know, Wig and Tory, but these are also
religious factions.
So it's dissenter or puritan against Anglican.
Um, you know, all these things are not, they're not consistently aligned, but
they're sort of generally aligned.
And so, um, you know, the way from an 18th century English perspective to think
of America, imagine you're like a Puritan in England.
Um, suppose it's not quite the same thing, but suppose you're a libertarian today.
And then you hear about the libertarian paradise has been built in Honduras.
You would be very supportive of that paradise.
And then, you know, if your, um, you know, government, you know, sent the
Marines to go and wipe out the libertarian paradise in Honduras, you would
have a bad reaction to that.
Um, um, and so there's this sort of strange situation arises where, you know,
there's this conflict between two segments of English society and then that
conflict is a cold war at home, but abroad it's actually a hot war.
Um, and, and that hot war, essentially the Americans win the war, not because
they're militarily superior, but because Britain has very little will to fight
at any point and loses that will basically completely.
So question, are the founding fathers based or cringe?
Well, you know, there's a lot of, there's a lot, you're including a lot
of different individuals there.
Sort them out then.
So, you know, there's definitely a cringe aspect to Jefferson, but I mean,
because, you know, Jefferson, you know, becomes this huge fan of the French
Revolution.
He's like this massive Francophile.
You know, he writes these things about the French Revolution where he's like,
you know, the tree of liberty must be watered with blood.
You know, like, have you ever listened to the lyrics of the Marseillais?
I'm not sure I recall.
Like the French national anthem is all about like, we must drown the country
in the blood of the foreigners or whatever the fuck.
Right?
They sing this.
And so, you know, there are aspects of the American Revolution, which are,
especially the early American Revolution, which are very, very Jacobin-like.
So if you look at a figure like Samuel Adams, who kind of disappears from history
because he's just a fuck.
You know, like, he's like, you know, who would Samuel Adams be?
You know, Bill Ayers is not too far away from Samuel Adams, right?
He's really just this complete rabble, completely unprincipled rabble rouser.
And they were all torn on the French Revolution.
This was a major point of contention.
Well, later.
I mean, of course, this is well before the French Revolution, right?
Because it's 1775, right?
But, you know, and the French Revolution is this kind of dark imitation
of the American Revolution done by these Anglophiles, basically.
And, you know, but of course we forget is that our glorious constitution, you know,
as established in 1789, is established in a reactionary coup.
Not only is the constitution a reactionary coup, basically orchestrated
by George Washington and his friends, a very monarchical individual.
One of the things you'll notice is basically the first, you know,
you probably can name, you know, the first American constitution,
the Articles of Confederation.
The period of basically the Congress of the Confederation totally airbrushed out of history.
Do you know who America's first president was?
It was John Hansen, the president of the Congress.
And the results of that system were so disastrous.
And the results of that system were identified by people
like John Adams, literally with democracy.
And, you know, basically, like there was a just period of like, they were just like,
this is a shit show.
We have to establish basically responsible aristocratic government.
We have to replace democracy with oligarchy.
And so we're going to run this constitutional convention thing.
But you like that part.
Well, I mean, that part was, you know, that part was an improvement in that situation.
You know, this certainly the new republic was very much an aristocratic republic.
And, you know, it managed to subsist.
I mean, people go and watch, you know, Hamilton.
I mean, God, if they knew the things Hamilton said about democracy.
I mean, you know, I'm like, Alex, you got to calm down.
So, you know, you know, I mean, it's a complicated era.
You can't reduce, you know, the like, you know, 25 years between 70, 75 and 1800
to like these people were based or cringe.
But sure, of course, I just thought.
But yeah, if you want to read about this, let's get off the subject,
which is very, very technical.
And, you know, the one thing that I discovered that's absolutely wonderful
is let me tell you in a form of a parable.
Let's say you grew up in Slobovia, imaginary country.
And all you know, all you go to school, you hear about the glories of the Slobovian revolution.
You know, of course, that there was a Slobovia before the revolution.
You know, like there was a period of Slobovia was under the heel of an evil monarchy.
You know that, right?
And the but, you know, the hero of the Slobovian revolution, George Washingtonovic,
you know, changed all of that statues to him or everywhere.
Yada, yada, yada, yada.
So, you know, you're, you grew up believing this, you know,
and being like a little cult of personnel.
It's George Slobovich Day, whatever, right?
Washingtonovic.
And then one day, you know, some people at this company, Slugal,
you know, do something weird for like just weird pothead reasons,
which is they're like, we're going to put all books ever written in Slobovian online.
And of course, this includes books from before the revolution.
Like it includes all kinds of weird books, right?
And stuff that's just like totally not cool.
And so one day, you're on Slugal and you're browsing, you know, these books
and you're like, for some reason, you type in the phrase,
true history of the Slobovian revolution.
And the first result, I believe this still works, the first result of this is a book
whose title is true history of the Slobovian revolution.
And this book, turns out, was written over 100 years ago.
And you're like, oh, that's interesting.
I wonder what these old weirdos 100 years ago thought about the Slobovian revolution.
And you start reading it and you're like, oh, oh, well, that makes so much sense.
Oh, well, I never understood that at all.
You know, it's like, so here's an example.
You know, ever been, anyone here been to Philly?
Probably some people ever been to Valley Forge?
How close is Valley Forge to Philadelphia?
Pretty, it's like 20 miles.
You could walk there in a day, right?
So how is it that in the winter of, I think, 77 or 78, I think 77,
maybe no, 78, whatever, I'm not one for details.
Lord Howe is partying like a monster in Philadelphia.
He's occupied Philadelphia.
He's going off and left Burgoyne, who is marching down, remember the Saratoga
where the tide turns, yada, yada, you remember like the third grade history.
Burgoyne has this plan, Burgoyne, who's an actual Tory, also a playwright, by the way,
has this plan to basically cut the Republican half by invading from Canada down the Hudson.
And basically Howe, who's the overall commander, ghosts him.
Literally, like basically just ignores the plan.
Like he's like, I didn't even get that letter, goes and occupies Philadelphia,
which is a very civilized town and just like parties like an animal all winter.
Meanwhile, in Valley Forge, 20 miles away, George Washington is starving with his troops.
Now, it was the 18th century, they didn't usually fight in the winter, but come on.
Can't you go out there and be like, hey, why don't you guys surrender?
Do you want a hamburger?
You know, and like militarily, it simply doesn't make sense.
And, you know, essentially what Sidney Fisher, the author of this book,
The True History of the American Revolution, points out is that you just can't
understand the history of the American Revolution.
Just like you can't understand the history of Vietnam if you're only understanding it militarily.
You have to have an accurate and what I would call Machiavellian,
which just means realistic understanding of what was actually going on.
And once you do, you're like, this makes so much sense.
So here you're reading this book, it's not even a primary source.
And you're just like, this is much more convincing than anything I've ever learned.
So that was like, and the great thing about debunking the American Revolution is that,
you know, like to quote Henry Ford, all of history is bunk.
You can debunk basically any conflict in history.
It will be written by the winners.
It's always more complicated than that.
But, you know, you want to go in and, you know, rewrite the history of World War Two of the Civil War.
You can get away with World War One kind of, you know, you'll get a lot of that's
a very complicated and interesting problem.
But the Revolutionary War, what's amazing about debunking the American Revolution
is that now in 2020, nobody actually gives a shit about it.
You can basically go and be in a bar and be like, man, the British were right.
We should still be under King George III.
And we'll be like, man, that's cool.
It's so cool that you think that.
Well, this is another one of those strange convergences with the radical left wing critique, right?
Because the left also debunks the American Revolution.
Oh, yeah, we're supposed to admire those people.
But really, they were they were property owning slave owners.
That's all bunk in a weird way.
You're converging with them.
And well, you know, what I would say about, you know, if you read like, you know, you can read, you know,
Chomsky is a great one for, you know, Chomsky is also a pill dispenser.
You know, and you'll read it's sort of interesting when you read kind of leftist debunkings.
And, you know, I would when I use the word leftist, I kind of mean, you know, you've kind of become a ring
race to some extent.
And so, you know, you're kind of corrupted by when it's someone like Chomsky, say, would read the American
Revolution or any kind of, you know, don't even start me on like the 1619 project.
Basically, they're writing their own history that's generally based on actual facts.
Although, you know, for the 1619 project, I think we've gone a little beyond that.
But generally based on actual facts, but you're writing this history to be useful.
And so you're looking for something here is a piece of history that is useful to me, right?
And in what way could the story of, you know, the Crimean War be useful to the audiences of today?
That is the mindset of these people.
And that is just not at all the mindset of the historian.
And it comes back to power, doesn't it?
Yes, it comes back to being corrupted by power.
And so, you know, the mistake that people who have a problem with this system often make is they
imitate it. And they say, well, you know, here's my new history of the American Revolution that's
like useful for the opposite reason.
And that's not like that is also doing a grave disservice to the people, you know, these are real
people who fought, you know, in this war.
And, you know, if you look at any war in history, you should be able to understand and empathize
with both sides and feel and understand why both sides thought that they were fighting for what
they thought was right.
If you did, if you can't do that for any conflict, okay, individuals can be psychopaths, but you
can't necessarily identify with a crazy individual.
But if you can't identify with a group of individuals, it just means you don't understand them.
Well, but and this kind of brings us to your recent idea about the clear pill in a way, because I
see especially your recent ratings as it's almost as if you're trying to debunk ideas on the left
and the right.
I think one of the yes.
So basically the goal of this series, which I'm currently plug plug plug writing at the Claremont
Institute's American Mind blog, that's kind of the American Mind is if you don't mind me saying so
kind of the the second tier publication of the Claremont Institute.
If it was really prestigious, I'd be in the Claremont review books.
But the maybe I aspire to that, but or maybe I don't.
But, you know, the American Mind, the editors of that have done a really great job of kind of reaching
out to kind of interesting new thinkers, certainly, you know, probably people more
interesting than myself.
And the and so the goal of this series is basically, you know, I would say if I made, you
know, and I wrote like a few hundred thousand words in that damn blog.
So I made a lot of mistakes.
But I think if I made any kind of strategic mistakes and kind of how to think about this
problem, it was the idea that sort of the cure for the present way of thinking and the way you
should be thinking instead were one thing.
And I don't think they're one thing and they can't really be understood as one thing.
The thing is that whether you're, you know, a progressive or a Nazi or a constitutional
conservative or something else, I suppose there must be something else.
I can't think of it, maybe a centrist pragmatist.
You basically are kind of attached to a particular way of seeing the current world that I would
say contains certain contradictions.
And, you know, the way that you want to always carry out in kind of an intervention, whether
it's a personal intervention or a political intervention is to say, let's think about these
contradictions and what you think.
It's like my example of like democracy versus politics.
I'm like, I'm just asking you a question.
I'm like, if you can explain the difference, why, how democracy can be good and politics can be bad,
but they're both the same thing, then you have no need of my products.
You must know something I don't.
Because I feel like I know the explanation and it's a pretty darn complicated explanation.
And, but sort of before you make that explanation, basically, you know, you have these kinds of
attachments to these causes, these issues, even these individuals, these parties, these
cultural groups, which are very, very emotional, you know, it's like being a Lakers fan or
something, probably some Lakers fans in the room.
Let's have a moment for Kobe.
All right.
And the, and yet you know that there's sort of nothing rational about being a Lakers fan, that
it's actually kind of stimulating this sort of political instinct, this thymos, this desire to
be relevant and powerful, which ends up in like team spirit and like, you know, just cheering
mindlessly in front of the TV, again, the pornography analogy suggests itself.
And so in a way, I'm basically like, you know, to kind of take that analogy a little bit further,
I'm like, all right, young men, let's face it, you want to get laid.
The first thing you have to do, like the way you're thinking of getting laid is basically, how
do I meet the girls on the porn site?
That is basically the way you currently think about politics.
Okay, so they basically the way people on the left or the right or both, really both.
And, and, and in order for you to basically have like this kind of normal romantic life, like a
normal person, you know, the kind of the first step is to just give up your porn.
So I'm basically going to go through all these different kinds of porn, and I'm going to explain
why it's not realistic.
And, and, and so that's kind of the purpose of the series in a way to basically say, okay, you
know, as a progressive, you know, this is part two, I'm not under the illusion that many
progressives will read it, but there are a lot of them, so some will.
And I'm like, here is kind of what's going on in your head when this stuff excites you.
And maybe it's like, if you think a little harder, this is not the thing that you should be
into. And then basically the same, and it's a very different story for why constitutional
conservatism is hopeless and should give up.
And then another one for why white nationalist Nazis, whatever you want to call them are
hopeless and should give up. And so, you know, when you basically said, Hey, you know, all of
these things are hopeless. I'm like, imagine, you know, all these things are hopeless. Everyone
is trying to change things, and nothing has changed. You know, that kind of fits together in
a way. And so to detach people from these kind of false, you know, very false kinds of systems.
First of all, it's a service, you know, in itself, you know, the way the way I think about, you
know, how should you think about politics or power? Let's say that, okay, you're probably an
American. Let's say you move to Costa Rica. You become an expat in Costa Rica. What is your
attitude toward Costa Rican elections and the Costa Rican government? Do you consider that this
government has no right to rule over you because you did not consent to it? Do you not obey the
speed limit? No, you obey the Costa Rican law because you live in Costa Rica. Do you vote in
Costa Rican elections? Do you want to vote in Costa Rican elections? Do you like notice it in
anything more than a practical way? No, then you're sort of completely detached. And that level of
kind of detachment from the desire to change the world is very, very difficult. But paradoxically,
I believe it's what's necessary if you're actually going to change the world.
Yeah, seriously fucked up.
No, that's something that you and I definitely agree on. I come from a more kind of left wing
trajectory and you from a more right wing trajectory. But I think it's a fair to say that
you and I probably agree on something like the proposition that true intellectuals, whether
they be artists or writers or philosophers or scientists, if what you're really looking for is
true disinterested truth seeking, one must a detach from power and any dreams or hopes of
having power political efficacy and be it's probably going to be in some weird nether region
beyond left and right.
Yeah, I mean, again, you know, you use these words left and right, these are, you know, very
complicated words. But that's my point, right? That they're not they're not really good. Yeah,
that that you know, I would say that, you know, sort of more a more immediate problem. When you
I would say what people normally mean when they say left and right is simply competing
cultural groups that are essentially competing, you know, kind of ethnic religions almost in a
way. And, you know, one of my strongest beliefs is that if you ever have if this country ever, you
know, functions again, or has a government that functions again, or at least, maybe can like test
people for the coronavirus, I think they're getting around to that. Like, you know, the like, the
difference in capacity between this country and China in that is remarkable. I mean, frankly, next
week, I wouldn't be here and you'll be wearing masks. And the but I wouldn't be here. And maybe
you're wrong. Maybe I'm, you know, but I think that's the case. And it's very possible that you're
going to see the level of state capacity that we have in this country, you know, compared very
directly. And if you're ever at a point where basically, this country actually works and functions
as a country, I think it's going to involve like, I think one of the most striking things about
right versus left is I think one of the main reasons that people support either side is fear of
the other. The main reason that people are like feel passionate about being leftist is they, they
have the sense that they're defending this like little dot of light of like civilization against
this like horde of ignorant peasants. And you know, anyone who was grown up in that, you know,
that's with that feeling, you know, like knows that sense that, you know, we are the enlightened
few, and the masses out there are coming with burning pitchforks to like spear us. And this is
not a word. I mean, this is in the modern world, a ridiculous fear. But historically, this is not a
ridiculous fear. And so you have this, this sense of like, this kind of very deep and bitter
loathing between the upper class and the middle class, most people call when they say mean middle
class, they say lower middle class. And when they say mean upper class, they say middle class, you
know, but basically between the professional managerial classes and anti woke leftist would put
it. And, you know, the, what would you call the Trump voters, the pearls, would you say pearls?
Don't say the pluribles.
That's a good question. I don't think you could say pearls, pearls is much more general left and
right, not just, you know, there are there are Bernie supporters that are pearls.
No, there are Bernie supporters that are pearls, but they're not cultural pearls, or they wouldn't
be Bernie supporters. This, this, this identification of class stratification with like your bank
account is one of the kind of characteristic distortions of leftism. It's all about culture.
And, you know, like, if you've ever been a grad student and like some fellow grad student, because
his like stipend is low, is like, I'm poor. And it's like, no, you're not poor, you're broke.
And, and those are just very different things. And so, like status is, is, you know, is a much
more important determination of class than salary or bank account. And it's definitely a status
conflict between, you know, essentially, well, if you, if you'll allow me to use, you know, Marx's
terminology, you have the, the, the professional managerial class, the pearls and what Marx would
call the lump and proletariat. And so there's a sort of alliance of the ruling class and the, the
lump and proletariat, which is basically the Democratic Party. You could call it that. And the, I
really hate using these like code words, you know, like, they just become inflammatory. And, you
know, it's like, you know, at least you said Democratic Party, if you'd said Democrat Party,
that would have meant you were on Fox News, right? And my stepfather is, is a longstanding Hill
staffer on the, on the Democratic side. If you want to get him to explode at dinner, just say
Democrat Party. And, which I obviously would never do. And, but the thing is, my point is that
basically, if anything is ever going to actually work in this country, it's basically can only be as
an alliance of all three of these classes. You cannot imagine any successful government that is
like a government of like one over the others. And, and so one of the, you know, for me, kind of the
big political historical question is, you know, to just take a really grand scope. Are we in the late
Roman Republic or the late Roman Empire? So if we're in the late Roman Empire, we're absolutely
completely fucked. And there are certainly many kind of parallels that you can draw between, for
example, the intellectual class Justin was part of, and like the grammar in ruling class of the late
Roman Empire, you know, you might have seen this class kind of parodyed in a certain Monty Python movie.
And, you know, really, like, just completely worthless people, but very well educated, and just
useless against the Huns or whatever. And, or are we in the late Roman Republic? And that's a very
optimistic, you know, most people are like, Oh, my God, it's like the late Roman Republic. I'm like,
that's actually the optimistic perspective. And so one of the things about the Roman Republic, if you
know, like the kind of kindergarten version of the Roman Republic, you know that the whole history of
the Republic is this conflict between, first, it's the plebeians and patricians, then those categories
kind of become obsolete, and it's the optimates versus the
populars, right? And which is basically optimates versus populars is Bernie versus Trump.
As simple as that. And, and you're like, Okay, how does this work out? It's true that they have some
civil wars. I don't believe that civil war is possible today, which is another very optimistic
perspective, which I will defend. But I just don't believe in violent politics at all. And
which is very optimistic. But the, the outcome of this is even more optimistic, which is that it kind
of magically ends up with Augustus, the first Roman Empire previously Octavian. And Augustus is
actually success. And one of the features of the Roman Empire is this whole conflict between red
states and blue states, popularists and optimates, whatever this whole civil conflict, which had
been part of the fabric of the Roman Republic for 400 years, something like that, not an expert
here, disappears. It's gone. It's never heard of again. So, you know, if you could imagine
basically, an America in which there's no like red state, blue state conflict, no, like race war,
like, none of this garbage, like, you know, okay, what would you trade for that? I think a lot of
people would trade like, you know, I think a lot of people would be ready to make, you know, pretty
large sacrifices for that. So in a way, like, you know, what happened exactly? How did that come
about? Augustus? Have you heard of the guy? Yeah, heard of him. But of course, I know everything
you're talking about. But for our audience, please, please remind them of a few of the details.
Okay, well,
you know, maybe in Roman history, like Trump versus Bloomberg is like Marius versus Sulla.
So essentially, what happens is, is one side wins the Civil War. And but the side that wins the
Civil War is not really, you know, it's like Caesar, who's the one who actually wins and Caesar
and Augustus have much the same plans. Caesar just wasn't really careful about his personal
security. But they were basically both, they both had the style of unifiers. And they were, and by
the way, they didn't claim to have abolished the Republic at all. They claim to have restored and
fixed the Republic. You know, they were just the first citizen of the Republic. And you know,
the everything was voted on by the Senate, of course, the Senate was a rubber stamp. You know,
but you know, they never restored the title of Rex, the title of King, which was an old Roman, you
know, title, you know, the last Kings of Rome are driven out in like 500 something BC, right? So
they're like, we have saved the Republic. But we've created in practice is effectively a monarchy.
So in some ways, Augustus is actually more like FDR than you might think. And so, you know, if you
let's imagine like, you know, Bloomberg doing a new new deal. And, you know, like, it's a ridiculous,
it could never happen. But, you know, the thing is that, you know, Augustus is Rome, like FDR's
Washington was a startup nation, because it was under the absolute control of this guy, Augustus,
who was absolutely competent, and completely effective, and had no interest in continuing any of
these squabbles. So there's this great story. It's about Caesar rather than Augustus. And I think it
sort of expresses the kind of attitude that's kind of necessary in creating kind of anything new and
awesome. Of course, you know, your nothing happens without not violence, but force. So, you know,
Caesar's force comes from the popularis. He is originally a man of the popularis. So, you know,
he fights the civil war, and he's fighting against Cato. And Cato is like everyone super respects
Cato. Cato is like, imagine like some like really old line, you know, Democrat who like really believes
in the process, really believes in the Republic. It's not cynical at all. You know, this is a
person who is just completely believes in the system. That's Cato. And so, you know, Cato gets
beat. And, you know, he does this very Roman thing. He commits seppuku, actually. He does this like
Japanese suicide ritual, and actually cuts his belly with his sword and like tears his own intestines
out. And the and his slaves tries to push them back in and he tears them back out again. Super
gory. And would make a great movie. And so Cato is beaten, right? And but Caesar basically captures
Cato's headquarters. And in Cato's tent, there's a big chest. And the chest is full of letters from his
supporters in Rome. So one of the things that about these these conflicts in Roman history, and you
see this extensively in kind of the pre the preludes to the that final civil war between like
Marius and Sulla, is something called proscription. And that idea of proscription is when you win one of
these contexts, contests, you basically are like, Okay, who are the wealthy supporters of the other
side? We are going to kill them and take their property and give it to our friends. I think
standard supporters are getting excited listening to you. Yeah, right, right. So get it, you know,
imagine if like Trump wins the election, he throws Soros in jail, he takes all of Soros's money and
redistributes it to like megatards, right? If you'll excuse my French, you know, so this would be
very aggressive action by Donald Trump. But that was absolutely normal in Roman politics. So basically,
completely normal expected thing to do. So, you know, Caesar's guys basically find this chest and
they're like, Holy shit, you won't believe what we found. Because we're like, this is the mother
load. Because of course, a lot of these motherfuckers write letters to both sides. It'd be like, Kato,
man, you're the one you're really strong, you know, you have these Roman values, and then they'd be
like, Caesar, oh my God, you're so Caesar, right? You know, and, and so they'd write the same letter
to both sides. So you know, these are the people that you really want to find, because these are
not your guys, right? You can't trust them. And you really want to kill them and take their
property. And then there are the guys who are just against you, and you definitely want to kill
them and take their property. So, you know, Caesar's guys are super hot to try it, right? And
they're like, What do we do? How do we start working through this? He's like, Caesar's like, Okay,
take the chest of letters, put it on a bunch of logs, pour olive oil on it, and set it on fire.
These guys are like, What? He's like, You don't get it. Like motherfuckers, we won. We won. They're
all our guys now. And so, you know, the, that sense of basically, they're all our guys now, you
know, is basically essential to anything that actually works. And so, you know, that's obviously,
you know, very far from this vision of, you know, peasants with red hot pitchforks, you know,
visiting, you know, the University of Southampton, I guess, to, you know, basically toss you on
their, their devilish burning tines. And it's that absolute opposite, but it also doesn't mean,
you know, you must, you know, hound and harry the peasants and, you know, basically get go full
Spartan on them. And, you know, which is really, I think in many ways, the attitude of not necessarily
the, you know, there's definitely, I don't know, when I say go full Spartan, one of the things
the Spartan elite like to do is basically, if you were like a young Spartan, like, you know,
ruling class, like, you know, like Chapa dude or whatever, you would basically imagine if like
Chapa dudes like had like secret Chapa parties, where they went and like just found like drove out
to the suburbs and found like some like MAGA dude with like a MAGA sign in front of his hat,
and just house and just like burned his house down and killed him. That would be like the
Spartan way of being a ruling class, right. And you know, I think there's people that like to do
that. And I'm very confident of it. And so that like, you know, that mentality is a very dark
and evil mentality, which in a way, very much parallels the mentality of the average school
shooter today. You know, and I can say average school shooter, because frankly, there's a lot of
them. And so you kind of see this kind of, you know, like these pathological phenomena emerging
out of this conflict. And I think it's a very pathological conflict. And I'm certainly, I mean,
you know, these are very, you know, banal sentiments, everybody's going to agree with that.
Nobody's going to agree with basically how you get out of it. But right. No, that's interesting.
So what I want to do in just a minute is open it up to audience questions, shortly. But if you
have just a little bit more steam credits, I thought I'd maybe ask you one or two more questions.
Sure. And specifically, I'd like to ask you about some of the bigger ideas in your writings.
I don't think there's any really big ideas. I don't really have any ideas at all, actually.
Well, I can ask you and then you can you can answer that. If that's how you'd like to answer,
you're more than welcome to because we've talked a lot up until now about debunking
various ideas on the left and the right. And I think you're very good at that. But if one reads
your blog on qualified reservations closely, and there's a lot of it to read, but I have read most
of it, one does see certain big ideas, more positive ideas, I think more positive.
I disagree very strongly. I think that the really important content there is is purely negative.
It's basically, you know, the most important thing is is an absence of belief. You know,
there are probably some positive ideas behind it. But you should really focus on the absence of
belief. Well, let me give you an example. And while I'm asking you just one or two questions
about what I see as the more the bigger positive ideas in your in your writing, the audience,
you all should be thinking about good questions to ask if you're interested to ask any.
And I'll turn to you in just a minute. So one would be formalism. For instance,
right, this is how you describe your political philosophy. And in one word, I think it's kind
of the most efficient way you describe your political philosophy. And if I understand it
correctly, I'll give people just a very quick and dirty summary of the idea. And you can clarify
if you need to or what have you. But then I want to ask you about it. The way I understand it is
pretty much Curtis seems to be of the viewpoint that one of the biggest problems in especially
American politics today is a bad mapping between the actual distribution of power
and how how power is actually acknowledged or or or formalized or labeled that the where power
actually exists is distributed and messy. And no one's really honest about it. Whereas the idea
of formalism is that if we could simply account rigorously for who has power and where power
is had, and that's done formally in a way that's rigorous, that this would solve a lot of problems
perhaps. So so you know, yeah, I think that's that's pretty much mostly right. I would recommend
if anyone out there likes likes books. One of the great possibly the greatest work of political
science in the 20th century is a book called the Machiavellians by a writer named James Burnham.
It's not his most famous book, but it's his best book. Burnham was he was originally a trotskiest
of all things. And like many trotskiests, you know, he found himself a right winger,
maybe the world moved under him, maybe he moved, maybe both. He wrote this wonderful book called
the Machiavellians, which is a summary of what's called the in English of what's called the sometimes
called the Italian School of Political Science, which is over 100 years old. And it's classic.
It's great figure really. A guy on a par with Newton and Darwin in my mind is guy named Guy
Tana Molska, who's completely unknown. He wrote a book called Elements of Political Science, which
somehow got the English title of theory of the ruling class. I think of it as elements of political
science because that's actually a title. If you just read Burnham's very incisive summary of it,
that basically gives the basic idea that Justin was just trying to express, which is essentially
that many, in fact, most political systems in the real world have this divergence between formal
power, like how the system is actually supposed to work, and objective power as in terms of who's
actually in charge. It's like, you know, a very simple way to think about this is like Elizabeth
II. So Elizabeth II has, you know, kind of nominal authority. Actually, she can veto legislation.
Most people didn't know that she has the same power as the president. She can veto an active
parliament. The last time in English monarch vetoed an active parliament, 1707, I think, under Queen
Anne. So, you know, but so in theory, she has it just like in theory, Donald Trump can tell the
Justice Department who to prosecute and who not to prosecute. But in practice, that would be taken
as a gross violation. And so the reality of power and the formal, you know, like the formal legal
reality of power are and the objective reality of power have become diverged. And that's very,
very common historically. The emperor of Japan has not been the emperor of Japan for over a thousand
years. Something that might not be clear to people are not obvious to people is why is this
such a problem? And why would formalizing that distribution of power be so good when you formalize
the distribution of power? Because basically one of the the main benefit for the powerful
of this divergence between appearance and reality is that when the reality is powerless and basically
symbolic, when the appearance is powerless and basically symbolic, then the reality is unaccountable.
Because no one thinks of it as an organ with power. And this is especially effective
if it's decentralized. So like any oligarchy. So there's a great example under in, you know,
seventh century France of the the Merovingian and the Carolingian kings. So the Merovingian
dynasty are like these like, you know, long-haired barbarians who conquer, you know, Gal, you know,
Roman Gaul and establish themselves as king. And of course, originally, they're badasses.
They're like Germanic warriors, right? And but over time, they come to develop a taste for
civilization. And they basically turn into the French word, I'm gonna, I can't speak French,
is quaffonniant, which means do nothing king literally. So these kings who are like, you know,
you know, Clovis the fourth or fifth or sixth or whatever become these like, like Elizabeth the
second. Unusually, however, the force holding real power is the mayor of a figure called the
mayor of the palace, who was originally just a permanent bureaucrat. He's basically the deep state
of Merovingian France. But the deep state of Merovingian France is actually monarchy. Imagine
if the deep state had a boss, there was like a chief deep state person, like that would be the
mayor of the palace, right? And so eventually, the mayor of the palace is just like, fuck it,
I'm running things. And literally, what does the king do? Literally, I like bring him out in an
ox cart every six months to read a speech I wrote. Fuck this. It's over. It's done. He's not the king
anymore. I'm the king. And this is how this is the origin of Charlemagne. You've heard of Charlemagne.
This is a rapper, I think with that. This is the origin of Charlemagne, right? And so basically,
here you see actually a real monarchy and a shadow monarchy at the same time. And the great thing
about being the mayor of the palace is like, it's like being the deep state, you're completely
unaccountable, which is absolutely great if you're you, right? And so in a sense, essentially,
you might remember originally that I said that this country was not a democracy and I didn't
think it should be a democracy. You have this very, very, you know, these very unaccountable
permanent structures, some of which are in the formal government and some of which are outside
of it. So here's another example. Suppose you basically, you're like, okay, there's this thing
called the mainstream media. You might have heard that term in like Breitbart or something.
You know, you know, to someone who's part of it, of course, you wouldn't say that, you would just
say the press, the free, the free press, right? And when you look at this free press, you're like,
okay, I can identify that certain institutions are part of the press and certain are not.
Like, what does it mean to be a journalist? Is that a formal title? Do I get out on my like,
like airline tickets? Do I say, you know, J instead of Mr as a journalist? No, but yet
there's some sense in which it's official. There's some sense in which the New York Times is official.
Well, you know, without really changing the way the New York Times operates, you could say,
we're going to take the Times, you know, and the Post, and we're going to call them
part of the federal government. They're not going to change the way they operate at all.
We're just going to call them the Department of Information, and we're going to call them
Paper Number One and Paper Number Two. And then they're going to, instead of thinking
themselves as public servants, they'll be civil servants, have exactly the same immunity, have
exactly the same free access to government secrets, which they then sell to the public.
And you're like, not only is the Department of Information clearly a real part of the government,
it's actually the most powerful part of the government. It's actually completely unaccountable.
And you know what else is cool about the New York Times? You know, I was having this
discussion, confidentially, with a journalist who should not be named.
I only talked to journalists off the record. And I was like, you know, there's a difference
between Jeff Bezos' relationship to the Washington Post and the Salzburgers' family's
relationship to the New York Times, because Arthur Salzburger, punch or whatever the fuck
they call him, is actually part of the news desk. If he tells the journalists, hey, I think, or the
editors, hey, I think you need to steer things in this direction or that direction, they'll listen
to him. If Jeff Bezos tells the Post, oh, I don't think I really like how you're covering this story.
You know what the answer of any self-respecting postjournalist is going to be? I quit. I'm going
to go work from the New York Times, which is a real newspaper. And do you know how
the New York Times is governed? How? It's an absolute hereditary monarchy.
Based.
Yes.
All right. Definitely not cringe. So the last question I want to ask you before we turn it off
to this very patient audience that is sat. Thank you for sitting through all this ridiculous
quietly and wrapped. Let's talk about soft corpse real quick. This is, I think, one of your other
big ideas that you're kind of known for. Sort of an old big idea. I mean, both formalism and
soft corpse are kind of like, as I was writing this, you know, piece, I was, you know, as I was
writing this blog, of course, I'm thinking at the same time. And so some of my kinds of perspectives,
I mean, I don't disagree with these ideas at all. I just emphasize them a little differently.
Sure. Well, the idea of the soft corp, which many people will, you know, remember, if they've
read your blog is there you go, take that shot. Oh, sip on the sip on the whiskey. I thought
you're going to throw it back. We're almost done. We're almost done here. No, we have to take shots.
You got to get loose for audience questions. All right. All right. All right. All right.
Sure.
Skull.
The idea of soft corpse, as I understand it, you paint a portrait of a possible political world
in which there's a very, very large number of relatively small governance structures or polities.
This is sometimes known as patchwork. This is an idea that a lot of people are actually quite
interested in right now. This is an idea that a lot of people have separately had independently.
Of course. Yeah, I'm not saying you invented or anything, but in your vision of patchwork,
there would be a kind of governance structure or a kind of polity in which pretty much the
government owns a piece of territory and runs it like a business.
This is the way it already works, actually. It's just done really badly.
So it's closely related to formalism.
Yeah. So if you imagine one of the things I strongly believe in is whenever you're
talking about a group or an entity, you should always use the term that that group uses to refer
to itself. So in Washington, if you're writing about the US government, you will say either USG
or the USG. Either is acceptable. And actually, coincidentally, there's a company called USG,
United States Gypsum, which is like traded on the stock exchange, right? But they're not the
same thing. But in essence, what you're looking at when you're looking at a government is a
corporation that owns a country. It just is. It's the same thing. It just sort of has this
really strange governance structure. If you can imagine like a corporation governed the way
the United States is governed. Imagine if Apple had a Congress and a Supreme Court.
Maybe it had separation of powers. So Congress would be like marketing and the executive branch
would be like engineering and be like, you have to separate marketing and engineering.
And then the Supreme Court is like HR. I mean, you could imagine doing it that way,
but I don't think it would make very good phones. And one of the things that's most
remarkable about the way people think about politics and democracy today is probably
most people here got here in a car. Did you get here in a car? Well, who built that car?
I'm like, well, there's a very simple answer. That car was built by a monarchy.
Because it was built by a corporation with a CEO who is essentially in absolute control of
that organization, yet also accountable. I'll get to that in a second. But you drive a car.
It was built by a monarchy. You eat at a restaurant. It's a monarchy. Anyone ever seen
Ramsey's Kitchen Nightmares? Amazing show. It's not about cooking. It's about management.
It's about power and about government. And I realize that Gordon Ramsey is not eligible to be
president, but I mean, if you want a reality show president, imagine Gordon Ramsey going through
like the State Department's fridge. You'd be like, you're, well, yeah, I see you sitting $500
million to this guy. Wow. Who is this person? What is this doing in this drawer? So you could
imagine that very easily. And if you've seen the show, it's a very good show. The British one is
better. But that's very easy to, like, that once you start seeing that equivalence, you're like,
okay, you know, I got here in a car built by a monarchy. I ate a restaurant built by a monarchy.
I stayed at a hotel run by a monarchy. You know, I went and sent a letter at a post office.
And so there's this kind of massive contrast that everyone sees, right? And, you know,
you could even get, you know, anyone will be like, oh, yeah, benevolent dictatorship is the best,
you know, form of government. But how do you make sure it stays benevolent? As though this is like
a question that can't be answered. And I'm like, no, actually, I think that's a very interesting
question. Maybe he does have an answer. And so, you know, the concept of, and the answer is to make
them compete, the answer is, the answer is, I would say as generally as possible, if you look at what,
you know, your car, you know, your restaurant and, you know, Elizabethan England have in common,
they are all what I would call accountable monarchies. And so, you know, let's take Augustus,
we talked about Augustus earlier, like Augustus saved Rome, everyone in Augustus's Rome is just
like, oh, my God, I'm so glad that was over, I could never even imagine it being over. And yet,
it's over. This is wonderful. That is the unanimous sentiment. Augustus is, you know,
a supremely competent dude. He does fine. Augustus's successor is Tiberius. There's some questions
about Tiberius. You know, this is weird. Yeah, episode with Seginus. After Tiberius comes a name
that you might recognize. Caligula. After Caligula, you get Claudius, who's kind of a nerdy weirdo.
After Claudius, you get Nero, right. And so, in a way, when people think about monarchies, you know,
you know, that wasn't quite a hereditary monarchy, it had weird things going on. Hereditary monarchies
can have this just like monstrous failure mode where it's like Henry VI, Shakespeare wrote to
Henry VI plays, you had an incompetent king of England, it resulted in the wars of the roses,
massive devastation, right. And so, you know, and anyone, even if you're like Steve Jobs,
you're like this amazing like king of Apple, right. You know, Apple succeeded because Apple
is sort of more truly a monarchy than any other corporation. And because of that,
it made the most amazing phones. And they've kept that up, even without jobs. You know, but,
you know, suppose Steve Jobs, instead of getting a pancreatic tumor, gets a brain tumor.
He goes nuts. He's like, no, your next phone has to be big. Big. I want a big phone, right.
You know, he goes nuts. And who's who can say no, no, we can't sell a phone that is the size of
an easel, right. And no one, no one has the right or the power to tell him that. And so he has to
be accountable. And so, in a way, one of the kind of tragedies of the modern democratic form of
government, one thing most people don't know about the title of president, I'm pretty sure I'm right
about this. I hope I'm not wrong. But even if I'm wrong, it's a good story. President is actually
originally, you know, it's used as a corporate title and a political title. You imagine that the
corporate title is like a copy of the political title. Not so. It was actually a corporate
title before it was a political title. And one of the things about the Puritans, who basically
founded the Republic, they were very experienced in forming like trading companies and so forth.
And so the idea of kind of the Congress being in a way kind of like a board of directors,
in a sense, to whom the CEO is accountable is kind of, it's like almost there in the Constitution,
but it's not there. So we have this shit show, right. But it's kind of almost there. And, you
know, the modern corporation hadn't really even been invented by the time. You know, it's sort of,
there were these kind of prototypical things. But, you know, you get the real modern joint stock
corporation in the 19th century. And I'm so crazy, I actually think the Industrial Revolution was
actually the corporate revolution. Very unpopular belief, right? You know, because basically people
learn how to operate in these effective, these structures that were like states, essentially,
but they were like secondary states under the main states. And it was like, you look at like
Amazon, Amazon's like 500,000 employees or something, you know, that's enough to govern the world.
Right. And that, you know, is is accountable to this one guy, Jeff Bezos. And like, it's not just
he's not just a figurehead, like it really, you know, Bezos is like a jobs like figure in some
ways. Right. And so that's kind of the ideal of monarchy. And then, of course, you have Caligula
and Nero. So, so in your model, then, in an ideal world, the United States government would be
the distribution of power would be fully formalized. We would turn it into essentially a joint stock
corporation in which the power holders would be shareholders in a corporation. And then that
corporation would run the country or run the territory. There's a crucial there's actually
there's a there's a crucial mistake that you're making, I think. And this is an over like,
this is why I don't really use that terminology anymore, because, you know, what you're saying
is right, but it's also wrong. And, you know, the way in which it's wrong is it has this kind of
mechanical, it's sort of almost, I think a lot of, you know, the only reason I would recommend
not reading my old blog is that I think a lot of the material in it in some ways was kind of designed
to be as kind of harsh and off putting in difficult as possible. You know, which was just one notice
is that right away, which was because yeah, it was just kind of juvenile of me makes it fun,
though. And I would I for one would definitely recommend you read Curtis's blog.
Fine. And and the, you know, part of the problem is that this is my free content. And I want to
write a book that's going to compete with us. And it's just it's just a sheer matter of the
grift, Justin. And you know, like real artists grift. And and the, you know, Samuel Johnson,
Samuel, not Samuel Johnson, Samuel Johnson. The you can see I shouldn't have knocked back that
shot. Samuel Johnson, we definitely should have Samuel Johnson, you know, said, you know, only
only a fool writes for anything but money. And that case, I'm definitely a fool. And the
so yeah, so so in a way, the way you stated it is stated in a relatively
in a way that's sort of both off putting and wrong. And and one of the things about one of the
things most people like they even people who are like, you know, like, say business school
professors, and I do know one or two business school, well, always one business school professor.
And and even people who are business school professors are basically in some ways think
of the way corporate governance works in the wrong way, because they're like the shareholders
govern the corporation. The reality is having actually been the CEO of motherfucking fucking
corporation. The reality is the CEO is completely in charge, but completely accountable to the
board. I was my own board. So it was a little different. But if you actually have a board,
if you're so unlucky is to actually have a board, you're accountable to that board. But the thing
is, if the board gets involved in the governance of your corporation, something is completely
fucked. And if the shareholders get involved, something is profoundly fucked in your corporation
is almost certain not to survive. Or like, either corporation is not going to survive,
or you are not going to survive. And that is the only reason why shareholders would get involved
in like shareholder democracy. And so when you think when you look at this structure of like
the shareholders and the board, it's not a management structure. It's not a power structure.
It's not actually micromanaging like the board of Apple is not was never second guessing Steve
Jobs's decisions, right? It fired Steve Jobs once. It was probably prepared to fire again,
fire him again. And it would have fired him if you've gotten a brain tumor and started selling
phones, the size of a fucking window, you know. And but it didn't need to do that. And it shouldn't
have done that. And so Steve Jobs was accountable. And the thing is, the mechanism he was accountable
to, because it was not actually governing the company was not actually corrupted by power.
Because it was not willing power. It was just a backup safety mechanism. And so the accountability
structure in in in in accountable monarchy is a backup system. It's not actually sort of in power.
It's just like, Oh, yeah, if things get fucked up, we'll fix it. Make sense.
Makes sense to me. What do you all think? Ladies and gentlemen, Curtis Jarvin.
All right.
