Well, actually the first time I wrote about this was for a little site before my blog
in 2005, and so at the time really I was thinking about the age-old problem of the Austrian
theory of money, which is really first elucidated by Karl Manger, which is the question of why
certain kinds of goods seem to have anomalous value.
Well, of course, often focus on the material utility of the classic, you know, sort of
pre-modern monetary standards of precious metals, and they're like, ooh, it's valuable.
But in fact, these goods are grossly overvalued, considering if you analyze them as simply
as commodities, they don't make sense.
They use an enormous stock of these commodities, and that stock keeps being accumulated instead
of drawn down, and the price is wildly disproportionate to the demand for industrial use of these goods.
So there's obviously something sort of interesting going on here, and the simplest way to think
about it is that money is essentially a store of value, it's a medium of savings.
It's a way that you move purchasing power from the present into the future.
Even in the presence of financial instruments like bonds, don't really change the need to
physically shift purchasing power from the present to the future.
Even if you lend money to be returned in the future, you're lending it to someone who therefore
is holding money.
So lending abstractly should not change the demand for money.
So there's always a demand for some such good.
And when you look at the sort of game theory of the demand for this good, which is sort
of uses some concepts that the classical Austrians didn't really have at hand.
You see that you're basically looking at a coordination problem.
Because you have to standardize on some store of value, which is going to be overvalued.
So you have at least one good that has to be overvalued in an economy.
But if you have more than one, that's an unstable competition.
Whereas to have exactly one, and there can be only one as they used to say in the movie
Highlander, a great, great, great 80s movie.
So the stable state of the system just very, very abstractly is a state in which there
is one dominant money.
And so what happens when that standard is created or when standards change, which is
a very sort of cataclysmic financial event.
This of course is the Bitcoin hyper monetization, Bitcoin maximalism, essentially theory.
What happens when one of these standards is created is basically people move their savings
into this good.
And if this good is an appropriate money, appreciating its price will not substantially
appreciate its supply, which is obviously very important.
And violated a little bit in the case of the precious metals.
I mean, when the gold price goes up, it increases gold mining a little bit.
But the amount of newly mined gold is still quite small compared to the world gold stock.
So what will happen is that basically people will buy this good up in sort of exactly the
same way as GameStop stock was bought up last year.
And so when something goes up because everyone is buying in and not because it has any intrinsic
value or utility, that looks like a bubble.
That's in fact the same thing as a bubble.
And so when we look at a sort of financial bubble, we can see sort of an attempt to re-standardize
a money.
And that attempt is sort of if the bubble pops, and there are various ways that certainly
Bitcoin could in theory pop.
If the bubble pops, it looks like this ridiculous tulip scam all over again.
If it goes to completion, it looks like you bought into this incredible thing very early.
And so the general cause for sort of an intrinsic demand to re-standardize money today is basically
monetary dilution.
And when I say monetary dilution, most people will sort of define the stock of money in
dollars using very narrow instruments like M0, M1.
I prefer to basically describe the stock of dollars as the total net worth in dollars
of all people holding dollars in dollar denominated financial instruments and financed assets.
And that's essentially defining the dollar supply as the sum of personal net worth, which
is a statistic, I don't know how accurate it is, it's a statistic that the Fed keeps.
And so when you see personal net worth, I think in like 2021, it may have gone up by
or 2020 to 21, it was going up by $20 trillion a year.
This is obviously not the stuff that we have is getting $20 trillion more valuable, you
know, maybe we have wine and the wine is aging.
I don't think that's how it's working.
It's basically a sort of this way of creating dollars broadly stated when the stock market
goes up, everyone feels good.
It is no different from printing money and sending it primarily to rich people.
And so what you're doing, you know, you're actually running this very cynical economy
that's doing two things.
One is that it's running on the basis of printing money and sending it to rich people.
Another way to see that is that the economy is actually losing $20 trillion a year because
those are liabilities.
Your stock, you know, when the stock market goes up, you're creating liabilities, equity
is liability on a balance sheet.
And so, you know, when basically the total financed value of this financial asset is
increasing, what you're seeing is that basically $20 trillion got created out of thin air.
Basically $20 trillion got borrowed out of thin air because those companies now have to
justify in theory those valuations.
So in practice, you know, you're looking at this very strange system where if you set
interest rates to basically zero, which is a very strange thing to do, not least because
the valuation of financial assets tends to use equations in which the interest rate is
a denominator.
And so we sort of have, with all of the like, wee, free money for everyone, everyone's
401k went up, you know, experience of, you know, not just the last two years, but, you
know, before this latest, but more like the last, you know, I mean, since Allen Greenspan,
you're basically watching this sort of huge red ink factory and you're seeing a nation that is
basically living pretty much on debt, like a very rich person who's so rich that he can just
keep borrowing.
And so, you know, that sort of experience of a nation living on debt sort of does a couple
of things.
That's obviously very destructive to the real economy, not that there is much of a real
economy left, but, you know, it does a lot of damage to the real economy, but also from a
financial perspective, it causes all assets to basically you have to, you know, you can't just
hold cash, you have to move your money around in such a way that it benefits from this, you
know, beneficent force.
And so it basically makes everything want to get out of cold dollars into things like, you
know, index funds, you know, we have this interesting concept of passive investing, which
is in total defiance of all economic theory, you know, the reason you invest is that you're
adding value to the market, right, or you're lending, but like passive investing is like,
you know, we, I have an index funded it magically goes up and everyone can somehow make a right,
right, right.
And so basically, like, you know, but the one thing money doesn't want to be is just plain
cold dollars, because just plain cold dollars don't participate in this, except in the event
of the expansion motor turns off when the whole thing begins to rapidly collapse as, you know,
it's done a bit of this year, and then you really want to be cold and cold hard cash,
which brings us perhaps to another topic, which is a competitor money.
Yes, exactly.
And so, and so, you know, the ability to, you know, just the fact of the dollar supply
inflating inflates the potential demand, assuming even just assuming sort of constant
influx for this other money.
And so basically, what you're seeing is you're seeing that the whole dollar system when it's
expanding like this, and it needs to expand because the economy is losing money, you need
to like to generate consumer spending, you need to be printing new money by giving it
to boomers and their retirement accounts, right.
And so, you know, if this system, like, I mean, like, it can't like what you're seeing
right now, for example, with the fed raising interest rates and creating a recession, it's
like, basically, there's sort of a game of chicken, like how hard can they do this before
like they realize that, I mean, they see another 2008, right.
Right.
And if they see another 2008 in the presence of inflation, are they going to chicken out
and just say, you know what, actually, Putin did the inflation, we can correct the numbers,
we'll add a Putin, you know, fudge factor, right, and the real inflation will be, you
know, 1% again, because it's like Putin is not included, right, or something like that.
I don't know.
But but the like, can they get out, you know, it's a hard problem for the Fed because they
have this dictum of like, affecting consumer prices, it's really, it's just a mess.
The point is, this thing loses money.
And to take something that structurally loses money and say, OK, you're going to run at
break even is really, really hard.
Right.
So you can basically bet that this attempt to raise interest rates is going to fail and
fail reasonably hard.
OK.
OK.
So that said, I do have invest investment advice for right now for everyone out there.
You know, there's a current.
It's a it's a it's it's the dollar.
It's it's cash.
I recommend cash.
Interesting, even though even though you just went through how it's it's yeah,
I but I but I don't think we've exactly hit that wall yet.
OK, fair enough.
And so when things are contracting, you know, basically cash is a great investment
because everything is going to contract relative to cash, including Bitcoin.
And this basically leads us to the sort of the point of like, what causes these crypto,
you know, Winters, Uncle Garve, you know, and don't they suck?
Yeah, they kind of suck.
But they suck because they suck for people who basically deserve it.
So like, you know, I think one thing that many people have said is it's like
this sort of of the Bitcoin holders and the Bitcoin tourists.
And, you know, in crypto, winter comes the tourists depart.
And what a tourist really is, is someone who's not actually saving in Bitcoin.
For example, he's borrowing dollars to buy Bitcoin, right?
That is not saving in Bitcoin.
That is speculating on Bitcoin.
And that makes him basically a weak hand because if Bitcoin goes down,
he's going to get it as margin calls. OK.
So you so you you do not save in Bitcoin.
No, saving in Bitcoin is like basically being a naked long Bitcoin.
But a lot of people do that now.
Yes, a lot of people do that now.
But a lot, a lot of other people will do things like, oh, I'll have Bitcoin.
I'll like lend it to someone for a yield, right?
You know, so you have this have or, you know, have this whole sort of fake
defy economy where, you know, just like, wow, I see a lot of lenders, but no borrowers.
Like and when you see like financial system with like lenders and no borrowers,
like you're like, oh, I see, right?
You know, OK. And and, you know, like it's it's a I mean, you know,
that white powder under your nose could be salt, right?
But OK, OK.
So so money is the bubble that doesn't pop, right?
Pops, it's a bubble, but it could also not pop and then it could become money.
Right. It's a contingent outcome.
And so there's a world in which basically, you know, the worlds
stock markets sort of turn into more and more of a mess.
For example, they just start like going down permanently the way
Japan's did for 30 years, like the Nikkei peaked in the 1880s.
And so, you know, you have it could be that we hit a recession so hard
and so like more a bond that actually you get to the sort of Japanese level
where even zero entry, you get the zero bound problem, as they call it, you know,
which is that you basically no one wants to borrow because everything is contracting.
And then you're like, well, we could pay people to borrow money
and like crazy shit like that starts happening.
You're really so the point is that that there's a lot of.
There the scenario under which the monetization of Bitcoin
or possibly a competing currency continues is it requires savings
to keep flowing in that direction.
And what we see in the crypto, these crypto crashes is that basically
all of the weak hands not only get flushed out, but get like, you know,
they will never sit, you know, it's like Mark Twain said, you know,
a cat that sits down on a hot stove will never sit down on a cold stove again, either.
Right. You know, and these people are gone.
But also the price does appreciate over time.
Every cycle, there's a few more
hotellers added who seem sustainable. Yes. Yes.
And the question, but of course, when you look at that, you have to say,
well, you know, is there a limit on the kind of people who would do this?
Can this break out of the libertarian nutcase savings pool?
Can. So, you know, there are many, many credible
situations under which, you know, Bitcoin does not become money after all, you know,
of course, you know, for example, you look at the health of the exchanges out there,
that's kind of a double-edged sword. On the one hand, these are big businesses
that can afford to pay protection money to Washington, which they do.
On the other hand, basically, if some agency somewhere passes
an order tomorrow that says banks can't talk to crypto exchanges,
think about what happens. Basically, no one can sell their crypto.
Right. If you have, there's no price.
And if you have no price, you're with zero.
And you instantly go to basically the zero equilibrium.
So this is something you've been writing about for many years now, since you first started
up. Yeah, I'm just, I'm just, I'm just like, you know, on the one hand,
in a purely abstract private sector, you know,
a version of the standardization problem with, like, perfect information.
With perfect information, everybody realizes what everyone else should do
tomorrow and does it today. And, you know, it sort of happens instantaneously.
Right. Right. And so obviously, we don't live in the world of perfect
information, and we live in a very, very imperfect world.
I was actually, when I realized sort of the game theory, I was like, wow,
if I like post about this, like this could happen, like tomorrow, but, you know,
we don't live in the stock market is not a superintelligence.
You know, and, and, and so you actually have this sort of long,
complicated, it's essentially sort of meme warfare, right?
You know, because the only thing that differentiates Bitcoin from
to a random Bitcoin fork, which you can start tomorrow is basically the
memetic weight of being the standard.
And it's like the problem with trying to overthrow that is, you know,
let's say you have Ethereum, which is, you know, going to have with proof of
stake a lower inflation rate, a lower sort of rate of like miners creating
coins that they have to sell.
So, you know, miners creating coins that they have to sell to buy electricity is
a sort of natural source of sellers.
If you don't have a natural, like, you know, a pool of four sellers, you know,
your, your levitation effect will be better.
So maybe that's a case for Ethereum overtaking Bitcoin.
There's a world in which that could, that could certainly happen.
On the other hand, it's like the sort of standardization, like once
that's happened, sort of like the standardization power of the number two
is sort of then even weaker against like the number three and the number four.
And so, you know, and, and, and people who I don't think there has yet been
like the market understands that whatever the mysterious cause of the valuation
of these coins, it has something to do with being a store, store of value.
Um, and what they don't really understand is sort of, it's really hard to convey
the sort of very simple game theory of that, which is just why think about how
much stronger the whole argument would be if simply if Bitcoin and Ethereum were
a single store of value, if they were not competing for that role, right?
Because the competition makes either of them more unstable because then you
have to accept the probability that one will lose to the other in addition to
the probability that crypto as a whole will fail to dominate the world.
