Don thank you for coming on. Thank you Carlos for inviting me. It's a pleasure to be back.
Yes, I'm so excited and the viewers are too to have you on for round three. For anyone who hasn't
yet caught the first two rounds of our conversations, those will be linked below in the description.
People who want to catch up. And today what we'll do is we'll type some loose ends and cover some
topics that we haven't had time for in previous conversations. And as an extension from round
two, where we primarily covered your Fusions of Consciousness paper, which came out earlier this
year. And just to give the audience like a very brief summary of what that paper entails as you
propose a theory of a network of conscious agents that serves as the basis of the fundamental
level of reality. And then emerging from that through a series of steps is everything that we
know. So everything is space and time, quantum dynamics, everything comes emerges from that
from that proposal. So I'd love to hear it gets kicked off here. What has been the reception to
that paper so far? Well, it pretty well, it's it's already been cited. So it's pretty early for a
paper to be cited. Yeah, same year. And in the that journal, apparently, I that's the highest
downloaded paper in the last papers, all their papers in the last six months or something like
that. So Wow. So it's gotten not an 11 or 12,000 downloads, which for a geek paper is pretty good.
That's a pretty great in entropy, right? That's an entropy. Right. So that's awesome. Yeah, it's
pretty good. But of course, the proposal itself is quite radical. So I expect and enjoy pushback
and feedback. That's how science works. If you put out radical proposals, you need to
be prepared for all sorts of counters. And that's how you learn. Absolutely. It takes time. Yeah,
as you put it, it's very early, early days. But it does take time for people to write critiques
and get back and to build off the theory itself. And one thing I'd be really interested to hear
about is core to your to your work is the Amplity Hedron. So the work from Neymar Connie Hamed,
his discovery, or maybe invention, I think it's probably more discovery, but of this
geometrical object that sits outside of space time. I was wondering, do you I haven't quite seen any
collaborations with between you and Neymar? But have you spoken with him? Are you have any
dialogues with him around your ideas? Not yet. I mean, I think I would enjoy doing that at some
point. The Amplity Hedron, by the way, is for massless particles. And so it's not the whole
story as Neymar himself would say, working on other structures like the EFT Hedra that are for
all particles of all masses and spins. The real deep structure there is the decorated permutations.
So we've really connected with decorated permutations. We have a, in the fusion's paper,
we show how to take any Markov chain and map it canonically into decorated permutations. So we
give a dynamical, for the first time, a dynamical interpretation of these Amplity Hedra, well,
the decorated permutations behind behind the Amplity Hedra, in terms of entities that are
undergoing a Markovian dynamics. So yeah, we'll see where that leads. But we've been then
using that to figure out, okay, how do we map from the Markov chain now to specific properties like
momentum and spin and energy and so forth? Because the decorated permutation link does
tell us what parts of the Markov chains to focus on when we're trying to think about how they map
to particles. So that was the real win in getting the fusion's paper result, that it showed us what
part of the dynamics we needed to focus on in trying to figure out the mapping between the
concentration dynamics and properties of particles like position momentum and spin and energy.
Gotcha. And one thing I, as I was doing research prepare for this conversation,
I stumbled upon a presentation you gave last year at Chapman University at the
mine and agency conference. And I was going through that and noticed you had a slide and maybe I'll
even, with your permission, I can overimpose this just so folks can see it, showing the links from
the conscious agent level all the way up to the Amplity Hedron. And I was wondering, are there
any differences? Because, if I recall, it was asymptotic behavior, feeding into permutations,
feeding into Birkhoff polytopes, feeding into the positive grass mania, and then feeding into
the Amplity Hedron. So there's a lot of steps there. And is that where you landed with the
fusion's subconscious paper? Because I think when we discussed it, there were, maybe it's condensed
the levels a little bit, but is that still accurate? Is that still the same framework?
Shortly after we gave, after I gave that talk, we discovered this projection onto the decorated
permutations. And so we actually view this as a step forward from the talk that I gave at the
Chapman University, that there we were mapping onto the asymptotics directly, but we were trying
to figure out how that mapping went. We didn't understand exactly how we would project onto
the asymptotics. And it was in thinking through that, that we discovered this mapping onto the
decorated permutations, which gave us a direct link into the deepest structure that the physicists
have found. So I'm actually much happier. And I have a talk that I gave at Stanford,
which is similar to the Chapman talk, but the Stanford talk is like the Chapman talk, but it
updates that slide and talks about the new results, about mapping markup chains into
decorated permutations. And so we worked pretty quickly to get that paper out by this January.
The fusion's paper, we'll go into that. Gotcha. Okay, I'll have to look for that Stanford talk,
and I will link to that in the description of this video for curious viewers. Because also,
I think I noticed that talk, whoever uploaded it, the volume is extremely low on that Chapman
University. So I had to turn it up all the way and put on captions in order to follow what was
happening there. Yeah, sorry. Stanford talk is a little bit easier to understand and get you
here. And there we have the updated for the fusion stuff. But even since the Stanford talk, we've
been made far more progress. Things I would have loved to talk of Stanford, but we didn't discover
them yet. Yeah, it's happening too fast. And one question from one of the commenters on the last
video was from Dennis Sovin. He asks, or she I make sure sure, extremely interesting. Thank you.
Are there any experimental evidence available? Or do you have any projects planned to prove
the fusions of consciousness proposal? Yes, we have. We've been working on a computational
experiment to do this to test this. So and the the logic of our experiment, you know, we need
to find something inside space time that we can explain based on this dynamics of conscious agents
beyond space time. So the question is, where what there's lots of stuff in space time to try to
target to try to explain with a computational experiment. So what is the most intelligent
and most accessible thing that we could do? And you might say, well, neuroscience, right? That
seems to be the most related to consciousness. And so if you're having a theory of consciousness
from outside of space time, surely you want direct related directly to brain activity. But
that's brains are really complicated physical objects. You know, some people say they're the
most complicated thing that people have ever discovered in space and time. That may not
be where we want to start. Of course, ultimately, we ought to understand it. And I'm a cognitive
neuroscientist. So I've actually studied the brain for for decades and done FMRI and EEG and
collaborative experiments and so forth. But if we're having the theory outside of space time
and mapping it into space time, what we want to do is test it where it's the simplest and easiest
to test it. And so what we're proposing is to test it
at what particle colliders are finding when they study the inside of protons. So they
smash electrons into protons, for example, a very high energy electron ion colliders.
And they look at what happens, you know, you destroy in many cases, you destroy the proton
in the process, but you see all these quarks and gluons and a sea of quarks or it depends on the
energies, what they call the the q squared, the energies and also the the temporal resolution that
the Bjork and x and so forth. So what we're proposing to do is, and this proposal will come
out in on June 24, it's, you know, it'll be made public on June 24. We're proposing a series of
experiments to show that we can get the exact momentum distributions of the the quarks and gluons
at all the various values of Bjork and x and q squared that have been tested at at colliders,
in other words, to map to match the momentum distributions exactly. And so we would need
to find a master Markov chain, and a specific set of trace chains, so called Markovian trace
chains, and then temporal windows of sampling of those trace chains, that give us exactly
the sequence of momentum distributions from high q squared and Bjork and x, all the values that they
that they map. So that's what we're going after. And again, that sounds well, gee, you're going
after, you know, high energy particle physics, that sounds really, really complicated. I want
you to start with neuroscience. It's just the opposite. The particles, what are particles?
The elementary particles, physicists will tell you, are nothing but the irreducible representations
of the Poincare group of the symmetries of space time. In other words, they are the most simple
aspects of the actual geometry, or the symmetries of the geometry of space time. So if we're going
to make a connection, that's where we have the most data, and where it is as complicated as it
might seem. It's the least complicated thing that we can do. So that's why we're going after that.
I'm not a particle physicist. I'm learning as much as I can. But fortunately, we've been
joined by a world class particle physicist, Schrapo and Chatterjee, who's collaborating with us on
this, who likes our ideas. And so we have a real first rate particle physicist who's been
at the forefront for, I don't know, 30 or 40 years at the CERN and Fermilab, who's not collaborating
with us, like Chaitan and Prakash. And we have a student, Ben Nepper, and Ben Mead. So four of us
working on this idea. So that's where we intend to go. Then we want to crawl our way up. Of course,
eventually we want to get to brains and neuroscience and so forth. But if you can't get quarks and
gluons, you're not going to get brains. You've got to start where there's really hard data
and where people can really push. And you really know the mapping from the dynamics of conscious
agents, precisely into space time at the smallest scale. And then you can crawl your way up. I
presume we're going to have to crawl our way up through. So we're starting with sub-nuclear
physics. Then we need to go to nuclear physics. Then we need to go to chemistry. And then we
can crawl our way up to biology and then to brain science. We need to go systematically
and make sure each step up is secure. So yeah, the question is, of course, a great question.
And we have to start, we have to reverse the ladder of physics. We have to start at the bottom,
quote, unquote, and climb up the ladder. The typical way that people think about physics
and all the way up through biology. They think of it as the basic science and then the special
sciences, right? We're turning it around. We're saying, no, wait a minute. Physics is not the
basic science. Consciousness is. And physics is just the simplest part of our interface.
It's the most elementary part of our interface. And so that's why we're connecting with the simplest
part of the space-time interface and then building our way up to the more complicated
parts of it. Sure. Great question. Yeah. Thank you, Dennis Oven. And I might have some other
commentary questions sprinkled throughout here as well. So really appreciate that. If people
will comment below with questions, that's really great. I actually think this feeds
into something that we've literally, I've mentioned at the end of both of our interviews,
where I was like, I can't believe we didn't get to this one topic because I really want to talk
to you and dive deep into this. It's the UVIR interaction, which I learned about through your
interview with Jonathan Pageau. And can you explain what this is for the audience? I think that
there's some deep implications here. And I have a bunch of different questions to ask you about
that. But could you set us up with what this is? Yeah, it's truly profound and important aspect
of modern physics. The big success in physics has been reductionism until recently. Statistical
thermodynamics is an incredibly successful field where you can explain phenomena like heat and
thermodynamics at a macro scale by thinking about reducing to smaller scale and looking at the
dynamics of little particles and looking at their distribution of entropy and so forth.
That gives you deep insight into heat and thermodynamics. So that's a real win for
standard reductionist kinds of thinking. And the hope had been that, well, we can just continue
that. We can just keep going. So the kind of reductionism I'm talking about is,
I mean, there are many kinds of reductionism, but I'll be very specific about the reductionism.
As you go to smaller and smaller scales of space, the hope is you'll get to more and more fundamental
elements of reality and more and more fundamental laws. And the hope is that that will continue
forever. We will continue to go to smaller and smaller scales, find more and more fundamental
constituents of reality and the more and more fundamental laws that govern those.
And that has worked dramatically well. But we actually know that our best theories of physics,
namely the Einstein series of spacetime, special and general relativity, and quantum field theory,
which is based on spacetime, the fields are defined over spacetime. So our modern best physical
theories, which assume spacetime at their core, also tell us, the very mathematics of those spacetime
based theories tell us that spacetime itself cannot be fundamental, that it ceases to have
any operational meaning at the Planck scale, 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, 10 to the minus 43
seconds. And what you find is, as you try to go smaller and smaller by, for example, using light
with finer or radiation with smaller and smaller wavelengths, right? That's how you resolve finer
and finer details. Well, when you do that, you know, quantum theory, in fact, Einstein in 1905
is equals H new kind with light tells you that you're going to get more and more energy.
The smaller the wavelength, the more and more energy. And then Einstein also told us in 1905
that energy equals mass. And as theory of gravity tells us, well, as you increase the mass energy
density of the vacuum, space is going to curve. And the problem is, when you get beyond a certain
point of mass energy density, spacetime gets a singularity. It actually falls apart. You get a
black hole. And so it ceases to have any operational meaning. And this is well known. I mean, for
example, in 2005, David Gross published a paper. He won the Nobel Prize in 1984, in 2004, by Muddly,
for his work on, I think, quantum chromodynamics. So in 2005, you know, basically, you know,
celebration of Einstein, you know, the centenary of Einstein's special relativity theory, 1905 to
2005. He basically said, thank you, you know, wonderful job. And now spacetime is doomed.
And that's the way science works, right? You thank people for their incredible contribution.
And then you show the holes and the way forward. And so he pointed out, spacetime is doomed and
cited a bunch of people were saying spacetime is doomed. And the problem is this, what you mentioned,
the UV IR, typically, so UV, physicists talk about UV when they say we're going to smaller and
smaller scales with higher and higher energies. So that's so an IR is what they talk about when
they go to larger scales and lower energies. That's that. But it turns out as you try to
push to smaller and smaller scales, you're trying to go UV, more and more UV. What happens is you
create a black hole. And as you put more energy in, the black hole gets bigger. That's so you're
starting to get bigger. So now the scale is getting bigger. So that's sort of a UV IR kind of thing
that you thought you were going to go smaller. And instead, you're going bigger. And so you're
starting to see that basically, why the UV IR thing is so important is it means the death
of reductionism of the kind of reductionism that I just talked about. Some people, when they hear
me say this, will say that they think I'm saying there's it's the death of scientific explanation.
No, no, no, no. Scientific explanation is one thing. It's a broad class of theories.
Reductionism is just one kind of scientific explanation, that particular flavor of scientific
explanation, which is the UV going to UV and getting smaller and smaller scales and getting
deeper and deeper entities and and laws, that works up to a point and then it falls apart.
Our best theories tell us that. So that's why it's so important. I should mention another reason
why this whole thing is so important. Because it tells a beautiful story about how science
works. It's, I think, not really well understood. And here's the kind of misunderstanding that can
come up. I just said that Einstein and quantum theory assume that space time is fundamental.
They take that assumption and they try to build a mathematical model. Einstein's special and general
relativity, quantum field theory, fields defined over space time. They take the idea that space
time is fundamental. They make it mathematically precise. But then their mathematics comes back
and tells you that space time is not fundamental. That space time is doomed. It doesn't even make
sense beyond 10 to the minus 33 centimeters. So here, so a lot of people will say, aha, well,
we've caught physics in a, they've shot themselves in the foot logically. And here's the logical
problem. You assume to begin with that space and time are fundamental or space time is fundamental.
You then went ahead and took that intuition. And you put mathematics to it. Now, either your
mathematics faithfully represents that space time is fundamental or it doesn't.
Suppose it does faithfully represent that space time is fundamental. Well, then how in the world
could it come back and tell you that it's not fundamental? Surely that wouldn't happen. Okay,
so forget that. So therefore, it must be that your mathematics didn't faithfully represent
your intuition that space time is fundamental. And if it didn't, then why could you even trust it
to tell you that space time is not fundamental? So you couldn't possibly, in other words,
there's no way, according to this kind of logic, without self contradiction, you couldn't
use your physical as theories to show that space time is not fundamental. So the whole thing is
just a self contradiction. So that's the way some philosophers will argue about this kind of thing.
And here's the problem with that is very, first my simple, gee, how do you get out of that?
Looks like you've really shot yourself in the foot. How do you get out of it?
It's quite simple. It completely misunderstands scientific theories. Scientific theories make
assumptions. And when you write down a scientific theory, you know that your assumptions are just
assumptions, they're fallible. They're not the final word. And so what you do when you write
down a scientific theory is you try to get a mathematically precise statement of those assumptions.
And if you've done it right, your mathematics will itself tell you the limits of your assumptions.
And that's what you want. Because when so, the mathematics will tell you the power of your
assumptions, the area of application of your assumptions, what problems they can solve.
But the mathematics will also tell you the limits of your assumptions. And we know,
a priori, that there is no theory of everything. There isn't. There's all, there's only a theory
of everything except my assumptions. And you'll always have to get deeper and deeper assumptions.
And that's a never ending process. And so this is essential to how science moves forward.
At every step, you will take your intuitions, you'll put them to mathematics.
And then the mathematics will come back and tell you the limits of the intuitions,
the assumptions in your intuitions. If it's a good theory, if it's a bad theory,
it'll just pat you on the back. And, and, and you won't make any progress, right? You what you want
is a theory that comes back and slaps you in the face and says, at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters,
precisely, your theory ceases to make sense. It has no operational meaning.
That's what you want. So, and the same thing has come up with my theory about conscious,
well, I have a theory in terms of using evolutionary game theory to show that,
that evolution shaped us not to see reality. So that, that space and time and the notions of
organisms and resources and competition for resources is not fundamental. And the same argument
has been used against that. People will say, look, okay, Darwinian evolution. That assumes
organisms in space and time competing nature, red and tooth and claw for limited resources and
mates and so forth. So either the evolutionary game theory accurately modeled those intuitions,
or it didn't. If it didn't accurately model them, then you can't use it to disprove, you know,
the fundamental nature of, you know, organisms and space time and resources and competition.
And if it did accurately model Darwin's ideas, then it couldn't possibly contradict Darwin's
ideas. So once again, you've shot yourself in the foot. And again, the answer is that completely
misunderstands the most elementary aspect of scientific theory building and progress.
We want to get mathematical models of our theories that show us the limitations of the
fundamental assumptions because they are necessarily going to be limitations. That's
necessary because there is no final theory of everything. Once you realize that, then the whole
question about this particular kind of shooting yourself in the foot goes out the window. Of
course, there are ways to shoot yourself in the foot logically, but this isn't one of them.
Sure. Yeah, no, that's really great. I agree with you. I think one thing maybe we could
just follow back on a little bit because as you pointed out, I do think it's a very powerful idea
that the UV-IR interaction. And it's not something that I think is in the popular,
you know, consciousness. Very few people know about this, this dynamic that occurs.
But what seems to happen is, so you have the ultraviolet, the smaller higher energy scales,
you have infrared, the very large scales. And what happens is it kind of wraps around
where the micro-laws come back around to the macro-laws or does it push back upward?
Like, where is, if we had to think about it, if you had to analogize it, how would you do it?
Well, I would say that the physicists themselves are really eagerly exploring that very kind of
question because it looks like there's a lot to it. The mathematics suggests all sorts of UV-IR
interactions. So this is, I would say right now, a very hot topic in high-energy physics
research. So the one I mentioned about, you know, as you try to go to smaller scales, you effectively
are making a bigger black hole, so you're going to larger, that's just one symptom. I think that
there are going to be many, many more UV-IR correspondences. So I think that that's what
I mentioned is just the tip of a big iceberg. And the physicists themselves are just now beginning
to really explore that huge iceberg. So it's still a pretty big mystery. We don't really know,
because I was wondering if, I think about it in terms of, let's say you had UV at the floor,
the ground level, and you have IR at the ceiling, let's say. So it's like,
if you go in one direction or the other, does it pop back around? Like, if you go through the
ground, does it pop back up through the ceiling? Or instead, does it go back up? Does it bounce back?
Or does it wrap back around if that makes sense? Yeah, those are exactly the right kinds of questions.
Our theory of consciousness outside of space-time may help eventually in understanding this,
because what we're saying is that the space-time itself is nothing but a fairly trivial data
structure. It's a four-dimensional, I mean, if it's string theory, maybe 11 or 12-dimensional,
whatever. But the dimensions of the dynamics of the conscious agents outside of space-time
could be quadrillions of dimensions. I mean, it's just the number of dimensions,
and these are not dimensions curled up inside space-time like you think about in string theory.
You think about these are small dimensions that are in some sense inside space-time curled up inside.
No, these are entirely beyond space-time, entirely outside, and space-time itself
is a relatively trivial data structure, a user interface that systems of conscious agents use
to interact with each other. And so that framework may be what we actually ultimately will need to
understand this UVIR back and forth of just space-time as merely a data structure, an interface,
that may be the framework we have to go to. That way we actually will see
the limits of that data structure. One question I had, and also a commenter, I'll have to find
the name of the commenter and overlay it on the screen for this portion, because I can't remember
who it was, but there's a question about how the epithetodron, which I believe it maps for
particle scattering with its volume, how does an object have volume outside of space and time?
Well, so for example, think about the volume of a square, a 5x5 square.
Well, let's say 5 inches, whatever the units might be. Well, then it's 25, right? 5x5.
Okay, now go to a three-dimensional cube. So it's an object that has the same length and
three dimensions. Now, what is this volume? It's 5x5x5, which would be 125, right? Well,
now go to four dimensions. Well, that's 5x5, so it's 5 to the fourth. Now go to six dimensions,
5 to the sixth, and so forth. Now go to 10 dimensions, 5 to the 10th. And so in each case,
you can compute the volume. No problem. And all you're doing is you're, so the way to think about
this is our ability to visualize as human beings is pretty trivial. We can visualize in two dimensions,
three dimensions, and it stops. It's very easy for us to think that the pretty pathetic limitations
of our intuitions put a hard and fast limitation on the nature of reality. No, no, no, no. I would
love to be able to visualize in a thousand-dimensional space. I'm stuck with three, three piddling
dimensions. And I feel that limitation all the time. It's my limitation. It's not
a limitation on reality. It's a limitation on my paltry imagination. So where our
visualization abilities fall apart, at least we have enough visualization abilities to get the
picture. Oh, okay, a square 5x5, cube 5x5, okay, four dimensions, it must be five to the fourth.
Contrast it. So we get the pattern and then we realize we can go up to three dimensions.
Reality goes limitless, quadrillions of dimensions, Google dimensions,
and then infinite dimensions. So there, that's where mathematics is so powerful,
where we, our intuitions stop at three, mathematics can go
to infinity and beyond. Right, absolutely. And staying in this, I mean, we're going to
stay in the not intuitive kind of landscape for a little bit, because I have a bunch of questions
to ask you regarding the quantum space, a quantum realm, let's say, quantum mechanics.
And the first is, so you get space time from your fuses of consciousness, your network of
conscious agents. And the quantum, everything is very not intuitive, you know, it's outside our
regular comprehension. Does your theory of a network of conscious agents, does that
like lend itself towards explaining some quantum phenomena, like things like the delay choice,
quantum eraser experiment, like the really, really strange stuff that were, we seem like miles away
from trying to understand or getting to understanding. Does it lend any credence to
that? Or does it help explain that? Are you finding any interesting early evidence there?
Right. So the answer is yes. And I should say that the physicists themselves, for example,
like Nima or Connie Ahmed, when they say that space time is doomed,
they're also saying that quantum theory is doomed. Yeah, both. That is not fundamental. And
that he says that he thinks that they will both arise, quote unquote, joined at the hip
from some deeper structure. And the idea is that, yes, I think that that's correct. And that
we will get not only space time, but quantum theory arising from as a projection of this
theory of conscious agents. Now, the weirdness of quantum theory is largely because I claim
it's a projection. It's not the full reason we have to use
amplitudes and do all the complicated stuff in quantum theory. And we get things like entanglement
and so forth is because quantum theory is only giving you a mathematics of a projection of
reality, not the full reality. And so there's been some work even by quantum theorists showing
that many of the properties of quantum theory, and by the way, people who want to actually
check on this, there's a paper by Chris Fuchs, FUCHS, called Quantum Bayesianism.
Oh, yeah, I was gonna ask you about that next. And he goes in and actually talks in that paper
about many of the properties of quantum theory that that are simply
due to lack of information. And so there's no surprise if space time is a projection of this
deeper dynamics of conscious agents, and that dynamics of conscious agents could have countless
dimensions, lots of things going on in space time has four dimensions. And it's just a trivial
projection. It's no surprise that most of the information is lost. And so quantum theory really
is the mathematics of how to deal with partial knowledge when you've lost most of the knowledge
through projection. And so that's what we're that that's how I see this thing going. But but yeah,
of course, our as I mentioned earlier on, we want to first show that we can get the momentum
distributions of the quarks and gluons inside protons, but eventually mean, ultimately, we
will show that all of quantum theory arises as a projection of this dynamics of conscious agents.
Yeah, yeah, I was literally gonna ask you next about Chris Fuchs, because he I mean,
I see a lot of overlap between your theory and quantum Bayesianism. And especially because
I was rereading your fusions of the conscious paper. And as you point out a few minutes ago,
trying to make as few presumptions as possible going into your theory, you make you make only
two you posit that there are conscious experiences seems very basic. I'm with you on that. I think
most people would be anyone watching this. I gotta say, you're having a conscious experience. So
it's gonna be hard to debate that. And then the second one is that there are probabilistic relations
among conscious experiences. But that seems yeah, sure, I'm with you there. And that seems to be
it's overlap very highly with Cubism, which was just the shorthand for quantum Bayesianism.
And even Fuchs in a 2010 paper, he wrote this quote, I thought was great,
quantum mechanics is an addition to Bayesian probability theory, not a generalization of it,
not something orthogonal to it altogether, but an addition, which I thought was really
interesting because he's like layering out saying what's what's more fundamental and it's this
probability. And of course, probability relations are our core to your theory as well. So are there
can you is there an overlap there? Or can you compare contrast? Is there a difference? Yeah,
I know Chris. Yeah, we were there together at the Chapman University conference and so forth.
I've been trying to persuade him to join our join us and work with us on the stuff. But
but yeah, so there's a lot in principle that we agree on. I don't know that he's
Chris and his paper of quantum Bayesianism points out that, you know, the observer is really important,
right, that quantum theory is basically a story about the how the observer takes
track of the data and counts for their own data and what they're so it's but he said I don't
owe you a theory of the observer. I'm a physicist. I don't owe you a theory of the observer. And of
course, that's what I'm after here. I'm doing that the theory of conscious agents is a theory
of the observer. And I think ultimately, without a theory of the observer, you'll not make progress.
You really, that's what we're saying. We're saying, conscious agents, these agents are
experiencers, they're observers. And it's only when you actually study the dynamics of observation
that you're going to understand how physics arises as a projection, you know, space time
physics arises as a projection of that. It's just one of one trivial projection out of countless
other kinds of projections that you could have. So, so, you know, Chris and I, you know, we're
friends. I enjoy talking with him. And I would love to have him collaborate. But we'll see. I mean,
it's maybe if we get success on modeling quarks and gluons, we can rope Chris into join us. We'll
see. I like Chris. He's he's he's brilliant, of course. And and and we have enough differences
that there's a good, it's a good interaction, because there are differences. And so that's
what you want in a scientific collaboration. Right. Sure. Absolutely. And the other a couple
of things on the quantum side, before moving into some more non physics territory in a bit, the
that I want to ask you this one on our last conversation, the recent Nobel Prize winners.
So aspect closer and Zellinger. If you could, did you mind just explicating for the audience a
little bit about, I mean, as a ground groundbreaking work over many decades, you know, they all had,
I was tracing out like, oh, this is decades apart, their their work. And they found that this is from
quanta, some wonderful publication for folks who are familiar with it. But they wrote, I think the
high level summary is that they found reality has no fixed and predetermined state until you measure
it. That's what they found. That's the true of John Bells. But would you could you give us like
just a high level summary of that? And I guess how plays into your work. So so yes, the the
the recent Nobel Prize last December was for the experimental test of the prediction
of quantum theory, that local realism is false. So local realism has two parts. One is locality,
which says that particles have properties that whose influences propagate no faster than the
speed of light. So properties, the influences can't, you know, there's a speed limit on the
universe, and you can't exceed that. At least for information transfer. And the end local,
that's locality. Realism is the the claim that particles have definite values of their properties
even when they're not observed, like position, momentum, and spin. And Einstein was famous for his,
you know, support for realism. He said that, you know, if without disturbing a system, you can
predict with probability one, the value of a property, then that then that value of the property
really does exist. And it really did exist, right? That's that's realism. And most people would side
with Einstein. Of course, you can predict with probability one before you measure without
disturbing it, what what the value is, then the value did exist before. And it really is real. And
so, so, so most of our intuitions would line up with Einstein that realism is true. But
quantum theory says no, local realism is false. And that's what the the Nobel Prize is for over
several decades, and starting Clouser and aspect and then Zeilinger, the over decades, these guys
did the test, and then close loopholes in the previous test and close more loopholes, because
this is such a big one. I mean, our intuitions are so much against local realism being false. We
believe local realism. We believe realism. That that they really needed to go to all sorts of
links to close any possible loopholes. And, and so, it's just plain false. That particles have
definite values of properties when they're not observed. And by the way, Chris Fuchs paper,
the again, the quantum basing paper, gives an example. He if you so people want to see you can
see an actual quantum example that that that he goes through is not Fuchs example, you know,
himself, he he's quoting and explaining some other work by their physicists. But but Fuchs
Fuchs paper is a great place to do it because he gives a good explanation. A quantum setup
where you can know with probability one what value you will get when you make a particular
measurement. But you can prove using quantum theory and that particular experimental setup
that it's impossible for the value to exist prior to you making the measurement. So you so Einstein
was wrong. Here's a quantum system where you know with probability one, what you're going to get
without disturbing the system when you measure it. So without disturbing system, you know,
with probability one, what the value is that you're going to get when you do measure the system.
And you can prove that that value does not exist. Prior to the measurement. So,
so that's the real kicker is that that the act of observation is not an act of fact discovery.
It's an act of fact creation, which is the kind of thing that John Wheeler would like to say,
the you know, the active observation is an act of a fact creation. And, and that's what the
the theory of consciousness is saying as well that the coin of the realm are conscious experiences.
And that's, and that's what's happening is we're, we're, you know, the fundamental reality are these
conscious experiences that arise and disappear. And space time itself is just a user interface.
One possible out of many, many countless other possible interfaces that we could use
to interact with the other conscious agents. I'm looking forward once we
nail down the relationship with space time to then start to explore all all the other
kinds of interfaces that are possible. Space time is, is not the only one and it may not
be a particularly interesting one. It may be a fairly, I think, fairly trivial one. I think we
got saddled with a cheap model. Maybe it was the best we could afford, Don. I think that there are
conscious agents out there with interfaces where they can understand, they can,
they can imagine 50,000 dimensions and I'm jealous. Yeah. At least we're not stuck in one
dimension or one and a half, like the second dimension, you know, flat land. I was going to
ask you like maybe E coli, maybe E coli only has one dimension. Yeah, who knows what their perceptual
experience is like. The, I wanted to ask you, next was going to be about John Wheeler and his
It From Bit, a participatory universe that he, that he posited. Does that, I mean, I know that's,
you know, that's an idea that decades old and it's not such a popular idea anymore or I don't know
if it ever really caught on. He had some pretty out there ideas like the one electron universe
and everything, but, but It From Bit, in particular, the participatory nature of things,
that seems fairly similar to what you're, what you're proposing here, right? Is there any tie
with, with your theory? I, I agree with you and I think Wheeler agreed. He actually cited me in
his It From Bit paper. Oh, I didn't realize that. Wow. Yeah, 1989. So I, with, with Bruce Bennett
and Chaitan Prakash, we published a book called Observer Mechanics in 1989. And it 300 pages of
math, which was our first attempt at this theory of conscious agents. And Wheeler cites it in his
It From Bit paper. I think it's like reference 175 or something like that. So if you want to see
it, it's Bennett Hoffman Prakash and he cites, so he'd actually seen our book. And we, in fact,
in our book, use the notion of a participator as the technical term. And we got that from Wheeler,
right? So we, we, we chose the term participator, which was sort of our, our, our name for conscious
agents in that book. conscious agents were, we called them participators. We had a more
cognitive dynamics of participators. So, so yes, we were influenced in our 1989 book by Wheeler's
ideas and at least for the language that we used. And then Wheeler was clearly looked at our book
and liked enough to cite it in his It From Bit paper. So, and I think that a lot of physicists
like Wheeler's idea, but don't know what to do with it, right? I mean, Wheeler,
it's the kind of thing where you go, there's, there's, he's on to something and he's, he was
a genius when he was, everybody understood he was a, you know, a physicist genius and, you know,
very famous physicists were his students. Feynman was a student of Wheeler's and so forth. So
he was nobody's fool. That's for sure. He was, he was brilliant. You can't dismiss him out of hand.
It was, I think a lot of physicists think that, you know, there may be something deep there,
but, but, you know, science has to, you know, physics has to catch up. We have to get to the
point where we can, you know, put beef on the idea that, that Wheeler saw and hopefully the
theory of conscious agents may be a step in that direction. That's great. And then the last
physics piece before we jump into some non-physics stuff, Seth Lloyd and his ontology of qubits
and gates, which I know you've referenced in at least one of your papers before, you know,
you were pursuing a different ontology than his, but I don't know if you've, if you followed his
work in that space at all, but it also seems similar in some respect to sort of like Wolfram's work
with the computational sort of digital universe concept and ideas. But do you have any comments
about Seth Lloyd's work or if that has any overlap with, with what you're working on?
Well, there, there is a way in which they're similar and a way in which they're very, very
different. So the similarity is that they're not taking space time as fundamental. They're
trying to build it up, right? So that, but Seth Lloyd is using, trying to start with quantum
theory and build it up for quantum bits and quantum gates. And it's brilliant, brilliant work.
But on that, I, I think that Neymar, Connie, Hamed is right that, that, that we,
starting with quantum theory is not going deep enough. We're going to have to find a deeper
framework entirely outside of space time and quantum theory and show that space time and
quantum theory together arise joined at the hip. So I, I agree with Neymar on that. And part of it is
that, that quantum theory, at least the evolution like the Schrodinger equation
has time as a parameter. So it's, it's, so space time is doomed. That version of quantum
theory is doomed too. It's not fundamental. We're going to have to get something, something deeper.
So, so, you know, of course, I think in science, we need to let a thousand flowers grow. So I,
I wouldn't try to stop their work at one bit. I would encourage their work. I should,
I would say it should be funded. And, and, and also the work which trying to show some kind of
automata, maybe some kind of cellular automata or something like that, at the foundations of
space time. But if, if the idea is that, that, that space time is fundamental, and these are just
like the building blocks of space time, then I think it's not going deep enough. I think we,
we really need to let go of our clinging to space time and view it for what I think it is,
which is merely a user interface that, that is, it's, there's a deeper dynamical reality
utterly beyond space time. And space time is, is one of countless interfaces that that
dynamical reality can use to interact with itself. So, so that's, I think the difference.
So in spirit, they're trying to get at the foundations with Seth Lloyd is really trying
to use quantum theory to boot up space time. And in other cases, you know, might be various kinds
of automata. And I guess, in some sense, there is probably some kind of mathematical map between
our probabilistic Markovian dynamics of conscious agents and automata. And for example, our, our,
it's as easy to prove that the Markovian dynamics is computationally universal.
So anything that you can do with automata, you can do, or with Turing machines, universal Turing
machines, or neural networks, you can do with Markovian dynamical systems. So they're computationally
universal. But there's another aspect to it. And that is that the Markovian dynamical systems
are not limited to computation. In particular, the measurable spaces and the measurable sets on
which the probabilities are defined need not be computable. They could not be recursively
innumerable. There's, as far as I can see, there's no reason to restrict the definition of probabilities
to our resets. So if that's right, then, then Markovian dynamics is not restricted to computer
computability. Of course, it gets computability trivially. And that's one reason why we felt
comfortable in our, in our basic definition of conscious agents to have it be so trivial.
I mean, there are, there are conscious experiences, and they have dynamical interactions with them.
So we, what didn't we put in? We didn't put in a notion of a self. We didn't put in notions of
learning, memory, problem solving, attention, none of that. But we knew that since networks of
conscious agents are computationally universal, that any, anything that you could build a neural
network out of the neural network of learning and memory and intelligence, you know, like
chat GPT and so forth, anything that you can do with those networks, you can do with
conscious agent networks were computationally universal. So that's why we didn't want to put
the kitchen sink into our definition. We wanted to make our definition is absolutely spare as
possible. While retaining computational universality, so that we could then build everything else,
and we'd be forced to build everything else. And so, so that was why that that was our choice.
And that's what you want. That's, that's Occam's razor, right in the building of scientific theories
is minimal set of assumptions as possible. And that's so yeah. Yeah, that's great. And before we
yeah, I kept off the sort of physics related kind of questions, truncated a comment or a question
from carbon 1479. They asked, I'm truncating it a bit here, but does your model lead towards
any eternal block universe or multiverse? No, no, okay. So the like the Einstein block universe
where he's space time, there's a space time flow from, and no, it doesn't lead to that kind of
universe at all. In fact, it says that that the space time itself is one trivial fairly trivial
kind of interface that networks of conscious agents can use. As I said earlier, it's the cheap
model. It's a I think it's a cheap model. So even the interface isn't a block universe,
even the even even the yeah, even our interface version is not a block universe by any means.
Here's one way that could be concrete about why it's not time.
Time is not fundamental in our Markovian dynamics. You might say, wait a minute,
you're talking about Markovian dynamics. Now, dynamics sounds like you have some notion of time.
And there is a notion of sequence in a Markovian dynamics. But time, as physicists think about
it, is intimately linked with the second law of thermodynamics, which says that entropy is always
increasing in some sense, that law gives the arrow to time, the direction to time. And with our
Markovian dynamics of conscious agents, there is a step sequence, but it's straightforward to
write down Markovian dynamics in which the entropy does not increase. It's a constant entropy.
But it's also trivial, it's a three step proof to show that if you take such a Markovian dynamics,
which there is no arrow of time, so there's no physics time at all in it.
Any projection of that dynamics, so you're taking this Markovian dynamics and you're projecting it
to another dynamics that where you've lost, where you've lost information. So it's another
Markovian dynamics, which is a projection of the deeper one. So it's a projected dynamics,
but it's lost information. The very act of losing information and the projection entails
that you will have an increasing entropy in the projected dynamics. So you will have an
arrow of time in that projected dynamics, not as an insight into the original dynamics.
It's an artifact of the projection. And so the entropic arrow of time, that is the foundation of,
for example, the spacetime cube, is not an insight into this deeper reality. It's a trivial artifact
of the projection process. It's something that happens, quote unquote, like a mistake of the
projection. It's entailed by the projection. It's not a deep insight into the deeper reality.
So that's why, so that's a good question. But you can see that why we're definitely not just
the spacetime cube, and even the time part of that cube, we're saying is an artifact of projection,
that that arrow, the notion of an arrow of time, that would allow you to trace out the cube. Of
course, the cube itself now is this spacetime loaf in which in some sense, you're seeing all of time
at once. But there is an arrow, nevertheless, in that loaf. And that arrow is an artifact of the
projection process. So in the original, not yet projected space, let's talk about spaces already
throwing it off a bit. But let's say in that realm, if there is a sequence, there's no time there.
But how does the sequence play out? Or how do you get the orderedness of it? I mean, is that,
is the block, like that seems to me like a block universe, but that seems to me like a block space
sort of in that these sequences exist, but no time. So how does that, how's that ordered?
Right. So in the theory of Markov change, you do get these ordered spaces where you look at all
possible trajectories that the dynamics could take. And those typically to noted by a capital
omega. So often that the spaces are written and then individual trajectories are a little omega.
So you have all these little omegas that are possible trajectories and together all of them
make up the big omega. And these are infinitely long trajectories and so forth. And then once you
put a probability measure on these trajectories, you can then see whether that particular more
COVID dynamics has a growing entropy or not on that. But it turns out you don't need to have
a growing entropy and therefore you don't need to have a physics kind of notion of time at all.
So there is a notion of sequence, an order. So you have a total, so here's the thing,
you have a total ordered set of steps. So there's a total order. But that's,
time has more structure than that. It's got a growing entropy and so forth. In fact,
time in modern physics is subject to Lorentz transformations and the whole bit.
What we would like to show is that here we have this Markovian dynamics. There need to be no
arrow of time because there's no increasing entropy. And we can show that under certain
projections, yeah, it looks like a Lorentz transformation. So for example, the projections
might be various kinds. If I have a big Markov chain, you can do so-called trace chains. You could
do various projections onto different traces of subsets of states and maybe even
subsamples of steps. And this is one direction I'm really interested in pursuing is to show that
under what conditions of the tracing and sampling that all the different traces and samples are
related to each other by, for example, the Lorentz group or the Poincare group. So that we can
actually show where those symmetries come from as just one way of getting a family of projections,
a group of projections of this deeper dynamics of consciousness.
Cool. When you take a sampling, and this is another comment or question I have to find their name
and overlay it, but when you take a sampling, let's say of the largest group or the total group,
is there a fractal-like quality to a smaller sampling set? I think they mentioned that you
did an interview at some point, and you mentioned that there was some kind of like
self-similarity between, say, a sampling of a space and, say, the Omega, the totally large space.
That bringing any bells or is this totally off? Well, it's a pretty interesting direction to think
about. There's the notion of self-similarity. Well, first, if we have this big
consciousness dynamics, you might get, you know, trace chains of it that are similar in various
ways to the original, certainly. But there's something very, very deep about...
Well, I'll just put it this way. First, yeah, straightforward to get self-similarity. You
can do that with Markov Dynamics, but there's something really, there's something even deeper,
and there's something that physicists and scientists call universality.
This was discovered by Eugene Wigner working on the Manhattan Project and trying to get the
energy levels of the uranium atom, which are so complicated he couldn't get it.
So what he did was he used large random matrices, just matrices of random numbers,
and he showed that the... he found that the eigenvalues, so the eigenvalues are a way of
characterizing the intrinsic properties of a matrix. And you could have lots and lots of
eigenvalues and they'd be spaced. You could have, you know, maybe an eigenvalue would be close to
another eigenvalue, but the spacing, they wouldn't get too close and they wouldn't get too far away.
And you got this distribution of the spacing between the eigenvalues. And this has shown up...
he discovered that and it seemed to match the spacing of energy levels of the uranium atom.
And then this whole thing about universality, you mentioned the magazine, Quanta. Quanta Magazine has
wonderful videos and articles on universality. So if you just google Quanta Magazine and
universality, there's a fun world to enter through Quanta Magazine on that.
But our Markovian dynamics, we have these... a Markov kernel is a matrix. It's an end-by-end
matrix. It could be a billion-by-billion. And many of the matrices that we're going to study
are random. They're random numbers where the numbers are between zero and one. It doesn't
matter what the range of the numbers is, the random numbers. So universality is going to pop out of
this where we're dealing with just random matrices. And so I'm right now just... and that has to do
with like phase transitions. So how do you go from one, for example, state of matter to another
phase transitions? So I'm... that question is good because it's pointing to a huge realm of
research that I'm really eager to jump into. Yeah, there's a notion of self-similarity, but then
there's this whole universality thing. And it's really deeply tied somehow to random matrices.
And matrices are the foundation of this theory of consciousness. And many of them are going to be
random. Many of them will not be random, too. So it's going to be really interesting to explore.
So yeah, we get fractal kind of behavior. We also get behavior that's very deterministic, right?
You can model both. So you don't necessarily have to get fractal behavior in a Markov chain,
but you absolutely can. And you can get universality as well. So it's a very, very flexible
framework. And I'm very eager to explore. I may need to have some other experts who are
more expert on them. The mathematics here is pretty intense. Yeah, there's a lot of different
areas that you jump in between. I spoke with Carl Friston a few weeks ago and talked about
his free energy principle. And I was wondering... because one of the things he mentioned to me
in our conversation was... his quote was, there's... doesn't know of anything that's more fundamental
than the free energy principle. So trying to minimize... I think it's a variational free energy
in a system. Anything... any agent in a system is trying to do that. Do you find... have you found
any of those kind... that kind of dynamic from your conscious agent framework? Are they exhibiting
this kind of behavior? But do they abide by the free energy principle?
Right. So in... in the theory of Markov chains, what you... you're going to get very, very similar
kinds of things popping out. There's something called potential theory. In... in... in... so
what you're going to have is systems in which you can model what would look like heat. So the
free energy... Gibbs free energy, for example, is the enthalpy minus delta... so... so the delta G,
you know, the change in the Gibbs free energy equals delta H, which is the change in the enthalpy,
minus T delta S, which is... T is the temperature and degrees Kelvin, and delta S is the change
in the entropy. So... so what I see happening is that these are going to be high level descriptions
of... when we actually look at Markov chains, you're going to find that they're... you have this
dynamics that's happening in a... in a large dimensional space, and certain states are going
to have higher probabilities. You're going to be, in some sense, more... the dynamics will be more
attracted to those states, and then... and then less attracted. If you put it somewhere else, it'll...
it'll tend to... to converge to certain kinds of states, and so we're going to be able to model all,
you know, absolutely Gibbs free... free energy, enthalpy, entropy, the whole bit within the
Markovian dynamics. Now, one thing I'll mention that... that may be a difference in... in our frameworks,
you know, I think that the Gibbs free energy idea is important and should be pursued, but
typically the work that they're doing is assuming...
it was built on the work of Judea Pearl, directed acyclic graphs.
Markov chains are more general.
Directed acyclic graphs are a special kind, a special subclass of Markov, but there's no reason
not to have cycles. Why... why should it be acyclic? Lots of things in nature are... are acyclic,
and so the... the Markovian dynamics that we're... we're studying, of course, can model
directed acyclic graphs as a special case. There are special Markov chains that do that,
but it is not restricted to that, and so that's... that's going to be one difference.
Another important thing is that in some cases, it... in the discussions, it seems like some of the
proponents of the, you know, free energy principle are thinking that the... there's... with the directed
acyclic graph and the free energy principle, you have what's called a Markov blanket, right?
There's the... the states of the system inside, then there's the external world,
and then there's a blanket, and so if you have a set of nodes that are your system,
the blanket is technically defined as, you know, all the parents of the nodes in your system,
all the descendants of the nodes of your system, and all the parents of the descendants of the
nodes in your system. Those... those are... those nodes form the Markov blanket. This is from Judea
Pearl's work and for directed acyclic graphs. Now, it's a theorem that the state of the nodes
inside the blanket and the state of the nodes of the rest of the world outside of the blanket
are conditionally independent, entirely conditionally independent, given the state
of the nodes of the Markov blanket. What that means is the only thing that the nodes inside can know
about, quote-unquote, the world is captured on the blanket, and it's trivial to show that there are...
there's an infinity of different states of the external nodes that would lead to exactly the
same state of the blanket nodes, right? Given... right, so you could have tons and tons of states, so
the Markov blanket is what we call an interface in our theory, right? It's... it's an interface,
and there's no way that the... so often in many cases, they talk in this literature as though you
are doing Bayesian inference and actually inferring the true state of the external world.
That's not possible. The state of the nodes outside the blanket and the state of the
nodes inside the blanket are conditionally independent, given the state of the blanket.
So there's no way... so all you can do, you can never get a Bayesian estimate of the true
state of the external world. You can't. All you can do is get your best interface description. So
the way I think about the free energy principle I think is a little bit different than many of the
proponents of the... of that free energy principle. It's... you're not doing Bayesian inference and
getting an estimate of the true state of the world, not by a long shot. You are simply getting a user
interface that allows you to stay alive as a system. But staying alive as a system doesn't
mean that you've actually estimated the truth about the external world. So there may be a difference
in philosophy that would be fun to discuss. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's interesting. It's still...
I talked with him for a while and I've researched it fully. It's still... aspects of it that allude me,
if I'm being honest, that the... I'm not sure what's sort of intrinsic and what's sort of a by-product
in what's... you know, what's sort of naturally happening there. So it's something that I have to
have to keep following back. There was a great set of papers in behavioral and brain science
a few years back that I can point you to where they... there's a target article that argues that
that, you know, the free energy principle is it's used... and the notion of Markov blankets is it's
used... is different from that of Pearl, that Pearl gave a functional definition and in many cases
looked like they were giving a physical definition of the boundary. I think since then,
a lot of work on free energy principles sort of walked back the idea of
identification with a physical principle. But I think there's still a very interesting
dialogue going back and forth. I think that... I think that Gibbs free energy is, of course,
central and it's very, very important. Exactly how it's being used is really critical. My take is
as long as we're still thinking inside space-time, we're not thinking deep enough.
We're going to find that when you analyze the potential theory of Markov chains and so forth,
you will get all... you'll get Gibbs free energy and all those concepts entirely outside of space-time.
Then when we look down to space-time as a user interface as a trivial projection of that deeper
thing, we will then see the physics notion of Gibbs free energy and the chemistry notion of
Gibbs free energy and so forth as a projection of this much deeper notion of the potential
theory of Markov chains. That's my take of where it's going. I want to ask you about in a commenter.
I have to find the names of these commenters. I know it's all over the place, but I know there
was a commenter who posited something around how do you know and I guess I would assume it's the
best we can do, but like math and formal logic, how do we know it's not just another symbol within
our interface, i.e., how can we be sure with enough confidence that outside of this interface,
say outside space and time, that they say hold true because 1 plus 1 equals 2, we know that's
true here, but how do we know it's true outside our universe or in another universe or all the way
outside of that? Do you have anything? I mean, I'm just showing you something you've thought about,
but you respond to that in any way. Well, there's several levels of, it's an important question
and there's several levels. Maybe the simplest level would be if you just have the notion of,
for example, the basic kinds of geometries we could have of spacetime. Is it flat? Is it
hyperbolic or positive or negative curvature space? And so we can use this mathematical notion of
geometry to ask the question, well, what geometry does our universe have? And what we find is what
using the cosmic microwave background radiation, we've been able to say to within a certain level
of certainty, our universe is flat. It has zero curvature. It's not positive or negative, it's
zero. And we can put limits on, if it's positive curvature, we can put limits on how big it could
possibly be. So we can actually say, okay, our data suggested it's flat, but they don't rule out a
small curvature because of course noise and so forth. You can't rule it out. So given what we
know about the noise, and even though we've pointed to zero, it might not be exactly zero,
we can put a limit on the positive curvature in there and therefore the positive diameter of our
universe. And so that's been done. So that's one way, and you can see, here we're using geometry
the mathematics, abstract mathematics to constrain using data, our understanding of the geometry of
the universe we happen to be living in. So that's one way of getting up. But there's a deeper now,
there's a deeper, I think the questioner is asking a deeper question, which is why should we trust
mathematics at all? And these are the mathematics that we're using. It's not the final word,
by any means. And I would say, yeah, I agree that mathematics is this powerful tool, but we have to
be extremely aware that what humans have discovered of mathematics is trivial. I would say if all the
mathematics that is to be known, we know probability zero of it. We know measure zero of the mathematics
to be discovered. And we know that there are many different axiom systems that we can use.
And so it's now one way that some people have responded to this kind of thing, though, for
example, like Max Tegmark, is to say, well, that just means to him, he thinks mathematics is
fundamental reality. That doesn't just mean the mathematics that we now understand, that's all
the mathematics. And so for any possible kind of mathematical system, there's a universe. And so he,
I think he calls it his level four multiverse, where anything that's mathematically possible,
including stuff we haven't discovered yet, is actual, and all those universes exist.
Now, but there's another answer to this as well, which is to say,
if we're going to reason at all, if we want to argue, if we want to have differences of opinions
and try to convince each other, we're using logic. Or if we don't have that, what do we have?
brute force. I mean, I'll force you to agree with me. Who's interested in that? So we
use logic, we use reason, we try to use evidence.
The more precise your reasoning, the more you're really moving into mathematics,
the less precise, the more your reasoning is probably not worth listening to.
So we're in this real interesting catch 22. We know that the mathematics we know is trivial
compared to what's out there to be known. We know that there are many different axiom systems that
are mutually incompatible, and all are interesting. And yet, we don't want to say we shouldn't use
persuasion and reason and logic in our discussions in politics or religion or in science,
or in social studies or in arts and humanities. We see reason and logic and argumentation,
like intelligent argumentation going on. And that certainly is far better than just
brute forcing, believe me, you must do it my way, you must assert and state what I,
we don't want to do there. So we're in an interesting position where
it's humbling. If we don't use math and logic, we're screwed. If we do use math and logic,
we can't prove that we're using the right stuff and we don't know what's out there that we don't
know. So my attitude is we have to go with what we have so far and always be humble.
So my theory is just the best theory I have so far. And of course, it's just a theory.
And of course, sooner, hopefully, then later, people will look back and laugh at our theories.
We look back at the, we look back a few centuries and we see the confident pronunciations of people.
That's embarrassing. It's completely, you know, earth, air, fire and water, that's not it.
And you know, caloric, that's not it. And even Newtonian theory, it's beautiful, that's not it.
And the same thing will be true of quantum theory and space time. That's not it. And those who,
it's really, if we don't want to embarrass ourselves, we should be the ones that are
saying about our own theories. Of course, this is just the next baby step. If we don't have that
attitude, we will look very, very silly in short order, hopefully shorter, sooner than later.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I mean, yeah, the response I think is basically,
and I don't think this person commenting was critical. They were just curious, but it would
be like, well, what do you have that's better? What do you have that's better than math and
formal logic? It's like, if you have something that's better, let me know, because we'll try
to use it. But it's hard to, yeah, it's the best we can do is what we have available.
But I do think I want to turn to, and perhaps we could close in this kind of area, is personal
experience as a teacher. Because I do think, well, you know, each of our individual life stories and
our own personal experiences, those are, you know, as true as close to real as we can get, perhaps,
or as, you know, the life force, the day-to-day living that we do. And one thing that I think
we mentioned this on this interview earlier rounds is your meditation practice. You know,
you spend upwards, you know, three hours a day, most days meditating. And I'd love to hear more
about that, because when I've heard you talk about your practice, it's quite fascinating to me.
How did you land on that practice? Like, did you try out a bunch of different forms? Like,
how did you find what works for you? Well, I should say that I got into it simply because
I was having a hard time sleeping. And so I didn't want to take pills. And so I decided to meditate.
So it wasn't like some deep... My guess is that if I hadn't had trouble sleeping, I wouldn't have
ever meditated. And you know, I'm glad that I've meditated, because it turned out to be far more
than just a sleep aid. It has transformed me in many, many ways. I was helped because I had a friend,
Joe Arpaia, who had written a book on meditation with, I guess, a forward by the Dalai Lama as well.
And he had asked me to read and give him comments on a draft before he published it. And I wasn't
myself interested in meditation. I didn't do it, but Joe was a friend and a good friend, and still
is a very, very good friend. And so I gave him comments. So I had some understanding, a little
bit of understanding just from reading of the Buddhist approach to it. And then I read a little
bit of a guy named Thomas Keating, who was a Benedictine monk. So that's from a Christian Catholic
kind of perspective. But then he also had lots of influence from Buddhism as well.
So I saw that there was these mystical aspects of Christianity and Buddhism were, you know,
not that far apart. I mean, they use different languages. The Buddhists aren't that terribly
interested in Mother Mary, whereas, you know, Father Keating was, you know, but those were
sort of compared to the, as far as the practice was concerned, they didn't really affect the
practice. And so my practice, and then I've been, I would say I've been heavily influenced as well
by Eckhart Tola. I think that his is a fairly non-religious explication. I really like that,
a very non-religious explication of meditation and very, very practical. And you're not trying
to get anywhere. You're either present now or you're not. And there's no issue about getting
getting good at meditation or anything like that. It's am I present now? If not, why not get present,
be present now. And if you're, you know, and there's nothing about, you know, having to use
decades and decades of effort to finally get enlightened and so forth. So I've really been
helped by, by Eckhart's saying, because the mind naturally tries to get into this
thing where, you know, I have to try really hard. And if I try real hard and do all these hours,
then I will get enlightened eventually. The reason I have to spend so much time is
my guess is that I just have a lot of issues, a lot of emotional issues. And so I just have to be
there and face this stuff. And what Eckhart told, it calls the pain body. I think I was born, you
know, I know from the stuff my parents were dealing with before I was born, they were in
deep, deep emotional pain. And I was born into that. And so we each get a deck of cards that
were dealt with. And I came into the world kicking and screaming. I cried nonstop for my first year,
basically. I was, you know, I was just born that way and gave my parents tremendous difficulty.
So, and I'm still facing probably, we know that a child born to a mother who is highly stressed
gets methylated in certain ways. You're, you're, you have change to your genetics.
And so I suspect that I was born into this world screaming and crying because I was
methylated. My mom was very anxious. My parents were very anxious. My dad was in the military.
They were only 21 years old, 22 years old. They didn't, they, they were, they were little kids
scared to death. Well, alcohol abuse and their families and so forth, they were just trying
to get their act together. So their stress gets taken into the child, right, methylation.
If your parents are stressed, it makes good evolutionary sense that you would methylate the
child to be ready for stressful situations. So I was, I came ready to deal with stress. I was
stressed out all, so hyper vigilant and so forth. And, and so my guess is that the reason I have to
spend so much time is I'm dealing with methylation. Literally, it's a biological, you know, from that
point of view, it's a biological thing. And, and so the unwinding of that is, is I've been at it
for 30,000 hours of meditation. Wow. And other people get born to parents who are calm and never
get methylated in this way. And so it's a different, and you know, I would say that, you know, I got
the cards I was dealt with, other people get different cards. It's been painful, but I've
learned a lot. And, you know, so I, I'm not complaining about it. Those are my cards. And,
and I've learned to, to, you know, more and more be with what is, and in some sense,
the bigger the challenge you face, the more you learn. And this has been a huge challenge for
me. I mean, having to spend several hours a day just facing that and almost like looking at this
little child that's, that's inconsolable and just being there and consoling them and staying with
it. So I've learned a lot in the process. And I think that it's fed into my, my work on consciousness
because I'm really facing in a very personal level, this, this whole thing about consciousness.
My own take is our theory of conscious agents has a theorem. It's a theorem of a theory that
there is just ultimately one conscious agent. There is one. And all, all conscious agents are
projections, traces of that one conscious agent. And so the, and that, but, but it's also a theorem
of the theory that, that we can never get a complete mathematical description by a long shot of that
one conscious agent. It trend. So our mathematics says it exists. And it says you can't actually
describe it. It's, it transcends mathematics. We can't do it. You'd have to climb up all of
something called Cantor's hierarchy and there's no end to Cantor's hierarchy of infinities.
So you could never get to that, that, that final description. But my own personal view
is that you and I and each person that I meet in an amoeba and my cat,
I'm actually, each of us is the one that, that, that, that, in other words, that, that infinite
conscious agent that transcends any mathematical description, looking at itself through a particular
little interface. And so I'm, the way I view it right now is that, you know, I'm talking with
Carlos, but it's really the one talking with one. It's the one using a Hoffman avatar talking with
the one using the Carlos avatar. And it's, it's, it's doing this for very, very deep reasons.
In some sense, the one which transcends any experience plunges itself into particular
experiences and thereby gets to know itself better. But that's, that's a few words for
something I think is extremely deep. A system can never know itself completely. You can't ever
know yourself completely. But in meditation, when you sit in silence without any thought and you
literally, when you really let go of all thoughts and you just are, you, you, you just be,
then you are really and fully the one looking through this particular little window,
this particular little interface, but you are the one and you're, you're not separate from that.
That's, that's what you are. When you get caught up in your ideas, your thoughts and get lost in them
and criticism and comparing with other people and, and identifying yourself with, you know,
oh, I got this car, I got this house or I'm, I'm this smart or I'm this stupid or whatever. All
these things, then you're still the one, but you've got to cover it up with all these thoughts
that are hiding your true identity from yourself. And somehow that seems to be also a necessary
part of the whole thing of the one going to sleep and then waking up, deciding to really
plunge yourself into this particular little interface. As I've said, I think space time
was a pretty trivial little interface, but, you know, it, the one chooses this, it probably has
thousands and trillions countless other interfaces that it plunges into and learn something
new about it. It's inexhaustible. The one is inexhaustible and the exploration is inexhaustible.
And so in some sense, what you learn in meditation is the attitude of
yes to whatever comes. Yes, not resistance, not letting go of fear. And that's what life may be
about, which is being open to whatever comes and being open to learn no matter what happens.
And not crawling back into our shells and complaining and whining. And when we look at
little children, you look at an infant, you know, a 15 month old and mom says, you know,
it's time for us to leave the swimming pool now or it's now it's time for us to get out of the
sandbox and the child breaks down and cries and no. And you realize, wow, I mean, you
understand what the child is doing, but you also understand that's a lot of pain that the child
is going through. And if they just understood that mom and dad in the healthy cases loves them
and there's other fun stuff that's going to happen and just went with it, life could be a lot
better. And so I think that all anytime I find myself saying no to this moment, complaining in
any way, I'm the little child in the sandbox that's unnecessarily causing myself grief.
And so what meditation really teaches you is you are the one
everything's going to be fine, even death. And you've got to
you're here for the ride and enjoy the ride, be open to whatever comes on the ride. And that's
easier said than done. That's why I spend three hours a day in meditation. So I'm not saying
this as someone who's there. I'm saying it as someone who needs three hours a day
to open up to the ride. And I'm good with that too. As I said, that was my deck of cards.
Other people like Eckhart Tolle, it happened overnight. And I could wish that happened to me,
but that's not me. That's him. And so the one does, it has, tries on all sorts of different
avatars. It's all part of learning about itself. So it's a long answer to the question, but I think
that it does feed in to my research. And in fact, I would say this, that the best ideas I have in
research come after you have to do your reading, after your homework, of course, you have to,
there's no substitute for that. But then if you want the really good ideas,
go into silence. The real creativity comes when I let go of all thinking and just go into
absolute silence, interior silence. That's where the best ideas come from.
Yeah. Do you have any advice for people? Let's say there's viewers out there that don't have,
they don't have a meditation practice, but they've been considering it or
they're thinking about starting one. Do you have any tips or advice for people maybe starting out?
My advice, again, I'm thinking about people sort of like me,
that may not want to be heavily invested in any particular religion.
We'd like to have something that's just practical, that's helpful, but maybe you don't have to buy
into a bunch of other stuff. For that, I would say Eckhart Tolle, his book The Power of Now and
New Earth, those are fabulous books. I've read them and reread them. I've gone through them
multiple times and he has a number of audio tapes. Did you hear audio books or audio lectures
he's given? And I find them extremely helpful to listen to. Rather than me giving advice,
I would suggest here's the dude that's really helped me a lot. I've listened to all of the
stuff. I don't detect any nonsense. I detect a genuine person. Now, I know that I say this to
some people and some people say, well, no, you really need to do this more advanced,
Buddhist thing or whatever. And that's perfectly fine. But I think for many American, many
non-religious people, the approach that Eckhart gives is going to be the most easily understood
and used. But of course, there are Zen approaches. There are every mystical tradition, Sufism,
mystical Christianity, mystical Hinduism, and all the mystical traditions.
So I'm not pushing any particular religion at all. When you look at the mystical side of each
of the religions, Judaism as well, they all are pointing in the same direction, fallibly,
but genuinely pointing in that direction of going into, ultimately, it comes down to letting go of
thought. Literally entire silence, interior silence, no thought at all. So the thought
isn't your master. I use thought, of course, as a scientist. I'm talking with you. I'm using thought.
But there's a time where you say, okay, it's time to stop thinking all together and just be,
and just to spend a few minutes or a few hours, and then have it actually be the habit instead of
going through the day sort of lost in thought. Because most of the thoughts that we have,
just going through the day, when you look at them, they're completely dysfunctional.
They're useless, and many of them are painful. It's much better to understand that thought
by itself is like a wild animal. It's just running around. So tell it to stop. You learn to just let
go of the thoughts or to watch them and not believe them. If they're not going to stop,
you learn to watch them and not believe them. And eventually, they go away. And then thought
becomes very useful. When I need it for science, it's far more useful. But when I need creativity,
in many cases, thought is the background I need. I need to have done my homework. I need to have read.
But then when the true creativity is often something that transcends any thought.
So learning the care and feeding of thought, and to train it and to not let it run you,
but to have you use it as a tool and be able to put that tool down when you don't need it anymore,
or when you don't want to use it. So the tool tends to run us. It tends to tell you who I am.
No thought can tell me who I am. That's one of the key things. There is no thought.
I am such and such a scientist. I am the owner of this car. I am such and such. My name is,
I did this. I am the president of that. I have this big cap. All these thoughts
don't get anywhere close at all to telling you who you really are. They're distractions.
You can only find out who you are in utter and complete interior silence.
That's the only time when you will actually find out who you really are, and no thought is ever
adequate. Yeah, that reminds me too. A few minutes ago you mentioned something about benedicting
monks. Are you familiar with Joseph Campbell? Yes, in his work. Yeah, he was for folks who,
audience who is not familiar. He was a mythological and religious historian and teacher
for like 38 years, I think at St. Lawrence College. He had this great anecdote how he went to,
I think it was in Thailand. He went to some conference that was between
Buddhists and Catholics and a meeting of the minds. He said, the theologians that met on both sides
were just talking past each other. They could not understand each other's theologies,
but the monks on both sides, the Buddhist monks and the Catholic monks,
they were like, oh yeah, we get it. We're in the same wavelength. We're doing the same thing. We're
talking the same kind of process. We're getting the same feelings. That's what I think you alluded
to before. These like different mystical traditions and the practices that they have,
there's a lot of overlap between them and the kind of interior Meister Eckhart is another one.
Yeah, there's so much overlap that it seems like we're doing the same thing and it's just
different window dressing of the different traditions that are there. I agree. Yeah,
the when you go into silence, then all those trappings disappear and you get in touch with
the same thing. Yeah, unfortunately, I have to take off. Yeah, I was about to know that I think
that's a wonderful place to end and I just so appreciate your time, Don. Thank you again.
Thank you. It was a great pleasure. Wonderful. And thank you also. I really like that you bring
up these questions that people have because I do like to try to address the questions and
that this is very, very good. Thank you. Yes, I appreciate it. Yeah, I'm sure there'll be even
more coming. So and I will overlay that because a few questions I had in mind, but I don't care
from the commenters names, but I'll overlay them when those sections come along. And yeah,
thank you again, Don. And I wish you all the best and appreciate it so much.
Thank you, Carlos. Great pleasure. Take care.
