The holographic principle is basically,
and a hologram at any point is the information
for the whole object, the whole scene,
the whole cup, the whole ball, the whole plate.
Berkson was far more famous than Einstein
in the first two decades of the 20th century,
which is kind of mind-boggling to think of now.
Berkson and Einstein had a history in 1922, I believe.
The story is the myth, perhaps, is that that debate
prevented Einstein from winning the Nobel Prize that year.
Is that true?
Yes, right.
There was only one problem, and that was that
there was a war going on, and I had been drafted
as soon as I got out of the seminary
because my draft status was no longer 4D, which was exempt.
So I ended up going into the Marine Corps,
and I was actually in a long-range reconnaissance group
plowing through the jungle, trying,
with six guys in the middle of nowhere in the jungle
being dropped up in helicopters, et cetera, et cetera.
One of Gibson's big ideas was affordance theory, right?
He was that we see...
Affordance is a big thing, yes.
We see what is the usefulness of the objects,
and we see that kind of space.
It reminds me quite a bit of Donald Hoffman's theories
around we see the world in terms of
one of the most fit for us as organisms,
rather than what's actually there.
But I know you've done a video on Hoffman.
Right.
We're gonna blow Hoffman away here, but let me go back.
Just for one moment.
Could you tell us about that mystical experience,
what that was like?
Shall we say, all of a sudden,
just kind of laying on the deck, kind of like,
wow, what's going on?
And what one felt was that suddenly
that there was this other being that you actually were.
And this being was infinite.
You and this being had been the same being forever.
I guess I'm reminded of a statement by Thomas Merton,
the great contemplative monk that a Catholic contemplative
monk in a statement was in true contemplative state,
or actually he meant a mystical state.
All concept of sin dissolved,
because this being that you are is obviously a divine being,
and cannot sin.
And so when you brought up in the Catholic framework,
sin is very much a doctrine and a dogma,
and you're worried about mortal sins and venial sins
and confessing sins, et cetera.
And this whole thing just dissolved
because it's felt to be ridiculous.
It's felt that it's no longer applicable.
And the whole world was just one gigantic sea of love.
I mean, the ecstasy was so intense,
I almost had to have it turned off.
And there was another interesting concept
that must have come from deep in my being,
because I got this, all is just.
There was another was justice.
I must have been worried about injustice.
I still am, but at that time it was like,
well, everything is just.
So it was very intense ecstatic experience.
Rather, each instant penetrates, permeates the next,
like the notes of a melody,
each note penetrates, permeates the next.
Some melodic transformation, an organic continuity.
How is these bits,
how are they suddenly becoming concrete coffee cups
with liquid in them, stirring, rotating, right?
Come on.
When you look at the conception, it's ludicrous.
It is not Berkson's conception of a holographic field.
So it's 2D bit hologram, sorry, but not the same thing.
Not even worth looking.
See, you got me mad.
No, that's okay.
I mean, you're passionate about it.
I get it.
How is this theory, Berkson in general,
how does this influence your day-to-day life
or your moment-to-moment existence, if it does at all?
I, for one, think that science, physics, psychology,
cognitive science, given Berkson's framework,
absolutely backs the spiritual vision of man,
the Zen vision, if nothing more,
but probably also the Hindu vision
of what our actual capabilities are.
I think that there's no conflict between science
and this whole notion that's permeating people's minds
right now that neuroscience says we're just human robot forms
with no spiritual component whatsoever
is utterly destroyed by Berkson
and gives us a very solid grounding in science
and our own mystical experience that supports it.
So I guess bottom line from that perspective,
Berkson is a great comfort.
And if people wanna shed the transhumanist vision
the idea where we're gonna all get a nice bunch of chips
because it's just all we really are anyhow
and just become enhanced robots
and also there is no God, there's no karmic laws
and et cetera, et cetera that they'll get into Berkson
and you'll see quickly how just shallow and superficial
and understanding they actually are.
I don't include people like Sam Harris
or Daniel Dennett, et cetera.
These people are in my mind are extremely badly misled
because they extremely do not understand
the problem of consciousness and time.
So that's one thing, after that, it's been a giant pain
because I never thought that after 50,
what are we, 50 years that this particular conception
would be so buried yet.
It's buried in cognitive science
that no one wants to look at.
It's buried in memory theory,
it's buried in perception theory.
It's buried by the Getzonians for great sake.
They won't even look at it.
It's buried by the Berksonians for that matter.
Even Berksonian philosophers can go,
well, who can't deal with it?
I can just feel it, they don't want to deal with it.
Oh, it's too much, can't deal with that.
So it's become a frustrating pain
and I feel like my life's mission has been a bust.
So I feel right now, let me tell you the truth,
it's been a good, it was a good try.
Maybe someone later will come along
and take it up because right now, to me,
it's completely being ignored.
Steve Robbins has a PhD in educational psych
and psychology from the University of Minnesota
with a focus on cognitive science.
His thesis covered turn of the 20th century
French philosopher Henri Berkson
and his alternative model of mind.
In the decades since,
he's published academic journal articles
and three books on Berkson slash consciousness.
Before his doctoral work,
he served as a Marine Infantry Officer in Vietnam.
After 33 years in the software industry,
he's now retired on a mini farm in Wisconsin
and runs a YouTube channel with over 80 videos
dedicated to Berkson and his holographic theory.
Steve, thanks for coming on.
Oh, thank you.
It's a pleasure.
Yeah, it's so great to see you and get to chat with you.
I've discovered your channel many weeks ago
and have been digesting each video.
They're dense, but I highly recommend people check them out.
After this conversation, I'll link all of your,
link to your YouTube channel and your website
in the description of my video.
Right, right.
It's a tiny point, either in space,
somewhere in the channel.
Yes, yes.
Which takes a voyage to discover, apparently.
Yeah, absolutely.
A lot of competition.
You have to, it's a tough market.
I know, I'm a similar size channel, so I get it.
So Steve, it'd be great if we could kick us off.
I know you have some prepared slides.
If you want, you can pull those up.
I'd love to, I know you have some at the beginning
that goes through your background a little bit
in even more detail, because I love to learn.
I know our audience will have some context on you
to get your story and to figure out what intrigued you
so much about Berkson.
I consider you one of the world's experts on Berkson.
So if you wouldn't mind, yeah, pulling that up,
we can get into individuals of your story are great too.
I think seeing the trajectory of your career.
We're gonna have to go visual, as you noted,
because there's a lot here to comprehend
that two talking heads make it very slow to get across.
So some pictures work well.
Yes, for the viewers, if you like visuals,
Steve provides a lot of visuals on his YouTube channel
and extensive quotes that help elucidate
the concepts you're trying to get across.
We were thinking about beginning where,
how it began with, well, where I come from, I guess, is the...
Yeah, let's get your background.
You know, where'd you grow up?
I mean, you know...
So I'm basically a Minnesota native.
I'm sitting in Wisconsin right now,
a little bit north of Milwaukee.
I spent a good chunk of my life, like seven years,
as a Franciscan seminarian,
down in Chicago and ultimately in Illinois.
In fact, there was a good picture of,
there's my seminary in Illinois and West by Illinois.
And that's not me, but that's some Franciscan.
Just to give a context of what I'm talking about.
Because I spent the last year in 1966 in the Vichit,
where you're actually dressed up in a habit
and walking around with your cord and your rosary
and et cetera, et cetera.
But I decided to...
Can you tell us what you're up with, Todd?
Do you mind giving us some context as to why you
were temporarily joining the Franciscan order?
Well, yeah, I would say this.
My folks were very Catholic, very dedicated, very devout.
And I had some sort of, shall I say, affinity toward this.
I remember reading The Life of St. Francis,
Perfect Joy of St. Francis when I was seven years old.
And that already started me off right there.
I was going to be a Franciscan.
And...
Wow, at seven.
Yep.
Yeah, that division experience was quite the deal.
You got up at midnight and chanted office,
the divine office for an hour and then meditated.
And then went back to bed and got back up at six
and did more chanting of the divine office,
Tristan Lodge or whatever in Latin
and then go through the whole day.
There was no talking, et cetera.
But I left in the spring of 1966
because I decided ultimately after seven years
and lots of Latin and Greek and German,
the interesting education that was available at the time
in that environment, that it wasn't quite the fit for me.
And so, I ended up going to the University of Minnesota.
I had to finish off my undergrad in Crem,
two years into one year at Minnesota.
And I was in psychology and political science.
I was actually, political science was my thing.
But I liked psychology in the mind.
But that place there was the absolute haunt
of skin air and behaviorism and his rats.
And the very last course I had in the spring of 66
was by a professor from Michigan
who was teaching Piaget and Cogeth the development
and the whole theory that actually there's something
in the brain that skinner denied.
For skinner you weren't even supposed,
the brain was off limits.
You didn't look in the brain.
Here you had Piaget talking about cognitive development.
And that somehow turned me back on to psychology.
And there was only one problem and that was this,
that there was a war going on.
And I had been drafted as soon as I got out of the seminary
because my draft status was no longer 4D,
which was exempt.
And so I ended up going into the Marine Corps
for reasons I won't go into.
And I was actually in a long range reconnaissance group
plowing through the jungle,
trying with six guys in the middle of nowhere
and the jungle being dropped up in helicopters, et cetera,
et cetera.
So I spent 68, 69 doing that.
And these are always interesting experiences.
And I came back to the States and I guess that's a piece
I didn't, it's hard to picture here,
but I was very, I call it involuted because I was,
when you go through an experience like that,
you're wondering what's the meaning of life
and what the heck is this all about?
And so you sort of go into an intense inward state
and in that state, toward the end,
I was in North Carolina near on the sea coast,
the inland waterway.
I was living with three other ex-officers
and they were still officers in the Marines,
but on top of a yacht base and yacht club,
but I had what one would call a mystical experience
and which again had an impact on me
because I'm used from the seminary from a course
I took an epistemology,
which I didn't have a clue what was going on about.
There's something problematic with the relationship
of subject to an object.
And we'll come back to that in this discussion,
but that mystical experience sort of enhanced
that whole perception that oh, this is quite interesting.
And you see Piaget back to him,
he was sort of describing how the child starts out
and actually kind of a mystical state
where he's one with the world
and only gradually does he learn
that he's a self among other selves,
an object among other objects,
a force among other forces
and that he has an identity himself
with respect to this other matrix of beings,
forces, and objects.
And so in essence, it's the description of how one goes
from a, shall we say, infatmistic to,
excuse me, needing a Zen koan to break through
back to this original state
or where you are one with the universe, shall we say.
So that all struck me.
In fact, that kind of became my thought in that,
well, this is what I really should maybe look at
if I go back to the University of Minnesota,
which my next arrow says back to Minnesota in 1971.
You let me out of the ring for early.
Do you mind, Steve?
Sorry, I hate to interrupt you
because you're in a great flow here,
but if you care to share,
and I know it might be a very personal experience,
so please, if you don't want it,
if you don't care to,
but could you tell us about that mystical experience,
what that was like?
It's a little hard to describe, but it was,
I kind of found myself, shall we say,
all of a sudden just kind of
laying on the deck kind of like, wow, what's going on?
And what one felt was that suddenly
that there was this other being that you actually were,
and this being was infinite.
You and this being had been the same being forever.
And I guess I'm reminded of a statement
by Thomas Merton, the great Catholic contemplative monk
in his statement was in a true contemplative state,
or actually, I think he meant a mystical state.
All concept of sin dissolves
because this being that you are is obviously a divine being
and cannot sin.
And so when you brought up in the Catholic framework,
sin is very much a doctrine and a dogma,
and you're worried about mortal sins and venial sins
and confessing sins, et cetera, et cetera.
And this whole thing just dissolved
because it's felt to be ridiculous.
It's felt that it's no longer applicable.
And the whole world was just a gigantic sea of love.
I mean, the ecstasy was so intense,
I almost had to have it turned off.
And there was another interesting concept
that must have come from deep in my being
because I got this, all is just.
There was another was justice, everything.
I must have been worried about injustice.
In fact, I still am, but at that time it was like,
well, everything is just.
And so it was very intense ecstatic experience.
And with the awareness that there really wasn't no death,
you had been this being, this whole notion of sin fell away
because, well, there's lots of implications in that.
So, yeah, that's pretty much the content thereof.
Okay, and it wasn't long thereafter.
I mean, that, well, it's kind of funny
because I lived with another,
one of the lieutenants I lived with,
his nickname was Duke.
He had been over in Vietnam for, well, 18 months.
The normal 12 month tour and then his troops,
his platoon turned them on to marijuana
because they thought he was a cool guy.
And he re-extended for six months just to do the marijuana.
Wow.
And then he'd be walking around.
He was in LSD and he could be on an LSD trip.
You never knew it, you know?
Wow, interesting guy.
And because I had gotten out of the Marine Corps
about a week after that mystical experience,
he took me on an LSD trip, which was quite interesting,
which also helped in the ultimate breakthrough
one needs to understand.
Because Berkson, as we're going to point out,
is very zen, very mystical.
And people that are not zen and not mystical
and don't have this intuition,
I think have a very hard time understanding Berkson.
So, yeah, so like I said,
the era, I ended up back at the University of Minnesota
end of fall of 1970, starting 71.
I'm back in graduate school in educational psychology.
It was really called the Cognitive Foundations of Education.
It's really a cognitive psychology thing.
Philosophy was, and ultimately computer science
is going to come along.
Right.
I guess that was the, 72 was the big year
that computer science swept into academics
into cognitive psychology.
And the interesting thing you and I talked about before
is how I hit Berkson.
And the reason was I found a course right away
with a Dr. Bart who was into Berkson, was into Piaget.
And it was a discussion about or devoted to
Piaget's group theory,
not use of mathematical groups,
which I think he got from Ernst Kassier,
and initially, the great French phenomenon
or German phenomenologist philosopher.
And my thing was, I was going to write a something
about the epistemology of Jean Piaget, you know,
this came from my one course in the seminary
and epistemology and my association
discovering a Piaget at the end.
And I had no idea what I was going to do,
but I thought it was cool.
And Dr. Bart says, well, why don't you write
a comparison of Berkson to Piaget?
I thought, oh, okay.
I'm thinking, who's Berkson?
I am a, I don't have a clue who Berkson,
but I can do that.
Sure, I can do that.
Oh my God, do that.
So I discovered, you know, you go to the library
and you find books on Berkson,
because you're never going to,
or you wouldn't want to read Berkson right off the bat,
but you find it's going to distill it for you, hope.
And by will and car, I found a book on Berkson.
And this is what I ran across, right off the bat,
and about three or four pages in the car,
this statement by Berkson.
Questions related to subject to an object,
do the distinction in the union,
what's it put in terms of time rather than of space?
And I thought, whoa, that's cool, subject to an object.
I have no clue what that thing meant.
I mean, what is that?
That's why I have the zen picture there.
It's a koan, it's like, what is the sound of one
has flapping or who is it that sees?
Okay, it's a koan that you have to contemplate.
Well, I didn't know what that meant,
but that was enough to tell me
that something cool is going on.
Do you mind, Steve, if we quickly just give folks
a context as to when Berkson lived, what is...
Oh, yeah.
I mean, I know, but you're the expert, so.
Well, of course I forgot when he was born right off the bat.
Yeah, I mean, yeah, mid-1800s, 1800s.
Yeah, well, he's writing his thesis in 1889, okay?
Thesis was time and free will.
That was the title of it, 1889.
So he's probably about 20, we can probably go back
to about 1879 or something like that
when he was roughly born.
So I'll see so much from my Berkson expertise
right off the bat, down the drain.
But he was obviously French.
He was quite brilliant.
He was extremely diplomatic.
His classmates said he could destroy your theory
in a matter of a few sentences,
but he did it very diplomatic and nicely.
He won at 18 a very prestigious French prize in mathematics.
And he greatly then disappointed his mathematics professor
because he decided he was gonna go into philosophy.
That professor said, well, you could have been a politician.
I just can be a philosopher.
And I'm pointing this out because there's a great mythology
about Berkson ultimately,
because he ultimately gets in a big argument
with Einstein over relativity.
And I think he beat the heck out of Einstein
in terms of proper interpretation of relativity.
That's another story we may not even get into,
but the myth is that he did really understand mathematics.
Even Einstein ultimately admitted, well, yes,
he Berkson totally understands the theory of relativity,
but believe me, when you look at Berkson's book
on relativity, he just dismantles this dissection,
reconstructs the whole theory mathematically.
And obviously the effort was simply.
They're famous debate, Berkson and Einstein
had a famous debate in 1922, I believe.
And as a true, I mean, the story is the myth perhaps
is that that debate prevented Einstein
from winning the Nobel Prize that year.
Is that true?
Yes, right, right.
And there's a whole book on it,
and now we're doing a canalist
called The Philosopher and the Physicist,
which is the great title, going through the debate.
And unfortunately, she completely misses
the actual essence of the debate, which is a problem.
But maybe we'll get Berkson in.
One of my pieces of research, this person claimed
that Berkson was far more famous than Einstein
in the first two decades of the 20th century,
which is kind of mind-boggling just to think of now.
Right, because what happened is
he published his Time in Free Will,
which was taking the problem of free will
in the context of the nature of time,
which still is ignored today completely.
You can read Dennett, and A, you don't see Berkson mentioned,
B, you don't see Time mentioned,
Dennett on free will, Dan Dennett.
And in fact, almost all of the current discussions
on free will, he follows it up.
He spends five years studying memory difficulties,
aphasias, amnesias, and lesions to the brain,
and comes out with this book,
I got a picture of their matter in memory of 1896,
because his whole problem was,
does the brains actually store experience?
Does it store that coffee cup out there in front of my guy
there with the stirring spoon,
that experience of the coffee stirrer?
Does that store in the brain?
And his point was, the whole theory of consciousness
rests on this question,
is experience stored in the brain?
And again, you won't find that question ever mentioned
anywhere, not by charmers, not by straws,
and not by any of the people that are
the supposed great theorist of consciousness nowadays.
Just simply not understood.
The bottom line, his analysis of the subject
of all the phenomena of memory research at the time
was that it couldn't be stored in the brain.
It was not stored in the brain.
You did not have to have that hypothesis,
which is now a dogma, that memory is stored in the brain.
In fact, all that could be happening is that the brain,
when it's damaged, simply doesn't,
let's say, form the proper neural patterns
or modulating wave patterns, I'll call it,
that allow the memory to be re-instantiated
the original experience,
but not from within the brain itself.
So that's another whole question we ultimately,
probably actually quite won't get into,
but we'll see part of it.
And then, in 1907, he followed up
with the book called Creative Evolution,
which was a tour de force on the problem of evolution,
the problem of Darwinian evolution.
He was not a fan of Darwinian evolution.
And really the whole nature of the evolution
of the universe.
I mean, Tegard Deschardin, who actually,
I was reading at the time of my mystical experience,
I should say, was the great Catholic Jesuit,
a kind of a mystic theorist,
was inspired by Brooks's work, Creative Evolution.
And he was launched it by that point
into quite a bit of fame and famed them,
to the point where the ladies of Paris
wanted to attend his lectures.
And there was discussions of whether you'd hold
the lectures in the Paris Opera Hall,
because the attendance was so great.
Yeah, he was a local celebrity in Paris, right?
This of course also generated its own self-resistance,
because now you had other academics
that were like Brutern Russell,
that were extremely upset.
Should we say, we won't use the word jealous,
but they didn't like this, too much popularity.
And Brutern took a lot of shots.
The bottom line to, I don't know how to make this too long,
is that his popularity, well, again,
he really emerged back in 1922, like you noted with,
because he had been a great theorist of time that he was,
his ears pricked up when he discovered
that Paul on Javon had announced
what's called the twin paradox.
Do you remember where the twin leaves the earth
and the rocket comes back
and he's ageless in his brother?
And Berkson thought that was a complete misuse
of relativity.
It destroyed the logical consistency of relativity.
Hence, he began his arguments and got,
ultimately, Scott Einstein wrote the book,
Duration and Simultaneity.
And that sort of began this period.
He was actually working with Einstein
and I think the League of Nations at the time, too.
So he was somewhat prominent in politics at the time,
but that was beginning of his gradual descent into obscurity
and waiting in the wings, as I like to know,
his behaviorism, skin area and behaviorism,
the analytical philosophy,
which is very antithetical to Berkson's continental philosophy.
And he ended up dying of pneumonia
after standing in the line for a long time in Paris, 1941,
occupied by the Germans, by the Nazis.
He caught pneumonia.
He was going to declare himself a Jew publicly,
as the Nazis were demanding.
So he died of pneumonia and that was the end of Mr. Berkson.
And as I said, he sort of then went into obscurity.
And so that's him.
So meanwhile, someone like me comes along
and discovers this quote, we were sitting right now.
Yeah, this quote, back to the quote.
Yeah, thank you for the context, it's helpful.
Okay, so that began my reading of that book,
Matter of Memory.
I mean, I must have read it a dozen times
in backwards forwards, for the middle outwards,
every direction, because when you hit Matter of Memory,
you really don't know what's going on.
And the book was considered,
especially its first chapter, obscure,
even by his adherents, Berkson's adherents,
and we'll see why.
So I'm in Minnesota, and what's about to happen
in Minnesota is the computer model of mine
is going to sweep in in 1972.
The whole notion that the brain is a computer.
My advisor in the education psychology side
was very enamored of a book by Newell and Simon
called General Problem Solving, Human Problem Solving,
which went through their book with their computer model,
the General Problem Solver,
which tried to simulate solving problems
the way humans do, like cryptorithmic problems,
like Donald plus Gerald equal Robert,
which we have to sign numbers to each letter
like to Donald and Gerald equal Robert,
or chess was another one of the things in their books.
And so that swept in.
And the other side of the story I was related to
was on a pure psychology side was what eventually became
my thesis advisor, Dr. Bob Shaw.
And let me, I think that's where we're,
we're having subject to an object here.
I forgot to put that.
Sorry.
Oh, I have to remember my source of my things.
So let's, before I go to Shaw,
let's go to this point in Berkson.
Here's another of the koans.
This is in chapter one of that book.
So, but isn't that, Berkson is talking about
how do we see the coffee cup out there?
And in space, extended out there on the table.
How do we see that coffee cup?
Is there a photograph of the coffee cup in the brain?
And he says, well, obviously, is it obvious the photograph?
He said, I gotta keep my things in order here,
but neuroscience at the time was developed enough to know
that there was no coffee image in the brain.
You couldn't, you weren't going to find an image
of the coffee cup in the brain,
which is why I have the little red circle there
with the line through it.
So he says, excuse me, but isn't that obvious?
The photograph, if the photograph,
if photograph there be is already taken,
already developed in the very heart of things
and at all points in space.
No metaphysics, no physics can escape this conclusion.
But if the universe with atoms,
each is subject to the action variable and quantity
and quality according to the distance,
exerted it on by all material atoms,
exerted on it by all material atoms,
bring in Faraday centers of force,
the lines of force submitted in every direction
from every center bring to bear upon each,
the influence of the whole material world.
Call it the Leibnizian monads,
each is the mirror of the universe.
So that is key to his answer to how we see the coffee cup.
But you can see it's yet another coin.
It's coin number two along with subject to an object
in terms of time.
So I have no idea what that meant when I read it.
He went on, he was actually before this,
he was talking about the nature of the universe.
Take any object, for example, like the coffee cup there.
Any object is obliged to transmit the whole
of what it receives to oppose every action
with an equal and contrary real reaction.
To be in short, really the road by which pass
in every direction, the modifications
or what can be termed real actions,
it's visualized waves propagated throughout
the immensity of the entire universe.
Okay, so he says,
so only if we consider any other place in the universe,
we can regard the action of all matter
is passing through it without resistance and without loss.
And the photograph for the whole is translucent.
Here is wanting behind the plate the black screen
on which the image could be shown.
Our zones of indetermination,
there is talk about organisms,
centers of free action that can act upon the world,
play in some sort of the part of that screen.
They add nothing to what is there,
the effect merely this, the real action,
those waves passing through the coffee cup
that the coffee cup is reflecting
and sending back to all the other points in the universe.
They affect merely this,
the real action passes through those waves
and the virtual action remains, okay?
So if anyone here listening knows what this means already,
let me know, but unless you've picked up what I've said,
but you can see that this is pretty much co-on like,
very difficult to understand what's going on.
And he's talking about the problem
perceived in the coffee cup,
seeing that coffee cup out there on the kitchen table,
which is really the hard problem.
And we'll go back to that.
That's the hard problem.
I'll we see the coffee cup out there with this qualia.
Okay, so this is where I was going.
My other advisor, who eventually my thesis advisor
was Bob Shaw, the bottom there, Robert E. Shaw.
Now, he was a student of Gibson at Cornell
for a couple of years.
Gibson topped the picture, J.J. Gibson.
There we have his dates, 1940, 1974, 1979.
To me, he was the greatest theorist of perception
that walked the planet, maybe next to Bergson,
but actually pure theorist of perception on philosopher.
But he was very philosophical too.
He founded the subject of,
or what we call the subject of ecological psychology,
which is, there's now a journal today,
the Ecological Ecological Psychology.
It's a whole field or subfield in the study of perception.
And Shaw, my advisor there,
was the founder of that journal,
the Journal of Ecological Psychology.
He obviously knew Gibson.
He was, he studied with Gibson at Cornell
for a couple of years.
Why he was studying abstract automata theory at Cornell.
Abstract automata theory is, shall we say,
another level of abstraction above computer science.
It's the abstract logical description
of finite state machines.
And Bob was a brilliant guy, as we'll see.
I think it'll become through, yeah, but.
Gibson, if I may, had just such quick,
one of Gibson's big ideas was affordance theory, right?
He was, that we see.
Affordance is a big thing, yes.
We see what is the usefulness of the objects.
And we see that kind of space.
It reminds me quite a bit of, seems analogous to,
although I'm sure there's differences,
between Donald Hoffman's theories around sort of our fitness.
We see the world in terms of what are the most fit
for us as organisms, rather than what's actually there.
But I know you've done a video on Hoffman.
Right, we're gonna blow Hoffman away here,
but let me go back just for one second here.
Sure, sure.
But we won't do it here.
Yeah, that's why I look quickly.
To say, let's go back to, look at the very bottom line, okay?
Virtual action, that's affordances, as we'll see.
Oh.
Just a little preview, okay.
I didn't, yeah, I was gonna ask you,
I know virtual action, there's a few terms that you use
that when we get to them, I am going to stop and say,
let's really define this and get this down.
So virtual action is essentially affordances.
Okay.
Well, yes, but it's worse than that.
So we're gonna see.
Oh no.
We have to take it in a holographic context, so.
Sure.
Back to where I was.
Oh, let's see what my next slide is.
Okay, so we're gonna get there.
So, in 1972, like I said, the computer model swept in.
I attended a seminar with Shaw,
and he went through a Fygenbaum's book
on computers and thought.
And Shaw simply destroyed the whole network
with the notion that the computer model of mine
had anything to do with reality back then, already in 1972.
Around that time, also, Prebom, Carl Prebom,
I don't have a picture of here, published his book
called Languages in the Brain,
where he argued that the brain was a hologram.
And that accounted for how the brain stored memory.
He was trying to buttress the findings of Carl Lashley,
where Lashley had tried to destroy memories in the brain
and couldn't do it, and decided that,
which basically, what Lashley was doing,
he was also destroying anything
that would be considered neural nets today.
But that's another question.
And Lashley decided that memories
won't be somehow very distributed.
And holography, as we'll see, is the essence of distribution.
And Carl was trying to argue that.
And he had a very minor theory of perception
at the time, in Languages of the Brain,
how we see that coffee cup out there.
Maybe the whole holography has something to do with that,
but it wasn't a real coherent theory.
But Shaw had invited Prebom to come to a conference
and talk at a conference at the University of Minnesota.
And pretty obviously, the two had discussions.
And that, shall we say the next day
that Prebom was there, Shaw was giving his seminar.
And he started talking about holography.
And so we're gonna quickly talk about holography.
Construction of a hologram.
And so in the construction of a hologram,
we've got the hologram plate there.
And we've got a form of laser light to the left.
That would be a laser, a coherent frequency laser.
And so the waves from that laser
are hitting the hologram plate.
And then, I don't have a picture there,
but normally some of those waves are bounced off
of half mirror to the object or the scene,
the pyramid of the ball there.
So you would have some waves bouncing off the ball
in the pyramid and bouncing back toward the plate.
So that's called the object wave as I've got labeled there.
So the hologram is the interference pattern
of these two waves, the reference wave and the object wave.
And I was gonna put a nice picture
of an interference pattern there and I forgot,
but it looks, it's just a jumble of lines
to look nothing like the pyramid and the ball.
But that's our hologram.
It's a jumble of lines, the interference,
the recording of the interference pattern of those two waves.
And now the reconstruction process is interesting.
If I beam a wave of light, a coherent wave
of the same frequency as the original wave
of the original reference wave,
that's now called the reconstructive wave,
the reconstructing waves that are just labeled at frequency one.
We're beaming that back through the hologram plate.
And what is specified is the source
of this original object wave front,
namely the pyramid and the ball.
So notice, that's called the virtual image,
virtual action, but now virtual image, okay?
That's the virtual image.
Then you can move your head around.
Notice the viewer up there.
He can sort of, he's seeing the behind the plate
as it were out in space, the image of the pyramid and ball.
And he can move his head around
and sort of see the side of the pyramid
and the side of the balls.
It's a 3D image, so to speak.
So that's the reconstruction process.
Let me see what my next slide is.
Now, one can store multiple wave fronts on a hologram, okay?
So on the left there, I've got the frequency one case,
a reference wave of frequency one being used
to store the pyramid and the ball interference pattern.
I can change my reference wave frequency
and therefore my reconstructive wave frequency two
store an image of a cop.
And that wave front also interference wave,
interference patterns also on that plate.
And so if I modulate the reconstructive wave
from frequency one where I'm specifying the pyramid ball
to frequency two, I'm specifying now the cop.
I can modulate it back to frequency one
and see the ball again.
So I can modulate the reconstructive wave, okay?
So far so good.
I'm in the footsteps of Shaw here.
So then what Shaw says is,
well, rather than looking at the brain
as being the hologram,
what if we look at the universe as being the hologram?
Universe is the holographic field.
In other words, as he said, the hologram is not in the head.
The head is in the hologram.
And the brain is acting
or is creating the reconstructive wave
passing through the holographic field
and specifying a source within the field,
the coffee cup, stirring spoon, the table.
Okay.
So he's flipping
Prebram's thesis around completely.
And that's when I realized what Berkson's talking about.
But isn't that obvious that the photograph,
I gotta move your picture.
That's okay, yeah.
But isn't that obvious that the photograph,
the photograph there be is already taken,
already developed in the very heart of things
and at all points in space.
What Berkson was describing in that obscure chapter one
was that the universal field, the field of matter
is a holographic field.
That's each point.
And that's a little slide I forgot to do.
Because each point in that field is the reflection
of has the information for all other points in the field.
If I go back to the slide here, for example,
if you look at the cup, okay,
visualize it as a set of points, okay.
Where each point is giving rise to a spherical wave.
Okay, this is in the, let me go back one more.
That sounds, I mean, it's related to, would you say?
There's clearly a relation to quantum mechanics here,
where, you know, waves and particles, et cetera.
I'm sure.
I wouldn't go into the quantum mechanics black hole
in this yet, okay.
Okay.
But here, instead of the cup, go back to the ball.
Each, this is, we're constructing a hologram, okay.
Each point on the ball can be considered as giving rise
to a little spherical wave that goes out toward that plate,
all right, and covers the entire plate, okay.
So the information for any one point in that ball
covers the entire plate.
But conversely then, at, when you realize
a whole set of points of that ball covering that plate,
then that at any point in the plate
is the information for the entire ball, okay.
So one point, the spherical wave from one point
covers the entire plate.
But now when you see, there's a whole set of spherical waves
covering the entire plate, you realize that at any point
plate is the information for the whole ball
and the pyramid.
So, the holographic principle is basically that.
And a hologram at any point is the information
for the whole object, the whole scene,
the whole cup, the whole ball, the whole plate.
So that's back to this,
we were, the photograph is already taken,
already developed a very hard of things
in all points in space.
At every point in space is the information for the whole.
So we don't need a photograph.
And then you've got this next quote,
our zones of indetermination in the organisms
play in some sort of the part of that screen.
They add nothing to what is there.
It affects merely this.
The real action passes through.
The virtual action remains.
So remember in the previous picture,
you're seeing the virtual image,
the virtual image of the cup or the,
so that's the virtual action remaining.
So if we-
What would be the real action?
Well, the real actions going back to the other quote
is every, all of those,
the, remember Berks and Tuck with a Holt,
this is massive set of real actions.
Where that, if you look at the,
my little picture there of all the lines and waves
in my little symbol of the universe as a holographic field,
we're only picking out that set of real actions,
those waves that are interesting to us.
That actually relate to the body's capability for action.
Okay.
So hence why it's virtual action.
You're seeing how you can act.
You're seeing the possibility of action.
I can act on that cup.
I can act on that table.
We'll see this more again,
or in other words, the cup presents affordances.
Sure.
The cup of the virtual action.
And the real action would be everything else
that we don't perceive.
Yes.
Yes.
We're embedded in the field of real actions.
What we're seeing is the virtual action,
that subset of the real actions,
that the brain and the body are picking out
as interesting to it that relate
to its capability of action.
So when you upgrade Berks into,
remember the holographic model,
the notion of a hologram wasn't discovered
until 1947 by Gabor.
Matter and memory is 1896.
That's why no one understood it.
It didn't have this physical model there to get it.
Even when I tell people about it now,
they still don't get it, but that's another question.
But when you upgrade Berks
and then into the holographic language,
you'd be taking these quotes.
You'd be saying, well, the universe is a holographic field
and the brain is a reconstructive wave specific
to a virtual image within that field,
the coffee cup and stirring spoon.
And as we'll see, it's a modulated reconstructive way
because coffee stirring itself is very dynamic.
All these events are dynamic.
So the brain is constantly being modulated,
dynamically transforming as we'll see.
Can you define what modulation is?
Well, that was back to the picture
where we simply were changing from frequency one
to frequency two to frequency three.
We're modulating the wave to a different frequency, okay?
But as I understand-
Like frequency modulation.
Sure, so forgive my ignorance,
but I think what I think of modulation,
and let's try to be on the same page,
I understand it as a signal that's sent
to help the transmission of information or help the...
See, this is where the limits of my understanding kind of go,
but does that make sense?
It's like sending another signal through a signal.
Right, but you simply-
Even in that framework, I think you're trying to get to,
you're basically modulating the wave
into a certain pattern or form, okay?
So that it carries my...
So it's, you modulate that wave,
so it carries my voice pattern, my voice frequency, okay?
So that it's reflective of my voice up and down, okay?
It's a more complex modulation.
In fact, this is gonna be,
and ultimately this is gonna be a very complex
form of modulation that we're talking about here,
but the simplest form is you're simply changing
from frequency one to frequency two to frequency three,
and back to frequency two,
simply modulating that wave to the different frequencies.
That's the simplest form of it.
Well, I gotta see where I'm going here.
So as I was saying,
so the brain is in this framework
is a modulated reconstructive wave,
put the brain here,
and it's specific to or specifying the cup.
Now that cup is right where it says it is.
Now here's another, I have in the picture,
modulation here in modulated, reconstructive wave.
Let me move from frequency two,
we can see the cup, frequency three, the wine glass,
frequency one, again, changing that.
What would be the purpose of changing the frequencies?
Well, if you remember,
each of those objects was stored
with a specific reference wave of the same frequency.
That cup, that cube was stored
with a reference wave of frequency one.
So the interference pattern is kind of related
to frequency one, it's a function of frequency one.
The cup was frequency two and the interference pattern,
the way the waves all mesh is a function
of that frequency two and the object wave from.
Sure.
So if you could, in our moment to moment existence,
how many frequency waves are we talking about
in terms of what we can perceive?
I mean, are we talking like an astronomically large number?
Well, what we're gonna see here is that this is a,
this talking in terms of a simple frequency like this
is a way to get the mind going into how this process works,
how the holographic specification process works.
But when you're talking the brain and the event
that's driving the brain, namely this coffee stirring,
okay, you're going to have extremely complex pattern,
modulation pattern, we'll call it,
that where the notion that it's a simple frequency
kind of fades into, and you're looking
at something far more complex.
Sure.
So hang on, you'll see that in a second
when we get there with a little more in Gibson,
what has to be brought in.
So as I'm saying it, so that we're,
it's specific to a specifying this wave,
the brain is now specifying the cup
right where it says it is in the external field.
It's not right where it says it is.
It's common sense says to us when I'm looking
at my coffee cup out here in the desk.
That's where it is.
It's not constructing an image.
No, it's not an image inside the brain
in some mental space or perceptual space somewhere.
Like you'll get theorists talking about like Yoshabak
will say, well, it's in a perceptual space.
Well, what's the perceptual space?
So this is what's called direct perception.
That is indirect perception would be the picture up there
in where the image of the cup is in the clouds.
So we see in the mental space or in the brain somehow.
And somehow that corresponds to the world out there
in some magical way.
But direct perception says, no, you're directly perceived
seeing the cup right where it says it is external
in the field.
We're not constructing an image in the brain.
Now I'm saying, when driving,
here we're going to do your question.
What's really driving the modulations?
What I've termed the invariant structure of the event
and we'll talk about that where this event
is extremely complex.
It's got velocity flow fields in the swirling of the liquid,
the abiotic ratios, which are when you're stirring it
energy of oscillation, the frequency of oscillation
is a ratio of that.
Inertial tensors which have the momentum of the spoon,
the various force momentum of the spoon,
acoustical invariance like the clinking of the spoon
which is always coordinated with the motion of the spoon,
et cetera.
So we're going to go into that
because that's going to take us into Gibson.
But every such event has such a structure
and that's driving the brain.
We'll get into that.
And it's all being specified at a scale of time
because that brain has chemical velocities.
And this is a neural dynamics there,
underline which are chemical velocities
which can be expressed in the arachnian seclusion
and it can be modulated too, it can be changed.
You can drop a catalyst which lets the reactions
occur more quickly with not as much energy,
raise the whole chemical velocities.
So the brain is, we're seeing the world specified
at a normal scale, normally the buzzing fly,
200 wing beats per second.
But if you raise the energy state of the brain,
increase the chemical velocities,
it could be specified as a heroin like fly
barely flapping its wings or even raising it still higher,
a just a cloud of electrons.
So we have to break what I like to call the scale policy,
that the world just exists at this scale, it does not.
There's multiple scales and the brain is specifying
a specific scale.
So this wave is supporting, it's a reconstructive wave
and specific to a scale of time.
So what a fair way to, I'm just trying to perhaps simplify it
for the audience.
There's waves, there's a holographic field
made up of waves out in the world.
There's waves in my brain and the waves in my brain
are connecting with the waves out in the world.
One could look at it that way, yep, that's a start.
I mean, that's a really-
But, you know, because there's levels of description,
you can see it as waves, but now notice I just described,
okay, the coffee cups is set of waves,
but also at another level, and so she has scale,
it's all these invariance logs, okay?
The swirling flow field, the adiabatic ratio of energy
or oscillation of the frequency as I stir.
So what I had pictured there-
Would you mind just defining invariance for the audience?
We're gonna see it in a second.
Oh, great, awesome, thank you.
We're just, we're going there,
because this is why I have the picture of Gibson there
and the fact that Shaw was a student of Gibson,
because Gibson was the pioneer in describing
and the importance of invariance laws in the world.
He saw this information as being part and parcel
of the direct specification of the coffee cup out there.
So here's an example.
You have what's called a texture gradient,
and the texture gradient is a whole pile of texture units,
my little circles of the texture units,
and they recede in the distance.
The horizontal, there's a little math amount of law.
The horizontal distance between each little unit
is inversely proportional to the distance from the observer
is S is proportional to one over D.
And then the vertical separation going back,
notice they get completely compressed,
that separation is special to the law,
one over D squared or S is proportional to one
over the distance squared from the observer.
Okay, so that's an interesting little thing.
Does that have to do with our field of vision,
or is this just how,
sorry, if you could go back a step.
Yeah, because I find this very interesting
that there's different laws for horizontal versus vertical,
but the distance, why is that?
Point I forgot to mention, these fields are ubiquitous.
Okay, these are gravel, this is your gravel driveway,
your field of grass, your beach sands.
Et cetera, if I turn the upside down,
it becomes the cloud ceiling,
stretching off in the distance to the back.
If I turn it on angles like this,
it becomes the walls receding, okay?
What's being said here is this is an inherent
intrinsic mathematical law within these fields,
these textured gradients, okay?
And it becomes useful because if I move the cup
across this gradient, there's an invariance law
relative to those texture rows that specify
that the cup stays the constant size.
If notice there's including roughly four texture rows,
if I move it forward, okay?
It's now including two texture rows,
but its height is doubling, okay?
So as the height doubles, the number of texture rows
goes as halved, and again, you've got this invariance law
where n is the number of rows, s is the height of the cup,
or s times n equal k is always a constant, okay?
And so this would be an example of invariance law
where there's this invariant ratio of size
to the number of texture rows included
as I move the cup back and forth across this gradient,
which is helping specify the role as stable
when I move my cup back and forth, okay?
As the size of the cup does not change,
even though the size is growing on the wet retina
as I move the cup back and forth toward me,
this ratio is constant,
and so I don't perceive the cup as changing size.
I forgot to say two texture rows
included with the height is doubling.
Here's another one, it's an optical flow field.
So we're putting this whole gradient in motion.
Now it's a gradient of velocity vectors
where again, the value of each vector
is proportional to one over the distance squared,
again, the distance from the observer.
So the fastest moving vectors are closest to you
if I'm standing far away at the border
at the very versus optical flow field,
and the slowest moving vectors are furthest away
near the mountains, okay?
There's a good example as I'm driving along,
velocity flow fields.
There's all kinds of interesting little things
to find over these flow fields,
like the tolerate show, which I've got specified there.
Don't ask me to translate what it means,
and you can see it involves the velocity over time.
But this ratio has been shown to be useful
for things like coming in for landing
because this specifies the severity of impact.
If the tau value is too great,
that as I'm coming up too fast on it,
that flow field is too fast, I'm gonna crash.
You know, as a bird coming into land,
I'm using this tau value to modulate my wings
so that I land nice and softly, or as a pilot,
I land nice and softly on the runway, okay?
So here we're starting to get a picture
of the information is getting,
not information in the light,
and dynamically transforming optical field
that the brain is modulating,
the brain is getting into the action systems.
Those ratios are being used to specify virtual action,
how I can act on the world, okay?
Here's an example of, I'm gonna appreciate,
there's also what's called grasping tau,
that is, as I'm moving the cup back and forth
for modulating how I grasp the cup, okay?
Again, this information data and optical information
is getting into the action systems
to modulate, specify how I can act, or affordances.
Now, if we get more dynamic, you know,
there, I like to do what I call the Gibsonian cube,
because if you were rotating cube,
you'd have a partition set of these flow fields,
or the top would be a radio flow field,
and as the side, that right side moves toward you,
sorry, where my little cube is rotating
the opposite direction up there in the corner,
if the side is rotating toward you,
it's an expanding flow field,
it would directly present it to you,
it's just a non-expanding or contracting flow field,
as it rotates away from you, it's a contracting flow field.
The edges, and there was a static features of the cube,
are really simply sharp discontinuities
at the junctures of these flows,
and if you think they're not,
well, here's an interesting little experiment
or demonstration that Shah discussed,
or I've got a rotating cube, a wire edge,
and it's got a symmetry period of four,
so it carries itself into a symmetry period,
it carries itself onto itself every 90 degrees,
the cube maps right back onto itself every 90 degree turn,
it looks like the same thing again, right?
So it's got a symmetry period of four,
you'll do that four times,
and if I strobe the cube at an interval multiple
of that symmetry period,
four, eight, 12 times per revolution,
I'll get a rigid cube rotating,
so I've got a strobe there,
so it'll still look like a rigid cube,
but, and here's my little picture here,
so I've got a symmetry period of four,
sort of saying the same thing,
in phase, four, eight, 12,
out of phase, this would be out of phase strobe, five, nine,
13, it's no longer an integral multiple,
well, if I do the non-indrical multiple,
out of phase strobe,
it becomes a wobbly, non-rigid,
plastically deforming, not a cube, okay?
Now one could argue this is a constraint being violated,
that normally spatial symmetry that our nice cube,
carries itself into itself four times per revolution,
is no longer being specified,
it's, you expect spatial symmetry
should equal temporal symmetry,
but it's not when you have that out of phase cube.
I didn't put another picture here of a rotating ellipse,
that if, again, you can decompose the edge of the ellipse
into a whole pile of velocity vectors going around the ellipse,
and if the ellipse rotates too quickly,
it becomes a rigid, a non-rigid, wobbly object again, okay?
So these, the point being that these forms in the image,
the coffee cup, the table,
are very dynamic, they're dynamic,
they're dynamic forms, they're actually qualia themselves.
That's why I said that the whole image is the problem,
it's, I think I mentioned,
where Chalmers kind of misled us,
that the whole image is qualia,
we're trying to explain the image of the external world,
it's all qualia,
hence why we need the brain as a reconstructive wave,
specifying a portion of the holographic field,
as we'll see, that holographic field is qualitative of itself,
specifying the cube, the coffee cup,
is a qualitative portion of a qualitative field.
So all of these are examples now,
I think of invariance laws, I think,
the velocity vectors in the distance,
the height of the cup, the rows occluded, the toleration,
it's all information that is specifying or useful for part,
part of the specification of the environment,
the external world.
It's not Shannon's definition of information,
nor can it be brought under Shannon's umbrella.
This is Gibson's information,
and it's resolutely and adamantly ignored
in the neural net and computer model mind.
As you can see, it can't be.
Why can't it be?
Well, it's obviously important, that was my simple,
it's too important to ignore, you know?
So, you know, get put in it all together,
back to my coffee, you know?
It's got all these invariance laws
defined over that coffee cup,
the radial flow field and adiabatic invariance,
there's a ratio of energy of oscillation,
the frequency of oscillation, I moved that spoon,
and inertial tensors, finding the various
from mental at this point, these are all defined over time.
You don't find the value of the energy of oscillation,
the frequency oscillation is a static,
instant static point, we'll come back to that.
Acoustical invariance, you got the spoon
clinking against the cup as the spoon moves and sound,
you've got ratios relative to the extra gradients and flows,
I could move that cup back and forth
on the extra gradient, remember?
Constancy remains the same.
If I had a cubocal cup, I could be rotating my cup,
and now I'd have that Gibsonian cube
with all the flow fields defining the quote edges
and vertices of the cup, et cetera.
Grasping tau, as we noted for grasping the cup, et cetera.
So back to my picture, our little coffee cup,
our innocent little coffee cup is this invariant structure,
and the invariant structure is,
that's what I say is driving the modulation of the brain
as a reconstructive way, but I think now,
back to your question, well, can we really talk about
quote frequency one or frequency two, really?
Only in a metaphoric sense that it helps us understand
the holographic reconstructive process,
because this is obviously very complex wave form, right?
At this point, if you visualize the brain
dynamically changing over time, being driven by this structure,
it's obviously a very complex structure
that's being unfolded into the brain.
And yet, ultimately, the vision is that
it's all comprising this reconstructive way.
And as I noted before, all models of the brain
have to address this dynamic structure.
It's obvious to the information that's specifying,
it's obvious to the information
that's defining the event, defining coffee stir.
But neural nets do not, and cannot,
partly because they're in this completely different model,
in a different model of time.
The neural net is simply a instantiation
of a Turing machine, and the Turing machine
is a discrete state model of time,
or removing state zero to state one, et cetera, et cetera.
Removing state to state as we move that tape.
So you've got an intrinsically different model of time
in the computer model, as opposed to what we're gonna need
to support this holographic field reconstructive wave,
invariant structure model, and we're gonna get to that.
We're gonna break it out in terms of the computer model
being a discrete view of time.
Yes, we're gonna, we're about to launch right into that
because that's another piece.
Continuous, okay.
Yeah.
I had one more thing to say about invariance laws,
it's kind of interesting.
Over here, another invariance law,
here we have the aging of the facial profile.
And the law specifying that aging is such,
if we take a cardioid, which is like a heart shape figure
and place it over a skull,
place the skull on a nice coordinate system
or matrix there, then if we apply
what's called a strain transformation,
which expands that coordinate grid
in all directions simultaneously,
like stretching a rubber sheet,
what you do is start generating an aging of that profile.
I have a picture there.
You can, if you start with a child,
as you do the strain transformation,
you'll get the second picture there.
And then the third,
there's a whole series, obviously,
I just picked out three.
You can see that we're getting an aging of that profile.
So, interesting because this aging
is normally a very slow event, right?
It takes us, we perceive, we recognize that Joe aged
after we, when we meet him 30 years later,
or watch him as he grows.
But the interesting thing is here is that
the same law is going to hold
in different space time partitions
all our relativity.
For example, the burden, the essence of relativity,
the real point of it in Einstein's relativity
was that the same law holds
in either space time partition,
in the moving, in the stationary system
on the bottom right there,
the law is D equal VT.
In the moving system, it's D prime equal VT prime.
It's the same form of law.
It's just I've changed the distance units
and the time units in that moving system,
or what I call the moving system.
So the same law holds in each partition
D equal VT or D prime equal VT prime.
And variance laws are critical in special relativity.
That's probably the most important piece
of special relativity is the importance
of invariance laws, okay?
And I got to see what I say here.
Now, if I go back and notice, I said,
you could raise the energy state of the body,
increase the chemical velocity.
So I could take that buzzing.
And if I raise the chemical velocities,
I drop in, frankly, LSD at the right proportion.
I got a whole paper on that.
You're gonna increase the chemical velocities,
but you're gonna slow down the specification of the event
that fly's gonna go to from 200 wing beats per second
to looking like it's barely flapping its wing, okay?
And I got to keep moving you around.
The slow moving wing of that heron-like fly,
maybe it's a seagull, but we won't argue here.
What does that mean?
It means it's got a relationship to action,
to the possibility of action.
I can reach out slowly and grab the wing.
I mean, more startlingly, let's say I raise the energy
state enough so that the fly was stuck still.
I mean, the wing stopped.
I mean, not clearly I could reach out slowly and grab it,
but this is the exemplar of perception being virtual action.
We're seeing the possibility of action
of how we can act.
This must be so for perception to be ecologically valid
in all partitions.
Because I can change the velocity of processes
just by changing the temperature.
I can get a fever and I can slow down time.
Nature has to have allowed for this.
That is, you have to have invariance laws specifying
these events.
And that is, the information has to be invariance laws.
It's invariant to the spacetime partition
or the energy state of the body.
Which, and the energy state is a range of energy states
and the time scale that can be specified
is a massive range of time scales.
Again, this is affordances.
It's just an aspect of affordances that the Gibsonians
never seen.
Well, you can see it's too much of a stretch for them.
And I'm going to see why, ultimately.
But obviously, if the fly is affording a certain action,
so is the gall affording a certain action.
But it's at a different scale of time.
Change the scale of time, I'm going to change
the form of affordance.
So, as I noted, back to where we started,
aging is a rapid event.
If I take it as a rapid event,
let's say that little Joe there is growing
right in front of my eyes.
So the same law is employed to guide the modulation
of the hand if I wanted to grasp the transforming head,
the strain on the cardioid.
That's the information that would be getting
into the action systems to guide my grabbing that head
as it transforms at a very rapid rate.
Just a little aspect of the nature of it,
just a criticality of invariance laws.
So, I noted Gibson was for direct perception.
To him, the environment is directly specified
via all this information.
The brain is resonating to this time-extended information.
Another way to put it here, my little box,
the brain is resonating to the invariance
in the external event.
And it's directly specifying the image out there.
There's no image in the brain.
That's Gibson.
No one can understand it.
Purvis and Lotto, great perception theorist recently.
There's our little book.
Well, Gibson is now perceived as mystical.
Stephen Leihar's early perception theorist
goes through Gibson's, I've looked at Gibson,
I have no clue how direct perception can possibly be true.
Because for all these people,
somehow the image is in the brain
or in that perceptual space, that cloud I had up there.
Again, to make sense, Gibson's direct perception
must be placed within Berkson's holographic,
brain's a reconstructive way framework.
And as we're gonna see, it puts motion of time.
And into this, because motion of time.
Another aspect of what, implicit aspect,
we're specifying the past, okay?
The specification is to the past,
to the past extent of the transformation
of the holographic field.
But the wingbeats of that fly,
by the time they get into the brain
or processed are long gone.
It's 200 wingbeats per second.
They're long gone.
So how we're seeing the past,
how is this past specification possible?
Okay.
Well, what's the barrier to that?
The barrier is this conception of space and time
that we have.
I call it the classic metaphysics of space and time.
And we're gonna compare that to ultimately
the temporal metaphysics of Berkson,
which allows the specification of the past.
So the classic metaphysics,
in essence, it's an abstract space.
It's a three-dimensional continuum of points positions.
I'm showing a two-dimensional continuum
of points and positions there.
Are my little points and positions?
But ultimately, it's a three-dimensional.
We're moving the cup through a three-dimensional
continuum of points and positions.
Because it's a space, it's infinitely divisible.
I can, in fact, as Berkson calls it,
it's a principle of infinite divisibility.
He called it, in essence, a mental diagram,
the meshes of which we can contract at will,
that we place beneath the extensity,
the true concrete extensity of the concrete world.
We'll talk about what extensity a little bit later.
But just imagine it's the concrete world
and we place this abstract mental diagram of meshes
that we can make smaller and smaller.
So when we look at motion in this framework,
as I move that cup from nearer to far
across the continuum, it's taken as a series of,
the motion is taken as a series of points on a line,
which, again, is a space.
And that line being a space is infinitely divisible.
I can divide it into this little point
after point after point.
But between each pair of points,
I can imagine there's another line of points.
Again, infinitely divisible.
And so what we end up with is this is an infinite regress.
I can keep dividing between each pair of points.
I can do another line.
It's an absurdity because motion is now being reduced
to a series of immobilities.
How do you get motion out of a series of immobile points?
And I should add, it's precisely the source
of Zeno's paradoxes, where I'm taking that line
and I'm having it successively
and smaller and smaller I have,
but Achilles never reaches the tortoise
because it's infinitely divisible.
I can never quit the process of infinite division.
Only with, I can do it with a mathematical convention,
but that's a magical mathematical convention
like taking a limit.
But that's a mythology that mathematical convention
has actually solved the problem.
Whitehead tried that solution, but it's just a mythology.
Because infinity is infinity.
The mathematical convention is simply conveniently stopping
the infinite division.
Now, time is interesting
because now it's simply the fourth dimension
of this abstract space.
So really have a four-dimensional abstract space.
It's this series of instants.
So each point along that moving cup
is taken as an instant, shall we say.
So each instant corresponds
to a position of the moving cup.
And then each instant can be taken as
across the whole of the universe,
as though the whole of the universe
at that point, at instant in time, is a cube of space.
For each cube, the time extent of each cube
is a mathematical point, equivalent
to the mathematical point on the line.
But as such, each of those blocks is frozen, it's static.
You can't move from one block to another.
I jumped ahead of myself here.
But each block then is completely homogeneous.
There's zero qualities, especially emotion.
Because you can't get a block or a series of such blocks
because remember, each block disappears
as the next one arrives.
So all you ever have is one block.
And the next and the next and the next.
So you're not going to get the quality of motion
like Valerie Hardcastle's list in the context of a symphony.
The patrons shift in their seats.
The musicians concentrate.
The curtains ever so gently waving.
Those are qualities of motion,
which I've never talked about, by the way,
the problem of quality, but these qualities of motion.
So the car looking at this in order
to reintroduce motion in this metaphysic
actually thought that you had to have,
this is where you needed God,
because God would have to create each block
and the next block and the next block and the next block.
That's the only way you could get the universe to evolve.
So once you've frozen it is a static block.
You're not going to get the next block.
Again, this is precisely the metaphysic
underlying the turbine machine and all of computation.
It's why intrinsically, inherently intrinsically,
the computer metaphor is not going to be able to deal
with what we need for Berkson's framework,
shall we say, and mind.
So let's go to that.
The temporal metaphysic for Berkson.
For Berkson, that transmission of the universal field
or motion itself is indivisible.
It is not a series of discrete states.
Rather, each instant penetrates,
permeates the next, like the notes of a melody,
where each note penetrates, permeates the next.
So melodic transformation and organic continuity.
Also, the matter field in this is characterized by extensity,
as I noted.
So here's my, there's a nice lake there.
That's the concrete material field.
The abstract space placed over it
at continuum of points and positions
is not the same thing.
It's the ideal limit of this extensity,
but it has never reached it.
It cannot be reached.
It's simply an ideal mathematical limit.
This is why you can't exalt the abstract space
into a reality and make it your starting point
for building a model of mind as does AI.
The brain simply does not dwell
in the world of the classic metaphysic.
It deals in the world that classic metaphysic,
that abstract space is,
it's created or derived by the brain in its development.
It's called the development.
Piaget spends great deal of time explaining
all the way from eight zero to eight seven.
It takes to our cop to truly construct that abstract space.
Okay, one point, Steve.
The top, just the top two points here.
Would you say it's, and I'm sure people disagree,
but current consensus in say modern physics
is that space and time is discreet.
Yes.
So they would break it down in terms of like the plank,
like I'm thinking, and of course,
we don't experience that this way
because it's so minuscule,
but you have like plank, the plank length, plank time.
That says, if you had to discreetize space and time,
you could possibly do it that way,
but this model is different.
Is that accurate?
Yes.
The problem is all of mathematics
is based in the classic metaphysic.
And even the wave equation is based in this classic metaphysic
and ultimately involves this process of taking limits
such that I can arbitrarily stop an infinity.
Okay, at the basis of the wave equations,
Euler's identity.
Or Euler's identity is,
or the description of the wave,
but in order to make that identity work,
eventually you take a limit to stop the,
well, basically in Euler's identity,
you've got sort of a rotating cosine wave,
but it always comes back to zero.
In order to make it come back to zero,
that's Euler's identity,
E to the i pi equals zero,
you have to take a limit of that relation,
E to the i pi, our arbitrary mathematical limit,
but that sits at the heart of the wave equation.
And you're exalting that abstraction into the reality
from which you're trying to start all theory.
See, everything's inverted in our current theoretical world.
That's the problem.
So, yeah, I did a speaking of quantum.
I mean, I did a YouTube on Schroediger,
I think it's number 60 on quantum jumps.
Schroediger did a Quake paper in 1952
where he utterly destroyed the whole notion of quantum jumps.
He destroyed it, logically destroyed it.
People don't realize this.
But again, that comes back
to the fundamental nature of the mathematics underneath it.
So let's see.
As I said, the domain, this is important.
The brain dwells or is embedded in dynamically transforming,
indivisibly transforming a holographic field
or the world of temporal metaphysics.
It derives the spatial metaphysics,
the classic metaphysics, the abstract space.
This is just completely foundational
if you're gonna follow Bergson.
Okay, so let's find the past to bring it back.
The indivisible transformation of the field
where there are no incidents falling into the past.
Again, you don't have this model of instant
after instant falling into the past,
which is the symbol of non-existence.
Rather, you've got this indivisible flow,
each instant permeating the next organic continuity.
Well, that, in effect, forms a primary memory.
I was stealing the term from William James.
The field is already, in essence, got its own memory.
It's not falling into the past, it's not in existence.
So then, when you're specifying the holographic field,
the specification is to a past extent
of this holographic field.
Now, this is interesting aspects of things
that I haven't totally worked out
because you're gonna have to have the resonance field
of that represented by that brain, those waves there
as only lasting for a certain period of time
and it's relative to an extent of the past of the field,
of the buzzing fly.
Again, as in, the wing beats are long gone.
So this allows a past extent of the transformation
to be specified.
You don't need short-term storage areas in the brain,
which is a concept filled with logical problems.
Because right now, if you think about when I said,
for Berkson, the essence of the problem,
consciousness was his memory stored in the brain.
Well, when your perception is already the problem,
you're looking at that spoon stirring and the fly buzzing.
Well, are you storing each instant of that in the brain,
sliced by like snapshot, by snapshot, by snapshot,
then trying to reconstruct the motion?
How are you doing that?
Where do you, who reconstructs the motion?
Some internal scanner, we'll talk about that in a second,
but you can see that the very fundamentals
of perception itself, of seeing that coffee cup
already involves the problem is how,
well, his memory actually being stored in the brain,
his experience being stored in the brain.
And the answer is, no, it can't be.
And something else we can see there, but I lost it.
So, but if I go back to Gibson for a second,
you'll see what he's saying the same thing.
Notice this, this back, back to the classic metaphysics.
He says, the idea that space is perceived
in times you remember, looks at the back of our thinking,
but these abstractions, space and time,
the classic metaphysics, borrowed from physics
are not appropriate to psychology.
And he says, adjacent order and successive order,
better abstractions, and these are not found separate.
Oops, I can spell R there.
He says, physical events can form a relation before and after,
and not to the contrast of past and future.
Well, again, you've got to visualize that line of points.
For one point is the present, points before that are all past,
which are falling away,
and the points coming later are future.
That's what he's saying is, that's the classic metaphysics.
When you take the classic metaphysics down to,
it's logical conclusion and the brain itself
only exists for one of those infinitely small points,
and a point of mathematical extent and time.
That's just not applicable.
Unfortunately, the Gibsonians are not,
are not paying attention to that quote.
I mean, even my brilliant advisor, Bob Shaw,
did papers trying to model the whole of Gibsonian
ecological theory on the wave equation
with this inherent problem.
So, just an aside.
Here's another thing that Gibson notes,
the traveling moment of present time,
that infinitely tiny point that's called the present
between the present and between the past and the future.
The spacious present, that mathematical point
that would be the spacious present.
Again, Berks and Gibson notes,
well, no one can say where perception leaves off
and memory begins.
In fact, I failed to put the quote there,
but when we're looking at the past,
specification of the past,
it's really an essence of Berkson said is the case.
Perception is already, already a memory, okay?
All perception is memory already.
So, no one can say where perception leaves off,
memory begins, it's difficult, it's an old one,
and notice he says in the blue,
there are animals that men perceive motions,
events, episodes, and whole sequences,
as they don't see point after point of,
it's an after instant on a line
for the classic metaphysics.
And he says, the document of sensation-based perception
requires the assumption that the succession of items
can be grasped only if the earlier ones are held over,
so as to be combined with later ones in a single composite.
He says, this can be pushed into absurdity.
Well, notice I've got up there,
Barcelona's theory of how you would store
a biting transformation.
I'd store it there, I'm inviting a carrot,
there's three schematic states.
Mouth closed, mouth open, mouth closed back on the carrot.
And so we store that in the brain, three schematic states.
Equivalent to storing, putting three snapshots
on photographs on a table, okay?
The question is, well, how do I restore the motion?
How do I reconstruct the motion
by some sort of internal scanner, okay?
But then I've got an infinite regress,
I've now got to explain how the scanner,
internal scanner registers the motion.
See, I'm doing there exactly in that picture,
you're just insane.
A succession of items can be grasped
only if the earlier ones are held over,
like on the table, successively, one after the other,
to be combined with later ones into a single composite.
It can be pushed into absurdity, yes it can.
Biting is actually a facial flow field.
There's Homer there, biting, or, you know,
look at the facial flow fields on these biting,
or here we go, here's an actual biting of carrot, okay?
It's hard to store, oh, I screwed up, back there.
We got to go back, sorry about that.
It's hard to store as the coffee stirrer
into the rotating queue.
See, again, notice, do you see anyone in memory theory,
I'm just rhetorical question as far as your concern,
addressing how you would store that coffee stirrer
with all those invariance laws that define it,
which define only all over time.
The invariant radio flow field, the inertial tens,
there's a lot, how do you store that?
And, you know, as a series of three-dimensional
snapshots in the brain, good luck, okay?
And then how do you restore it, reconstruct it as motion?
Hence, you know, again, Gibson's relying on Berks.
Which brings us to the last thing I got here,
that good old original question,
a problem subject to an object,
how do, what is going on there?
Because we need to remove the viewer.
Somebody looking, see, remember the hologram plate
is the brain, and we have to review,
who's looking at that image out there?
Or, equivalently, we need to remove the homunculus,
looking at the image, whether it's in a perceptual space,
or the, or out there, or somehow.
So we're back to our coin,
questions related to subject to an object,
to the distinction, the distinction of the unions
you put in terms of time, rather than space.
My original coin.
So, here's the deal.
Defined over the dynamically transforming
holographic field, we've got an elementary awareness
that is the null scale of time.
And that is, when I say null scale,
I mean, most infinitely small scale of time you can imagine.
Now, things are still always changing,
but think of that change in the tiniest interval
you can imagine.
Again, each point or event in that field
reflects the state of all of the points, okay?
So, in essence, you've got elementary awareness there,
that at every point, every point's sort of
an elementary form, truly an elementary
of all the other points,
taken at this infinitely small scale of time.
And you've got an elementary memory
because of the indivisible transformation
or there are no instance falling into the past,
that primary memory.
So, as I've noted, if you take our fly
and take it at that null scale,
a very tiny scale of time,
or it's almost a cloud of electrons,
it's not going to have the distinct outlines
from the rest of the field,
the rest of the holographic field
to include any distinct outlines from our body.
Our body's gonna be the same thing.
In other words, the objects that we think are nice
and separate, like the cup and the spoon and the body,
and don't actually have the distinct outlines.
I'll mesh into the field, ultimately.
It's a big spatial unity.
So, if I start lowering the energy state of that brain,
I'm going to lower it now
because I'm going to go from the very small scale
to a bigger scale.
I'll get my hair in like fly, okay?
And if I lower it still more,
I'll get my normal scale, a buzzing like fly.
So, we're starting to have subject differentiating from object,
not in terms of space, but of time.
The unity of the two,
the body and the fly there is not broken, spatial unity.
Remember, there's no distinct outlines
or borders between these objects.
But as I impose the scale of time,
I start getting this nice separate object,
the buzzing fly and the coffee cup from my body.
And in terms of time,
and then I think we have to add a bit more
with the Piagetian development,
where ultimately he describes this whole evolution
of the child's conception of object,
where he starts to realize that he's a separate object
from the coffee cup and the fly.
Can I tell you a quick anecdote that this reminds me of?
Do you mind?
To what?
I just have a quick anecdote on that.
You just mentioned child and this is reminding me,
I have a niece and two nephews
and this is just recalling something my nephew said
to me years ago when he was a little younger,
I think he was five or six years old.
And we were just playing, hanging out.
And he said something to me that we were separated.
He was standing on the, he was standing, you know,
I was standing separate from him.
And he goes, I'm touching you right now.
I was like, what do you mean?
He's like, well, I'm standing on the floor
and the floor is touching you.
You're touching the floor.
And I was like, huh?
And he said, yeah, it even,
I'm touching the house across the street.
I'm touching that and his conception,
I think it has something to do with,
I think about this a lot with kids,
like what are they perceiving?
What are they seeing?
What is their kind, like the difference in terms of,
and obviously as they grow up,
they reach some critical period where
they come into agreement with society,
the people around them as to the nature of things
and what's actually happening, right?
Or as we perceive it.
Yeah, they start to need to be, you know.
Yeah, but the interesting thing is like,
if you look at it in terms of a slice of time, let's say,
and I hope this is, if it follows with what you're saying,
if you were able to just take a slice of time,
one plank time, let's say, you know,
just one snapshot, everything would be the same object.
Is that accurate?
Yeah, yeah.
If you, yeah, once you,
because it's all, it's one big field and, yeah.
Almost, yeah.
I'd say yes, I'd go for that.
Something like that.
Obviously language is tough because
we're trying to put towards these very complex things
and it might not even be possible in our vocabulary
to get there, but we can kind of analyze
and get around it sort of.
True.
Okay.
I think I'd maybe one more thing.
So this is where it's kind of interesting
There is, the essence is there's no one seen.
This is, this is where it gives Zen
because the specification is to a time scale form
of that elementary awareness that we're talking about,
elementary memory to find over the transforming
holographic field.
And so, I mean, this is the kind of the essence
of the Zen Satori where all of a sudden
you can concentrate on your Koan.
Who is it that sees?
All right.
And all of a sudden there's this Satori or Ken show
where you are the field, you know.
There's a famous book by Douglas E. Harding
that I having on having no head
where all of a sudden you realize there's just this.
There's no, there's no,
you're that, that, you know, there's no separate being.
His context, he became the Himalayas, you know.
But this is the essence of the Zen Satori.
I spent some time on YouTube discussing,
I know you said you watched the Zen experience.
I think those are my favorites.
Right, this is why Berkson is so Zen.
I'm not sure what I got left here now.
Well, like I said that, so, well.
I have a lot of questions even when you're,
I have a lot of questions even when we complete
the slideshare, but.
So, notice this is Berkson's unique panpsychism
over on the left.
It's a panpsychic model because that field is conscious
in essence, it's got elementary awareness
and elementary memory, but it's not the consciousness
of stirring spoons and that experience
of the coffee cup and stirring spoon
or if you're a frog, the fly buzzing by
or anything like that, it's not yet the consciousness
of frogs or humans or ants or anything,
but it's panpsychic, but there is no aggregation problem.
We're not trying, this is Chalmers famous problem,
we're not trying to aggregate or combine the consciousness
of all the little tiny particles into the field
and explain how we end up with the experience
of coffee stirring, you know.
How do you get coffee stirring out of a bunch
of little conscious particles?
Well, or to make it even worse for Chalmers,
how would you explain how you now get the time scale
of the buzzing fly as opposed to the hearing-like fly
as opposed to the electron cloud fly
out of your conscious particles too, right?
Of course, time scale is never a problem
for any quality of consciousness
there's ever seen in my life yet.
So, they just don't comprehend that one,
so the deal is the reconstructive way
of specification dynamics takes care of this.
I'm specifying this field as a coffee cup
and a buzzing fly.
In other words, I now have a dynamics,
I have a mechanism to explain the conscious experience
of the external world in this panpsychic field
that panpsychism in and of itself does not have,
it has no such thing, it fails miserably
and drops dead on that.
So, that's my panpsychic field.
The only other thing I had that was,
I just, I think it's worth mentioning is this,
in this model, experience is not
occurring solely within the brain.
Therefore, it cannot be stored solely in the brain.
Yes, the brain, the brain also as a reconstructive way
can resonate in the same invariance law pattern
as the coffee cup we saw, as the coffee stirring.
And we can reconstruct or reintegrate
in the old terminology that experience.
So, if you wreck the brain as a modulating device,
it's gonna look like the memory is gone.
A memory stored in the brain is destroyed,
but all you've done is wreck the brain's ability
to assume the complex modulation pattern
that is involved in the perception
of that coffee cup as we've been discussing.
Now, obviously then, in other words,
what we really are, and if you took Berkson's theory
with that temporal metaphysics,
is we're four dimensional beings.
We're elongated being of four dimensions
in which all of that experience,
all the coffee stirrings you've ever seen,
are stored in detail, not in that image form necessarily,
but it's all there.
And I can reconstruct it by re-assuming
the right modulation or resonance pattern.
And so obviously,
you've got a whole different theory of memory implied.
I've done a lot of talking about,
but also a whole different theory of cognition
because we're using our experience,
our experience of coffee cups,
our experience of cubes, of rotating cubes, et cetera,
to do cognition, to think.
And this is where Penrose went
when he was talking about why computers
can't deal with consciousness.
He started up, obviously,
the Gettel's proof as being an indication
or the problem basically showing this,
but he, along the way, in the shadows of the mind,
he started talking about what he saw
as non-computational thought.
And here's a little example I've got here,
this would be a proof, a visual proof,
that he tried out of a computation
that does not stop, it's called the halting problem.
How can I show that a computation does not stop?
It goes on infinitely
and always ends up with the next logical result?
Well, in this case, what he's doing is showing
that a hexagonal number
and added to a previous hexagonal number
always makes a cubicle number
and never stops.
And so what he does, as an example there,
you've got the number 19, which is this hexagonal number,
and he folds that into a three-sided cube,
and then he stacks that three-sided cube
over the previous cube, which was an eight,
two by two by two, a two by two by two cube,
and now he's got a three by three by three cube of 27.
He's going to go on and take another cubicle number,
which is 37, fold it in three sides,
stack it over the three by three by three cube
for a four by four by four cube, and now he's 64.
And obviously this can go on and on and on.
So notice what he's doing, it's very visual.
He's folding each hexagonal number into a three-sided cube.
He's stacking the cube always over the next
to make an ever larger cube.
So this is a dynamic transformation.
Hope I don't lose my slide, yeah, over time.
It requires a mind that's in indivisible flow,
not state after state after state,
where each previous state disappears as the next one comes,
which is the essence of the computer model.
You have to have this invisible floor continuity
else the globality of this transformation
of continuous folding and stacking cannot be perceived.
And the invariance across this transformation,
namely always a three-sided cube,
always ultimately a stacked cube,
then various can't be registered.
So Penrose was really pointing to the essence
of invariance laws as being the essence of proofs.
And I need this continuous indivisible transformation.
Him being a complete mathematician
and totally stuck in the classic metaphysics
didn't realize what he's saying.
He never has grasped the implications
of his non-competitional thought.
And of course, he was trashed heavily
in behavioral and brain sciences journal
when he did a precess of this book, they couldn't stand it,
but this is what he was pointing to.
This is the essence of true cognition.
This is what you have to have.
And this is why a computer and AI
is never going to equal human thought.
Because again, the intrinsic model of time
is the classic metaphysics,
the discrete instant state of time.
All there are, no matter how concrete you look at,
the computer itself, with all of its
electrical flows and wires, et cetera,
the essence of the machine is an abstraction.
It's a logical model.
It can be carried out on an abacus
or a registered machine with beans and shoeboxes
as long as you're carrying out the abstract operations.
And the abstract operations are state after state
after state in discrete time.
So inherently, intrinsically,
it cannot do this type of thought.
And you're never going to get AI.
And if you notice, this is actually already
simply a special case of the problem
of common sense knowledge,
which AI can't deal with either.
It's his bet noir, common sense.
Yes, there's working on the crew
and trying heavily to solve it in terms of neural net,
sure, but neural nets are again,
simply instantiations of Turing machine.
So they're faced with this problem.
This is just another common sense knowledge problem.
I mean, you can imagine myself,
I'm going to build a mousetrap or even a lawn mower
and I got to stack a whole bunch of stuff
on top of each other and make a big cube.
So I think that's the main thing I wanted to say.
Yeah, notice I have a little note here.
Penrose identified this thought
as demanding consciousness, but again,
in other words, he stuck in a classic metaphysic
and doesn't understand that consciousness applies
in the divisible flow of time at primary memory.
Oh, and I did one, because this is just an example
of the same thing and Piaget is just replete with this.
I mean, if Penrose actually understood
the literature of developmental psychology
and cognitive psychology that Piaget represents,
he would probably have been ashamed to do what he had said.
But here's another simple example.
Piaget is taking children age three to seven,
he's got a tunnel there,
and he moves those little colored beads into the tunnel
and then he rotates the tunnel, there's a halter
and then he asks the child,
well, what order will it come out now?
And you can see if I do a semi-rotation 180 degrees,
the order's gonna be reversed.
I'm gonna go in as ABC,
but I'm gonna come out as CBA.
If I do a full rotation,
I'm gonna keep the order the same, right?
I'm gonna come out again as ABC.
If I do it three times, three afterns,
I'm gonna invert the order.
And if I ask seven times, what's the order gonna be?
Well, if I know the rule by this time
that the order changes, odd number of turns,
the order reverses, even number of turns,
the order is gonna be the same as it went in,
I can always tell you, 19, okay, well,
it's gonna be, the order's gonna reverse, right?
It takes the children three to seven years
to figure this out, this odd even rule.
And in the course of it, what they do is they visualize,
just like Penrose and his cubes,
they visualize one half rotation, one semi-rotation.
What will happen then?
What if I do it again?
What if I do it three times?
Okay, it's gonna say the same, it's gonna reverse, you know?
But they'll get to a point
where they can maybe visualize four semi-rotations,
but ask, what will happen on number five?
They can't, they flake out.
They can't visualize it,
they can't keep the train of visualization going anymore.
So ultimately they come to a point
where they can say, what's body seven?
Oh yeah, odd number of turns, it's gonna reverse,
even number of turns, it's gonna say the same.
And this all comes down to what he describes
as concrete operations,
which develop over three to seven years.
And he hears this interesting quote,
he says, well, operations, one might say,
are nothing more than articulated intuitions
when they're adaptable and completely reversible
since they are emptied of their visual content
and survive as pure intention.
In other words, operations come into being
in their pure state when they're schematization.
So notice that.
In essence, the imagery,
the dynamic transformation of imagery
is absolutely essential in the course of development,
exactly like Penrose was pointing to.
It's just that as you do it enough,
the images almost disappear
in terms of very schematized form.
And so he says, instead of the actual representation,
each inversion will be conceived
as a potential representation,
like the outline for an experiment to be performed,
which is not useful to follow to the letter,
even in the form of performing it mentally.
So this is really the essence of Piaget's concrete operations
or non-computational thought to put it in Penrose's term,
which she didn't know about Piaget.
In other words, you need Berkson's device
to support this kind of thought.
Again, this is just a common sense knowledge problem.
Now, I mean, this specific problem,
but is this an example of the kind of,
I mean, call it a thought process,
the kind of problem solving
that a computer would find difficult to do at this point?
Yeah, common sense knowledge is,
yeah, is the essence of the problem.
I mean, they've tried to simulate this stuff
with neural nets, the developmental series,
but people have looked at it and says,
well, what's going on in the neural net weight,
how the weight change has nothing to do
with how children actually develop.
But when I say common sense knowledge problem,
my metaphor, my example I like is creating a mousetrap
out of arbitrary components, okay?
Where I should have put my picture in here,
but you imagine you have a little cardboard box
and you have a pencil and rubber bands and paper clips
and a piece of cheese and some strings and some toothpicks.
And I actually ran across this when I was in my teens,
it was a, in Reader's Digest,
it was a creativity test for engineers.
Well, here's this pile of stuff, can you make a mousetrap?
Okay, and you can visualize making a mousetrap
with a, imagine a box with,
you got the pencil drawn back,
you got rubber band outside the box
and you have a little hole, the pencil goes through
and you can draw the pencil back
and maybe you put the toothpick lodged
in a little groove in the pencil so that the pencil sticks there.
The mouse, the pencil will be in the inside of the box
holding the pencil and there's a string to the cheese
and the mouse pulls the string, pulls the pencil out
and sticks himself with the pencil, okay?
The pencil flies and hits the mouse, okay?
In other words, it's a crossbow trap.
It's analogous to a crossbow, okay?
Hit the picture, I could make a,
if I got a razor blade, you know,
I stick the razor blade into the pencil
and I prop the razor blade up in a corner
and prop it up with a pencil
and maybe rubber bands pulling it down.
I'll give myself some staples to work with, you know?
So there's force on the pencil
and the mousetra gotta be a fairly strong mousetrap
to pull the, pull the razor, pull the,
it depends, people whip up these traps all the time, you know?
Gotcha, so if you're, yeah, and now I,
maybe you have the stapler falling on the mouse,
I don't know, but you know, this is the common,
okay, the problem is that there's no finite set of features
that you could put in the database
that a machine could use because, you know,
the features are emerging with the transformation, you know?
The rigidity of the pencil and the sharpness and the fact,
or the fact that I could lodge it in the box corner,
the box corner is a nice place to lodge a pencil for the axe.
All these things are, all these features of the pencil
or the functions emerge with the transformation
that you're, the analogy transformation,
you're sort of visualizing like,
I could make it into a crossbow
or I could make it into a giant boulder trap
like that destroys Wiley-Coyote or something like, okay,
that I've, okay, so it becomes a massive problem
of representation, excuse me, of the features of objects
because there's no finite list, excuse me,
all the transformations that are necessary, et cetera.
That's the common sense knowledge problem.
And you can see why I'm saying, well, just tunnel rotation
or stacking cubes of one another,
just part of the same kind of problem,
same thought process.
Cool, and this is your last slide, right?
Yeah, I do believe this.
If you have time, I'll add one more.
Oh, one more.
Yeah, but I thought that would be the one we,
part two, if we ever do one, we'll go into relativity.
Because that's another piece of the story of,
excuse me, getting grit in the horse.
This is another piece of the story I was interested in
because I remember Berkson's argument
with Einstein and relativity.
And I, in that time I had with Shaw,
I was trying to reconcile Berkson to relativity
because Berkson believes in becoming,
the dynamic transformation of the universe
has always evolved in becoming.
But you have that static block model of space,
of space time where everything's laid out in one big block
because supposedly there's no simultaneity.
Therefore, there's no plane that you can take
through that block that represents a universal present
across the entire block of a present instance
that then grow as the block grows, okay?
Because I've destroyed simultaneity, supposedly.
And I was trying to reconcile that,
and I found this article by Millik Kappek,
where he tries to show that
the Mankowski formula
for the space time manifold or matrix,
the Mankowski space time actually preserves becoming.
And I thought that was cool.
And I wrote this paper up
because then it seemed like, okay,
Berkson's got to be coming and this interpretation says
there's at least some becoming in the static block universe.
There's gotta be some becoming, some becoming.
And that seems to be the point of reconciliation.
Shaw thought that was cool.
And he gave it to Gibson who was there at the time.
And Gibson read the book, read the article,
and said, well, yeah, scribbled on the top.
Yeah, it's good to take big thoughts, big questions,
but you should look at other things, you know?
I said, okay, well, he doesn't like that resolution.
And the next day he was giving his talk
at the University of Minnesota,
and he comes up with a statement out of the blue,
you know, to anyone there other than someone who happened
to have written that particular paper, namely me.
So I'm sitting there,
and I'm probably the only one who knew what he was saying,
but this is the quote,
he says, physicists must lead us
when they say there is no simultaneity.
When the camera pans to the heroine,
tied to the rails and then to the hero,
rushing to the rescue on his horse,
these events are simultaneous.
I guess we should add the train in
to speed into the hero, hero.
So, and I recognized right away another one of those,
oh, I know, this is, he's siding with Berkson.
He's siding with Berkson's argument against Einstein,
because these are what's called multiple,
I call multiple simultaneous flows
that cannot be relativized.
And that's another whole topic.
I don't know if you want to share it.
I think it would be interesting to go into, you know,
where this absolutely destroys Einstein
and very concretely and very easily,
and why relativity in its current interpreted form,
interpreted and interpretational form,
that is where the twin paradox is held to be true,
it's got to be ditched.
And so, but that's another.
Okay, yeah.
That's another topic.
Already a lot we've covered so far.
Can you, this is, this is, this one's your last one, right?
I hope so.
Yeah, it is.
I have a number of questions.
I'd love if, if you still have time,
I'd love to just cover up on a couple of things.
I guess the first thing,
gonna tackle this from different perspectives,
but taking a step back
and thinking about Berkson a little bit.
One of the things I think is interesting is,
and I'm trying to make a comparison here with,
I think a lot about ancient symbols
and semiotics generally,
but are you familiar with the Yin Yang symbol,
the Tai Chi two, the, are you familiar with that symbol?
It's like two, a white half and a black half.
Oh, the white, oh yeah.
And the pace, the pace lays in between.
Well, one thing I think is very interesting about Berkson is,
he's spoken about as like a poetic philosopher,
oftentimes.
And of course, the debate we just talked at the beginning
about between him and Einstein
seems to be if there are two halves of the same coin,
let's say Berkson would be the intuitive
Einstein representing rationality.
Would you say that's a fair kind of,
it's a very broad kind of statement,
but that is where they kind of,
Well, the other way, equivalently the classic metaphysics,
classic spatial metaphysical space and time
versus the temporal metaphysics.
Sure, yeah, you can split it both ways.
Which incorporates the latter incorporating intuition,
which is another whole topic.
Yeah, intuition was a big,
intuition was a huge part of Berkson's framework
and ideology, but so I bring up that Yang symbol
because the way I perceive it's quite interesting
because Berkson's usually portrayed as this poet
and that's part of the reason why he spoke,
he spoke and wrote in sort of beautiful language,
flowery language.
It was kind of tough sometimes I think to sort of provide
boundaries or like specify exactly where he stood
on certain issues perhaps for other people,
for other people that read Berkson.
I bring up the Yang symbol because it's funny
because like within Berkson, that intuitive sense,
what you've brought here is a very technical framework
and it's almost like you're bringing in the rationality
within Berkson's poetry.
Does that make any sense?
Is that congeal at all to your, the way you see it?
I could see it in a certain way,
but I tend to look at it as I'm just getting even more visual
and more concrete than Berkson did.
No, I mean, I agree.
I think you are getting more concrete
because Berkson was, you know, it's funny.
He didn't have the language.
He didn't have, he predicted this stuff early.
I'm doing this in a PowerPoint medium
with all kinds of stuff.
I mean, he, I mean, one of the reasons
that kind of I ended up doing those,
whatever number I'm at, 75 or whatever of these things is,
I mean, I published a lot in academic,
but you can't express all the stuff there is
and is dynamically and is neatly in articles
as you can in this medium.
I mean, I think this was incredibly freeing up
a powerful medium.
I mean, obviously I'm, you know,
I'm sure people look at me
and think I'm in a stone age on it,
but because, you know,
I know you'd be prepared to you, I'm in a stone age,
but it's, so some of that,
some of it is this medium.
Some, when you, I guess if you looked
at my academic articles, I would appear a little,
I probably wouldn't be quite as,
obviously you're going to put so many pictures
in an academic article and you have to,
well, it's no more.
And I tend to get a little more concrete
than Brugton and those things,
but there sure seems to be a whole lot of people
that you don't understand me.
So I don't, I don't, like I said, it's very Zen.
It's very, you have to have a certain intuition
of soul in my mind to resonate to this stuff.
Yeah.
And I agree.
I mean, the, and it actually speaks to perhaps a sub point
of what Berkson was getting at in terms of duration
with, and this is something I do if you're,
if we're going to talk both creators of content on YouTube
and another place, of course, your written work.
I've always found showing things in motion to be,
to have things, to explain things better
than static imagery.
So it's funny when you're showing off your GIFs or GIFs
on these slides and you show the stirring coffee cup,
and you can kind of, I think, understand where Berkson
was coming from, because would it be fair to say,
he'd argue most of science, the cutting edge physics,
let's say, focuses a lot on the spatial component
and doesn't give the temporal dimension its fair do
or its fair emphasis.
And actually, as far as the limited physics, I know,
it's funny, many, most, probably not all,
equations can be our agnostic to the direction of time
can be done backwards and forwards.
That's the bare minimum I know,
or I think that's the case.
But of course, the temporal component is probably
underappreciated or not fully.
Oh, it's just, absolutely, yeah.
There's so many, like, there's so many subject matters
where the temporal, the problem of time
is just simply just not grass.
I mean, like I said, when you look at the whole literature
on the hard problem, you just don't see any understanding
of the problem of time, period, you know,
like just as I noted, all the examples of qualia
are probably like the redness of the sunset,
the taste of the qualifier, so it's all fairly stacked.
Qualities of motion, like the gently waving curtains
of valoury hardcasts or the patient shifting slowly
and it seems like, okay, that's just not even
grass they're understood, and notice that it's all,
if I made the field make this point,
there's all dynamically changing qualities of form
that say, hey, the whole image is form,
and so your problem is, how do you see the external image,
the world, the image of the world out there externally,
the coffee cup changing with this,
in front of this gently waving curtains,
that's the problem, see, it's because of that failure
of the grasp of the time and all these dynamic forms
and change that when you say, oh, I've got a model
of how you see the image of the world out there,
they don't even know that that's a solution
to the hard problem, it doesn't even dawn on them
that that's a solution, but physics, same problem.
The fact that they think that they can get away
with a completely discreet state model of time
and capture what's actually going on
in the dynamically transforming matter of field
is endemic to them, and on nice examples
of it aren't coming to mind at this point.
It's fine, yeah.
But there are, well.
How do you think this model, sure.
How do you think this model, oh, sorry, at the,
and also just to be clear for the audience,
I don't believe Berkson, he didn't create
the term holographic theory of mind, right?
You are.
No, yeah, like I said, he was.
Interpreting Berkson.
It wasn't until 1947, so yeah.
Yes, it was after his death.
I represent this, and let's take Berkson
and upgrade him into how he probably would have talked
that he knew about holography, let's put it that way.
Can you intuit how does this model help explain qualia?
Well, as I said, the transformation of the field
is indivisible, instant permeates the next.
It's already a qualitative transformation.
So when you're specifying, the brain is specifying
the gently waving curtains, it's specifying
the qualitative transformation of that field
at a certain scale of time.
Color itself is a time phenomenon.
It's a certain vibration of a electromagnetic field
over time, that again, you're putting this,
like Berkson noted, if you take one second of red light
and spread it out wave by wave by wave,
such just that you could count in the normal amount
of time people can distinguish events,
you've got 25,000 years that would require
to count each wave of one second of red light
for 400 billions of vibrations.
But in essence, we're compressing the,
now notice when you spread it all out,
it's almost back to my cubes of space.
It's almost one giant big pile of cubes homogeneous,
no quality.
But now, when you're specifying that color,
it's compressed into a one second of red light.
It's now, that's what we see.
We don't see 25,000 waves.
You see this glob of color of pulsating red, okay?
It's this huge amount of time being compressed
by our perception and by the brain processes.
So it's now it's becoming more,
it's now obviously more qualitative,
perceptually than that huge spread out field
as it would look at virtually
what I call the null scale of time.
But it's, but again, remember the null scale of time
is it's an abstract limit.
It never becomes the homogeneous space instant after instant
of the classic metaphysics.
So all quality, all qualia is a function of time and motion
and at a scale where there's buzzing flies,
air and flies, brown flies versus red flies
versus white flies versus gently waving curtains
versus violently waving curtains.
Sure.
What is this?
And I'm going to jump around a lot here about that.
If you're thinking about the, say the double slit experiment,
does this, well, I mean, this is a theory of every sort of,
a theory of everything or a theory at least,
our state, our perception of things.
Does this relate to the double slit experiment in some way?
And if so, how?
I'm sure it does, but I, you know,
I don't even know how to answer that question.
I know it's a very broad question,
but I'm making connections here between,
obviously the double slit is, you know, particles.
Oh, sorry.
There seems to be a connection between
at least the wave particle duality,
the observation of that.
So our measurement of that.
And then it's resultant effect on, you know,
the pattern that's found on the screen, right?
So this seemingly, you know,
so this theory would have to at least incorporate that,
or at least I don't have to explain it per se,
but it has to be at least perhaps consistent
with that observation.
Yeah, I'm drawing.
It's like, it's a giant disc loaded to my head.
I can't do it right now.
I understand.
Yeah, we just, this is a long conversation,
so we can provide you with that.
It's a giant memory stick, I have to reload.
But I think that there is probably a connection here
if you were trying to make the case, yeah.
Yeah, I, you know, and I don't think,
I mean, I've looked a lot, I think I've looked a lot,
I've looked a lot at the quantum theory
of the stuff I had it, you know, videos on it,
like I noted, you know, about Trader, et cetera.
But I would say that making that final link
that you're actually asking for, that resolution,
that's kind of a physics problem,
more so than my problem.
I can't, I can't do it.
Yeah, sure.
It's a good question, but don't get the answer for me.
No, absolutely, I understand.
That's something to consider for the future.
The other thing I'd say, or question I have is,
it's sort of coming back full circle to,
well, sort of the top of our conversation.
And some of my favorite videos of yours
on your channel actually were the Zen related,
Zen Buddhism, and how it relates to this theory.
I think you have two, maybe more related to
holographic theory.
I did one on Zen, number 24, and I did one on Zen
in the Art of Multicycle Maintenance.
Yes, I think those are some of my favorite videos of yours.
So I wonder if, and this is, you know, speculative
or let's say thinking out loud kind of territory,
do you think there's any relationship
between the mind and meditation
and perhaps the process of quieting those potential,
say waves or that modulated reconstructive wave,
as you put it.
Is there some perhaps right relationship between that
and the sense of, say, oneness, say with the world
or the outside, what's outside of the brain?
Yeah, when you go, I think I kind of get
the Zen-satori experience, when you go to the,
in the context of Berkson framework,
but when you go to meditation,
yeah, that's just another whole subject matter,
what's actually going on there.
Obviously, the Berkson framework, which that says,
we're A, four-dimensional beings,
B, we're embedded in this holographic field
in which we have no actual difference distinction
from laser framework for lots of things
that can happen in meditation, you know.
But I just haven't really gone into,
that whole subject of how meditation
or the brain waves and how it's operating.
I just haven't got into it.
Actually, I don't think there's all that much understood
really to go into it.
I know you have people like, you know,
the biology of belief and these kinds of books
that have been written, but no, I'm just not,
it's just a bridge too far for me to walk over.
Yeah, that's a subject.
I'll say, also, I'm jumping around a lot here,
but one of the interesting videos on your channel as well
deals with the holographic theory of mind
and how it relates to the holographic principle more broadly.
And what I was surprised by was how those two things
are actually, in your opinion, not compatible.
Right.
Yeah, can you talk about that a little bit?
I can.
Probably would, pictures would have been good,
but you see, Susskin, I mean, I looked at Susskin's stuff
on it and, you know, they're trying to describe the hologram
as being on a two-dimensional surface,
somewhere, basically digital, like bits.
Okay, so volume, and they were expressing,
we can express all the information in the universe
volume-wise in terms of bits on a two-dimensional surface.
First of all, I have major problem with their bits
because, as I noted to you before,
bits are a mass of abstraction that don't exist,
except over some sort of concrete embodiment,
like, you know, to represent a bit,
it takes tons of transistors on a breadboard,
it takes magnetic cores and more stone age philosophy.
Something is very concretely, you know,
doing voltage changes or whatever to represent those.
And we're looking at it and say, ah, that's a bit.
Well, what is that on a surface of a black hole for God's sakes?
You know, what is your bit other than highly imaginary
piece of information stuck mentally on your black hole?
I mean, you know, it's not a breadboard,
it's not a, it's not a, oh, we can see even worse
when you look at qubits, it's even worse.
You know, now you have LC circuits that are, you know,
with resistors and capacitors that are representing the qubit.
I mean, like, with Josephus and junctions.
I mean, come on, you know, that's your bit,
that's your qubit and it's on a black hole.
You know, not that there's all kinds of instantiations
of qubits, but they're all worse, but that's the rule.
Number two, what the heck is the reconstructive wave?
What is the source of the reconstructive wave
that's beaming through your two-dimensional surface
to project the three-dimensional world?
Okay, four, and then next problem C,
how do you introduce time into this thing?
When you have a whole series of flashes
of your reconstructive waves, so you have projection
after projection after projection
to create the coffee stirring.
Oh, how is these bits, how are they suddenly becoming
concrete coffee cups with liquid in them?
Stirring, rotating, I mean, come on.
I mean, you know, when you look at the conception,
it's ludicrous, so it is not Berkson's conception
of a holographic field.
Suskins 2D hologram, sorry, but not the same thing,
and not even worth looking at.
See, you got me, man.
No, that's okay.
I mean, you're passionate about it, I get it.
It's something that I have to do a lot more research on
and try to understand better myself, so.
And what they're gonna be interested in is that.
I mean, the idea that they're gonna use
the holographic principles is somehow,
it's somehow it's got something to do with mind
and consciousness and the holographic theory
is just insane.
Gotcha.
I just lost my light.
So we're coming up on time.
If you have a question, like what question I would say,
one of the last questions I wanna ask you is,
how is this theory, Berkson in general?
I mean, you've been a fan of Berkson's for decades now.
How is this conception, how does this influence
your day-to-day life or your moment-to-moment existence
if it does at all?
Well, if I were to say spiritually,
it would say, hey, I for one think that science,
physics, psychology, cognitive science,
given Berkson's framework.
Absolutely, Berks, the spiritual vision of man,
the Zen vision, if nothing more,
but probably also the Hindu vision
of what our actual capabilities are.
I mean, when I say Hindu vision,
I'm thinking of people like saints like Ananda Maima,
or Yogananda that could read anyone's thoughts
or could Ananda Maima supposedly stop the train engine
with a wheel spinning on a train platform.
But that's another, I think that there's no conflict
between science and this whole notion
that's permeating people's minds right now
that neuroscience says we're just human robot forms
with no spiritual component whatsoever is utterly destroyed
by Berkson and gives us a very solid grounding in science
and our own mystical experience that supports it.
So I guess bottom line from that perspective,
Berkson is a great comfort.
And if people wanna shed the transhumanist vision
of where the idea we're all gonna get nice bunch of chips,
because it's just how we really are anyhow,
and just become enhanced robots.
And also there is no God, there's no karmic laws
and et cetera, et cetera that they'll get into Berkson
and you'll see quickly how just shallow and superficial
and un-understanding they actually are.
I don't include people like Sam Harris or Daniel Dennett,
et cetera, these people are in my mind
are extremely badly misled
because they extremely do not understand
the problem of consciousness and time.
So that's one thing, after that, it's been a giant pain.
Because I never thought that after 50, what are we,
50 years that this particular conception
would be so buried yet.
It's buried in cognitive science
that no one wants to look at.
It's buried in memory theory,
it's buried in perception theory.
It's buried by the Gitsonians for Christ's sake.
They won't even look at it.
It's buried by the Berksonians for that matter.
Even Berksonian philosophers can't deal with it.
I can just feel it, they don't want to deal with it.
Oh, it's too much, can't deal with that.
So it's become a frustrating pain
and I feel like my life's mission has been a bust.
So I feel right now, let me tell you the truth.
It's been a good, it was a good try.
Maybe someone later will come along and take it.
Because right now, to me, it's completely being ignored.
Yeah, well, I'm glad I, you know,
it's your life's passion or part of your life's passion
and you've picked up the torch.
It seems like from Berkson on this
and tried to keep his ideas alive.
So it's a Bible.
Yeah, well, I'm a little different from Berkson
in that respect.
I mean, he watched himself be buried, you know?
Along came Skinner and his rats.
And after that, the computer model of mine,
I mean, the complete antithesis.
The computer being the absolute embodiment
of the classic metaphysics, the realization,
almost the wet dream realization
of how we can instantiate the classic metaphysics
as, quote, mind.
I mean, he watched that.
He didn't see the computer thing come in, I'm sure, but.
I got to live through that one.
Yeah, absolutely. It's still there.
All right, Steve, is there anything else?
Is there anything you want to leave us on?
Tie this thing up in a bow.
Where can our viewers,
how can people learn more about you and your work
in Berkson?
Well, yeah, I have a little website.
It's stevenerobbins.com, S-T-E-P-H-E-N.
I'll put it below, yeah.
Yeah, dot steven-e dot robin,
and steven-e and robbins.com.
That's all.
It's got all my articles on it.
It's got a link to the videos.
And the videos, I think, is the same channel.
I think steven-e robbins.com, or steven-e robbins.
Stephen-e robbins.
I'd have to flip out and look at it, but.
Yeah, so, yeah, I have stuff there
that people can look at.
Yes, you do. You have your website.
It's probably like 20 academic articles, you know?
Yeah. Academic journals.
They're all.
I'll link in the description below
your website, your YouTube channel,
and I think I might parse out a couple of my favorite videos
of yours to share with my audience.
So, Steve, I want to say thank you so much for your time,
attention, and energy.
This has been fun.
There's so much to think about,
and kind of let's Steve in my brain
to try to make this all congeal.
But thanks again, and this has been a wonderful time,
wonderful conversation.
Oh, it was great fun, Carl, isn't it?
I do hope people get something out of it.
Enjoy it.
I'm sure they will.
Alrighty.
Thanks, Steve.
See ya.
See you later.
