My favorite paper of yours, and maybe one of my favorite papers ever of all time,
is the computational boundary of a self paper that you wrote in 2019.
I started to try to formalize the way that one could think about any possible cognitive system
or any possible intelligence. And when I say intelligence, I mean William James,
this kind of definition where it's a competency to reach the same goal by different means.
It's a very cybernetic definition. It means there's some problem space, there's some
goal you're trying to reach in that problem space. It becomes a navigation task.
And it asks you to think about for any given system, how much competency does the system
have in navigating its world to reach its goal despite all kinds of new things happening,
various barriers, and so on. So I started thinking about what if we can't rely on origin story,
because I don't think that matters. If we can't rely on composition, because I don't think
having a brain that looks like ours makes any difference here. What do cognitive systems
have in common? And so what I settled on is this notion of a cognitive light cone.
And the idea is this, and this is borrowed from, well it's sort of upside down actually,
but it's borrowed from the way they do. Minkowski may have been the first to do it,
but these kind of space time diagrams in physics and what you do is you put
times on the vertical axis, all of the dimensions of space are on the horizontal axis.
And what you can define is you can define this cognitive light cone
as the spatiotemporal size of the biggest goal that the system can pursue.
Michael Levin is a scientist at Tufts University. His lab studies anatomical and behavioral decision
making at multiple scales of biological, artificial, and hybrid systems. He works at the
intersection of developmental biology, artificial life, bioengineering, synthetic morphology,
and cognitive science. If you got this far, please hit that subscribe button,
and I hope you enjoy our conversation. Mike, thank you for coming on.
Yeah, thanks for having me. Happy to be here.
Such a pleasure. I mean, I first learned about your research. A couple of years ago, you did a
podcast, your first of a few with Kurt Geimungal. That was my first exposure to your work.
And I just thought it was absolutely incredible. And I agree with him when he said like your work
already, it's like deserving of Nobel Prize, which you've already been able to accomplish.
And just think of the implications of what your work could bear out in the future. It's
remarkable. Well, thank you. Thank you. And your lab, you're working with, is it over 40 people
working in your lab? Oh, at the moment, there's probably around 32. 30? Okay, 30 to 40. I know,
yeah, it sort of varies. Probably don't share with time. And your work is at the intersection of
all these interesting areas. I think to get us kicked off, it'd be great for sort of the lay
audience, people who aren't familiar with their work, if you give them a brief overview of what
you're working on, maybe your career a little bit, and then we can dive into the nitty gritty. I have
a ton of questions to ask you about the specifics of your work too. But just give us a little high
level grounding. Sure. Yeah. Well, our work is spread over a number of areas. So we have, there
are people in the lab who do very basic conceptual kind of stuff that's almost philosophy. And then
computer, there's some computer science, and there's some bench work in developmental biophysics,
and there's some behavioral science and things like that. And we have a mix of
biologists, physicists, bioengineers, computer scientists, and so on. And there are lots of
projects in areas such as birth defects, regeneration, moving towards regenerative medicine,
cancer, AI, unconventional computing, and unconventional cognition, and things like that.
And all of it, it sounds like a grab bag of 100 different things, but it's actually all stemming
from one fundamental question that I'm interested in and that I've been interested in since I was a
kid, which is really this issue of embodied mind. This issue of how minds can exist in the universe,
how they interact with their bodies, how minds scale from the primitive kinds of
metabolic and other competencies of single cells to the emergent mind of the body and then of the
whole organism in a behavioral sense. And this scaling, embodiment, and communication is
at the root of everything. So it's at the root of developmental biology. It's a way that we think
about the task of regenerative medicine is to communicate with this collective intelligence
of cells to get it to do various things. And then, of course, applications to robotics and AI,
and so on. So that's kind of the field of the group. You must be having so much fun because
it's at the intersection of all these fascinating areas, intersections on intersections. It's
absolutely just mind boggling. And I recommend for people who are interested in your work,
I'll link in the description some of your papers, some of your presentations that you've given.
I really love visuals to the company, the explanations, and the regular presentation
you've given in the last couple of years that has everything from the planaria to morphogenesis
and explaining those kinds of things. It's really super helpful. So that's really cool.
And I should say, just as a shout out the visuals, there are a lot of amazing visuals,
both in the talks and in the papers. And most of them come from one graphic artist named Jeremy
Gay, and he works in Paragreen Creative as his company. And he is phenomenal. And he helps bring
all of our crazy ideas into a visual form that other people can participate in.
Yeah, thanks for pouring that out. Yeah, I was going to mention him as well, because
those are some of the slides in particular that I wanted to share in a moment,
because to be honest too, in preparation for this interview, I've only given,
it's been about a dozen interviews so far, but this was by far the most difficult interview
to prepare for, if I'm being honest, because it's extremely, it can get extremely technical,
especially reading a research papers. And I believe you have over a couple hundred
research papers, right? You've published quite a bit in your decades of work. So,
and that had a lot of collaborators that you worked with as well. So we'll be changing scales,
I think, quite a bit during this conversation, because, you know, I want to get to the details,
but I think where it's really interesting is the biomechanics, where they intersect with,
say, like information theory, and sort of jumping between levels and different scales,
but they kind of say biomechanics is implementation of, say, a lower or more
fundamental laws, perhaps. But we'll, I think that's something we'll sort of start to unpack as
we go through this. And one of the papers of yours, though, that I think, my favorite paper of yours,
and maybe one of my favorite papers ever of all time, is the computational boundary of a self
paper that you wrote in 2019. And I think that'd be a great place to sort of ground the conversation.
And because it's got a little bit of everything, a lot of your work is referenced in there. And we
won't go to the paper line by line, but some of the major topics of conversation, I think,
will be pulled out of that paper, and we can dive into the specifics. So if you give me a second,
I can actually just share my screen here. Yeah, as I just mentioned, this paper of yours, it
tackles so much in one. Could you possibly give us an overview of the paper and a million questions
to ask in terms of specifics? But should you tell us what this paper's about?
Yeah, yeah. So I've been thinking about these things for many, many years. But what finally
catalyzed me sitting down and writing this up is that in 2018, there was a conference on
Diverse Intelligence put on by the Templeton Foundation. And we were challenged by our program
officer, Pranab Das, to think about frameworks where unconventional intelligences could all be
thought about at the same time. And so there were people there working on ants and octopuses
and chimpanzees and things like this. And I, like with a number of things, I sort of
tend to crank that knob all the way out. And so I'm interested in every kind of possible
cognitive system. So we're talking cells, tissues, minimal matter, collective intelligence of groups
of organisms, all kinds of artificial synthetic beings, software, AIs, possible aliens, like all
of it. So I want to know how we detect, how we understand and how we relate to and maybe even
create diverse intelligences. What is the space of possible minds? And I'm certainly not the
first person to ask that question. So we were thinking about all this. And I started to try
to formalize the way that one could think about any possible cognitive system or any possible
intelligence. And just to give it a definition by intelligence, I don't mean the kind of
second order metacognition that, for example, humans have where you can sort of think about
what you know and so on. I mean, that's one kind. But I'm talking about when I say intelligence,
I mean, William James, this kind of definition where it's a competency to reach the same goal
by different means. It's a very cybernetic definition. It means there's some problem
space, there's some goal you're trying to reach in that problem space. It becomes a navigation task.
And it asks you to think about for any given system, how much competency does the system have
in navigating its world to reach its goal, despite all kinds of new things happening,
various barriers and so on. And so I like that definition because it's independent of the origin
of the system. It doesn't matter if you're evolved or designed or some hybrid. I think that there
are a lot of artificial distinctions that are made in these various fields that are
not facilitating progress. They're kind of blocking it actually. So I want things that are
as unified as possible. I really take this unification task seriously. So I started thinking
about if we can't rely on origin story, because I don't think that matters. If we can't rely on
composition, because I don't think having a brain that looks like ours makes any difference here,
what do cognitive systems have in common? What does it mean for something to have
some kind of cognitive system? And so what I settled on is this notion of a cognitive light cone.
And the idea is this, and this is borrowed from, well, it's sort of upside down actually,
but it's borrowed from the way they do. I mean, Kowski may have been the first to do it,
but these kind of space time diagrams in physics and what you do is you put
time is on the vertical axis, all of the dimensions of space are on the horizontal axis.
And what you can define is you can define this cognitive light cone as the spatiotemporal size
of the biggest goal that the system can pursue. And I don't mean the reach of its sensors and
effectors, right? So the James Webb telescope has this incredible sensory that reaches to the
edges of the observable universe, maybe, and so on. That's not what I'm talking about.
I'm talking about not what you can sense and where you can act. I'm talking about the size
of the goal state that you are, the largest goal state that you are capable of pursuing.
So this frames, much like James, and I think it was right, and like Wiener and colleagues before
that, it frames the tasks of some type of cognition, whatever it is on that spectrum,
as being fundamentally about pursuing goals of some type. And so one can start with very simple,
and so here it's a tick, but you can think about a bacterium or something. And the cognitive light
cone is quite small because it has a little memory going backwards and has a little bit of
predictive power going forwards in time. But what it really cares about is the local concentration
of whatever molecules it cares about right at that local level. So it's very small. The cognitive
light cone is very small. And you can move up to something like a dog. So that has a longer
light cone going backwards. It has a little bit of predictive, more predictive capacity going
forwards. And of course, spatially, it will know things like one of the goals is to keep intruders
out of its neighborhood than the perimeter of the house or whatever it is. That's what it works on.
But so that's great. That's way bigger than the tick or the bacterium. But what you're never going
to get your dog to do, as far as we know, is to care about what happens in the town three
miles over a month from now. It's just not going to happen. They're not capable of it as far as we
know. And then you have very large light cones like humans that may really be one of the goals
maybe something to do with world peace and what's going to happen. Some people are literally
depressed because the sun is going to burn out. And so they're working on these technologies to
get us off the planet and so on. And of course, we all have limitations. So even though the human
light cone is huge, and it does have this interesting feature, maybe the first one in this
evolutionary chain, maybe not, where some of those goals are guaranteed not attainable. So if you're
a goldfish and you have some goals that reach, let's say a half an hour forward, that's absolutely
attainable. You're very likely to live that long. And so your goal, most all of your goals are
attainable. If you're a human, it's very likely that you know that many of your goals are your
cognitive light cone is longer than your lifespan. You know they're not attainable. And that may or
may not result in some psychological pressures that are unique. But I don't know. So our cognitive
light cones can be huge, but they're also limited in that, for example, and this becomes important
in some of our more recent work. If you think about the capacity to, I mean, what this is
fundamentally about is care and compassion. And if you think about your capacity to care about the
welfare of other beings, we are quite limited in the linear range. So you might have a certain
amount of care about something that happens to some number of people. But if it's then, if you're
told that well, actually, it's not a thousand people, it was actually 10,000 people that it
happened to, your amount of active care is not going up 10-fold. We just can't muster that level.
But you could imagine, and you could imagine these sort of bodhisattva like beings whose
light cone is large enough where they can actually, they can literally care about a massive amount of
possible sentient beings. So anyway, so that's the point of this cognitive light cone. And
the idea behind all of this, and there's a follow-up paper from last year that's kind of the
next version of this, which is the TAME paper, the TAME, the technological approach to mind
everywhere, which extends this and really goes into this, the mechanics of what this
is supposed to be. What this is supposed to be is a framework that moves these kind of questions,
questions of cognition, of sentience, of intelligence and so on from the area of philosophy,
where people have a lot of philosophical feelings and preconceptions about what things can do and
what things can't do. And it really, really stresses the idea that you can't just have
feelings about this stuff, you have to make testable claims. And so every claim about a system
of some level of competency, you say this thing doesn't have this level of cognition or it does,
wherever you are on the spectrum, and it has to be a spectrum, it's not binary, that's the biggest
thing that trips everybody up is trying to be binary about these things. But wherever you are
in the spectrum, that is a testable claim. So somebody has to pick out a problem space,
say what you think the goal is, say what you think the system is capable of doing to reach
that goal, and then you test it. And then you see if what you've got facilitates discovery,
experiment, further research and so on. So for me, the goal of all of this is to
make testable frameworks that advance a research program, they're not just philosophy.
Sure, sure, so fascinating. And thank you, that was a great succinct summary of the paper. And I
love to, at the bottom right corner here, this collection of compound intelligences. And I
think it's one of the points you made, you made in a few podcasts, is that all intelligence is
collective intelligence, we're a collection of cells. And I think that's such a wonderful
point, because we do kind of get lost in the philosophical debates, let's say, in terms of
thinking of it as a singular kind of pointed focus. But this, especially this graphic in
particular, where you have the cell and then actually the components within the cell, I believe
those are the pink diamonds there, that makes up the organism, the organism makes up the colony.
So you can see these things are made up, they're sort of nested. But one thing I would love to get
your, just the explication on a little bit here, is how, I believe it's from the paper,
that most biological systems consist of multiple nested cells. And how is that different than,
say, one, say, integrate itself. I think you actually point out it's not one as implied by
integrated information theory. Could you tell us a little bit about that?
Sure. Yeah. So this collective intelligence thing is crucial, because a lot of thought in
philosophy, going all the way back to René Descartes and before that, Descartes, which I think he
gets a bad rap for a lot of things, I like him actually. Yeah, I've seen him in your slides
sometimes. Yeah, he's great. Well, right, some very helpful stuff there. But one of the things
that I think he was wrong about is that he was really interested in the pineal gland,
because he said there's only one of these in the brain, right? And so that makes sense as a kind
of a nexus for this unified human cognition and so on. But actually, if he had had access to
some good microscopy, he would have found out there's not one of anything. If you look into
this pineal gland, what you see is a whole bunch of cells. And when you look into those cells,
you see a whole bunch of molecular networks and down it goes, there isn't really one of anything.
And so what we have to ask ourselves is, where does this large scale, because we certainly,
as an organism, you certainly have a light cone that does not belong to any of your pieces.
So you have goals and preferences and hopes and dreams in spaces that do not belong to your
individual cells and tissues and organs. They work in physiological space and transcriptional
space. And when you're in embryo, they worked in morphogenetic space. You work in three-dimensional
space and maybe linguistic space and maybe some other things. But so certainly there's a kind
of scale up process by which these competent subunits and that's one thing we have to understand
is that we are made of very competent subunits. I give another talk, sometimes it's called
why robots don't get cancer. And the reason that our current technology don't ever get
cancer is because they tend to be made of pretty passive parts. So you hope that your robot has
some degree of intelligent performance, but the parts themselves never go off the reservation
and do something else. But with us, that's a definite risk because that's the
price you pay for having those scaling mechanisms. You become susceptible to failure modes where
the individual parts, they have agendas. And there are these, evolution has given us some hardware
which is very good at scaling up these cognitive light cones and pivoting them into different
spaces into different problem spaces. But that has failure modes. And I think it's really
critical to ask that question, how the properties of the compound intelligence
and the goals, because there are novel goals that appear and so on, how those relate to the
properties of the parts, what dynamics facilitate the scale up, how do they go wrong? Because at the
level of tissues, for example, that's cancer, that's basically a disorder of this cognitive
scaling, results in cancer and all kinds of other implications up and down the chain.
And so the last thing you mentioned was about IIT and really the one thing I would say is this
and that I don't, we haven't really gotten into consciousness at all, which is fine. I think it's
really important to demarcate actual talk of actual consciousness from the stuff that we're
talking about, which is cognition, intelligence, performance, computation and so on. And I think
with respect to those kinds of things, I think it's pretty clear that
the kinds of ingredients and the kinds of dynamics for which brains are sort of famous,
and this is why people think that brains are associated with intelligence and so on,
those kinds of processes go on in every tissue of your body. So almost, I'm not aware of any
real distinction that one could draw between the kinds of mechanisms. People talk about
magnetic fields and they talk about quantum events and microtubules and they talk about
the electrical signaling and various parts, different kinds of integrated spiking and all that,
all that kind of stuff happens in other parts of the body. And so I think we have to be really
open to this idea that treating the rest of the body as clockwork, whereas we are kind of
okay with attributing various higher level cognitive properties to brains, I think that's
a real mistake and I think we're leaving a lot on the table in terms of biomedicine and other
things by making that assumption. Yeah. Matt, how did you come up with the name Scale Free Cognition?
That possibly could have been, so that comes from a paper that I did with Chris Fields.
I don't recall if he was the one that came up with that title or if I was, I don't remember
at this point, he and I do so much together, I don't know. But the reason it's good here is that
we as humans are very kind of focused on a very much like we are in the electromagnetic
spectrum and so on. We only see this like tiny little bandwidth. We are the same way for intelligence
and so we are very good at recognizing kind of medium sized objects moving at medium speeds
in three dimensional space and look there, that's a crow and this is an octopus and that's an orangutan
and we can recognize intelligence. But there are intelligences all around us at various scales
that we just find very difficult to think of in the same way. So the bacteria in your gut that
are solving physiological problems and navigating not just physical space but physiological space
in very clever ways, that's an intelligence but it's very small and literally it's very small and
it's hard for us to recognize those. The various organs that make up your body, people will immediately
say well they're not, they don't have a cognitive self, I have a cognitive self and they're just
part of me. Well yeah, that's because and they would say the same thing about themselves if
they could talk right. So this is just basically a first person perspective from a cognitive system
and we're very bad at recognizing the different scales. Going in the opposite direction,
one could for example, and this is also something that Chris and others and I are working on,
the paper's not out yet, but this idea that one could look at a whole evolutionary lineage
or in fact the process of evolution itself as this giant distributed agent where every
particular animal is a hypothesis that that agent has made about the outside world and like all of
our ideas that are being sort of turned over by active inference by this active inference process,
these hypotheses may be supported and they may survive and give rise to other such hypotheses
or they may be unfit and die and you'll never hear from them again. And so that's another,
those kind of ideas and I'm not saying it's right or wrong but those kind of ideas,
you can't even begin to have those kind of ideas and consider those hypotheses
if you're tied into the fact that all cognitive systems are roughly the size and scale of us
and they have to have the brains and they have to work on a time scale that's too rapid and that
begins to look too weird and too stretched out and well that can't be a mind but it's all relative,
it's all completely relative but we have this vantage point like we used to when we thought
we were the center of the universe and all that, we have this scale vantage point that just
really obscures the reality of things. Cool, yeah because I was wondering about the name,
how you named it there because it seemed like it struck me as more scale dependent cognition
because it's reliant on the space and time scope but perhaps scale free means, I don't know,
it's like a different approach, it's like a macro look at it versus... Yeah, I see what you mean,
so you're right in that this approach does emphasize looking at scales, the point isn't
to get rid of scale but I think when I say free, I mean there's sort of, it's kind of a play on
words, there's two ways to think about this, one is it's free in the sense that it's not tied to any
one scale so you can sort of jump up and down and it still works, it's these invariants so the same
thing is true and we see this all the time, I think physicists use it this way too, it's something
that's true on one scale and then you turn some control knob whether it's size or time or something
else and exactly the same thing is true at this other scale, right, that same dynamic so that's
one but I also like this idea, to me what free really specifies there is freedom in the sense of
freedom for the system to do what it's going to do and freedom for you as a scientist to not be
locked in one particular lens of looking at this system, that's how I see things, I see things as
you know sort of unfettering our ability to recognize these diverse intelligences.
Gotcha, cool and we're going to get into morphogenesis and bioelectricity
in a minute but before we do that, we do want to touch on two concepts that are in this paper,
surprise and infotaxis and I was somewhat familiar with surprise before, that the concept of surprise
from second information theory, infotaxis was a little bit newer to me but one of the things I
didn't realize was this concept of likening these agents, they want to minimize their surprise level
which is a concept from like the free energy principle, what's a bunch of other places but
and that you've of course published with Carl Friston as well, I'm talking to him next month
which will be great, I can't wait to talk to him about that stuff but I didn't equate it to
stress so like stress and surprise, should we think about those two as equivalent?
So yeah, so it's good that you're having Carl on and I'm certainly not going to try to butcher his
information by trying to recap it here but let me sneak up on it from a slightly different
perspective because I think stress is very important. One way to think about
the behavior of these collective intelligences of cells and we're talking about, let's think about
regeneration or development which is basically just regeneration from a single cell, same thing,
what you have there is a kind of, what the system is doing is it's navigating in morphous space,
it starts off in this, so morphous space is this virtual high-dimensional space of all
possible anatomical configurations that a particular genome could possibly reach
and so you start off in one corner of this morphous space as a single, as a single cell
and then you sort of navigate to this other region which is an ensemble of states that we
recognize as the correct target morphology for whatever creature that you are. That navigation
process has quite a bit of intelligence to it in the sense that not just, I'm going to take a
quick detour here, but one way people critique these ideas is they, oh well all you're doing is
painting the word intelligence on any complex process, anything that happens you say it's
intelligent because look how complicated it is in a gap from here to there, so that isn't it at all,
this is really critical, first of all you cannot estimate intelligence from observational data,
it has to be interventional experiments and what you're looking at is not,
you're not looking at emergent complexity, that's very easy, there are many systems that
start off with very kind of simple local rules and then something very complex comes out the
other end, that's not intelligence. Intelligence is the ability to get where you're going to reach
that goal despite novelty and perturbations, despite it's problem solving basically, so this
is key, so you're this collective intelligence because you're a group of cells very early on,
you become a group of cells and you have to reach wherever it is that you're going, okay so the
part of this that's intelligent is the part that when you deviate it from what it's trying to do,
it finds other ways of doing it, so let's just use a simple example, we got a salamander
and in that salamander there's a very particular limb that forms with a certain number of fingers
and if you amputate that limb and you can amputate it anywhere from the shoulder to the fingertips,
the cells will immediately grow, they will start to replicate, they will differentiate,
they will do all these different things and then they stop, this is the most amazing part,
is that they stop, when do they stop, they stop when a correct salamander limb has formed,
so one way to think about this, the traditional way to think about this is as feed-forward
emergence, so yes every cell has a bunch of local rules dictated by DNA and biochemistry
and you just sort of roll them forward and whatever happens happens and it just so happens
that it's a salamander limb, so that's one way of looking at it, I think that way of looking at it
is missing the boat in a profound way because it limits our understanding and our ability
to regenerate medicine, but anyway the view that I recommend is that you look at this as a
kind of homeostatic capability of this collective intelligence, what it has is and by homeostasis
I mean the thing that happens in your thermostat where there's this loop where it takes a measurement
of something, let's say temperature in the case of your thermostat, it makes a decision
relative to a memory, a set point of what the right temperature should be and then it takes
actions to get closer to that set point, so you can think of regulative development and regeneration
and cancer suppression and metamorphosis in exactly the same way, there is an error minimization
process that tries to work to keep the system in the correct anatomical region of space and when
it's deviated by injury, by mutations, by teratogens, by whatever, it tries to get back there as best
as it can and I give lots of talks about all the amazing examples of what it can actually do
in order to achieve that, just all the weird new solutions that it comes up with to various problems.
So in order to do that one, so how do we think about, I mean the key thing about that loop,
that control loop and this is for engineers, this isn't absolutely nothing new, that control loop,
the key is that it has a set point and why does it keep, why do these cells act, why do they spend
metabolic energy, remember they used to be independent organisms, individual cells
care about little tiny single cell goals, they care about metabolic state, they care about local
concentrations of things, they don't care about these large goals of organ shape and organ size
and things like that, so why do they keep trying to do this and one way to think about this and so
this is an idea that I sort of push forward in that tame paper and then since then we've done
a lot of experimental work on it which is not published yet which you'll be seeing later this
year and some good commutational modeling of it, some of it which is published as of a couple
weeks ago, so one way to think about this is that what keeps the system trying to minimize error
is stress, now stress is a really good word because stress has been used by engineers when
they talk about various materials, so they talk about stress in mesoscale stress and materials,
it's talked about by a psychologist, it's talked about by evolutionary ecologists in
terms of ecosystem stress, of course behavioral scientists in terms of single but where people
don't really talk about stress very much is at this middle level which we focus on which is cells
and tissues and organs and I think that this concept of stress is quite general, scale free
if you will, and that the deal with stress is that one of the things and there's a couple of
major things is just one of those, one of the things that helps scale the cognitive light cone
and move a set of subunits from caring about from a pile of cells that care about individual
cell level things to a collective that cares about much bigger things like hey we don't have
the right number of fingers currently right and no individual cell knows what a finger is or how
many you're supposed to have but the collective does and the thing that keeps them the motivated to
kind of try to get back to where they're going is stress and so what you need for this in that
system what you need for this is for every cell to be able to be stressed by and to spread its
stress to other neighbors in in response to conditions that are really failures of alignment
at a larger scale so for example just to give you an example if we were to take an eye and stick it
on the tail of a tadpole right and sort of you know transplant it you could have a situation where
no individual cell is damaged nobody's injured nobody's poisoned there's no DNA damage there's
no reason for any individual cell to be stressed but the collective is at the wrong location in
anatomical amorphous space there's a geometric problem and so or for example after amputating
the limb you know after all the cells heal and there's you know the skin everything heals
no individual cells should be stressed because everything is fine on the single cell level
but there's the real mismatch between there's a delta between the pattern memory that the system
has that's that set point and where the collective is now so so I think and there's there's a lot
more than than we have time to go into here but but but that spreading of stress and that linking of
individual cell stress response mechanisms which used to be all about my you know migration and
and and various physiological responses used to be about single cell stresses things that could
happen to an amoeba and stuff like that and they're now getting harnessed to much bigger states of
affairs and that's the beautiful thing about these homeostatic loops is that the cybernetic
kind of aspect of it it's a it's a it's a it's a set of wildcards measure something what do I
want to measure well it could be anything from your the quality of your DNA to the length of the
tissue in which you find yourself to your position in the hierarchy of the tribe you know some sort
of social thing any of that can be the thing you measure and then there's a set point to which you
compare and again that could be that could be almost anything and then there's some actions you
could take which again could be almost anything so what evolution does is it uses this basic
loop this this basic concept of this loop and then it just progressively harnesses the three
sort of main parts of that loop and points them at different sizes different scales different
types of things and and that that I think is a is a major aspect of the kind of multi-scale
competency architecture that makes this the whole thing so robust and interesting that's incredible
the um so for stress one thing that I think I'm not sure if it was from this paper another paper
of yours but and you you you sort of uh you didn't mention it's an exported error signal
yeah so I think as you put it in the paper um export of stress molecules which have no ownership
metadata yeah um can you explain that sorry I'm not a computer yeah that'd be helpful yeah yeah yeah
so there's two there's two pieces that there's there's two kind of two big components to what I
think of as what underlies the scaling of these collective intelligence is the first the first
is this is the spreading of stress so so imagine this is this is I'm gonna I'm gonna give you an
example but but really this is about all kinds of contexts not just not just cells moving around
but imagine that there's a there are a bunch of cells and there's one cell at the bottom that
that that according to the correct pattern needs to be up at the top now the cell can sense that
it's far away and it wants to minimize this distance and so it's going to try to migrate
but it can't because the other cells are sitting there and the other cells have no incentive to
move and let it through because they're perfectly happy where they are their stress is very low
so so what you what you've got here is a system where kind of like a like a cooling magnet right
where you have all these domains and as you cool the thing they try to find a globally acceptable
configuration where everybody where the total amount of stress meaning geometric frustration
right the alignment is is the all the free energy is another way to put it is is as optimized as
possible but what will happen is that sometimes it's impossible for everybody to be happy right
you can you can set up situations where the geometric frustration is such that you always
have some kind of lack of alignment somewhere so so the other cells so basically the temperature
that system temperature not physically but in terms of free energy the the temperature that
system is low the other cells are happy they're not going anywhere the barrier to get them to move
is is very high because if they move they become they become less happy so so now you got a problem
so so now why what what could what what can evolution do about this well one thing you can do
is the molecule that and and of course the level of stress how do we know when something is stressed
out well there are markers so there are more of the specific molecules that are used as a
as a physical implementation of stress so so so you know heat shock proteins then other other
markers that are like this is my level of stress right and then there's other there's hormones
and whatnot so so now one thing you can do with this is you could keep all the stress to yourself
and then this is the only cell that knows he's in the wrong location and nobody wants to help
him and and and that's it that's all the system stays or you could be a little bit leaky so if
you're a little bit leaky and and you're letting some of those stress molecules propagate to your
neighbors then something interesting happens they become less happy now why are the why are they
less happy well they don't know because stress is stress the molecule itself that's that metadata
I was talking about that much that that's that molecule doesn't by itself tell you what the
problem is it just says your something's wrong right and so what that means is that the cells
in this vicinity the temperature starts to rise they get a little bit more plastic and this actually
there are a variety of systems where actually where for example I just saw a beautiful talk
a week ago by somebody who studies in drosophila like like literally cells that are in the wrong
location they make they make the cells around them physically more fluid they get they literally get
a little more plastic and when they get a little more plastic they're more willing to let other
things happen for example that cell is now going to be able to get through them and again I realize
this is this is a an example that's very kind of physical but but same idea in all sorts of all
sorts of spaces by what you're doing by spreading that stress specifically in a way that looks like
all of their all of the other agents stress is you are making your problems be their problems
it's it's a way to it's a way to get alignment it's a way to get coordination towards a common goal
it's a way to get this kind of unification this kind of unity that's needed for a common for a
for a complex multi component system to achieve larger goals so so that's that's one thing the
spreading of stress to to to get and and notice notice something interesting it doesn't require
altruism it creates altruism these other cells are not helping you out because because they want
you to feel better they want to feel better and and the best way for them to feel better is for
you to stop stressing everybody out that's that's you know that's that's a real kind of a simple
way to put it but that's actually the dynamic that happens is is it's not that that they're there
to help you it's that you the system is set up in such a way that that lowering the overall stress
requires them to to to to to act in a way that lowers your stress now now the other business the
other part of this is the is the other metadata piece of this which is which is this one of the
things we study in in this kind of scaling up is this notion of this this notion of communication
via gap junctions now what are gap junctions gap junctions are these these little proteins that
form like a like a like a submarine hatch kind of thing that in the like a like a little aqueous
pore that can open and close in the cell membrane and when two cells are next to each other they
can dock those those those those gap junctions can dock and then what happens is that small
molecules and these are very we're not talking proteins but like very small molecule signaling
current and and so on can can go from one to the other now i've made i've made the
the claim before that that these gap junctions are kind of magic in terms of
this this this cognitive scaling and and and here's here's one reason why and they're not the
only thing they're not the only way to do this but i think evolution exploits them heavily
imagine that you're a cell and you've got there's a cell a cell a and cell b and they're sort of
near neighbors and and something happens to sell a and sell a has some sort of some internal
consequences of that let's say calcium has gone up or some kind of you know some kind of
memory trace molecule of that happening and what it can do is it can send a signal over to cell
b now now the typical way that these signals work is that there's a secreted molecule of some sort
it goes out from the cell surface it lands on the cell surface of cell b there's a receptor up
there grabs the receptor you know binds the receptor and now cell b now here's the thing
with that kind of communication um it's very easy for cell b to know that that's that that
information did not originate internally but that came from outside and with information that comes
from outside you have to be very cautious with it because that could be a parasite trying to hack you
it could be somebody else trying to you know uh so so basically once you know that it comes from
the outside you are free to ignore it you are free to respond to it you may you may let it alter your
model of what's going on in the world in other words you may learn from it or you may not
you got all those options but one thing you know very clearly is which information is yours
that's all the stuff inside of you and what's coming from the outside now imagine what happens
with gap junctions now cell a and b are now linked by gap junctions um something happens to cell a
uh that generates a memory trace let's say a calcium spike a calcium train of some sort
that propagates through the gap junction lands in cell b now what's cool about this is that
that calcium spike or whatever it was doesn't have any metadata on it that says where it came from
whatever that signal is it is what it is and so when cell b gets it uh it comes directly into
its internal milieu it appears inside right these gap junctions basically sort of make a connection
that that um lets the two internal environments largely communicate and what that does is provide
a memory wipe in the following way an identity wipe in the following for memory in the following way
the memories that you now receive through those gap junctions the traces of various events
you don't know as cell b you don't know that they're not yours there's nothing
you know they're just like the rest of the memories you have so so what it does is it's a kind of
mind meld it means that it's now very difficult for that system to say whose memory belongs to whom
was that was was i the one that got poked and now i have this calcium signal or not well you can't
even you can't even do that calculus because you are so connected to the a cell a and b are so connected
they're now one system with respect to the memories they have so now this is a great scaling because
it means that you can now uh you now have a larger computational uh capacity because because now
there's more and more networks and more states you have a bigger spatial area that you're sensitive
to you can take bigger actions you can start to exert biomechanical forces as a cell sheet so you
can do stresses and tensions that are hard for individual cells to to have on that scale and
you can so so so that that mind meld is uh is another way to scale to a higher level uh system
because as long as the individuals can maintain i me and your you then there's capacity for cheating
and for um defections in the game theory sense and and all kinds of calculus about well well what's
good for me versus what's good for the system once you have this kind of mind meld all of that
largely goes away you you can't defect against the cell that's gab junction to you you can't
poison it because it'll come back to you immediately it's it's you know it it it scales up um cooperation
that scales up um computational ability and it scales up um the the goals that the system is able
to pursue now uh i'll i'll just stop after one one one more point which is that i've painted a really
rosy picture of this gap junctional communication i mean it prevents cancer it's i mean it's it's
great for many things but one thing that people often ask and i want to come right out and sort
of uh say this is people often say well that's tremendous so so in a scale freeway let's all
borg ourselves together into this giant uh collective and we'll wipe our individual identities
and that will be you know just fantastic right uh and and and i want to be very clear that that is
not what i'm saying i actually think that works out very poorly um and uh what's what what we need
to keep an eye on here is uh for whose benefit do such connections exist because you will then get
an individual that a larger individual who who yes will do more impressive things in other spaces
but you know as each of us knows who you know if you've done any kind of uh uh you know contact
sports or anything you go rock climbing you scrape a whole bunch of skin off of your hands
i had a great day rock climbing will your your your skin cells didn't they had a terrible day
they're they're dead now and in fact and in fact right and so so so that happens all the time we
don't think at all but typically about about these little little lives that makes us up something
make us up so that's that's what happens when when you when you join a collective so
it's you got to be careful it's not it's not a panacea by any means sure wow there's so many
fascinating different places we go just based off what you said the um we want to go to next
here i think one of the things that would be cool and something that you highlight a little bit
i don't think i think it's something that's um underappreciated in biology is just the
importance of the membranes so um i was i was watching a um a talk on your the your mic 11's
academic content youtube channel that's yours right i just want to make sure it's hard to tell
you know some of the people can start up but and it's someone else's account but i just want to
make sure that's yours but i watched um the very first video there by bob gatenby oh yeah and um
he stated in his talk and this really stuck out to me that about 99% of the Shannon information
in a cell is in the membrane and membrane and transmembrane gradient which um seems like a lot
you know for someone who is a light completely layperson in this area can you give us a sense
of why there's such as this disparity because i mean within the cell there are all these other
sub cell components and they have their own membranes why is it that so much of the Shannon
information is on the outer boundary of the cell yeah well a couple things um bob is amazing you
should you should have him on uh he's a very very smart guy a lot lots of interesting things to say
um i i think that uh and i don't i don't recall the you know the exact calculations that he used
to reach that conclusion i can so i can sort of reconstruct why uh one one thing about information
is that uh Shannon or otherwise is that what's very central is the role of an observer
and we're back to this concept of surprise this idea that as an observer how much surprise did
you get out of a particular message that you received right or how predictable was it the
those kinds of things and so and so in the i could i could imagine some kind of an observer
in the cell that would get way more information from the things that are going inside versus the
membrane but i think what bob was talking about is the fact that when cells interact with each other
so this kind of multicellular context there's an interface by which they uh it communicate and
control each other so cells are hacking each other all the time and that interface is the cell
membrane and not just because physically that's what's on the outside but it's because in that
cell membrane are a lot of the interesting so so biochemical of course uh bioelectrical because
that's where all the ion channels are and uh bio mechanical because that's how you're going to
even exert strength forces on things uh that's where all the signals come come in and out so
so i think what he's saying is that that's the nexus of the information exchange between cells
in the outside world and every cell is some other cells in in the body every cell is some
other cells external environment which is also kind of a key thing to think about when you think
about the origin of cells and so on is that you need to you need to set a boundary somewhere it's
not given to you from from scratch so i think that's what he's talking about that that that
control and communication interface of cells got it okay yeah that was um that just stuck out to me
that i mean i understand the importance and that will sort of i can get to that the um
the the ion flows and gap junctions and a little bit and the importance of of of those one thing
that i think and of course there's issues with shenan information doesn't tell you about the
meaning right there's certain issues there but one thing that did stick out to me about um this
paper i believe is other than this paper that you said um everything about these light cones
that expanding the horizon is what enables shenan information to acquire meaning
because data becomes data becomes causally linked to distant and past experiences and
acquire simplifications for future expectations so can you help like decouple that a little bit
yeah yeah and that sounds like uh i'm almost positive that one was from uh that that's a
chris fields sentence and that one oh i'm almost positive and that one was from a paper that chris
and i did on on meaning and where meaning comes from and i you know the and you should have him
on too chris chris is also um absolutely remarkable so yeah i've come across his research before
he's great yeah you should you should definitely talk to him but um uh the what what i think what
i think is is critical there uh and what uh what what chris and i uh have been working on a lot
is uh the centrality of this concept of the observer and it's this idea that and i and i
actually think that's one of the things shenan information gets gets right and that it doesn't
assume that meaning is uh i mean yes it misses out on meaning but but when you're trying to capture
meaning you you start to get this idea well there is one meaning and it's our job to kind of discover
and i i think a better frame is that there are multiple observers which have to imbue uh
data with with meaning it's on them to interpret it and it means different things to different
observers everything is observer relative and in fact i don't know if you've seen if you've seen
this paper but there's a really cool recent uh well there's a really cool piece of um research
by josh bongard one of my collaborators uh and his student atusa on uh uh poly computation
and then and then josh and i wrote a review of and some new ideas about this this concept of
poly computing and this idea that one way to squeeze more computational power out of a piece of
biology or in fact out of anything is not to change the thing but to change your perspective
as an observer in the sense that multiple observers can be looking at the exact same physical process
and and and get different computational results out of it depending on what their
perspective is and what their interpretation is so it's this and it's got this it's it's an idea
that has this weird match to you know some ideas and in um uh kind of psychology and so on that
that changing your perspective on things is is is a tool that you have in addition to actually
trying to change the thing the thing itself um and so and so that's that's part of it is that we
have to we have to we have to think about that meaning is very much relative to some to some
observer which by the way might be the system itself an observer doesn't mean that there's
some sort of there's not always some sort of external thing that needs is there to give to
give something meaning the system itself can be sort of it's like this strange loop as hofstadter
puts it um that can do that for itself if it's a complex enough system yeah yeah that's really
interesting the um just so you know after the fact i'll probably won't have this slide up the whole
time i'll probably have the side by side of us just because uh it's probably up for you now but
just so you know i'll probably put it up and put it uh have it down and put it back up at different
different times of the conversation but one thing before because i do want to talk about
morphogenesis a little bit and go into bioelectricity but this light cone idea and
i think i think this brings in something you've said about cancer cells or at least your
theory of how cancer cells look they have like sort of the wrong scope of what what they themselves
are um can you explain that a little bit sure well one one so so a lot of cancer research
focuses on why why do we get cancer right like what like what causes it and i think that um
the right way or a better way to think about the the kind of the origin of it is why is there ever
anything but cancer why isn't it all cancer all all the time because if you think about if you
think about individual cells as as which are our as our ancestors their basic state is is not to sit
quietly as a disposable organ somewhere their basic state is to reproduce and go where life
is good we are made of pieces that want to behave like a tumor they want to go wherever they want
they want to reproduce as much as they possibly can they want to hijack other cells around them
to help them do whatever they need to do this is that's the basic state the real mystery is
is is what what keeps that uh under control and i think this was this was well recognized by people
kind of in the at the dawn of um the developmental and cell biology but it's sort of it's sort of lost
lost steam for a while but it's but but but it's a very powerful idea because then you ask yourself
well uh if we really take this this cognitive light cone thing seriously we look at individual
cells and we say um so what's happening here is that there are a variety of signals and those may
involve the stuff that we've been talking about so gab junction stress propagation you know with all
kinds of other things um what they're doing is they're partially erasing the identity of these
individual cells to enable the collective to work towards a very large goal like making a nice
liver or a kidney or whatever and then you start to think through well what would a failure mode
look like so you get some you get some sort of oncogene uh that uh let's say um uh shuts down
all the gap junctional communication for that cell and immediately what happens is once that cell
is electrically isolated from its neighbors it can now start to have an individual identity and
that leads to a calculus of individual little tiny cell goals and and that cell can now as far as
that cell is concerned now the rest of the body is just external environment so what happens with
these electrical networks and of course chemical and biomechanical networks is that they set the
boundary between a cell and the outside world if if you're a cell and you're connected to a whole
bunch of other cells the boundary of yourself is huge it might be the whole body you know and then
everything else is sort of external environment but as soon as that gap junction breaks your yourself
is now tiny it's just it's just a single cell so so that boundary between self and world uh grows
in shrinks it grows during during development and grows during evolutionary um uh you know evolutionary
the course of evolution and then it shrinks during during cancer where and and that's really
important to to to think about that these these cancer cells are not any more selfish than normal
cells you know in a lot of game theory you treat the cells as more selfish they're not more selfish
they're exactly as selfish as every cell they just have a tiny little self so all the other cells are
also being incredibly selfish but their self is huge and so they're all working towards this common
purpose that we see of us as an organ or in fact the whole organism um but it's not because they're
not selfish it's because they're their identities partially erased through their tight informational
linkage to other cells and so cancer is exactly what you would expect from a breakdown of that
process as soon as you're disconnected and we see this we see as soon as you get an you get a
strong oncogene first thing that happens is it shuts down um uh gap junctional communication
you get a weird voltage uh as a depolarized voltage state and then and then you start doing
this calculus well where am i better off well i'm going i'm going to go down there and then i'm
going to proliferate as much as i want and this is metastasis and and then and then yeah then your
goals start to start to deviate from the goals of the rest of the collective yeah yeah i love it
you said you pointed out the uh cancer cells no more selfish than another cell just has a
the wrong scope of what it is kind of it doesn't have the proper um that it's like cone is is deformed
let's say but yeah and and it's it's shrunk and and the key is that again so so so to make good on
this on this promise at the beginning that this wasn't going to be just just philosophy what we've
been able to do is to take that weird way of thinking about it and turn it into a therapeutic
strategy so so once you start thinking about that we think okay so maybe we don't need to kill the
cells and maybe the problem isn't the the the molecular hardware maybe what we can do is is
physiologically reconnected to the network and it should go back to doing its normal thing and
that's in fact what we've done so so we have we have a whole body of work on cancer in the frog
model and we're now moving to uh glioblastoma in human cells uh is to is to can convert the cell
with a with a really strong nasty oncogene like a k-ras mutation force it to be in proper electrical
state with its neighbors and the cell normal and they normalize there's no tumor they go even though
the oncogene is blazingly strongly expressed they just go back to doing what they what they normally
do because they're now again they're part of this they're part of this morphogenetic collective
will we eventually you think be able to electrically communicate with say a cancer cell
and just change the information going into the cell via say electrical currents and tell it to
do something else like is that a decent explanation of where we're going towards or is that a little
different than that it's it's it's it's it's reasonable um but i'll i'll twist that just a
little bit here's here's where i here's where i think it's going um down at the lower level so if
you zoom in yes i think that's what we're looking at is is aberrant electrical and other kinds of
signaling between cells that's the target however uh i don't think that uh the way that we're going to
be manipulating this is by focusing our our intervention efforts directly at that layer
and the reason i don't think that's what we're gonna do and i'll tell you what what i do think
we're gonna do uh is that it's kind of like uh it's kind of like programming a computer the way
the way you program the computer in the 40s and 50s is you have to physically interact with
the hardware you literally had to sit there and rewire it right and and that's and that's what all
of modern molecular medicine is about it's a crisper and genomic editing and and and rewiring
pathways and protein engineering like all that stuff is down at the level of the hardware
i think what what what can what the information technology revolution has taught us is that
if your hardware is good enough and i think the biological hardware is definitely good enough
to do this the the better way to do this is to communicate with the system using its own
built-in interface not to try to rewire it but to but to reset the set point and and and and take
advantage of its built-in competencies so so reprogrammability so so what i think we're going
to be doing is i don't think we're going to be telling every cell what to do in either cancer
or regenerative medicine context what i think we're going to be doing is uh basic basically a
rough way of saying is retraining it we're going to be we're going to be using high-level stimuli
and and i think i think it's a AI recent recent examples of AI and various techniques in machine
learning show great promise in being that that translation layer to uh to to to do very high
level top-down interventions where the details are all handled by the system itself this is how
we've done a lot of our work on bioelectrics we can make cells we can make bodies form an
eye in weird locations or an extra leg or or you know repair various structures and it's never
by telling the individual cells what to do it's never by differentiating stem cells
it's always by communicating with a collective intelligence with a fairly simple signal looks
like a subroutine call it just says build an eye here or regrow whatever normally goes here that
that's the kind of stuff you don't want to be down at the level yeah we then i say this to my to my
um students uh you don't you don't get out your soldering iron every every time you want to go
from from Photoshop to Microsoft Word right i mean you could but but we don't do that why don't
we do that because because your system has a much better way where you can take advantage of these
built-in multi-scale controls and that's what i think we're going to be doing oh that's great
thank you for correcting that's that's really helpful to have that um sure the you know there's
actually there's actually a really interesting piece of this that that ties into uh some some um
some medical uh issues that have been coming up for years we just we just had a talk by by uh
Fabrizio Benedetti who's this amazing uh placebo researcher and he has this quote which i just love
and i'm now using it all over the place which is um he said uh drugs and words have the same
mechanism of action and he's exactly right by looking at by looking at how bodies respond to
uh the context of being given a diff specific drug or being given a placebo whether the whether
the doctor was wearing a white lab coat or wasn't or whether he told you you were getting a drug
or whether he told you you were getting the best drug or what you know all of those things have
have massive implications for the therapeutic outcome and that's because we are part of this
multi-scale system where high-level cognitive expectations of what's going to happen
filter down to the molecular details of how your cells actually react and this is what makes um
a hypnodermatology work it's what makes the placebo effect work and it's also less people
think that this is some like weird exotic effect that's how you get up out of bed in the morning
because when you're laying there and you decide to stand up out of bed what's happening is
that high-level executive cognitive function that says you know what I think I'm going to get up
out of bed now has to has to traverse down to change the molecular properties of your muscles
of the cell membrane in your muscles in order for you to do to take these voluntary actions
it that that cognitive intent has to change the way your voltage is spread across the cell
membrane it has to affect the micro level physiology so this business where where top
level cognitive states affect molecular biology is not some some weird you know mind-brain medicine
woo-woo stuff it's it's it's the daily reality of being a behaving um a behaving living multi-scale
agent that uses uh by electricity mostly but but also a bunch of other stuff to cross levels like
that to go from from cognitive goals to molecular states oh that's fascinating I never thought about
that way huh yeah next time tomorrow morning when I wake up I'll uh think about the I gotta be the
executive and get get actually get up I'm not snooze a bunch of times the uh one thing I like
and you actually just touched on and it's another slide that um I guess the the the elevated um
function of bioelectricity versus these these other components that are happening um within the cell
um I think it's it's a great I think it's a great like sort of one slider in terms of like
looking at morphogenetics and um kind of breaking out the component parts and there might they're
very well very well might be other sort of components here but these are kind of the
major ones right the the ECM I think it's the extracellular matrix is that right tension can
you give us just like um I guess a quick um you know rundown of sort of what each of these kind
of component parts do and then like I said like and you have mentioned here of course on the right
here the bioelectricity has its own it's the computational layer so it's got sort of a special
component yeah yeah this is this is a very early slide I I used it extensively probably 10 years
ago um sorry as well no it's fine it's still it's still valid but but but see as as I was rolling
out to this whole this whole uh kind of research program starting in I don't know god 98 or 99 or
so uh there were certain things you couldn't say at the beginning that you have to you have to say
things a certain way and it's much easier now now that the data are there it's it's easier to
to say those things now what with this thing this this this diagram is um basically just
designed to get across a couple things uh first of all that there is this morphogenetic field
that impinges on every cell and it's made of multiple components so there's the biochemical
component uh or layer and then there's the biophysical and so so ECM and tension are both
kind of part of the biomechanical layer there the stresses tensions pressures the you know those
kinds of gradients um and then there's the bioelectrical layer so so that was the first thing I was
trying to get across and that this this information field is critical from development to to adulthood
to uh cancer suppression to regeneration to to all of that the other thing I was trying to say is
that bioelectricity doesn't do the whole job by itself because I've written many papers saying
how amazing bioelectricity is and then and then people will often read that as me saying that
well that's the only thing that matters and I'm absolutely not saying that of course all
these other things matter and they all work together um and then and then the the last thing
which which uh I only started emphasizing fairly recently is that what's it what's really interesting
and and again this isn't something I would have ever said early on but but but now I think
now I think I think it can be it can be said is that what's really interesting about bioelectricity
isn't um that it's yet another piece of physics that we now have to pay attention to it's more
than that it's actually the uh the excitable medium the the the uh medium in which the the
information processing and the primitive cognition of that collective intelligence
is stored so again that sounds very very weird and and sort of mystical but it's basically exactly
what happens in neuroscience so neuroscience if you ask the question what's the cognitive glue
that takes a whole bunch of individual cells I mean neurons are perfectly good individual cells
and then there's other cells in the brain of course uh what's the cognitive glue that binds
all of those cells together so that I emerge and I have some thoughts and and and uh and plans that
don't have anything you know that they don't exist at the level of these cells well the answer
that we've now known for for a really long time is ah bioelectricity that's what it is and so all
I'm saying is yeah that's right and where did the brain learn that trick it got it from from all
the evolutionary history before we had brains and neurons even of using the exact same thing
to store the content of the thoughts that the collective intelligence of the cells was having
about anatomy in morpheus space and then eventually evolution sort of pivoted that to be all about
three-dimensional movement and things like that so so that's what that's what that slides about
okay gotcha yeah sorry it's if it's a dated slide but uh I just thought that's an important concept
yeah it's got a lot it's very dense it's got a I think of um on different components to it and
I want to get to sort on the bioelectric um level there was I think I was someone in the 30s or 40s
I'm trying to remember Harold Saxton Burr yeah who who had a lot of these ideas 100 years ago um
and he was sort of on the right path what um what kind of privilege information did he have like
do you know anything about him or uh what what his deal was yeah yeah yeah that's a great question
and I apologize I've just got about a few more a few more minutes sorry oh yeah um yeah yeah so
so the story with Burr is interesting well first I'll just say I'll just say this this whole idea
of privileged information there's there's a few examples and Burr is one of my favorite examples
but but there are others like um this guy this guy Lama Tree who was uh around in the 1700s who
published this book that said man was a machine and you just imagine you know what machines did he
have access to back then you know water clocks maybe was the best machine you could have seen
and just to have that that foresight to to extrapolate from that and to be able to say
yeah and so all these great artists and philosophers what they do yeah that could probably be explained
that way right just like like this unbelievable um ability to to out paint from what you see
into what what the future might be so so so Harold Burr had this and and the thing with um
he wrote he wrote this this book called the the Fields of Life and he uh he had one of the first
good uh volt meters and he went around and uh he measured things everything from cells,
tissues, embryos, tumors, uh maple trees, um uh the psychiatric patients everything he
could get his hands on he would take these measurements he didn't have any ability to
do functional experiments they didn't really understand at the time what the kind of biophysics
was that was underlying it at the cellular level they didn't know anything about ion channels
uh but on the basis of these measurements he described what how he saw the the the the
the future you know kind of development of this area of bioelectricity and I got to say uh
he had a crystal ball I mean it was unbelievable just how with that simple with that one tool
that he had and nothing but uh nothing but some some some crude uh you know extra cellular
measurements he reconstructed and he was able to see I mean everything that he said in that book
has been basically slowly uh being being realized to be true uh and then there's some more stuff
that you know we'll find we'll we'll see um how it goes but um that that book was was hugely
influential uh for me um I think I think he was amazing I think he was he was a pioneer to be
able to to see all this stuff and uh of course of course the other part of this is you know I
sometimes get emails from people who say what are you doing all this work on electricity this was
all done in the in the in the 40s it's all done well okay there's a difference between
kind of uh roughly having the idea that something like that should be possible
and actually getting it to the point where it you know it it's quantitative and it works and
it's a therapeutic so so I'm not saying that I mean all the amazing people that have worked
since him which were also you know kind of my my heroes so so you know Lionel Jaffe and all of his
postdocs um you know Rich Borgans and Ken Robinson and all those folks uh uh were were amazing and
they all did valuable valuable work and now we're sort of able to to go from there but uh but yeah
he had these he had these very fundamental ideas uh be in the 30s and 40s it's really remarkable
incredible you have to do more digging on his uh on his work and then you know and dive into a bit
more and one final thing just before you go the one of the final paragraphs of the scale
for your cognition paper you write about zen zen buddhism uh which I thought was great and
brought me back to reading Colonel Ashrabak by Hofstadter which he has some zen in there um
anything you want to sort of leave us on on on that point I think um I can go back to the light cones
here because I think that's it's it gives you a good visual for what you're kind of getting at
there yeah the only thing I'll say about that and and I'm no I'm no kind of zen expert or anything
but but but I am fortunate enough to be working with a set of um scientists interested in uh
certain ideas in the buddhist tradition and we have a paper uh out now and we've got a couple
of other papers in the works on the kind of uh conciliants of this cognitive light cone idea
with the idea of enlarging one's ability to feel compassion and to active compassion I don't mean
feeling emotions about things I mean actively you know working towards the welfare of all
beings and so so to me this is this is really fun there's some good there's some good diagrams in
there that I think you like um there's some there's some really fundamentally important aspects here
because uh again one thing that thinking about this diverse intelligence does for you
is that it really makes it clear how the kind of simplistic distinctions that we've been making
about who or what we should feel compassion towards is uh it really needs revising and um
you know at the end of what many of my talks now I do a whole thing on uh kind of the space of
possible beings and all the different weird hybrids and hybrids and cyborgs and everything
else that's going to exist and what it's doing is it's completely wrecking the kind of primitive
uh uh criteria that we used to use on which to develop our ethics and that that all has to get
redone and I think that the goal of all of this stuff about enlarging your light cone by you know
technologically increasing our intelligence and our capability and I'm all for it I think I think
that's we've got to do that but the purpose of all of it isn't just to to screw around and have
more technology the purpose of it is to enlarge our our ability to feel compassion towards other
beings and and uh yeah you know we don't have time for all that but but but there is a there is a
whole paper on it and there's more there's more coming oh really what's the paper called um I
will uh give me a second I'll I'll I'll turn it here I just left a link to it and oh I want to
read it myself of course too yeah and the tame paper yeah as well yeah so it's called so it's
biology buddhism and AI care as the driver of intelligence and it's this idea that care and
compassion and the and intelligence are mutually reinforcing feedback loop so that as you as one
grows the other should grow too and that's that's um yeah anyway so so I'm gonna I'm I'm putting it on
the uh on the chat here so you can uh oh thank you yeah there's a bunch yeah so this is done this
is done with uh Thomas Dr. Olaf Witkowski, Elizaveta Salamanova and Bill Dwayne and there's
there's a couple of more um you know they're the buddhist experts not me so there's a but there's
a lot more on this coming that's right in my lane my audience is gonna love that um I can't
wait to dive into that paper and yeah that's what thank you you know you you could have them all you
could have them on at some point and just talk about that specifically like that if folks care
about that here then uh that's yeah that's a real real interesting discussion to be had yeah I'll
try to and everything that we discussed as well well these this paper specifically um some of my
favorite papers of yours your talks I'll link in the description of this video for the audience
watching is there anything else you want to um to tell people where they can find you or
you know looking out for working on next yeah the only absolutely everything we do is on my
academic website which is www.drmike11.org uh one word drmike11.org and everything is there all
the papers the talks the inspiration everything everything yeah wait we didn't get a chance uh
which I want to really want to talk to you because I know you're a big mid-journey fan
um and you have some stuff on there we are over our I think um styles or interests in art overlap
quite a bit like the the codex seraphon seraphonianus it's hard to pronounce and our Hieronymus
Bosch's work so this is surrealist I think we have like a lot of and I think you had something
a post about dwarf fortress which is like a game simulator and maybe one of your kids was was getting
into it yeah which I also had gotten down the rabbit hole about um like last week separately
completely and also my my computer almost froze uh a few days ago because I had so many tabs open
going off rabbit holes of your work and your research um there's so much fascinating stuff
that well we can do we can do we can do another one if you want we can we can talk about that
in AI you know we didn't get to AI and some of that stuff so yeah wow there's thank you I appreciate
that so much yeah there's a lot of questions I kind of over tend to over prepare over I have a
lot of other questions I had an active interferon so I'll talk a bit uh first and about that but um
there's a lot of other stuff and so I really appreciate that and I appreciate your time Mike
this was amazing I learned so much I'm sure the audience did too and I love your work and uh well
I'll be in touch thank you thank you so much yeah I appreciate it talk to you soon
