Welcome to this third lecture in the monthly series running through all of 2016's worlds
of fantasy and science fiction.
I'm Greg Sadler, so I'm the person who presents this.
I'm a philosopher who's also a big sci-fi and fantasy fan, and so this allows me to
indulge myself in some guilty pleasure reading that I otherwise might not make the time for
and to go back to books that I hadn't read for a long time that I really enjoyed from
when I was a child and then in college when I had more time to read, quite frankly.
So we're continuing this series with a particular focus on this guy, Eve Ann Voight, who is
a really early influential sci-fi writer.
He's from what they call the Golden Age of sci-fi, and I'll talk a bit about that in
a moment.
I wanted to focus on his Null A trilogy in part because it starts out with the world
of Null A, and the theme for this whole series is worlds.
So why not take the low-hanging fruit, so to speak?
He wrote a lot of other great stuff, though, too, like the Weapon Shops of Isher's series,
and we can talk about those things as well if you want to.
But what I wanted to talk about were these three books, The World of Null A, the Players,
or sometimes it's actually listed as the Poins of Null A. They're really the same book.
And then this much later one, Null A3 that he wrote, and they're a continuous story.
They're separated by, these two are separated by about 40 years in time, in real time, but
they're separated by a matter of weeks in narrative time, so it's one continuous.
This one does the world of Null A. This one is written in the 1980s, I mean, 40 years
after all of this stuff has sort of died down, he decides, yeah, I'm going to revisit it
because somebody had pestered him into doing it, and he thought it would be an interesting
challenge.
And I guess he sort of thought he left things not completely finished, and he still doesn't
finish them in the book, but he ties up a couple loose threads.
So what I wanted to do in this session was, I was going to talk a little bit self-indulgingly
about why Van Voight was the second main guy that I picked, and then we'll do a little
bit of biography and background, I created a handout about that.
I want to talk a bit about the universe and characters of the Null A stories, and then
I've got some philosophical themes picked out, and I found four that I thought were particularly
interesting.
One of them is his writing style and what his writing is trying to do.
Another is his understanding and depiction of science in general, because he really is
a hard science, push the, you know, this is scientific kind of guy, but some of the
stuff that he writes about really isn't that scientific, so the question is what's really
happening there.
And then we'll talk about an example of that, this general semantics that plays a major
role and non-aristotelianism, and then I want to talk a bit about supermen and political
meritocracy and enlightened monarchy, so political themes, you know, like who should be in charge.
The weapon shops of Vish are really focused, it's heavily on that sort of thing.
So as usual, ask questions at any time, we'll have time at the end for any other questions
or general discussion that we want to have.
My personal connection to the A.E.V.
Ed Voight stuff is that I encountered him pretty young, and I found a big, thick sort
of, not quite an omnibus, but it had three major novels of A.E. Van Voight and Ed, when
I was a kid, it was in hard cover form, it had Slam, which was one of his first major
novels, it had The Voyage of the Space Beagle, which is some great, you know, adventure stories
out in the middle of space, and then The World of Nalae.
And I found it in my uncle Hubert's library, my uncle Hubert was a great bibliophile, he
didn't actually have much of an education, he had to drop out of school very early, you
know, in grade school so he could work to support his family, but he was a great reader
and a great collector of books.
And so he encouraged me to take whatever I wanted from his library, he never worried
about whether I'd bring it back or not, because he knew I was going to devour it.
And I did with A.E. Van Voight, I thought his stuff was really interesting.
So I thought, you know, he's influential, I know that he influenced, for example, Philip
K. Dick, so let's go back to him and see what's there, and I was very happy with what I found.
I hadn't read this for close to 20 years when I went back to it earlier this year to work
my way through these stories again.
So I would like to also mention one other thing before we go into biography about Van
Voight's influence and critical reception, and that's sort of what I've got here on this
first handout.
You could think of this as sort of, you know, how we portray people with an angel on one
shoulder and a devil on the other shoulder, these diametric opposites, these are diametrically
opposed readings of what A.E. Van Voight is doing.
There's a historical significance to this.
One of the reasons why people who had been enthusiastic about Van Voight became lukewarm
and stopped reading him was because of Damon Knight.
Damon Knight, as a young author, published these reviews of science fiction writers in
the 1940s, and some of them are really rough stuff, and it wasn't just Van Voight that
he went after.
He went after plenty of other people.
He also sometimes would switch to the other side and sort of hero worship people like
Heinlein as well.
But Knight says that Van Voight is a terrible author, and interestingly, what he was criticizing
originally was the serialized version of this.
This was not published in a book form at first.
It was published in three stories, and some of the material that was in those serial things
didn't make it in here.
Because Van Voight looked at Knight's criticisms and said, yeah, okay, maybe I need to pare
it down a bit.
Maybe I need to fix this up, and he did, and that's what we have here.
So Damon Knight said that, the following, Van Voight seems to me to fail consistently
as a writer in these three, in these elementary ways.
His plots do not bear examination.
His choice of words and his sentence structure are fumbling and insensitive.
He has unable either to visualize a scene or to make a character seem real.
That's pretty damn it, isn't it?
And then he goes on.
He says, John Campbell, who was a major editor, the one who got Nullay published, said, Nullay
is one of those once in a decade classics of science fiction.
I offer the alternative judgment that, far from being a classic, the world of Nullay
is one of the worst allegedly adult science fiction stories ever published.
And then he said, here's four reasons why, plot, characterization, background, style.
And then he went on to write, well, here's what's wrong with the plot, here's what's
wrong with the characters.
The other thing that I put in here is, he says, this widely read novel began its career
as a pretentious, foolish, wildly complicated, and self-congratulatory, or self-contradictory
magazine serial.
In the hardcover version, so he's responding to a Van Voigt revision, a ruthless pruning
and trimming job is evident, whole sections of irrelevant material have been lifted out
in total, motivations and relationships have been patched into some kind of coherent shape,
and many of the objectionable features of Van Voigt's magazine style have been smoothed
out.
So that sounds pretty good, right?
All of these were encumbrances to the story's one virtue.
It's a powerful, exciting movement.
What emerges then is a fairly straightforward adventure story in a pseudo-scientific background.
So he's saying, it's a dilemma, either you got the original story, which doesn't make
any sense, and is terribly written, and the characters are unbelievable, or you got this
other thing, which is just mediocre.
Pick which one you want.
Neither one's good.
Philip K. ... Now, one other thing I'll say about Damon Knight, too.
So Damon Knight ends up becoming a real mover and shaker in the science fiction world.
He also stands in the way of A. Van Voigt later on in life getting recognition.
Harlan Ellison had to intervene personally for three years to get Van Voigt inducted
into the science fiction hall of fame, because Damon Knight was against it.
So he had a real animus against Van Voigt, and some of it seems to be personal, some
of it seems to be on aesthetic grounds.
Yeah, he was a young guy, too, and I think some of it was you make your bones by knocking
down the people who came before you.
I know a lot of people do that in philosophy.
I think maybe people do that in literature.
Oh, yeah, that's true, yeah, if you can prove everybody else's got it backwards, yeah.
Yeah, you know you're really something in science if you bring about a paradigm shift,
right?
And then nobody has to read anybody before you, so ...
I just thought the endorsement on the cover was even funny.
In New Yorkers, it's fine for addicts in science fiction.
I mean, that just seems so lukewarm.
It strikes me as one of those kind of endorsements where it was probably clipped from a much
longer sentence, which had some negative things to say.
Yeah, there is another one, where was it?
No, it's not on this, I saw something else on another one that had a similarly backhanded
endorsement.
Well, let's talk about Philip Dick, so I mean, Philip Dick is another really interesting
author, and he said that A. E. Van Voigt's stuff was great, as a matter of fact, so great
that when he first started out, he tried to write like A. E. Van Voigt, so that's a pretty
ringing endorsement.
And I think that what's interesting about Philip Dick is he provides us, he doesn't
just say, Damon Knight, you're totally wrong.
He says, well, here's why you've looked at it the wrong way.
Here's the other perspective.
So he said, A. E. Van Voigt was the person who originally got him off, a very 60s thing
to say.
He was in Van Voigt's writing mysterious quality, and this is especially true in the
world of null A. All of the parts of the book did not add up, so he's conceding there is
some internal incoherence.
All the ingredients did not make a coherency.
Now some people are put off by that.
They think that's sloppy and wrong.
But the thing that fascinated me so much was that this resembled reality more than anybody
else's writing inside or outside science fiction.
He says, Damon feels it's bad artistry when you build those funky universes where people
fall through the floor.
It's like he's viewing a story the way a building inspector would when he's building
your house.
But reality really is a mess, and yet it's exciting.
The basic thing is how frightened are you of chaos and how happy are you with order?
Van Voigt influenced me so much because he made me appreciate a mysterious, chaotic quality
in the universe which is not to be feared.
And then he concludes from another interview where he says, the world of null A, there
was something about it that absolutely fascinated me.
It had a mysterious quality.
It alluded to things unseen.
There were puzzles presented which were never adequately explained.
I found it a numinous quality, so almost a religious quality.
I began to get an idea of a mysterious quality in the universe which could be dealt with
in science fiction.
I realize now that what I was sensing was a kind of metaphysical world, an invisible
realm of things have seen essentially what medieval people sense as the transcendent
world, the next world.
So what Philip K. Dick is saying there is that his sort of career or trajectory and orientation
as an author takes its cue from Van Voigt and the way that Dick has made sense of Van
Voigt.
So, again, if you really think that a story has to be logically coherent in all of its
parts, Damon Knight's probably the person who you would follow there.
If you think that it's okay for a story to leave some things murky or to have some internal
incoherencies because that's the way reality is, maybe Philip K. Dick is right.
I can tell you, just as an example, I used to be on judicial boards at a university when
I was a student.
One of the things that we learned from this interesting policeman who briefed us on interrogation
techniques and on a bunch of other things was whenever a story is completely coherent,
it's probably a lie because people got together and they agreed on the details of that.
If it's got some minor discrepancies in it, it's probably true.
You know what, I think there's a difference in your time of life because when you're
younger, you do really want an orderly structure.
You really want things to fit and make sense.
You want everything in black and white and spelled out.
I think as you get certainly past 50, you've seen so much inconsistency and craziness that
maybe even if you don't necessarily have an appreciation for it, you certainly know
that it's there.
So you can take it in more, it's not exactly acceptable, but it's there.
The irony is that younger people get portrayed as if they're somehow more open-minded, more
tolerant.
You're right, they need things to be very cut and dried.
Some kids more than others.
I have one kid who really needs things that way.
Okay, so that was kind of an interesting little excursion.
I don't want to spend too much time on biography, but I think it is kind of interesting to
note.
He's a Canadian.
He starts out in Manitoba.
He's going to wind up in Hollywood, so he's kind of a typical 1940s, 1950s story.
Hollywood was a big place to go at the time.
He doesn't get involved in script writing or anything like that so much, but he does
stumble into another aspect of Hollywood, which was its sort of promotion of alternative
lifestyles, let's call it.
And so Van Voigt starts out and he has a pretty unhappy childhood, according to his own accounts.
He actually stops buying science fiction stories because the Great Depression hits, and he
doesn't have the money to buy them anymore.
Starts making his money as a writer, eventually quits his day job, and before he starts writing
science fiction, which he used to like, he writes these confessional stories, and that's
where he hones his craft.
Now confessional stories, I'm trying to think of what would be examples of like that in
TV shows.
You know, we have these reality shows, I guess hoarders would kind of be like that, right?
You're looking at somebody's thing and there's a lot of appeal to emotion.
I don't watch a lot of this sort of stuff.
I think a lot of things on lifetime would be sort of along these lines.
Like biopic.
Yeah.
Yeah.
What's that one with the computer stuff that, you know, with the websites, people trust
the wrong person on social media?
Oh, I know what you're talking about.
Do you know the name?
I can't remember the name.
There's certain things like catfish, where people pretend to be other people on social
media.
The idea is like an exploration into some sort of like real life circumstance, and you don't
know the whole story, and it's revealed to you, right?
That's it.
There's a mystery that's revealed, and every line has to convey emotion.
So you know, when you see these shows, the editing of it, there's lots of music to like,
bring your mood up and bring it down, and well, they were doing that in writing at the time.
So Van Voight got into that.
And then he reads this story, who goes there, in astounding science fiction, starts buying
science fiction again.
He says, man, maybe I'll try my hand at writing science fiction, and he turns out to be quite
good at it, but he applies some of the same principles of writing these confessional stories
to writing science fiction, and that's where his style comes from.
So the first thing he publishes is this black destroyer, which is going to be the first
story in the voyage of the space beagle.
That one, by the way, was the grounds for A. Van Voight to sue Fox when Alien came out,
because he said they stole my idea, and they didn't give me credit, and they settled with
him.
So they must have thought there was some merit to it, because it's hard to find out any details
about it, interestingly enough, because I got kind of fascinated with that when I found
out.
There's nothing to be found on the web about exactly what the grounds were, what they agreed
to, so there must have been an NDA that got signed somewhere along there as well.
But you notice that after he becomes a professional writer, first his stories are serialized in
these science fiction magazines, and then he starts publishing them as books.
And a lot of his stories start out as just being portions that are published in a magazine
somewhere, and then he fixes them up.
He coins his term fix-ups for them a bit later.
Now you notice that after the move to Hollywood, some years later, he gets involved with Dianetics.
And the reason he gets involved with Dianetics is because L. Ron Hubbard wants to get him
in.
He sees Van Voight as kind of like talent.
And he and his wife do get involved with it.
Eventually, they will leave the movement.
And some people said, well, that affected his productivity.
I don't see that in here.
I see him still churning out quite a few novels.
Some of them pretty good.
One of them is the Poins or the Players of Nalae.
And then later on, he just keeps on publishing.
He slows down a bit.
And you notice towards the end of his life, he starts getting some recognition again.
The Casper Award, if I remember right, that's a Canadian one.
And he's Canadian ultimately, so it makes sense.
And then the big ones are the Grandmaster Award from the Science Fiction Writers of America,
Special Award from the World Science Fiction Convention and being inducted into the Science
Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame.
That last stuff took quite a bit.
And Harlan Ellison, another very important speculative fiction writer, had to personally
intervene and make a case out of it.
Because Damon Knight was so resistant to A.E. Van Voight getting inducted, I guess there
was still some bad blood between them.
Unfortunately, by the time that he was inducted, he was suffering from Alzheimer's and didn't
really appear to know what was going on.
So it was kind of a sad, sad thing.
Is Harlan still alive?
I think so.
I don't know.
That's a good question.
I haven't heard of him dying, but you know, are you going to check for us?
Yeah.
If he is, he's probably ticking somebody off somewhere, because he's quite an abrasive
personality.
All right, so let's talk about the universe and the characters of these Naleh stories.
I picked these guys.
The setting is in the future, centuries from now, and it starts out in our solar system,
which has been colonized to some extent.
He is still alive?
Yeah.
Well, that's good.
Good.
So he's living the high life.
81.
Oh, yeah.
He would be up there.
Can I ask you a question?
Absolutely.
So when we were first talking with Damon Knight, and you mentioned Harlan Ellison, has he
educated for him to get in?
So why was that powerful at the time?
Like was there...
Damon Knight helped to found the, where is it, the science fiction writers?
So he was opposing sort of like, because he had a vested interest in it, because he
was one of the founders of the...
Well, I think he still thought that Van Voigt's stuff was no good.
He sort of staked out that position at the beginning, that Van Voigt is a charlatan.
He called him a pygmy, behind a giant typewriter.
I mean, just a lot of invective.
But he did that with a lot of other people, too.
Was he particularly vicious about science fiction?
Or did he extend that to fantasy also?
That's a good question.
I don't really know.
I know of him more in terms of, as a science fiction author and as a critic, maybe he gave
fantasy a pass.
But you know, some of the stuff he points out is actually right.
The science in a Van Voigt science fiction is not real science, for one thing.
But I mean, that's not necessarily a damning point, because you could say the same thing
about so many other people.
I mean, Asimov makes things up, you know, in his foundation trilogy, right?
So there isn't any of that science or techniques that exist in Frank Herbert's Dune series.
That's all made up stuff, although based on some things.
So, yeah, it's kind of an interesting question.
Well, let's go back to the sort of synopsis.
So we have, you know, the world in the future, and Earth is still the main home for humanity.
At least we think it is in the story at the beginning.
And there's some incorporations or advances in technology, but it's still really the same
basic setting as the one that we're in.
There's businessmen, and you know, sometimes they're crooked, and sometimes they're on
the level, and you know, there's a president.
But the one big difference is there's a games machine.
And the games machine is this massive, giant, you know, electronic brain
in the middle of the city of the machine.
And what's important about this is the games machine tests your null A ability.
Null A means non-aristotelianism.
And it's based in this philosophy that Van Voigt was really enthusiastic about,
which didn't actually have that much to do with Aristotle.
You know, it's portrayal of Aristotle as kind of a caricature.
Somebody actually asked me about that when I posted that I was going to do a talk on this.
They said, oh, so an Aristotle scholar is going to take up the side of somebody criticizing Aristotle.
And it's so far away from what Aristotle actually said that it's not even a criticism of Aristotle.
But it is kind of interesting.
And so it's sort of like a mental training framework.
And so you compete in these games that the computer runs.
And if you do well enough, you get to go to Venus.
And Venus is where all of the people who are super well adjusted live.
And they don't even need a government.
Everybody just does what they need to do.
So it's all females, right?
No.
As a matter of fact, interestingly enough,
gender relations in any of Van Voigt stories have not changed one bit from 1940.
Wives still sort of take a back seat to their husbands,
quick the dinner.
Even Van Voigt is this guy who, in many respects, is a lot of paradoxes.
He hates any sort of arbitrariness in social relations.
And yet gender relations, they can stay exactly the same.
That's probably a non-issue to him.
That's why, you know...
Well, of course it's a non-issue to him.
Because he's a guy.
He's getting the better side of it, so...
I mean, you know, here's another little bit of trivia.
His wife, you know, also wrote.
But it may actually be the case that nobody's quite sure that she didn't write.
And he published stuff under her name.
Or, you know, worked with her on it.
Nobody's quite sure.
There's a lot of back and forth on websites to talk about that.
But that is a good question.
So Venus is men and women.
And they're, like, totally well-adjusted.
Everybody does what they need to do.
And it turns out that it's very good, because they can respond to external threats
without having to have a power structure in place.
Now, if you don't go to Venus...
And by the way, too, if you're not supposed to be on Venus,
and you go to Venus, it's an automatic death sentence.
So, because they want to keep the riff-raff out.
The rest of us.
Now, if you do well enough, but not so well as to go to Venus,
then you get to be placed in a position of authority.
So, like, the president is supposed to have done really well in the games.
As it turned out, the president...
You're not quite well-adjusted enough.
No. And as it turns out, the president found a way to subvert the games,
because he realized he was the kind of guy who would not get in.
And so, he's accepted some outside help to make the game's machine do what he wants.
Not a computer virus, it's called a distorted,
but he's able to make the system break down.
And there's an Institute for General Semantics there
that plays an important role in having designed the game's machine.
Now, here's where it gets really interesting at the start.
So, we've already got a world that these people live in.
There's a guy at the very beginning of this,
and he's the main character through all these stories,
Gilbert Gosain.
And, you know, the name is sort of symbolic, right?
Gosain, the way it's spelled,
it's supposed to be pronounced that way,
because the whole idea of general semantics is sanity.
The guy who's associated with it wrote a book called Science and Sanity,
and the people who are not well-adjusted are either unsane or insane,
depending on whether they're neurotic or psychotic.
Nowadays, we don't use those categories.
We would say whether they have one kind of personality disorder
or another type of personality disorder, right?
Now, Gosain shows up out of nowhere
and thinks he's going to compete in the games.
He gets to this hotel in the city of the machine,
and there are these lie detectors,
and the lie detectors, they don't just tell if you're lying.
They tell what you're thinking and whether it makes sense and all that.
Turns out that he's mistaken about his own identity.
He thinks that he's coming to the games from this little town out in the middle of nowhere
because his wife has died and now he's going to, you know, try something new.
He's had the NALA training, and the lie detector says,
this guy is not on the level. He's not who he claims to be.
So they kick him out.
And the bad news about that is it's a time of lawlessness.
You know, there's no police enforcement or anything during the times of the games,
which is a weird quirk, never explained in the books why that would be the case.
So you're at the mercy of wandering mobs,
and maybe people who don't like the fact that they can't compete in the game, right?
They're out there.
And he ends up, there's a whole bunch of different sort of plots within plots,
within plots, within plots that keep on getting revealed.
As it turns out, I'm really going to sort of cut to the chase with all this,
and Gosane is, there are all these different plots and players involved,
and nobody knows what to make of him.
So, you know, they think, who's putting this pawn onto the board,
if we want to use chess metaphors?
Who's actually making this move?
So they don't kill him right away.
They will actually kill him, though.
Fairly early on, did you get that far in the book?
Where he dies for the first time.
Yeah.
He's burned alive and filled with bullets.
And then he wakes up on Venus.
Because as it turns out, he's rather unique.
There's a whole bunch of clones of him,
and consciousness can be transferred from one to the other.
It also turns out he's got an extra brain,
which makes him very dangerous to anybody who's already got plans,
because this guy could disrupt the plans.
It's going to turn out that this extra brain, once it's trained,
can do all sorts of amazing things.
And this is where, you know, we're we, outside of science,
some of the stuff that Van Voigt will make up about explaining how the science works.
Nobody understands what, you know...
Where does he get the brain? Is it in the cloud?
No, it's just in his head. He's just got an extra...
But he was burned to death.
Oh.
So how do you get the brain into the clone?
Okay, so you don't have to get the brain into the clone.
This is where Van Voigt will create a concept that explains things
and sounds scientific, but it's not one bit.
So he talks about things in the universe,
if they're similar enough to each other, are essentially the same thing.
So if I had a clone, and I am similar to it on what he calls a,
not just a 19 decimal point level of similarity,
but a 20 decimal point level of similarity,
and nobody knows what this means.
I don't even think Avi had Van Voigt did.
But it sounds cool, right?
Then when I die, my consciousness will be transferred into that other one.
And if you do this, you know, 20 decimal point, similarizing thing,
you can also memorize the atomic structure of this place over here
and then teleport yourself there.
Or teleport somebody else there.
Or you can do all sorts of really cool stuff.
Now, none of this is good science at all.
It's not even clear what it means.
He did stuff like this in other things, too.
Like in Slam, his character creates 10 point steel.
And normal steel is...
It's sort of like, it's not like thread count.
Thread count higher is better, right?
With this, the lower the count, the harder it is.
So it's more steel-like than real steel is.
Like real steel is just like, you know, 500 point or something.
10 point steel, nothing can penetrate it.
What is it?
Who knows?
But it sounds cool, you know?
It's a good literary device, in many respects.
But it's a good question.
I don't know if they just do that.
Yeah, I mean...
There's hilarious steel from Martin Luther King.
Oh, yeah.
From Chrome metal.
Yeah, or adamantium.
In Tolkien, there's mithril, right?
Yeah.
So, yeah, metals are really...
You get to do a lot of stuff with metals, but...
It's so elemental.
I mean, it's like...
Yeah, I think you're right.
So in any case, there's these really interesting plots that, you know, develop...
What's really about these plots is what's revealed is that there's a massive universe out there,
a whole galaxy filled with human beings.
So human beings are not just on Earth or in the solar system.
They're all over the galaxy.
And there's a massive war about to happen between the Galactic League
and this guy Enro the Red, who also has some special powers.
He is clairvoyance.
And Venus is just being used as a base by Enro.
That's why he wanted to subvert the game's machine and the solar system.
And sort of the great hope, the rest of the story is carried out in these two books,
where there's fighting against Enro and subverting his plots
and then all sorts of other things happening, more wrinkles being brought in.
But as it turns out, this Nulli philosophy is unique in the universe.
And so Gosane's idea and some of the other people involved with it
is that they can sort of almost evangelize and use it to...
Sort of like, you know, in Star Trek, you know, the Federation will make everybody get along
and, you know, because they have the right way to do things,
not like all those other races of people who they'll borrow from a little bit,
but fundamentally it's the Federation way.
That's what the Nulli people are sketching, except with them,
it's not that they take over, they, you know, propose it
and people can accept it when they do, and when they do, they'll be sane.
Everybody else will be, unfortunately, unsane or insane.
And so, you know, you've got this widening thing here.
This only takes you to, like, Venus, but exposes the grand galactic conspiracy.
This has him hopping around from Star System to Star System and back and forth.
This even brings in another galaxy and creatures who are originally human,
but then got mutated.
So there's quite a, you know, it's quite an ambitious sweep, you could say.
So that's actually a good point for me to take a little pause,
because that's a lot of information.
And then we can talk about some of the philosophical themes.
Yeah, any questions, or should I just jump right in?
Sure.
Oh, thanks.
I thought one thing through those sort of fundamental talks about, you know,
these futuristic machines.
Oh, yeah.
You know, I was looking up a psychiatrist and he looked through the yellow pages.
Yeah, that's a perennial issue.
I think at one point he, like, drops a coin into a phone too, you know.
Because, you know, strictly speaking, you want to, like, imagine everything totally different,
but that's so hard to do, you know.
You know who was a bit better at that was Philip K. Dick,
because he would explain how progress didn't happen the way that we thought it would,
and that's why these things are still there.
So, all right, so let's talk about his approach to writing itself.
Van Voigt is an interesting, like he said, a paradox,
because he's not an emotional guy himself.
As a matter of fact, there was a quote that he said that so struck me that I wrote it down
just in case I might want to use it, and now I think I do.
He was asked in an interview, does your emotional state affect your ability to write?
And he said, I'm a square.
I don't have emotional states, at least not for long.
The squares of this world are the essentially stable people.
The emotional types are more stimulating as individuals.
The reasons by one of my systematic thoughts is that they somehow had a direct contact opened
for them with a subconscious mind.
I achieved the creative benefits derived from such contact
with one or more of the dozen thought systems with which I operate.
This is not to suggest I don't sometimes detect stirrings of such emotions
or as anger or pleasure or fear.
I do have them.
Now, so why am I bringing that up?
Because his whole technique of writing is to introduce as much emotion as possible into your writing,
something he took from those confessionals.
He wants to keep the reader engaged, wondering, desiring what comes next.
And so he took this idea originally from this book called The Only Two Ways to Write a Story.
He also took from that this notion of writing stories in 800-word scenes.
And this also got him criticized by Damon Knight.
He called it the kitchen sink technique.
The idea is every 800 words, you should be introducing a new character, a new idea, a new plot twist.
Really, you know, it could be 799 if you want.
It doesn't have to be exactly 800, but somewhere around there.
And that's what he does in these stories.
And this is part of what makes them exciting.
And also for some people, makes them feel like, what the hell's going on?
There's so much happening here.
He also writes what he calls hang-ups into sentences.
This is that emotional technique, something that would leave open a question.
So he would say, you know, the creature crept.
And now you're wondering, well, what kind of creature is it?
And then the next line might reveal what kind of creature it is, but bring something else.
He wanted to do that in every single sentence.
That was his goal.
That's pretty, you know.
Well, I think he, as a writer, yeah, I mean, I think after a while you'd get good at it.
And he had all that training in doing these confessionals.
But he says a reader who tries to skim would quickly bog down.
They weren't making the contribution to each sentence the method required.
His regular readers don't get confused because they make a sort of contribution.
Another thing he would do is write these fix-ups.
He'd write a story first in a science fiction magazine.
And then, ah, let's turn that into a novel.
You know, we'll expand it and build it up.
The Weapon Shops of Isher is an example of that.
It's originally a short story, and then it becomes a whole novel.
He also drew ideas from his dreams.
He would set an alarm clock to wake himself up at given times, and then write down his dream stuff,
and then fit that into stories.
So, you know, dreams have their own weird logic.
It's not the logic of waking life.
That's part of why his stories have the structure that they do.
So what's the general effect to all of this?
A kind of ethos, you could say, that's going to make them unattractive or irritating to some people,
like, I think, Dame and Knight, for example, but also make them completely fascinating to other people.
Like, I found for myself, I think you probably found that.
Philip K. Dick, you know, found them so fascinating that he talked about them endlessly whenever he had the chance.
So, that's an interesting aspect right there.
VanVoy did that all deliberately.
It's not like he just sort of happened into it.
This is his deliberate style.
The other thing I want to say about his style is, despite his relentless emphasis on science, science, science,
which might think he could be associated with what we call an enlightenment or positivist attitude about science,
he really doesn't fit that at all.
This kind of murkiness, this weirdness involved, that makes him what we call a postmodern writer.
So, he's got a lot in common with writers like Philip K. Dick, but also Franz Kafka.
He's been likened to Jorge Luis Borges, one of my favorite authors,
who will write stories in which somehow the whole world can get turned inside out into the story itself.
And Joseph Heller, the guy who wrote Catch-22.
If you've ever read Catch-22, that book is not internally coherent.
I realized this as I was trying to chart out the events and the characters.
There is a logic to it, but it's not a logic that actually fits a linear frame.
There's some weird inconsistencies.
So, he actually wrote about his own process and said,
writing science fiction has been a major cause for the development both of my imagination and my sense of logic.
So, that's kind of a weird thing to say, isn't it?
You think that you just bring your sense of logic to it and now you write your science fiction.
Instead, he's writing the fiction and then the logic will follow.
He says, studies that I made which began as imagination often ended up as systematic thoughts
by which I subsequently handled my life and my associations with other people.
There has been a continual feedback between imagination and reality.
And I believe this also happens to people who read science fiction.
So, he's not somebody who's saying, we're going to write science fiction by just taking science
and that provides us with the format for everything.
Sort of like a, you know, what Max Weber called the iron cage of rationality,
you know, that he associated with modern times.
There's this back and forth between imagination and reality.
It's very experimental.
So, that's one interesting philosophical theme.
Any questions about that or comments?
That's a good place to take a pause.
For me, at least.
I haven't read any of the Nolai, but I did read The Voyage of the Space Regal.
And I thought it was very coherent.
I'm reading and listening to you read The Criticism's Night Hat
and I just, I didn't see those problems.
Yeah.
Well, I certainly don't see like bad characters or the writing being, you know, awful.
When there's incoherency, it's not, with Van Voight, when there is incoherency,
it's not one where you'll be like, aha, on page such and such, he said this,
but the character actually had a lamp in his hand at the time.
That sort of thing like you see in shows where the editing was bad.
Instead, it's like the parts of the story don't really fit together
when you think it out, kind of incoherency.
I haven't read The Space Regal for such a long time.
I don't know if there is anything like that.
That one has the advantage of feeling very serialized.
Yeah.
There's an event at point A and then it's over.
Yeah.
And then move on to the next thing and you can very much see where they probably were.
This was in issues one through five of this magazine and then six through ten.
I can see where he probably broke them apart.
And it doesn't feel bad in that story.
No.
And now where the chapters, if they feel that's significantly different,
that might be jarring, but in the voyage,
you were supposed to go on the next thing.
Yeah.
They're different monsters.
I think there isn't one that's not a monster, if I remember right.
There's always some that's basically a monster.
Yeah.
So the impression I got from reading the Weapon Shops of Isher
was that he's not really that interested in combining the story.
Making it or editing it.
He just, you know, some sentences are not very good,
but it's more of an idea.
He just wants you to, you know, he gets your attention and then, you know,
he's presenting an idea and you're reading it because you're interested in how the idea,
how the, you know, the main plot or it develops, what's going to happen.
It is very, you know.
Ideas, that's right.
I'm blended.
The themes are not blended at all, but perhaps, you know, after we've read it,
it's clear that he has not made an effort to blend them.
I think some more than others, you know, I read another one recently
because it was available at the Milwaukee Library called the Book of Patah
and it just was not very good, you know.
It wasn't terrible.
It's not like these, you know.
And I was a little disappointed in reading it, but, you know,
and he had some of the same themes as a lot of his works do.
We'll talk about, you know, the role of the lone individual
and, you know, that plays in the weapon shops and all sorts of these.
And Patah, it's actually a god, the Egyptian god, Patah,
who exists in this other place way in the future.
Well, let's talk about another sort of key theme then, which is science.
So he's a science fiction writer and you think that, you know,
the science in his books should, you know, provide the architecture,
but it doesn't really have that role in his works.
And, you know, when we talk about science,
there's often kind of a quasi, you might say religious attitude,
strangely enough, towards science that a lot of people have.
And this goes back a while when I talked about positivism, for example.
Nowadays we often just call that scientism, the notion that science by itself
has all the answers to everything.
Recent examples of that, Bill Nye, the science guy,
who, you know, like a number of other sort of prominent edutainers
got himself in some hot water by saying philosophy is just worthless,
making some terrible arguments that got pointed out to him.
You know, why would he say that sort of thing?
Because he really does have that positivist perspective that science is it.
That's all there is.
Anything that's valuable can be dealt with in terms of science.
Van Voigt doesn't have that attitude about a lot of things,
but he does it in certain other things.
Science is almost a laudatory term for him.
And some critics have complained that, you know,
science just has this sort of almost cultish status in his works
where whoever's got the most science wins, you know.
It's like something you could accumulate.
And I'll give you an example of how the scientific method, you know,
you really, when we talk about what is science and people want to say,
well, it's a scientific method, it's more than that.
Here's the example that I'll give you which comes from my own high school experience.
So I had to take a chemistry class like everybody else.
And I was really into chemistry because I had a chemistry set at home
and I would do, you know, little experiments out of it.
And in my high school chemistry class, more than half of the time
we could not get the experiments to work, most of the class.
So what would happen?
Because we had to do lab reports on those, you know, grid papers.
The teacher would go to the board and he would write down,
here is what you should have observed.
Here is what you should conclude.
So science, you know, in the laboratory is supposed to be this inductive operation
based on experience, we're seeing whether things really do work.
And he turned it into this pure deductive, you know, follow the rules,
wrote memorization thing.
And if you didn't do what he said, you got, you know,
if you wrote a lab report that said, here's what I actually observed,
you got points taken off.
So that's the interesting thing.
What would the scientific method tell me about that?
Well, science in a lot of cases isn't really science, you know.
Or we have to be very careful about thinking about who did the experiments
and whether they can be, we have a big problem right now
with reproducibility of certain experiments
that people are talking about in the news.
So, you know, if science is supposed to be something that's superior
to other ways of trying to understand things,
it's not so much on the basis of its sheer accumulation of facts
or its manipulation of technology.
It's supposed to be a questioning method, right?
There's supposed to be an openness to it, a willingness to revise things.
And that sometimes drops out.
And Voight was getting introduced to this idea through two main sources.
One was Alfred North Whitehead, who had written this,
Science in the Modern World.
And Whitehead was one of these guys sort of from the inside.
He was associated with the logistic project in philosophy,
along with Bertrand Russell, which turned out to be a complete failure.
And Whitehead says it is not possible that the standardized concepts of science
are only valid within narrow limitations, perhaps too narrow for science itself.
He sketched out a basis for what he called the post-materialist philosophy
that would be based on the notion of organism.
After that, he writes a book that almost, I know only a few people
who have read it and understand it, and I'm not one of them,
called Process and Reality, in which he tries to lay out
an entire metaphysics based on this.
But Van Voight read Whitehead.
And we know this because he talks about it.
And he was influenced by Whitehead's conception of science.
The other one that he was influenced by that fits into these Nalae stories
is something that nowadays most people consider a pseudo-science.
There was some philosophical examination of it by this guy, Max Black,
back in, I think, the 60s or so.
And this is Alfred Korzybski.
I'm not sure if I'm pronouncing it right. He's a Polish count.
He writes a book called Science, Insanity,
and Introduction to Non-Aristatelian Systems and General Semantics.
And he's the guy who gets this general semantics thing going.
Van Voight will end up taking that and running with it in this.
He also says this about science.
He says, I accept science as an attempt to establish
an orderly explanation of everything that's happened in the universe
since the Big Bang.
He has, however, been interesting to observe
at least a couple of generations of scientists got involved
as a consequence of the positive philosophy of the last century
in promoting specific limited explanations of this or that phenomenon
and that there are still a lot of people around
who accept the current theorems as if they were the Word of God
instead of possibly being intermediate explanations from what
may eventually be a more comprehensive understanding of the reality of things.
If there is any particular view of science in my work,
it's most likely that science is at this intermediate stage
evaluating the dynamic truth of the enigma
that underlies all that we perceive in the surrounding continuum.
So he's saying science may indeed have all the answers,
but we're not at that stage yet.
We're at an intermediate stage and things are still murky
and we'll worry about what it looks like at the end when we get to the end.
So let's not pretend that we're at the end yet.
Now, the third main philosophical theme,
I wanted to talk a little bit about this non-aristotelianism
and general semantics and I created a handout for you
that has some of the sort of key themes.
I'm going to run through these fairly quickly.
What I do want to say is that general semantics,
so this guy, this Polish count gets it started
and it becomes a movement like a lot of other movements
and it has a sort of rise and then it has sort of a decline.
They're still around today.
They still have conferences.
They still offer workshops and classes.
They've peered back on their claims.
Their claims were pretty big for a while.
This would cure you of everything.
It's called general semantics?
Yeah, there's a nice website for it.
There are quite a few people who got into that.
I think there's sort of similarities between it
and the dianetics that Hubbard was doing
because Hubbard was kind of a plagiarist.
He'd take from all sorts of systems.
And it probably has helped some people with things
because there's some ideas in it that if you do them,
they're good for you,
but they're not necessarily good for you
because of general semantics.
For example, one of the ideas in here is
the map is not the territory.
Our symbolic representations of things
are not necessarily the thing itself.
There's a difference between them.
But you don't have to do general semantics to get that message.
You could get that in all sorts of other ways as well.
Now, learning that we shouldn't necessarily take
our mental representations of things
as exactly what the reality is,
that can be quite helpful for a person.
It can get you out of a lot of binds.
But again, you don't necessarily have to get that
from general semantics.
The nonaristatelianism, what Van Voigt means by that
is he thought that Aristotle is saying
that things that are the same kind of thing
are identical to each other.
Aristotle actually doesn't say that.
Aristotle thinks that individuals are what exist
and that individuals actually do differ from each other,
that they have things.
It's sort of like we're men, right?
We're male human beings.
We can expand it further,
and then we have the generic human being,
and we can go further.
And the squirrel outside is an animal.
We're animals.
There's these higher and higher levels of abstraction.
Aristotle didn't think that those things existed by themselves.
Instead, there's a squirrel over there.
There's a human being there.
There's a human being there.
As it turns out, a lot of what general semantics
is going to teach is pretty aristotelian.
But it calls itself nonaristatelianism
because what they wanted to emphasize
is that we have to be careful about identifying things
through abstractions with each other.
We have to be attentive to the differences.
So, you know, one of the kind of cool examples
that I like is in a popularizer's book,
Iacawa, wrote about this.
He was a professor, and he said,
when my student comes in from last semester,
and maybe they didn't do so well in my class
because they were kind of a lazy person or kind of a jerk,
I shouldn't imagine that it's the same person coming in.
Because if I do, I'm already acting in them in a certain way,
thinking about them in a certain way, feeling in a certain way.
If I want to attend to reality,
I have to acknowledge that people change.
And so they carry out this thing they call indexing.
You know, Mary Smith 1 is not the same thing as Mary Smith 2.
They may be very similar.
We can look at the similarities.
We can provide evidence for that.
Maybe Mary still is lazy and is going to get an F in this class
just like she did in my previous class.
You know, I've had a few students like that in the past,
thankfully very few,
because usually they get the message
and find somebody else to go to.
But this is a good idea of attending to things as they are.
So that's like the idea behind the self-fulfilling prophecy
that if you expect someone in education that was very popular,
whether or not if you expect a certain thing from children,
you will get it.
And they did all sorts of studies that showed it was true.
You treat them like they're stupid and then they act stupid.
There was one where they changed around the classes.
They had the same kids.
They moved them into a different classroom
and told them all they were brilliant.
The first tests had been wrong
and now we realize you're all brilliant.
And that's what they got.
Yeah, I mean even just in medicine,
in the last 10 years,
they've finally started to become cognizant
of just how powerful the placebo effect is.
And so the placebo effect, by the way,
will even work if you know it's the placebo effect,
if you tell yourself that the studies have shown
how strong the placebo effect is.
So there's a few other points from this
that play kind of a role in Null A.
One is that, so a lot of the general semantic stuff
is based on the kind of speculative brain science at the time.
Nowadays what we call neuroscience,
which is still very speculative in many respects,
even if they have CAT scans and lots of funding,
you got to take what they say with some grains of salt.
But back then it was way more rudimentary.
And they do distinguish between some things
that really are different.
What's distinctive about humans is having the cerebral cortex.
That's what allows us to do the processing stuff that we do
and it makes us different from the other animals
in important respects.
And then there's the more primitive brain.
And nowadays we know there's the reptile brain
and then there's the mammalian brain.
You can go into all sorts of cool stuff with that.
They distinguish mainly between the sort of rational centers
and the emotive centers.
And they talked about it in terms of the cortex
and the thalamus.
And they wanted to try to institute what they called the pause.
You want your cortex to be processing all the time.
You don't want your lower brain functions to be deciding for you.
And so general semantics would try to slow things down.
Which is probably a good idea in many respects, right?
You think about dumb decisions you've made
firing off an email when you're angry.
You seem kind of rational at the time
but you're not rational when you look at it later on.
In retrospect, there's something to that.
So that plays a major role in these null A things.
When Gilbert Gosain winds up in a challenging situation,
he takes a cerebral thalamic pause
that allows him to be a good critical thinker
and to look at the situation
and not get emotionally invested in it.
It's remarkable actually because in this part,
some of the chapter headings will begin with quotes from people.
And sometimes they're from general semantics
and sometimes they're from other people.
With this one, everyone, there's these little inserted vignettes
giving the philosophy behind it.
And in this one actually, there's a training session
for a young boy who's being taught some of these ideas
from general semantics.
So he's doing, is that quite evangelizing?
I think in evangelizing, you're really trying to get people
worked up about it, you know?
But it is kind of evangelistic in that there's a good news
that he's trying to spread and it's that you can all be sane
and get over your neuroses or maybe even your psychoses.
So Null A winds up being an organizing principle in these stories
for what Gilbert Gossin does,
for the resistance to this galactic imperialistic guy Enrol the Red
and for the organization of society on Venus.
It's really quite interesting.
I suppose you could say it's doing allegorically,
like when we talk about the Narnia series of C.S. Lewis
being allegories for Christian ideas,
this is allegories for general semantics.
So that's the sort of third main philosophical theme.
Before I jump into the last one,
any comments or questions about that?
This Alfred Kurzybski, was he alive when, yeah,
Roy was writing these books?
I think so.
Some of the time.
I mean, by this, he's long dead.
I just wonder what he may have thought,
like if his ideas were being hijacked
or if he was excited that somebody was creating a world.
I think he was more concerned about what other people
who weren't doing science fiction,
but were adapting it to, like Haya Kawa was a linguist,
and he adapts it,
and then there were some other people as well who were professors.
But I don't know about the backstory quite so much.
And the Institute recommends those texts.
They also do recommend Van Voigt, I think.
And it's interesting too,
because some people come to general semantics
by reading the null A stuff,
getting excited about that,
and then trying to look around for, well, you know,
then they find out there really is an institute of general semantics,
and they get into it.
So, yeah, it's kind of an interesting...
I'm glad you explained that,
because I dig what kind of tangent he's trying to understand
with that philosophy.
Oh, the null A?
Yeah, well, this is not yours.
Yeah.
Because then I thought,
because you made reference to essence and existence,
and I thought was this existentialism
or non-existentialism,
I couldn't quite figure it out.
So, you know, it does have some similarities
to the existentialist movement
in its emphasis on individual choice, right?
If I want to be saying that's up to me,
you can't make me do that,
because of course if you coerce me,
I'm going to be neurotic or whatever.
It's ultimately my responsibility.
But, you know, where the existentialists tended to, like,
either very often as just plain individualism
or a kind of mystical theme sometimes.
Van Voight is science, you know,
and the existentialists weren't very big on science solving our problems.
They tended to be more hostile or suspicious of the claims of science.
But is the Aristotle really in this?
I mean, Aristotle would be the opposite of an existentialist, would you say,
and then wasn't the planet or the philosophy non-arist?
So I just kept going in circles, I guess.
Yeah.
And then I said, well, I'm going to give up,
because I don't think that's central.
I'm going to just run with, you know, whatever he's talking about.
So, here's what I'll say about that.
You definitely don't need to understand the philosophy
in order to enjoy the novel,
which I felt when I was a kid reading Nullay.
I just took it for granted that Aristotle guy is probably bad, you know.
And I have to admit, too, that I hated Aristotle
until I was a graduate student,
because I had to read him as an undergraduate,
and I thought, this is the most boring guy ever.
And what he says is either, you know, just common sense
and why the hell is he saying it then,
or just wrong.
So why are we reading this guy?
We're reading, you know, The Existentialist,
like Kierkegaard and Nietzsche and all that.
And it was only when I started reading Aristotle in Greek
that I picked up an appreciation for him,
because then I didn't have the translations standing in my way,
and I could finally figure out what the hell he was trying to say.
And then I actually like Aristotle quite a lot,
because I do a lot of work at him.
But for a long time, if you would have proposed to me,
I should read Aristotle.
I would think you're nuts, you know.
So you don't have to have any understanding.
The same way the weapon shops is not an introduction to physics.
No.
Energy and time.
Well, the physics, yeah, the physics and this is this.
Which is devotion to energy and time in their way, you know.
Yeah.
No explanations or no rationale.
I think with the weapon shops, the real core idea with that one
is this sort of like allowing people to have self-determination.
There should be truth and fair play.
It's more of a political...
And right and wrong.
Yeah, yeah.
Not this, you know, corruption, you know.
Yeah.
So that's a good segue to this last theme.
A lot of people say that Van Voigt's stories are full of supermen.
And I suppose in a certain sense that that's right.
But we have to be kind of careful about what we mean by that.
So Gilbert Gossin, he's the guy with two brains, right?
His extra brain lets him do amazing things.
He's also part of this sort of cosmic plot.
You know, the weapon shops themselves are kind of interesting
in that they can't be resisted.
You can't actually get rid of them.
Slan, you know, you have characters who have these mental powers
and are persecuted because of it.
In The Voyage of the Space Beagle, you have this one scientist,
Gravasna, I think.
And he is the one who can like see the whole picture
because he's got the right kind of science, nexilism,
which is better than the other sciences.
And so there's a lot of this kind of like,
there's a guy who knows the story.
And he may not even, at the beginning, he may not know who he is.
He has to sort of piece the things together.
But he's the guy.
He's going to put things right.
And there is quite a bit of that in Van Voigt's stories.
Actually, that's part of what I didn't like about the book of Patah
because it was just a straight out Superman story.
Even God who's, you know, got to reclaim his powers
and he's going to set everything right.
What, when he was asked about that, Van Voigt said,
in the Nullay stories, I had a different idea in mind.
My question was, can man be improved by a system of mental training?
Improved, that is, so you can live without police,
without government, without any technology to keep him that way.
And he took references to another book that he wrote
called The Anarchistic Colossus
where the technology is used to keep people that way.
And so Nullay was supposed to like, you know,
you know, Gosane is not just a Superman
because he has extra powers that nobody else does.
It's also because of his training,
which anybody else could get into, presumably.
See the difference there?
You know, in the one, none of us have an extra brain,
so none of us get to have those kind of powers.
But we all could study general semantics.
And, you know, if the games machine was around,
we could study it so well that we could deserve to go to Venus
and be part of this classless society
where everybody does what they want to do
and nobody, you know, does the sort of nonsense
that goes on down here on Earth.
So it is kind of a Superman thing,
but it's also not.
It's more egalitarian.
When we talk about Superman,
the person that usually comes to mind is Nietzsche
and is talking about the ubermensch, you know, the overman,
the creator of new values
who resists the degenerate, you know,
herdish morality of, pick whatever you like,
Christianity, science, religion, philosophy,
not Nietzschean philosophy.
You know, the whole thing, you know, consumerism.
And, you know, you could say,
well, I guess that Gosane could be seen as a Superman,
but he's definitely not a Nietzschean Superman
because he's not there to destroy everything.
And he's not there to, like, lord it over people.
So that doesn't really work.
As a matter of fact, he resists the people
who just want to try to claim pure power,
which is what, you know, at least some versions
of Nietzsche's philosophy seem to be saying,
try to grab as much power as possible,
crush everybody underneath your gauntlet.
Gosane isn't doing that.
So ironically, if we want to look for another Superman,
there's another place where we might go,
and that's Aristotle.
Because Aristotle, I'm sure that Van Voigt didn't read this,
but in the politics, Aristotle talks about
the person of superlative virtue
who surpasses everybody else
and is like a god on Earth because of that.
He discusses this in the context of laws.
And he says that laws, in general,
we should stick with the laws,
not do private interpretation
because that's always going to be selective.
The laws are, as he says,
mind without desire.
It gets translated differently,
sometimes mistranslated as reason without passion,
which it was quoted as in a legally blonde,
which probably gave it the most currency.
But the actual quote is mind without desire.
The law is mind without desire,
so we should obey the laws and not individuals.
The one person who is an exception to that
is the person who's so morally good
in a sense of having these as part of their character,
their virtues, that he doesn't have to be subject to the laws.
He's a law unto himself.
And Gosane is that kind of character.
Now, Aristotle points out a problem with this.
Can anybody sort of guess what it might be?
Besides not being able to find anybody like that.
You assume that you're better than everybody else,
so you could create a whole system of laws,
whatever, that really end up being against
what would be a normal way of existing.
You could be a tyrant, maybe.
But Aristotle does distinguish between a tyrant
who doesn't realize he's a tyrant and this guy.
He says, even if you have this guy
and he's the genuine article,
he's not deluded about,
there's no self-serving bone in his body about that.
It's still a bad idea.
Why?
Yeah.
There's no agency?
I mean, well...
He's the agent.
Yeah, but there's no one else that...
There is no kind of communion of agency.
That's a big problem.
Yeah, nobody else can really share in that.
He's not bringing other people up to that level.
Why is that a big problem, though?
I mean, maybe for Aristotle,
there's no actual good, then.
It's not a good all-on to itself.
Yeah, that's true.
There's a bigger problem.
Succession planning.
What are you going to do when that guy dies?
Because the better he is,
the more the people are used to turning to him
for the answers and not to establish structures like the laws
where we can all be more or less equal,
the less able they are to develop the kind of virtue
that they need in order to succeed.
It makes things worse when somebody like that is on the scene
because now you think,
that's the way all these rulers are going to be.
And then you get the bad ruler who comes right in
and takes over that mantle of authority.
Why do they kill them?
Like with Stranger and Strange Land
or the Jesus idea where he is.
It's too good to have to kill them.
And you know, Aristotle does discuss something like that
because the Greeks had this institution of ostracism,
which somebody stood out too much,
kick them out because they're going to lead to these sorts of problems.
Or kill them like the soccer games.
Yeah, well you can do that too.
So when you were talking about the way through semantics,
like here is this great way that you can accumulate this
and we all have a capacity.
How is that very different from what Thaydo was saying?
Was it in the email where he was saying
even a curious boy can learn by half?
I mean I remember saying why this.
Well with Thaydo there's this whole explanation
that a lot of people would find implausible
of we acquired these ideas in a previous life
when we were out of our bodies
and we're just remembering that.
That's why the slave boy who's never been educated
can be taught geometric figures by Socrates
asking the right questions
because he's really got the knowledge inside.
So this isn't saying something like that.
It's saying that we have a potential,
in a way if you contrast it to Thaydo,
strangely enough Nolay is a lot more Aristotelian.
It's saying we have a potential for what it would mean to be fully human
that doesn't get realized a lot of the time
and what stands in the way is not fully understanding
the kind of beings that we are and how our brains work
and not using them the right way
so that we get cognitive biases.
It's a big thing that people talk about these days.
That's sort of what General Semantics was trying to deal with.
And so General Semantics isn't that different
than a lot of other kinds of regimens
like say cognitive behavior therapy
where you're looking for cognitive distortions
that come about because of things that you believe
and you haven't really questioned.
You could do this in a lot of different ways.
You wouldn't need to do it by going to the General Semantics Institute.
So you could say that insofar as it's helpful or right
General Semantics does the same stuff as other things
and then when it becomes distinctively General Semantics
then it becomes kind of questionable pseudoscience.
Yeah.
But in any case, going back to this notion of the Superman
so Gossin is, or Gossin, I always thought it was Gossin
until somebody finally pointed it out to me.
Gossin really is a Superman
but he's a Superman who doesn't have the problem
of Aristotle's Superman of succession planning
because presumably there's this whole cadre
of people behind him who can do that,
that sort of null A thing.
He's not like Nietzsche's Superman at all
in that he wants just what's good for everybody
and he uses his capacities just for good.
As a matter of fact, there's even sort of a sexual morality thing involved.
A null A person won't, even if they're offered the opportunity
won't get sexually involved with a neurotic person
because it's just going to be bad news, right?
So there's a scene in there where he doesn't sleep with
somebody who's offering herself to him
precisely because she has not had null A training.
So he's very moral, right?
I guess the question you could ask that are there issues
that could arise with this, maybe self-deception
or people looking to him as a savior figure
but he wouldn't want people to look to him as a savior figure.
He'd want them to figure it out for themselves
and take control of their own destiny.
There's kind of a tension there
because whenever we offer that to people
usually they do crazy stuff with it
and then we're like, well that wasn't what I meant
by take control of your own destiny.
Go beat people up or get into drugs
or quit your job and just write a blog
or things along those lines, like that commercial.
But if you're going to give people that sort of freedom
you have to accept what they're going to do with it.
So that's all I've got as far as philosophical themes.
Is there anything else that you guys have questions about
or you want to talk about with respect to Van Voigt
or General Semantics or Aristotle or Nullay
or any of these sorts of things?
I feel like we covered it.
It's nice.
Okay.
Go ahead.
What's the next topic?
Oh, so next is C.S. Lewis.
But we're not doing Narnia.
We're doing the space trilogy,
which is actually shorter, which is good,
and the Narnia books are good,
but they really are for young adults.
The space trilogy is much more interesting
and it's closer to what Lewis himself
was thinking about writing about as a professor.
One part takes place on Mars,
one part takes place on Venus,
and then the last one takes place on Earth.
So that's what we'll do next time.
Well, the first one is out of the silent planet,
and that one takes place on Mars.
Peralandra is the Venus one,
and then out of the, you know,
that hideous strength is the Earth one.
