Welcome back from lunch. Now we will hear how quantum machine learning is changing data and artificial intelligence is presented by Peter Morgan, who will join us online and later we can ask some questions. So get ready for that.
Hello, everyone. Maybe you can see me at this position for the first time on this event, a little bit virtual, but we have a special occasion why we are doing like this.
We are having our distinguished keynote speaker from UK London, who unfortunately wasn't being able to join us this year in life, but we are sure that Peter has a good friend of conference and a member of our advisory board will be at with us next year, maybe even before the conference in November, hopefully,
especially if this corona corona measurements will let us do this much more live events. Like I said, we are going to have a keynote interview with the, with the, with our, with our guest Peter Morgan, and it's going to be a kind of final interview, which is going to tell us how quantum machine learning is changing data and AI.
In every way in ecosystem way in sense of academic way in sense of how we are doing business. So without further ado, I would like to start with the first question and I would like maybe to give Peter a chance to present himself to our audience.
Hi, thanks for inviting me like to speak virtually. Yeah, this is sad I couldn't make it with all the restrictions it's better that we do it this way.
My background is, I started off in physics quantum physics, and I was doing a PhD actually in theoretical particle physics in the, in the US, Massachusetts there and I left and went into industry.
And I basically went into computer networking and then the last eight years I have my own consulting company and machine learning and artificial intelligence and about four years ago quantum computing came onto my radar screen.
And I realized that I could combine, you know, my love of physics with my IT background so you know I haven't really looked back in the last four years in the quantum computing space, although it is very early days so I still earn money from machine learning as well.
Okay, I would like to ask you one question before on the beginning of interview and on the end of interview just to see if your or your answer was changed. So basically that question is, is quantum computing the way how we can achieve artificial general intelligence.
Yeah, that's a great question. It may be a part of the solution I don't think it will be the whole solution because the reason I say that because our brains are definitely classical.
You know we walk around at room temperature, we exist at room temperature quantum phenomenon has to be without sort of interacting with the environment whatsoever like, so it needs to be usually if that means it has to be called right down.
It actually may be a different type of intelligence, but it won't be like biological intelligence.
This sounds very interesting. Okay, I would like also to go to ask you.
How would you explain a quantum computing for data near audience, in terms of what's the difference between the regular computing and quantum computing, and maybe in what stage of quantum development, we are right now.
A couple of great questions so classical computing is what we're all familiar with.
It's kind of hard to explain something that's so ubiquitous right, we all grown up with it and it's, you know, it's in our hands with the iPhone Android, we have laptops, you know.
So quantum computing is done using classical transistors gates and logic circuits classical logic, and it obeys the laws of classical physics.
And, you know, we've got what, you know, 100 billion processors on a single, sorry, transistors on a single processor today so they're extremely the most complex things that human kind is built.
They're classical but they're extremely complex quantum computing on the other hand uses the laws of quantum physics so they have quantum gates they have quantum logic they have quantum.
Yeah, quantum transistors basically so these things just behave so differently from a classical gate, or a classical processor CPU GPU.
There's no comparison at all between them they just use different laws of physics. Now the way that quantum computing, the reason that people are interested in quantum computing and making a CPU for example, is that the laws of quantum physics means to say we can do everything in
parallel in something called Hilbert space which is the space that quantum physics occupies is just the way the universe is built from the big bang outwards.
It came in doubt with this Hilbert space which means things can be done in parallel, which gives it the incredible power. And so we haven't actually built anything that can do anything commercially useful today.
But we can certainly prove that they're doing quantum calculations, and we're up to about 100 qubits IBM announced a few days ago 127 qubit processor.
And so really we needed like millions of qubits so we're at the very early beginning days of quantum computing which makes it quite exciting to it's like the 1950s in classical computing.
Yeah, that sounds very interesting so basically what you're saying right now that quantum quantum whatever we can and engineers researchers, computers, like developers, basically there's some kind of pioneers you can understand correctly that right.
Yeah, definitely. It feels like being a pioneer right now, which is a great place to be. Yeah, it really is. Yeah, it must have felt like it did with in the 50s with classical computing for sure.
You know, you know even pre Intel and Bell Labs making the first transistor, the kind of it that that's point right now. Yeah, it's pretty pretty interesting and exciting.
There's no commercial applications just yet. So business people are not getting maybe as excited about it as as the scientists for example.
Okay, so with this being said I would like to go to maybe okay we're talking about the new answer like qubit power that we need to utilize the full power quantum computing with millions of qubit.
In what span do you think that it is realistic to have this million of qubits.
So we're scaling up. It's on its own Moore's law, the number of qubit seems to be doubling every year. So we've come from, you know, two to four to eight, 15 hour at 127.
So IBM and Google have actually and IQ these quantum computing companies are building quantum computers have all produced roadmaps out to 2030, which shows the number of qubits doubling every year.
So we are on a Moore's law there. So it doesn't take it's exponential so it's not going to take 100 years to get to a million, probably more like 1015 years.
Now it's not the number of qubits isn't the only factor we need them to be not noisy, and we need them to be well connected to each other.
So these are engineering challenges that need to be overcome. It's not a physics thing it's more of an engineering challenge. So a lot of work to do to build a million qubits for sure but we're on the road.
Okay.
This being said I would like to ask you.
We started a little bit we started with the quantum computing as a whole. And now let's move to quantum machine learning. What is the difference between a quantum machine learning and the regular machine learning.
So regular machine learning, maybe most of the audience at this conference data science conference are familiar with machine learning so basically what quantum computing okay so that's machine learning done on classical computers CPUs GPUs TPUs for
ASICs, etc. Now where quantum comes in with machine learning is you can offload a part of that calculation, almost like a co process co process a situation where you have some of the calculation machine learning calculations done on the CPU or GPU, and the bit set will be
up using quantum and then passed over to the QPU the quantum processing and then back again back and forth iteratively. And so the whole thing won't be done on a QPU it'll be a co process situation. So we'll be like a classical quantum hybrid.
So we'll always need classical computing for machine learning.
So basically what you're saying and that will be the second question but first, if I understand correctly, correct me if I'm wrong. When we're talking about quantum machine learning we're not talking about classical terms only quantum machine learning we are talking about the hybrid between machine learning or AI and quantum machine learning.
Yes, absolutely. Yeah, maybe one day in the far far distant future. Everything will be quantum like you sort of need to load quantum data. We haven't got quantum memory yet that seems like a long long way out. So basically for this foreseeable future next 10 to 20 years, it will be a classical quantum hybrid system.
This is this is this is an excellent question and this is something that that maybe can can be we can maybe it's a cool thing to say. So basically, what is the role of quantum machine learning engineer and quantum machine learning researcher is any kind of difference in these roles or they are still the same.
But yeah, this.
Yeah, that's a good question because really it's fundamentally comes back to where we are in the quantum computing development lifecycle and because we're at very early stage.
A lot of it is quantum computing research at the moment and engineering a little bit so kind of like a 9010% split. We can see that as we progress and build more powerful processors say with 1000 qubits and start putting them.
Well, they're on the cloud now but actually they'll be be able to be used for very small commercial applications will need a lot more engineers at that point Alex. So that will be to actually build the commercial applications that's the point will need more engineering.
Okay, this is this is this is sound very interesting so basically just to to to let's say before we go to the next question is so basically right now we are all researchers, some of our developers, but what we'll need like very very fast is somebody who's going to be engineer if I understand
Yeah, it will ramp up quite quickly again it's on the exponential curve at the very beginning. Yes.
Okay, been said that can you give us some examples of where quantum machine learning is already applied is there any kind of right right.
Yeah, that's a great no not yet not in commercial applications so all of this is kind of test in in, you know, companies it's not just in the lab and university labs it's in quantum.
It's in companies who want to become quantum ready like big investment banks, big pharma companies, material science companies, we're talking we're thinking black so Smith Klein, Bosch, you know, Goldman Sachs, these have all got quantum computing departments with 20 or so researchers
and engineers and developers, working on these algorithms today, whether that's machine learning optimization, you know, pharma material science simulation.
So yeah, quantum machine learning is a part of the whole picture, but there are other elements to like simulation and optimization, as well as machine learning.
So like I say, there are companies hiring, but I think at this point, you know, you sort of need a PhD in quantum science or quantum information.
It's a little too early for them to be employing just just a developer with no quantum knowledge so we have time to skill up.
Okay, and one, let's say one personal question for you, in which industry, you would like to be part of one machine learning project.
What is the industry that is most, let's say, appealing to you to try quantum machine learning, you personally.
Yeah, yeah, personally, I'm focusing focused on the simulation aspect so that's material science semiconductors photovoltaic cells.
So, you know, directly addressing climate change with, you know, also battery physics.
Yeah, I mean, it's, it's, it's a huge, very ambitious sort of project and we're just starting but once these quantum computers become bigger, we'll be able to simulate battery physics will be able to simulate semiconductors.
And a lot of photovoltaic cells are made out of semiconductors for example, as well as something called perovskite.
So basically it's simulating nature at the molecular level, which was fine and said in 1981 we can simulate physics with a quantum computer and by golly.
It looks like a great problem because it doesn't look so easy. And 40 years later we're just at the very beginning of doing that.
This sounds very interesting and basically what is this this important thing to understand not only for data and experts and leaders but also for software engineers and I think this is called because in the end there you can, we can talk about okay we will just
have an unbelievable number of I didn't know computer computational power but in the end computational like hard disks processor, they have limitation of physical world without developing further quantum rail and development in the quantum rail whatever we can we can
We are bounded by the limitation right now like I don't know if you heard about that this project they are trying to close the gap between the two semiconductors but the basic and the chips because it's very hard not to have like electricity when it's closer to some kind of nanometers but like I said it can be done but so like I said we can limit it in one part.
No that's right so classical computers.
We have to make so many approximations when we try to model a semiconductor or any kind of battery physics or any physics at the any kind of molecular dynamics including drugs drug discovery molecular docking.
Because basically we're solving the Schrodinger equation anybody Schrodinger equation for all of these systems which are quantum systems.
And we cannot do that directly on a classical computer we're using approximations so we've so limited. So, in that respect, if quantum and if when quantum computers come along, we can simulate these systems directly.
In no contest. It'll be amazing progress will be amazing and fast and swift and meaningful and impactful. We're talking drug discovery solar panels batteries. A lot of problems are just waiting. A lot of low hanging fruit. We just waiting on the hardware.
Only.
That's the only like the most expensive parties all the time.
Yeah, yeah, what we are like we are we are low on. Okay, yeah, what I would like those tasks is the one part is the future with quantum like, because what what I'm like personally and what we are seeing like as a society that we are witnessing that AI is basically
changing the very fabric of our society on every level and people cannot realize because it's a today but when you make comparison like five years ago and now, basically we made a progress that is un-matchable it's not only like because of the
COVID crisis that we needed to do digitalization, etc. But because we have adopted analytics, data science and AI. So, the question would be what changes to the society is quantum bringing.
Yeah, I mean I've worked in the machine learning area, you know, I haven't I saw my day job as is a machine learning and I've totally agree with you about the exponential increase in, you know, processing power and and data and you know just just algorithmic advancement and it's been
astonishing. If we see a similar type of progress in quantum computing, we can we can expect to see as impactful if not more impactful advancements to society, for sure.
I mentioned, you know, attacking the climate change problem through material science if we can model all these materials and build more efficient materials. That's huge. If we get a 10% gain even 100% gain in efficiency in a solar panel.
I mean, that's a trillion dollar industry, no doubt about it. Yeah, maybe more. Same with batteries with electric cars. Yeah, I mean, another trillion dollar industry.
Semiconductors, you know, another trillion dollar industry. I mean, it's just basically what you're saying that that's all I need to develop quantum computers so they can be.
We're definitely waiting on the hardware alley, but there are there are several kind of thrust is iron traps is superconducting this photonics.
There's cold atoms, and there's topological. So we don't really know who's going to win in the end with the hardware. I mean Microsoft is working on topological Google are doing an IBM are doing superconducting.
You and Honeywell are doing iron traps. So again, that's quite exciting to wonder and, you know, who nobody knows who the eventual winner will be. Maybe there'll be a few winners, different applications for different types of hardware.
But it's just going to take a little bit of time like we just have to be a little bit patient.
Also, I would like to come back closer to my question. So basically, once again, what do you think like for the like, like a regular person, how much dear or her or his life will be impacted by the quantum technology like five or 10 years from now.
What is your expectation basically from the point of one single person.
Yeah, I would say in 10 years we're going to start to see a lot five years will still be a little bit R&D phase. These things will live in the cloud we won't have them in our hands like you know the phone.
So they'll be at a distance so it'll be more in the background will notice solar panels, solar cells, solar electricity becoming more prominent and efficient and cheaper.
Perhaps the average person like you and I will notice the cost of electricity coming down a speed up in process of power.
You know better batteries in our electric cars when everybody's buying them, because it is policy now isn't it with the climate change conference the other week.
We're getting serious about moving to all electric cars and moving to solar energy. So that's, I think where the average person will notice it more, possibly in drug discovery, but we're looking 10 years out.
I don't want to get anybody's hopes up this is going to happen next year. Yeah, it's going to be a little way away.
Yeah, and we had a keynote or day before and it's about the Yakoslabonics from R&D.
His talk was basically that they already have implemented in modeling like together hybrid model together with the AI of quantum machine learning from banking.
So like I said, I think that some of the things will be will be but like you said the full power of it like so the regular person can see that that's like I totally refired 10 years.
It's like to be five years, but you're the expert in these sizes. This matters so I need to believe in your word that it's going to take 10 years.
It's going to be not only people need to understand it's not going to be 10 years like just if you not do anything there is a lot of road ahead of us.
Basically, our company is ready basically to embrace the quantum machine learning in day-to-day operation and if yes or not what is needed to get into quantum and have for example five years from now quantum machine learning departments.
Yeah, well I encourage people if they're interested in moving into this field, maybe they're data scientists today software developers machine learning engineers to start learning about quantum physics if you're very young, you know, going to university doing an undergraduate or even a graduate degree.
Physics isn't a bad option today, you know, before it was computer science machine learning today there's going to be because it's quantum computing there's still be a computing computer science element software engineering element, but there's going to be a little bit of physics as well.
So it's a little bit of a hybrid and it's unclear whether people are going to really be able to join the two together in a single person. Maybe we'll just, you know, it's tough because normally people love physics or they love computer science.
I mean, there's a little bit of a there's not a whole bunch of crossover quantum physics is quantum physics, software engineering isn't quantum physics so can you know can a software engineer, or do they even want to become a physicist doesn't physicists want to become a computer
scientist. It's, it's a little bit, you know, we're going to have to wait to see how this plays out but education is key.
Okay, and being said that, how do you see a cooperation between academia and the business sector in the quantum field, because it seems that like big tech companies, and they are indeed departments are a bit in front of academic circles.
This can say to be a true statement and what are the thoughts on this subject, do you think that it's enough or it need to be better if so, how it can be better.
Yeah, well I've already seen we're already starting to see companies like Google and Amazon and Microsoft hiring away from university so it's a little bit concerning in a way but we did see the same thing happening with machine learning.
All of the big companies like Google just hired everybody from university, and you know it, it saves sort of I've noticed they've sort of gone back to university part time so, but initially there'll be this huge brain drain I think from university, because it's very limited there's a few professors, a couple of postdocs.
You know, they need it we need a lot more PhDs and you know quantum engineering and quantum computing. These degrees didn't exist five years ago so you know we're at the very beginning.
So, I am seeing if you go to Amazon website and look at quantum computing careers, you will see, you know, they're looking for postdoc level people today, they can't hire enough.
Same as Google same as IBM they just simply cannot get enough people with the right skill set.
This is interesting. What just for our audience that can get a bit better of you. What, what amount of people we are talking right now to have like, what amount of people do you think that one Amazon one Google need to have like just to make it with what they would like to have as a progress in the quantum field.
Right. Well, I think IBM is a little further ahead they probably have the biggest quantum engineering team, but I noticed Google and Amazon have about 100 people now between 100 200 they've scaled up in the last two or three years.
Yeah, 200 200. They probably want to double that over the next two or three years as well, and eventually end up with about 1000 plus so we need ramp up exponentially so the number of people required will probably always lag the demand.
And as we go forward because it does take three or four years to train somebody, you know, to become a good machine learning engineer a good quantum computing guy, or girl, I mean it does take four or five years, it doesn't happen overnight so it's going to be a little bit of a ramp up.
Yeah, basically, what, and this is like one of the questions I want to ask this because I want to share with our audience that basically what we are saying that right now in the world.
There is just a couple of hundred maybe a couple of thousand at most like, I think it's too much to say a couple of thousand of people who are doing the for doing machine learning it's not that much.
No, no, no, maybe the whole quantum computing will be a couple of thousand but quantum machine learning maybe 200. Yeah. Yeah, that's right. And basically what what can be a good thing like basically if you're thinking about about doing quantum it's not that easy like to switch to quantum because you need to understand
quantum mechanics on the first. Yeah, it is somebody who studied that I can I can tell you people if you if you're so brilliant minds, and you didn't or some film about ancient and you didn't understand the something that's written on the backboard.
That's really true what is written and that's quantum mechanics, most probably, but what would be your advice to someone who would like to start the quantum career in terms of like students and in terms of somebody who'd like to get the pre qualification.
Yeah, maybe this advice. Yeah, well I think we're seeing physicists already become computational physicists and in the classical sense so they'll just be able to become quantum computing at the end of the day.
Yeah, quantum computing will be just another type of computer in the cloud co located in the data center along with the classical computers. Maybe there'll be neuromorphic computing as well.
It's just another form of computing, and it's only for a very specific type of problem it's not won't solve every problem websites will still run on classical computers.
So, to train to get there you you sort of you there's two ways of getting there one is to start with the physics background and move into quantum and move into computer science.
The other is to start with the computer science background and learn the quantum. And, you know, that might be a little harder I think than a physicist to learn computer.
Yeah, that's a good thing because it's just a very specific skill set is, you know, it's just, I mean I did physics and I know it's not for everybody. It's a lot of math. Okay, there's a lot of math.
Yeah, that's like that. That's a good output that that's what I'm talking about. There's a lot of people in the science field for doing very good because they understand their mathematical.
To talk about format is very, very hard. It's very, very on some other level but, okay, my last question before we go to your final remark is, what would be the first problem you would like to see solve with quantum machine learning.
Oh man, the first problem yeah.
Yeah, if it's kind of computing I'd say I want to simulate materials and you know build better solar cells and better semiconductor and better batteries. If it's kind of machine learning.
I think like I said earlier it's always going to be a hybrid classical quantum situation so it can be used for simulating material science it can be similar it can be used for optimization problems.
It can be used for, you know, anything that machine learning classical machine learning, which is basically good at, you know, pattern recognition, and it will accelerate that process.
So, I mean it's, it's almost any, any field you can think of that machine learning is already used in. So, you know you can work in a bank optimization of optimizing portfolios.
You can transport company optimizing traffic routes with quantum machine learning. You know you can. Yeah, maybe a medicine, you know alpha fold the deep mind protein folding.
I would love to see them using quantum computing to speed that up as well as it was with everybody. So any machine learning problem can be, you know, giving a little boost with these quantum computers.
The point of view what I would like to see is to try quantum machine learning and what will get in combination with quantum computing. It's in relation of black holes, for example.
Yeah, that'd be great. That'd be amazing.
It's something that we can learn a lot of it from from the fabric of the universe. And maybe you get from that question we can move on to the maybe the ultimate question of them all are we alone in this universe, maybe.
Yeah, that can be a second thing like doing after that like I don't know I'm, I'm coming back to the roots of my astrophysics.
No, a lot of people would like that. I mean, you might not even we might need even not even the machine learning there. I mean, quantum computers are just perfectly made to simulate black holes and the big bang, because those are 100% quantum systems.
Yeah.
You're so spot on there that, yeah, black holes will be an early application when we make them for sure.
Yeah, still I think that we need like 10 years but still in 10 years we can see more black hole people you cannot understand what we can learn from that that's that's something that that I think it will change, not very fabric of our side that very fabric of how we are
going to live like basically and that that's something that it will, it will, it will have an enormous change like on everything, but that's 10 years from now what I would like to ask you right now.
Would you like to say anything else to our audience right now as a closing remarks before we can start with the Q&A.
Yeah, sure.
No, not really but if you're interested in quantum computing don't be put off by the physics just just you know there's a lot of computer science in there as well a lot of algorithmic theory, I mean there's so many different branches in within quantum computing umbrella
there's machine learning, there's algorithmic complexity theory there's information theory, there's software, there's hardware, you know there's control systems.
So this is a place for everybody so just dive in, but I would say to people, you know, don't be, don't be put off by the quantum physics but there's a lot of work to be done.
Okay, Peter, thank you so much for this lovely chat.
It's all it's always very, very pleasant to talk with you. And right now what we are going to do we are going to start with Q&A and Peter will join us live to answer to your question, hopefully they're going to be a lot of questions.
Okay.
Thanks Alec. Nice to nice to speak to you again.
Hello everyone. Hello Peter.
So you can see me now live.
Okay, so basically the first thing is, do we have any question from the audience? Don't be shy, you can raise your hand.
There is, yes, no, okay, there's two. Okay, let's go here.
I will be the one.
Hi. Nice to see you again at this conference and shame that you couldn't come to do a live presentation even so it was great still.
I would like to ask for for somebody who is devoted to education is how to popularize physics to young generations.
Yeah, that's a good question. So, I've been doing a little bit of work on this for various companies. It is all about the education at this point, because, you know, there's this kind of massive ramp up going to be occurring over the next few years.
And that's what we saw with machine learning. Right. So, you know, a lot of professors leaving academia to be going to industry we're already seeing that was quantum computing.
You know, physics departments becoming a little bit depleted already, but so, but in terms of educating younger folk or people who want to, you know, move into this area.
Well, there are actually companies now creating courses. So, you don't have to go back to university just like with data science, you know, you can do online courses or three month boot camps.
They're starting to happen. IBM have got some good training material on their website. If you just Google IBM kiss kit or IBM quantum.
And so similarly with Microsoft.
So we're starting to see some of these educational materials appear online. So I would just, you know, start googling and our next couple of years we'll see more and more of this online information.
And also we'll see universities starting to offer undergraduate degrees and quantum information science and quantum, quantum engineering, which are degrees that don't actually exist at the moment.
And that, you know, people are addressing it. It'll be a little bit of a slow ramp up over the next few years.
Thank you, Peter. Just another question. Are you also a bit afraid that human kind might misuse quantum computing.
Maybe there's always a safety aspect in any technology right any new technology, you know, nuclear weapons and you know machine learning, you know, AI taking over the world and now rightly so people are considering what could possibly go wrong with quantum.
So it's a good question to think about. Don't stay away too late at night thinking about it I think, you know, like any technology can be used for good or bad right.
It does have national strategic importance though so you know governments are probably doing stuff behind closed doors that will never see the light of day really to be honest.
But most of the research has been done at universities and big companies and even startups nowadays. And so, you know, the hope is, you know, people will use AI for good, good things and same as similarly with quantum computing will be using it to simulate new materials and
drug discovery, you know, helping us with quantum machine learning optimization problems. And so those are all good things for humanity.
But yeah, there'll be an arms race, you know, China, Russia, the usual suspects in the West, you know, it's, we can't seem to get over that. So, we can expect that I mean in some ways it's healthy competition.
In some ways it's kind of annoying because you know people start worrying about how you know bad actors are going to use it. So, you know, it's one of these perennial problems that will never go away will never get rid of so we just have to, you know, treat it with the respect that it deserves maybe some
regulations and legislation will see happening and, but at the end of the day you know there's only so much we can do to limit bad actors.
Okay, do we have any additional question.
I have one question for you. It's going to, I'm going to put you on the spot here on the light. So basically Peter, who will you help us to bring at this stage live next year as a quantum keynote speaker.
Oh sure, Alex, I'd love to come back to the upgrade. Yeah, I mean I really enjoyed it last year. So sure.
You and who, who else from which company Google or something like that.
Yeah, but we'll try and get everybody from the big guys and the startups as well who don't really super interesting stuff so you know the usual suspects would be Google, Microsoft and IBM, and even Amazon have a quantum computing research department
and they're actually making hardware, not just putting other companies, quantum computers on the cloud which you can go and log into now it's called Amazon Bracket, B R A K E T, and you can log into about three different vendors today if you wanted to so we could get them along.
So that's for and then we could get maybe four startups.
Okay, thanks a lot. Okay, basically, if you don't have any additional questions, I would like Peter once again to thank you. Like Tatiana said, I'm looking forward to see you again here in Belgium alive.
When the Corona hopefully next year will give us a little bit of slack. We are moving forward with the program. I think that we are having like a small break or something like that, but I will let him know better than me.
Okay, people like to watch you. We have like five minutes before we are joined by Simon Boyden, who is going to follow with his presentation. It's going to be a very interesting one about about Wimbledon tennis championship.
So be sure to be here in five minutes because we are starting a sharp time because he's joining us virtually.
Thank you.
