30 years ago today, Lucasfilm released a graphic adventure that would change the landscape
of adventure games forever and usher in a golden age for the genre.
That game was the secret of Monkey Island.
Today we'll hear from some of the team that created the game and find out the story behind
its development.
I'm on a retro tip and this is the making of Monkey Island.
This video will make some assumptions, not the least of which being that you have played
the game.
This isn't an analysis of the game itself, but rather a look at how it came to be, how
it was created and by whom.
Before we get to the secret of Monkey Island, it's important to understand the birth and
development of adventure games prior to 1990.
Although a brief history is in order.
The genre itself and indeed the very name adventure game dates back to Colossal Cave
Adventure, first released in 1976.
This went by several names, including simply adventure.
In these early days, adventure games were what became known as text adventures.
The player is presented with small paragraphs of text outlining the story and its developments
and the player responds by entering simple one or two word commands.
Text adventures became very popular in the late 70s and early 80s, but it wasn't until
1980 that they became graphic adventures when Sierra Online, then known as online systems,
released Mystery House for the Apple II.
This was the first ever graphic adventure and, albeit primitive line drawings, depicted
an adventure game visually for the first time.
This was the birth of the graphic adventure game.
Obviously, technological advancements throughout the 1980s allowed these images to become more
and more detailed, but these adventure games still had one monumental flaw.
They still used command line interfaces relying on the player to input commands in text.
The text passes could be rather frustrating because they only recognized a set number
of commands, many or all of which would be unknown to the player at the outset.
The next significant leap for the genre came in 1984, again from Sierra, with the release
of the first King's Quest.
This was essentially a hybrid of graphic and text adventure.
The images on screen were now animated and the player could move the protagonist around
the screen without typing commands, but the majority of the game was still controlled
using text-based commands.
King's Quest saw a slew of sequels in the coming years, and some other very successful
entries in the Quest series, including Police Quest and Space Quest.
In 1986, Lucasfilm Games threw their hat into the arena with the release of their first
adventure game, Labyrinth.
Based on the Jim Henson film of the same name, it sought to sidestep some of the frustration
that came with these rigid command line interfaces.
David Fox at Lucasfilm developed a system using two word wheels from which the player
could select from lists of available commands and interactive objects, thus creating an
instruction for the character.
This was far from ideal, but it was a huge step in the right direction as it eliminated
the guesswork synonymous with text-based adventure games.
The next adventure from Lucasfilm Games, Maniac Mansion, came the following year.
Created by Ron Gilbert and Gary Winnick, Maniac Mansion completely flipped the adventure
game genre command interface on its head by introducing SCUM, or Script Creation Utility,
for Maniac Mansion.
This gave the player a selection of available commands, like walk to, pick up, open and
close.
These commands could be selected and then used to interact with objects or characters
by clicking on them.
This was a revolutionary step forward for the way adventure games would be played.
This interface was obviously far more suited to a mouse, and even by 1987 they weren't
standard.
It wasn't until the PC port of Maniac Mansion that the real advantage of having a mouse
became apparent.
Lucasfilm Games followed the success of Maniac Mansion in 1988, with their second SCUM game,
Zack McCracken and the Alien Mindbenders.
The interface was very similar, although slightly improved, but even at this early stage Lucasfilm
were already establishing their style.
Their next two graphic adventures were 1989's Indiana Jones and The Last Crusade, The Graphic
Adventure and 1990's Loom.
We'll hear more about Loom shortly.
But to understand how the secret of Monkey Island was conceived, we first need to understand
a bit more about Lucasfilm Games, and of course, meet the team who would create it.
Lucasfilm Games was a subdivision of Lucasfilm founded in 1982.
It began making original games for Atari, and all of its games were brought to market
by external publishers.
It wasn't until 1987's Maniac Mansion that Lucasfilm Games first self-published.
The company was small, certainly by today's standards.
In fact, that had been George Lucas's only instruction to the studio early on.
Stay small and don't lose any money.
The team that would work on the secret of Monkey Island were Ron Gilbert, the Concepts
creator, he also did design and programming.
Ron had previously done programming for a few of Lucasfilm's games, but most notably
designed and wrote Maniac Mansion, conceptualized Zack McCracken, and did design for the indie
and The Last Crusade graphic adventure.
Ron brought in two fledgling programmers to assist with the programming design and overall
story, Dave Grossman and Tim Schaefer.
They had both recently started at Lucasfilm, being hired in 1989 as Scumlitz, who would
help implement the designer's ideas within the Scum engine.
They had assisted with bits and pieces for some prior games, but the secret of Monkey
Island would be their first proper project.
The art team was made up of Steve Purcell, a cartoonist, notably the creator of Sam and
Max, who began at Lucasfilm Games in 1988.
He did artwork and graphics for the Indiana Jones and The Last Crusade graphic adventure,
graphics for the action game, artwork for Pipedream, and did character design and animations
for Loom.
He'd also designed the cover art for two games, Zack McCracken and Pipedream.
Mark Ferrari, an illustrator who had done art and animation for Zack McCracken, artwork
for Pipedream, and did all the background art for Loom.
Mike Ebert, another illustrator slash comic book artist, he started at Lucasfilm in 1989
and did actor art for the NES port of Maniac Mansion, artwork for Pipedream, and artwork
and graphics for The Last Crusade graphic adventure.
Ann Martin Bucky Cameron, who had previously done background art for Zack McCracken, graphics
and artwork for the indie graphic adventure, and had worked on a few other Lucasfilm games.
Steve Purcell, Mark Ferrari and Mike Ebert would be responsible for Monkey Island's
background art, and Steve, Mike and Martin Cameron would do its animations.
The art department was overseen by Gary Winnick, who had co-created Maniac Mansion with Ron
Gilbert.
He didn't work on Monkey Island directly, but oversaw the development as a whole.
The other notable team member was Michael Land, who began his Lucasfilm games career
in 1990 as their first in-house composer.
Despite of this, Lucasfilm had mostly outsourced the soundtracks for their games.
Of course, several other Lucasfilm games employees no doubt contributed towards the development
of Monkey Island, as was the norm at the company.
People often did a bit of everything, and it was common for employees outside of a games
development team to lend a hand where needed.
Quite a mixture of personalities here, most of the art team were illustrators or artists
outside of the world of gaming, and two of the game's lead designers, Dave Grossman
and Tim Schaffer, had never taken on such a role before.
Ron Gilbert first came up with the pirate theme for The Secret of Monkey Island as one of
several ideas for adventure game projects after developing Maniac Mansion.
Well, I had finished working on Maniac Mansion, and I was kind of thinking about another project,
and I came up with a few ideas that really never went anywhere, just ideas, and I wrote
down one page, and it was very common back at Lucasfilm at the time that people would
write little one-page design documents and then pass them around the office, and people
would comment on them and give feedback, and you'd sit down and chat with people, and
I did this for, I don't know, probably three or four ideas post Maniac Mansion, and nothing
really gained a lot of traction, you know, and nothing was really super exciting.
And I was really kind of thinking about games like King's Quest, and you had a fantasy environment,
which was very popular back then, and it is today, you know, fantasy is a huge kind of
genre in games, and you know, King's Quest kind of had this fantasy genre, and I started
thinking about, well, I wonder if that is one of the things that kind of makes it so
successful, but I'm not a big fantasy fan, and I didn't really want to make a game about
dragons and such, and I started thinking about, started thinking about them more, and that's
really where things like Pirates came up, because you know, Pirates actually share a lot in
common with fantasy, and I thought, well, maybe if I did a game about pirates, I could kind
of do fantasy without actually doing fantasy, which I didn't really like, and so that's
really where the whole idea of pirates kind of sprung up, was from bad idea.
At this early stage, the project was known as Mutiny on Monkey Island.
Looking at this early design document, it had only vague similarities with the final
game.
There were probably two major influences that just happened to, just by coincidence, you
read the book on Stranger Tides, which Tim Powers wrote, and that book was like this
real kind of eye-opener for me, because in that book, there were two things that kind
of made everything that I was thinking about for Monkey Island really click, and one was
that the protagonist in the story was kind of a fish out of water a little bit, right?
He was not a seasoned pirate.
He doesn't really understand this world that he's in.
That made a lot of sense to me, and a lot of stuff with Monkey Island really clicked
at that point, because that's when I started thinking about, you know, the player is really
in that situation too, right?
The player is not a seasoned pirate, and so it's really nice to be able to push this,
you know, protagonist into the world that doesn't know what's going on, because the
player doesn't know what's going on.
And so they can both learn at the same time about what it is to be a pirate.
And that was so much so that the very beginning line of Monkey Island is, you know, my name
is Guy Bersupad, and I want to be a pirate.
I mean, he just states right at the beginning of the game, I don't know anything about this.
So that was like a big inspiration for me, you know, from kind of a story standpoint.
And the other was really the Pirates of the Caribbean ride.
You know, I'd always loved that ride as a kid.
And there's just this feeling to that ride, especially at the very beginning.
At the beginning of the ride, you know, it's very slow, and there's lots of blues, and
it's nighttime, and I think you're in the Louisiana Bayou.
And I just, I just, I love that kind of environment a lot.
In 1989, while developing the concept, Ron wrote an article called Why Adventure Games
Suck.
This outlined the adventure game tropes that he wanted to avoid while making this new game.
These included, end objective needs to be clear, the player must have a sense of what
they're trying to accomplish, and why.
Give and learn, no deaths.
Backwards puzzles, avoid giving the player the solution before presenting the problem.
I forgot to pick it up, ensure that essential items can't be made unobtainable if forgotten
earlier.
Puzzles should advance the story, and puzzles need to make sense.
And give the player options.
These rules would allow the team to veer away from many of the gameplay aspects common to
graphic adventures that had led gamers to become rather frustrated with the genre.
Well, with Meeniac Mansion, you know, we, we dropped the parser, right?
That was the thing I hated the most about Sierra games was the typing, right?
I really, I mean, the first thing that really intrigued me about the Sierra games before,
you know, I had done Meeniac Mansion was just that they were graphic adventures, right?
I had played adventure games from like Infocom and, you know, even back in my university
days, you know, the original adventure stuff, and I played those and I really enjoyed those.
And I was very intrigued by, by Sierra, because these things felt graphical and they weren't,
they weren't graphics like, oh, here's a static picture, right?
They were, they were graphics in terms of, you know, the guy would actually walk around
and you move him around and things were animated and, and I was really intrigued by that, but
I really did not like the parser, which was kind of where Meeniac Mansion came from and
the whole, you know, scum interface, you know, ditching the parser.
So that was one thing I didn't really like.
The other thing that I didn't like, and I really hadn't kind of formulated this idea
until after Indiana Jones, but was the death part of it.
You know, the Sierra games really seemed to revel in death, right?
It was, it was something that the game would actually chastise you for.
And I always felt like the designers of those games actually took pleasure, you know, in,
in setting up a situation where the, you know, where the player would, you know,
would actually die.
And there were lots of places in Meeniac Mansion where the player could die and you
can get into no win situations and kind of posting the end of Jones.
I really thought, you know, I don't think the player should be able to die.
You know, you should not be able to get into bad situations where you're constantly having
to save the game because you're afraid you're going to make a mistake with Monkey Island.
You know, at least to some degree, probably mostly, you know, I kind of fixed that issue
with that game.
I found for my personal taste that that was always overdone, that the deaths were too arbitrary.
You couldn't see them coming.
It would have felt like, like in Lucasfilm's Indiana Jones game, the one was built before
I got there, you could die, but it always felt like you earned it.
You know, you lost a fight or something.
There were reasons why, why you were dying.
Whereas in the Sierra game, you would just, you know, sort of accidentally click too far
on the heart and you would walk into traffic and be run over by a taxi driver.
So that was sort of the, I think, the big philosophical difference between us.
And we would go out of our way to ensure that we didn't break the fantasy that it never killed you off.
Ron assembled a team to play the game.
Ron assembled a team to work on this new project.
We had hired some more kind of programmers and, you know, people like Steve Purcell had done a lot
of the art for, for the Indiana Jones game.
And so, you know, I was familiar with him by working on that.
And we had also hired some new programmers to work in the scum system.
I think there were four of them that we had hired.
You know, it kind of had that pool of people to really choose from, you know, as
terms of programmers and, you know, Steve was kind of a natural because we didn't really
have another project going on.
So, you know, that's when Steve came on.
And then Mark Ferrari, who did all the art for Loom.
So that's kind of, you know, I think how the team kind of emerged.
So at some point, Ron Gilbert came in and took Tim Shaefer and I aside and said, look,
it's a game about pirates and I want you guys to work on it with me, what do you say?
And we said, sure, what else are we going to say?
Of course we said yes.
And that's how I wound up on Gone Monkey, which was my first real, real game.
I did background art for Zach McCracken in using the EGA palette, using solid
fields of color for the EGA palette.
The next game, the next major game that I did was Loom, which was done in dithered EGA.
Loom won a lot of awards because of the way it looked and the way it looked was directly
and almost entirely because we were now using dithered EGA color instead of solid
fields of EGA color.
And I believe that the next major game I worked on after that was Secret of Monkey Island.
I was already there at the company where I had been creating some creature designs
for a game that was canceled shortly after I got there.
They discovered I could paint and hired me to do the Zach McCracken cover.
From that, I was going to start on Monkey Island, but we all got shifted on to
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade first.
I don't remember Ron ever seeking me out.
I was part of the small bullpen that got assigned to whatever was happening next.
The environment at Lucasfilm Games seemed idyllic.
The freedom that the development teams were afforded was significant and the
setting was picturesque to say the least.
In those days, Lucasfilm Games was based at Skywalker Ranch in California, a
beautiful working environment close to the rest of Lucasfilm.
I would drive up to the Skywalker Ranch from Oakland, roll into the gates, maybe
start the fireplace in the stable house at the back of the ranch where our
offices were, settle in and start drawing into Luxe paint.
I can't remember if we would have teen check-ins every day.
Gary Winnick was the head of the art department, so I'm sure we would
update with him at some point.
At lunch, we'd walk over to the main house, a big white Victorian house where
they served an amazing lunch in a gorgeous dining room with an NC Wyeth painting
hanging above the fireplace.
After that, Gary would say, work or walk?
We would usually choose to do a circuit of the ranch down to the farm area and
back past Skywalker Sound, which looks like a winery and past Lake Ewok.
Sometimes we'd get more ambitious and hike up into the hills surrounding the
ranch. In the afternoons, we'd labor at our desks and joke around as we worked.
I'm sure Ron would come down and do check-ins and let us know what was
needed or coming soon. Late in the day, we would start playing one of Larry
Holland's World War II games. You could hear the little airplane motor buzz
through the cheesy PC speakers. If we goofed around too much during the day,
we might stay late, or there might be a screening in the Art Deco stag theater
at Skywalker Sound. Once, on an after-lunch hike, the artist decided to venture up
for a look at George Lucas' observatory. He had built it to house a telescope
that someone had given him as a gift. On the way, we found a giant wooden spool
that power companies use to transport long lengths of cabling. We rolled the spool
all the way to the top of the hill overlooking Skywalker Ranch and let it go.
It went careening all the way down the hill and kicked up enough momentum to plow
through a fence. Dorks that we were, we ran away and never spoke of it.
The location wasn't the only liberating aspect of Luke's film games.
The company's ethos was also very relaxed, allowing the development teams to shine
creatively, free from deadlines and money-hungry executives.
And Ron Gilbert applied that same spirit when leading the Monkey Island team.
I didn't realize how much freedom we had until later when I had to have other jobs.
We weren't responsible for keeping the company afloat. We were a tiny division
of a great big media empire that had lots of movie money and special effects money and sound
production money coming in. And it wasn't until a few years in that anybody even suggested
that we should make a profit. But I don't remember anybody specifically saying,
you need to do this. It was more, you know, we were all at 20 something and we didn't
get into what we were doing. Ron had a sense of what he wanted, but he was flexible enough to
allow creative people to contribute. To lead a project, you have to find out how to point everyone
toward the same goal and then give them the room to invest themselves in it. People do
better work when they feel their contributions are valued. The result is stronger when the
lead can let the creative team flourish. Although each team member had their role,
a lot of the work on Monkey Island was a collaborative effort, as was common at Lucas
Film Games. Brainstorming sessions were common and ideas were often bounced around.
Working on the game and I was designing stuff and just really reacting kind of to
what we had seen implemented and going, oh, well, that's really interesting. Let's do more of that.
First of all, it was a new industry. Nobody had decided at that point what this was about
or what this should be about or where it was going. So everybody was in experimental mode,
even the investors were in experimental mode in those days. So the fact that all the answers
hadn't been nailed down and everything that hadn't been nailed down hadn't been excluded
left a great deal of wiggle room that is no longer well that hasn't been there until recently.
So our teams were six to a dozen people. Everybody knew everybody. Everybody was in
contact and talking and involved all day long and everybody was involved in all the discussions
there were. Everybody talked about game design. I mean, yes, we were each there to specialize in
some part of the game making process. A couple of us were there to do art and that was our
area of expertise. A couple of us there were there to do programming or game design and that
was their area of expertise. But everybody got together numerous times a day to talk about the
art and the game design and puzzles and dialogue and, you know, I mean, there wasn't anything
that anybody was excluded from. And there was very little in the games that wasn't actually
that sort of collegial summation of what everybody had contributed. It was a far more
creative, far more collegial environment than it is now.
So we would usually spend one or two, sort of maybe hour long sessions together all three of us and
maybe with some visitors here. Brainstorming about puzzles, puzzle structure, mostly, which is all
wrapped up in story and story structure. All the puzzles are sort of about people,
their weird needs. And then we would go off and have responsibilities and him and I were mostly
doing, we were sort of responsible for making a scene come to life. So it would be like, all right,
you're going to do the scene with these circus guys. And so part of that was somebody would draw
the art and but we would have to do some like stage direction, which is like, these guys are
going to stand over here and then when you talk to them, they're going to walk over here. If anybody
does any animations during the conversation, say how and when that's going to happen.
When developing the puzzles for Monkey Island, Ron, Dave and Tim made sure to bear Ron's rules in mind.
Typically we would do it how you might think of as backwards, which is think of the goal first
and then think of how you achieve the goal. That would start with story. So
usual approach is to sort of take the overall idea for the stories and break it down into a few
acts. Each act has some kind of a goal that the character is trying to achieve instead of
the other. And then break down that goal into some sub goals that sort of make sense.
And then take each one of those and break it down into some actions that you take
each action that you take should be hopefully something that makes you feel a little bit clever
and is sort of a leap of like, oh, I gotta do this. It's fun in some other way. And there's
definitely a space between telling people exactly what to do and leaving them lost. You have to kind
of aim in the middle somewhere where you've got some information, but maybe not quite enough.
And the more you poke at it, the more you learn, then finally you get to a point where you're like,
ah, I know what I'm going to do. The stuff that I like best now are the things that aren't
puzzle puzzles, but that sort of use the standard interface to do other stuff. So
I mean, there's the insult sort of biting, but also around that you have to, the puzzle where
you have to follow the shopkeeper out into the forest to find the sword master. And I thought
that was a clever bit of subterfuge. And there's one puzzle where you have to, like the frog is
eating through your mugs and you have to keep transferring it from mug to mug as you get there.
And I like those just because they're sort of breaking, breaking what we have come to think
of as this game or the adventure game puzzle, which is just use this on that and see the reward.
For Monkey Island, the scum engine was improved over the last crusade with a seemingly small tweak.
Players can now hover over environmental objects to see their description and therefore interact
with them. This minor change made exploring the world much easier and far more intuitive.
The game was also littered with references and in-jokes, a trend already established in their
previous adventures like Zack McCracken. These references included nods to previous Lucasfilm
adventure games, Lucasfilm movie properties, and even George Lucas himself.
The things that are sort of specific, timely references to something that was in the news
like that year, mostly probably wouldn't even notice anymore. But the things that are
sort of more general references to a certain type of character last longer, like Stan the
Ship Salesman is a good example. He's loosely based on a real guy, Cal Worthington,
this is his car salesman. But he was the used car salesman who was on TV a lot in Southern
California where I grew up. And people in Northern California or Oregon know about him.
And Tim wrote that scene, never having seen, I think, a Cal Worthington commercial. But he
still kind of hits the mark because there's something sort of universal about that kind of
hand-wavy, noisy guy who's trying to sell you a car.
Dave Grossman even had a little dig at Sierra's adventures by programming in a spoof game over
screen. The way that happened was I got the background art for that scene. I think Mike
Ebert was the one who did that one. And there was just like a line over at the edge of the
piece of rock that he was standing on. And it just looked like a crack, like it was supposed
to break. And my first thought was, did I miss a meeting? And is there a puzzle about this that
I don't know about? So I just that night, I painted a different version of it where the
thing had broken off and made the piece. So I could animate it dropping down and stepping
in there and put in this whole elaborate thing where the cliff crumbles. But we just make the
excuse that there's a rubber tree down there that you bounce off of and you survive. But not before
seeing the parody of the Sierra Death message come up. And someone says, ah, sorry, you died. No,
this isn't that kind of game, this is a Lucasfilm game.
The story and puzzles in Monkey Island were in the end very well put together,
and the game's sense of humour was light years ahead of anything that had come before.
The secret of Monkey Island was such a joy to play because its constituent parts were all
exceptional. And the artwork was of course a huge part of this. Even the box art designed by Steve
Purcell was striking. For the first cover, we worked with an outside designer for the logo,
and I designed the illustration to fit with it. I must have started on it pretty early,
because I have sketches of a version of Guybrush that's nothing like what he came to be.
In the roughs, he was kind of a muscly doofus. I had done the Zach McCracken cover previously,
and Ron said he wanted Monkey Island more realistic. That was a stretch for me, but I did what I could
with it. In those days, a video game's box art was far more important than it is today.
Kids couldn't simply look up a game on the internet to assess its appeal,
so sales were made and broken on the attractive box art sat on the shelves.
Even the game's copy protection was visually striking, the dialer pirate wheel.
The game would give the player a composite face made up of two different pirate faces.
It would then ask for a specific date to be entered relating to one of several Caribbean islands,
an ingenious device, and a bit of fun. During a particular rush period to get the game on
to shelves, the team were all hands on deck, so it's possible that Dave Grossman himself
assembled your dialer pirate wheel. So a bunch of us did that, there was probably
25 people all went down to this warehouse and stand the fell and shrunk wrapped things,
and we riveted code wheels and packed things in boxes, and it's fine actually.
It is entirely possible that I riveted your code wheel myself.
The game's artwork, all drawn in deluxe paint, a program familiar to any Amiga owner in the late
80s and early 90s, was even more impressive. To understand why, we need to rewind a few years.
Neither I nor any of the other artists who were being hired by Lucasfilm or Sierra Online or
virtually none of those people were computer enthusiasts. Some of them were, but most of them
weren't, and of course none of those people were pixel artists. There was no such thing.
We were traditional illustrators who were proficient at making imagery using traditional
media, so we came to this new platform with a set of expectations about color and about detail,
and about 2D visual skills in creating atmospheric perspective and you know linear
perspective and all sorts of things that went into making a vivid 2D image that were rendered
virtually impossible by this low res pixelated medium with 16 horrible EGA colors and nothing else
available. It made it almost impossible to do what we were trained as traditional illustrators to do.
So rather than being people who were in love with pixels and maximizing the visual and aesthetic
potential of pixels the way artists do today, we were people who saw pixels as a technological
misfortune that we had to somehow overcome as much as possible and compensate for. So when I sat
down to do Zach McCracken, the first thing I started doing was dithering the 16 awful EGA colors
that we had to use. You know there was this acid green and this acid magenta and this sort of
fire engine red and this buttercup yellow. I mean there were no useful, I mean little spots
of saturated color very important in a traditional illustration, but those spots become focal issues
because of focal spots because they are supported by a whole lot of the painting that's done in
darker less saturated background recessive colors and there were no recessive colors in the EGA
palette except for black and well except for gray really. I mean even the brown was this bright
orangey mustardy kind of orangey well not orangey yellowy kind of brown they're just were no useful
colors so I was being asked to draw you know architectural interiors and landscapes without
any of the colors I needed so I just began to checkerboard dither the ugly colors we were
forced to use with into more useful colors. The greatest hurdle faced by the monkey island art
team was the EGA color palette which was a mere 16 colors and most of them unappealing. We were
challenged by the color palette there was a good black dark blue and yellow that helped the night
scenes. Some other colors were not so forgiving you could shade a face with a mealy brown or a
dark red it never quite looked right Ron would have something in mind for all the locations
and then gave us room to explore. To combat this Mark fought hard to use a technique called dithering
in the background art. Dithering is a technique by which a richer color palette or at least the
illusion of one can be created by blending the available 16 colors. For example this image during
the Zach McCracken era of graphics would become this if dithering was used the only problem was
dithering would not compress. We finished Zach McCracken and all those backgrounds with solid
fields of EGA color and it has its own classic look now but it's still not a look I would want to
look at for very long. At the end of that project we were in crunch mode we needed to be working
over a couple of weekends they didn't want us hanging out on Skywalker Ranch through the weekends
they let us take our PCs home to work and while I had my PC at home and had finished what I needed
to do there I just decided to draw a nice looking EGA picture a scene of rows of receding hills covered
in crests of live oak trees against a twilight sunset with a crescent moon and some stars
and a sunset sort of an orange band of sunset at the bottom fading up into this blue twilight sky.
I did it all in dither it was just so beautiful compared to what we were doing for Zach McCracken
and I saved it to my hard drive and then I went back to work on Monday and when I finished up what
I needed to do Monday morning enough to go to lunch I decided just to put that picture up on my
screen and go to lunch just let it sit there I shared an office with the art director then
his desk and my desk were in the same room next to each other and I just put that image up and went
to lunch I figured people could take a look at this it was really at some level it was it was an
intentional complaint we could be doing this if we could use dither so that picture was up there
for quite a while and when I came back Steve Arnold who was then the head of the Lucasfilm
game division was in an animated conversation with Ron Gilbert about why dither didn't compress
and within a few weeks or a month at most dither did compress um Ron and his team had made changes
to the scum engine that allowed for that so the result was loom I did all the backgrounds for loom
because I was the guy there that understood drawing and dither I was in no position to implement the
ability to draw on dither that was all Ron but I was the guy who knew what to do with dither on
screen so loom was our first attempt at a dithered EGA game and it won a lot of graphics awards because
places people thought this was VGA art and we're very surprised because VGA art wasn't really being
used by gaming companies yet at that point it was all EGA so that worked out really well
Secret of Monkey Island was the next major game we did after that and Secret of Monkey Island was
among other things my doctoral thesis on dithered EGA art it was where I got to apply everything
we learned about how to use the EGA palette as dithered art during loom so that was sort of the
progression from EGA art in Zach McCracken to the EGA art you have in Secret of Monkey Island
the background art was split more or less in three between Mark, Steve and Mike Ebert
this created a small problem as each artist had their own distinctive style they sidestep
this issue by assigning each artist their own areas so it was less noticeable for the player
I was doing most of the background work for loom I only did about a third of the background work
for Monkey Island but I did most of the background work for loom probably because I was the only
person there who had ever given a second thought to dither or wanted to try that yet because loom
was the first time we really used dithered art in a game we did not understand going into loom
what the impacts of that were going to be but one of the impacts of that that nobody saw coming
till Monkey Island was that once you were able to get more color choices into a game with dither
personal artistic style suddenly began to actually be possible visibly on the screen
when we did Zach McCracken with solid fields of EGA color everybody's art looked the same
it didn't matter whether you were me or Steve Purcell or you know Andy Warhol or Vermeer
your artwork was going to look pretty much like everybody else's because there were so few
choices to make about what color to use or how to apply it to the image just dithering those
colors gave us enough additional choices about color and how to apply it and at that point
the images that Steve Purcell drew with dither and the images that I drew with dither looked
like two different artists drawing into slightly different styles so all of a sudden you know
up until then it had been no problem to have three artists working on a game it was just
going to look like one artist's work no matter how many artists you had helping as a monkey island
at least you could really tell the difference between Steve's dithered artwork and my dithered
artwork so for Monkey Island the way we solved that was we divvied up the different environments
and handed them out to different artists so when it came to Melee Village I was assigned that and I
did all of the exteriors from Melee Village and and some of the interiors when it came to the
monkey village on Monkey Island that was all Steve Purcell when it came to some of the other places
it was all Mike Ebert by assigning all of the images for a single environment to a single artist
that way when people move from one place to another and this looked completely different it was
because we were in some place different now it wasn't because of hey who drew this we actually
had to disguise those differences in artistic style they were a liability all of a sudden
but for Loom we had no idea that was going to happen I was fine doing backgrounds but Mark was
able to take them to another level I tended to get assigned a weird or funny subjects or maybe
they ended up that way because of how I did them I did the stone monkey head and Stan's dock with
the grog machine I can't remember if the machine was part of the assignment or something I added
to make it more fun and anachronistic I liked working on the big stone monkey head because
it's silly and I like strange stone zardos type icons and stories dithering wasn't the only technique
used in deluxe paint to get the most out of the limited palette mark also utilized color cycling
I didn't go in understanding the technology I didn't go in interested in the technology
I just went in trying to figure out how to make this damn thing do what I wanted it to do
and as such I never sat down knowing how to do what I was here to do today I sat down to figure
out how to do I was reinventing the wheel all the time because I'd never heard of wheels and when
we started working on artwork for the game one of the first things we did was that lookout point
with the stone arch where the old man is sitting by the bonfire staring out sea and we were debating
I mean first of all we were I was my first big challenge there was drawing fire light with
even in dither with these 16 horrible colors you know the way a fire looks like fire is not
just that it is orange and yellow but that it is casting orange and yellow light on and shadows
onto things we really didn't have the colors for it but part of that debate ended up being about
whether or not to animate that fire at all again all the art direction decisions that were made
by disk space just the extra frames to animate that little bonfire were a serious calculation
terms of consumption of disk space and we were very early in the game and Ron didn't want to just
start you know eating up disk space with gratuitous environmental animations until we were sure we
could so we were talking about just drawing that fire as a frozen part of the art which
really didn't appeal to me again for artistic reasons that was when Ron called my attention I
believe to the color cycling feature in deep paint deep paint came with this capacity to identify a
little row of colors of whatever length you wished in the palette and of course in those days the
palette was 16 colors so the length was pretty narrow no matter how you cut it but to identify
a little row of colors and tell this particular art file to switch the positions of those colors
in order in a loop at whatever speed you chose so with 16 colors there wasn't a whole lot you
could do with color cycling I mean you couldn't color cycle the whole palette otherwise the whole
screen would just become a jumble of changing colors so you got to pick just two or three colors
but Ron said here's a way to make things look like they're moving on screen maybe you could just
use this with the fire somehow to give it some motion without us having to do frames
and that was unbeknownst to me the beginning of my color cycling career right there because I of
course once I discovered a new tool even 10 years of using that tool I had to go back and figure out
how I could use this better how I could stretch this further you know what we might be able to do
to get around the apparent limitations of this at that involved a lot of happy accidents along the
way that opened my eyes to a possibility I would never have just thought of on my own etc I had
10 years to play with this so I got to do things with it nobody thought were possible nobody ever
imagined would be possible when they first saw the color cycling tool as presented by EA
the character animations were very accomplished too animating emotions and reactions was no mean
this kind of pixel art was concerned there was a lot of animation to be done so there was plenty
to split between me and martin and mike on indiana jones I had done the first special case animation
where a character does something that is specific to one moment in the game in the case of indie it
was him slipping down a bank special case animations were something I guess I had a knack for so I
would get those assignments we had lots of characters that would appear in cycles of animation
the cycles were designed by the animators to seem randomized martin and ebert were really great at
figuring out how to sequence the motions to get the variety so it would feel more spontaneous
they were also good at creating modular characters that could be used to make multiple variants of
all the extras I was good at goofy stuff I had fun working on the ghost ship in the sort of lava
underworld the skeleton pirates were fun because the blue lent themselves to a kind of glow effect
I enjoyed getting to figure out and animate guybrush and lechuck if my comic background helped
maybe it was in making stuff up on the fly which is also a help for storyboarding the challenge on
the computer was in working in 16 colors and trying to give life to tiny characters where
you can barely see their faces the challenge was getting these little figures to act with their bodies
of course monkey island looked different depending on the platform the amiga version was
significantly better looking than the dos ega version and then it was entirely redone in vga
you know we still only had 16 colors right all the way through the first version of monkey island
it really wasn't until the vga graphics became a lot more standard that we got access to 256 colors
which i mean the egg mansion was in you know redone in and I think when people play maniac
mansion or play monkey island today most people are playing the vga version so you know color
space really changed and then you know I don't know that memory was really that big of a deal
just because the scum system was really good at being able to shuffle stuff in and out of memories
you needed it I mean it did the more memory did allow us to do more complex animations
and you really saw that starting with um the last crusade game you know because the maniac mansion
there are no what we call special case animations right people walked and that was it when Indiana
Jones came out we started doing kind of special animation so when Indiana Jones had to do something
special there was this special animation that he would do that would only be seen in that one
place in the game and having more memory and more disk space kind of allowed us to do more of those
and then by the time monkey island came out you know we had even more disk space and even more
memory to you know to to play with and so we could do even more you know of those special animations
and the resolution was a lot higher i mean maniac mansion on the cometer 64 was 160 pixels across
and by the time monkey island came out it was double that so it was 320 pixels across
so having more resolution more colors you know more memory we're all we're all kind of nice but
i don't think anything really fundamentally changed part of the magic of the secret monkey island
was its diverse roster of quirky characters not the least of which being the game's lovably goofy
protagonist guybrush threepwood he wasn't your typical video game hero i don't always thought
about monkey island you know the protagonist which later became guybrush as kind of being a seasoned
pirate right and that's really if you look at the sierra games you're playing police quest and you're
a seasoned cop in police quest and you're you know all these things you're you're a seasoned person
and the player is not a seasoned pirate and so it's really nice to be able to push this you
know protagonist into the world that doesn't know what's going on because the player doesn't know
what's going on it helps with the game design because you can introduce the main character to
things at the same time you introduce the the player to things the origin of the somewhat unusual
name guybrush is an interesting one in those days a movable sprite on screen was called a brush in
fact i'm pretty sure that's what the tool called it there was a pull down menu in deep paint called
brushes or something like that i think and so this any anything that you picked up and moved
around on screen any bit of art that you picked up and moved around the screen was called a brush
so character sprites were referred to as brushes and as we were in the early stages of designing
the game our i think the designer's first intent was that there would be a male protagonist and
a female protagonist and the player could decide whether to play the young pirate as a you know
as a man or a woman in the end i think that that alternative was eliminated because we realized it
was going to mean a dual set of every protagonist animation in the game and that tiny bit of floppy
disk space we had in which to ship the game simply wouldn't accommodate that many animation frames
so but before we had figured out that there wasn't any way to fit that particular option on the
disks we were talking having one of these group conversations about narrative aspects of the game
where ron and steve brussell and gary winnick and i and bucky cameron and a couple of programmers
i don't remember who at this point we're all sitting in gary's office just shooting the pull
as we say about all of these things that weren't in most of our job descriptions or areas of
expertise but we were all people with interesting minds creative people with good senses of humor
and we were all having this thing and what we were discussing at the moment was what to name
this protagonist these two protagonist characters you know i think they came up with a name for
the woman first and then i think ron asked so okay so what do we call the guy brush and steve
brussell said well how about guy brush and everybody looked at each other and said well
that's great okay and that's how guy brush got his name that decision wasn't made by some designer
sitting his desk alone someplace or talking with the other designers that came out of one of these
pal around conversations that happened five times a day there his surname threepwood came from a pg
woodhouse novel the brinkmanship of galahad threepwood the other characters are equally well
designed from guy brush's independent love interest elaine marley and arch nemesis the ghost
pirate lechuk to the supporting cast of down and out pirates and mele island inhabitants
every single character not only has a unique persona and sense of humor but adds depth to the
overall story stan the used ship salesman herman two-throught the down on his luck hermit marooned
on monkey island the list goes on the secret of monkey island had a strong female character in
elaine but also with carla the sword master the reveal that she was in fact a woman added gravitas
to guy brush's eventual encounter with her carla was named and modeled after a lucas film games
employee you know elaine elaine was kind of switched to a woman originally the person who
was supposed to be the governor of the island was governor fat who appeared in monkey island too
as a governor island and so i switched you know i switched on her to switch that character to be
elaine uh in in monkey island the sword master i'm not really sure exactly how the sword master
came about i mean i do remember having this weird questioning about about everyone's assumption
at the time you know on the team was really that the sword master was a man so i remember thinking
well what if what if she was a woman right that would be interesting you know and then there was
this woman who worked in the product support department at lucas film um named carla and
i i don't i don't know how it happened but even if you look at the picture of the sword master
monkey island that is carla from product support it looks exactly like her and so it was i i'm and
i'm not really sure how that happened right so i'm not really sure how how that character became
carla from product support but um but there was that that initial questioning of like well why
does the sword master have to be a man let's let's make the sword master a woman
of course the build-up to the sword master encounter is one of the most well-loved aspects
of the game the insult sword fights on mele island a pirate's most valuable weapon is not his sword
but his sharp tongue author orson scott card most known for his 1985 novel ender's game
recently made into a film was brought in to contribute lucas film games approached me during
the time that i was reviewing games for compute magazine and a couple others in those days the
big game consoles had not yet taken over commodore 64 and a target were still treated as valuable game
platforms apparently someone at lucas film games liked the kind of things i said in my reviews of
their games and those of other teams and i was invited to visit and consult with them i did a
thousand ideas in an hour session at larks for landing and several other things i did in my
writing classes at the time but what i liked most was looking at various games under construction
the one year's completion was loom with a fascinating innovative interface during the
playthrough i made a couple of comments about very slight improvements that might be helpful
as far as i know they use none of my suggestions why would they but somehow they still found a
reason known only to them to recognize me in the acknowledgments the game that i contributed to most
was monkey island i was delighted with the concept that instead of a twitch game where
conflicts are resolved by pounding on a control button or key at a very fast rate ron had come
up with a dialogue centered way of winning duels when you start the game you have a selection
of very lame insults the computer ai also has lame insults but they have a few better ones which can
beat yours every insult you hear is added to your selection of insults and eventually you earn your
way into killer insults that defeat all comers and for that reason instead of keeping the fun for
themselves they asked me to come up with the insults when i got home to greensboro i asked my
kids to help what insults have they heard among elementary school and middle school kids the
the better i said so they came up with some terrific embarrassingly bad insults to be the
original selection they also suggested a few of the better ones but they had the most fun
coming up with insults so stupid that same one was more embarrassing than having one aimed at you
then it was my job to come up with sword fighting appropriate insults on a higher and higher order
it was one of the most fun yet challenging writing tasks i've ever done of course the final decision
on whether to use all or any of my suggested insults rested entirely with the game's design team
and i never checked to make sure whether they used my insults they did give me credit for all of them
which was generous and maybe the insults in the game all originated with me and my kids that would
be cool my aging brain does not remember any of the insults now my son jeffrey now a game designer
played through monkey island several times and because he only knew the opening insults he got
a kick out of the advanced ones as he played i never played the game when i was reviewing games
jeffrey would play them through until he knew how they ended then he would demo them for me along
with his comments on the gameplay story design etc i paid him half the pittons i was paid for my
reviews odd how 50 bucks seemed like almost nothing to me but a fortune to my son at the time the fact
that he loved the game made me feel confident that i had not let down the team at lucas film games
in the end many of the insults were created by david and the monkey island team as the retorts
learned would need to have two uses one has come back to the pirates insults in order to beat them
and two to talk back to the sword master during guy brushes duel with her this meant pairing the
comebacks with an entirely new set of insults i mean we're working on the game and and we just
sort of got this information that orson scott kind of had written was writing some insults
and comebacks for us but the instructions we got were you know just take these and if you can use
them use them and if they don't work for you then don't worry about it and just make up to more stuff
and and so because he didn't really have all the context for what these were going to need to do
do which is a they needed to be sort of matched pairs of insults and come back
that needed to be distinct from one another and that also we're going to need to serve double
duty when you got to the sword master you're going to have to use all your your comebacks
again in another context that's a very narrow box that he was not given and so
you know we just got a kind of a list of interesting insults and and so what wound up
happening was that tim and i crafted almost all of that but some of the insults are still in there
and i think mostly with different different comebacks so you know scott's fingers are still in
there somewhere all of monkey island's elements blended perfectly to submerge the player in this
intriguing pirate-filled world and its distinct soundtrack played no small part in this the
soundtrack's composer michael land had started at lucas on games in 1990 his background was not only
as an accomplished musician with experience in creating electronic music but also as a programmer
hired as their first in-house audio programmer and composer his first project would be the
secret of monkey island the soundtrack consisted almost entirely of caribbean inspired music
with many characters and areas in the game having their own distinct theme
he struggled with the music's fluidity matching the music to the action happening on screen
an issue he went on to fix for the game sequel with the development of the i-muse interactive
music system but that's a story for another time the secret of monkey island is undoubtedly a cult
classic a culmination of extraordinary talent gorgeous artwork a great soundtrack lovable
characters an unmatched sense of humor and most importantly a well-crafted narrative
but what solidified it in the hearts of gamers so profoundly that it's still so admired 30 years on
for some insight on this let's hear from some of the game's fans
the reason i love the secret of monkey island is undoubtedly the humor it has to be and i'm
sure lots and lots of people will say this but for me it's the humor because i discovered this
off the back of clain sierra's police quest which is as straight laced and as unfunny as a game can
be that's not to say it's not enjoyable so this was so refreshing when i discovered it when i
fired it up in fact before it even loaded into the game you had things like the dial-up pirate
copy protection kit and of course as soon as you get into the game it becomes infinitely
quotable you fight like a dairy farmer if for some reason you've never played this game do it
because the graphics hold up superbly the script writing is a masterpiece the jokes are still as
funny as they ever were and through the use of something like scum vm you can do away with all
compatibility problems and you can enjoy this as much as i did the day it came out the secret
of monkey island truly is in my opinion one of those games that everybody should play at least
once in their life so secret of monkey island wow the thing that was comes to mind with this game
for me way back in 1990 released by lucas films is um the show number of discs it came on i mean
eight discs i think on the gaming on the whole and um you know it was a very innovative very
important game and um luckily uh on my amiga at the time i'd sprung out for the extra disc drive
so you could have two discs going at once but still eight discs was always um a bit nervy for me
or any number of discs because uh floppy discs were so corruptible and um with eight discs all
you needed was for one of those discs to um stop working and the whole game was ruined so i remember
sitting there and hearing the older amiga whirring away and crunched the disc as they
would want to do and just hoping the thing was going to load every time um but the game itself
the adventures of uh guy brush um what a great game open things up in a big way for point and
click adventures hope you enjoy the game should you revisit it and uh if you're a retro gamer you
really should my relationship with monkey island isn't the same as most other people of my age i'd
always heard that monkey island was good but i didn't actually play it until a couple of years ago
i'm a lifelong fan of adventure games specifically in fact lucas arts adventure games i've played
the dig i've played day of the tentacle i've played grim fandango obviously i'd heard of monkey
island and i was always conscious of its impact on the genre i knew the music i'd heard that loads
of times before it's a certified classic i just kept missing out on playing it it's one of those
classics that you just never get around to it's like being into films and yet somehow never
having seen the godfather anyway i finally got around to playing it on my old dos laptop and
i was staggered by how good this game is there's no nostalgia for me here there's no rose tinted
memories of loading up old floppies on my amiga this is just straight up great writing great
puzzles great jokes the humor in fact has survived surprisingly well it still feels really 90s but
it had me laughing out loud for real and when you consider that's me reading pixely text off of a
screen with no voice acting that is a testament to the quality of that writing there was always
this nagging doubt in my mind that monkey island wouldn't live up to the hype that nostalgia
was warping people's opinion of this game i'm glad to say that that is absolutely not the case
monkey island is a certified banger it gets so much right that i don't hesitate to recommend
this game to other people who missed out just like i did although a huge success from a technical
standpoint the secret of monkey island wasn't an immediate commercial success seara was still
outselling lucas film's graphic adventures by a wide margin certainly in north america in fact
most of the team didn't realize it had become such a revered game until much later
so we got ahead of marketing a lucas film a guy named doug glenn and i think he had lived in europe
and he lived in italy for several years and so he was always like we have to go to europe we have to
go to europe you know and i think seara online had kind of licensed the kinks west stuff to i
think activision it's like the old activision but uh to activision and so i think i think activision
kind of you know had the rights to all of europe for this stuff and i think one of the things that
doug glenn did was he said no we're going to go to each individual country and do deals with
distributors in each country and i think his his philosophy at the time was if we do that these
individual distributors in germany and spain and the uk and stuff will have a lot more vested
interest in this game because it is a game for their market right and i think he was really
right about that and i think i think that's one of the things that kind of made mcgallin really
explode in europe is is that you know those those deals were not europe as this big you know giant
entity but it was deals with spain and deals with france and deals with germany and and i think it
gave those people a lot more ownership over the title and i think helped you know helped them
promote it i mean today you release a game and 24 hours later right everyone's playing it and
there's reviews everywhere and all that so that wasn't the case back then you know we would release
a game and it would spend months you know in manufacturing getting hundreds of thousands
of floppy disks pressed and then it had to be shipped to stores and then you know so it was
months between when we would finish a game and it would actually come out on the shelves and
and i i know i was very disappointed in the kind of sales of mcgallin but you know i had started
working on mcgallin two just immediately right mcgallin one finished and went on vacation for
two weeks and i came back and i started working on mcgallin two and i do kind of wonder right if
if we had had immediate feedback on the success of the game maybe i wouldn't have been allowed to
do mcgallin two but i could almost start mcgallin two without knowing how well mcgallin one did and
so maybe that was a kind of blessing in disguise you know it's like mcgallin one came out i mean
did okay it wasn't a it wasn't a flop by any means and then mcgallin two came out and i left lucas
film right after mcgallin two came out and so i didn't um i don't know how well it did because
i wasn't privy to any of that you know sales information after i left there were two games
i did and they were fun games and i was very proud of the games but at that point i started
humongous entertainment and that was really my focus right which was making these adventure games
for kids and i kind of in some ways forgot about mcgallin and it really wasn't until probably 2003
or 2004 when i started my blog and i started doing blogging stuff and there were just just
throngs of people would come to my blog and that was actually a little bit of surprise for me
and i'm like well i'm like yeah and i was like you know 10 years ago why are you still playing it
and and that's that's what i kind of personally realized what an absolute cult following you
know that those two games had was was when i when i really when i started my blog and i started
interacting with people and you know i made a couple of you know trips to europe just as
vacations and stuff and i thought i'll be fun to do little meetups with people and just the sheer
number of people that came to those meetups right just blew me away so i was i think that's the point
that i kind of realized that it had of the following that it had you know success is
definable on very very kinds of terms like um we got recognition like at the game developers
conference and stuff other other game developers liked it do that um and we all liked it you know
i think we we knew that we have made something good um just in terms of actual monetary sales
lucas film never did that great in the us market we were certainly um overshadowed significantly
by seara uh domestically uh but we did have a lot of european fans go there you know that was
like a significant portion of the income we got from europe and you know i mean i there's
no particular moment where i was like oh hey this is this is a success and i guess i always felt
like it was a success um just because it it came out which is i didn't realize even how unusual
that could be until much later in the career everything we did actually you released it came
out and and people played it and we got fan letters and you know the people seemed to like it and i
didn't um i didn't have a lot of uh insight or interest into what were the financials of you
know how much do we spend on this now which we're making now somebody else's job we had made something
that was fun and various people were telling me that it was fun so in that instance i knew right
away that this is a success um and and the fact that people still talk about it though is um
that continues to amaze me on a daily basis like so many other things have come out the fact that
we made something that was not just good and fun but that actually continues to be good and fun
many years after its release is um not something that i understood at the time
more what i know how to plan for that people needs to remember we had we did not sit down
to make a classic computer game nobody ever gave it a thought monkey island wasn't as good as it
was because we set out to make a classic computer game it was as good as it was because everybody
there was incredibly creative everybody there was very hard working and everybody there really
loved to make the best thing they could make the best way they could possibly make it no matter
what it was whether it was lunch we just thought we were making a computer game and making the best
game we could make because that was fun for us and when it was over i don't think we gave the
game another thought i did not discover that monkey island had become a classic game until
2005 i went on doing i went on to develop these techniques with color cycling and
palette shifting and things that made me literally the only guy in the world who could do those things
with vga 256 color eight bit art and i was beating away potential employers with a stick and you
know one of the eight guys for a very short time and then at the end of the 90s they they
came out with 3d cad rendered art and within a year or two everything i was famous for doing
was irrelevant i mean i suddenly i went from being one of the most sought after computer
game artists in the country to having no work for years at all and went on to other things
i assumed that my career in computer gaming art was over and since my career had always been
about art not about computer gaming it honestly i mean financially it was a catastrophe for me
but in every other way it didn't bother me all that much i just went on to do other things and
assumed that was the end of things uh and then after a couple years in Omaha i came out to seattle
washington for a on a two-week trip to attend the wedding of some friends there and attend a
science fiction fantasy convention happening in seattle intending to go back to Omaha at the end
of that period of time and on my last night in town i called an old friend from the computer
gaming industry whom i'd worked for back in my heyday to say hey i'm in seattle uh would you
like to get together for dinner and he said yes would you like to work for me and i said what he
said yeah i'm the head of a division of a pretty large subcontractor doing computer games would you
like i really need you because what i didn't know while i was out of the industry was that handheld
gaming platforms and smartphones were now powerful enough to run what we used to think of as desktop
computer games but not powerful enough to run 3d cad rendered cinematographic console games
and suddenly they needed people who could do the old style 8-bit art and nobody knew how anymore
because everything had been replaced so i started doing this work again all of a sudden and on our
first day at this new company steve was walking me around from cubicle to cubicle introducing me
to all of these by then i was in my late 40s introducing me to all of these 20-something
year old artists pixel artists hi hi this is a new guy working for our company today's his first
day i just want to introduce you his name is mark ferrari and several times these kids would look up
and go because they were kids to me i mean they were 25 years old but to me at that point these were
brush-faced kids so they would look up go you're not the mark ferrari the mark ferrari uh i don't
think so like monkey island i said how the hell do you know about monkey island i mean this was
way back at the beginning of my career i had forgotten about the secret of monkey island
i do you 25 year old kid know about monkey island i grew up playing that game that was one of my
favorite games i can't believe you're working for us this went on and on i mean it was just this
this sort of growing wave of astonishment that the mark ferrari was working for their company now
that was when i found out that secret of monkey island was a classic game
the secret of monkey island was a success story that nobody saw coming even the development team
but it changed the face of adventure games forever becoming a timeless classic with gameplay
and humor still as appealing today as it was in 1990 secret of monkey island is not just a classic
because of the way it looks it's not just a classic because of the way it left from
zakma kraken to you know ega secret of monkey island in addition to that those were games that
were about storytelling beyond their gifts as artists programmer designer and administrator
which were all considerable they were gifted storytellers and the reason these games are
classic more than anything about the scum engine or the look of the art or any of the rest of that
the reason they're classics is because their exercise and storytelling was so good so that
when somebody sat down to play these games they were involved in discovering strange places
meeting interesting people engaging in relationships solving puzzles mysteries discovering it was it
was a giant cavalcade of mental and emotional creative exercise when those games were replaced
by first person shooters all that narrative went away and for years and years all you did then it
was all about autonomic response and dopamine loops it was all about developing muscular and
nervous thumb twitches as you ran down an endless visually interesting but airless and repetitive
hallway kicking punching stabbing blowing up and knifing whatever you encountered along the way
there was often some little story scenario attached at the beginning at the end to frame this
somehow but there was no none of the same kind of exercise it wasn't because those games were too
slick technologically that people got bored with them it wasn't because they were produced after
the innocent age and they were all the same it was because they weren't doing the thing they weren't
doing the thing with your brain and your creativity that adventure games had done before
they weren't storytelling games people don't understand that their entire existence is storytelling
but it is and that once you understand that a whole lot of other things fall into place
in very different ways than they do for people who think it's all about some objective or mechanical
aspect or approach it's the secret of monkey island perhaps that is the true secret of monkey
island thanks for watching
you
