Welcome to Postdoom, regenerative conversations exploring overshoot grief, grounding, and gratitude.
I'm your host, Michael Dowd.
And in this conversation with George Sacacledis, we had in March, late March of 2022.
We covered a whole bunch of topics because I learned of George a couple years ago.
He's a brilliant writer, both fiction and nonfiction.
He has a podcast, George Reads George.
And he actually writes with a deep grounding in and speaks with a deep grounding in a love of life, biology specifically, botany specifically,
but also a critique of civilization and the whole world of profit.
So you'll see that early on we discuss something we don't see quite the same way, but the vast majority we do align on.
And I think he's a real important prophetic voice.
And I hope you enjoy this conversation.
George, I've been looking forward to this for probably two years now.
Since I first discovered you, I think it was on Facebook.
Actually, I think somebody recommended you and then it was like I began reading some of your posts and was like, wow, this is, you know, I actually thought you were younger than you are.
You write with such, well, first of all, you're a good writer and I understand how many languages do you speak, I'm curious.
Just English and Greek.
Yeah, I'm not very talented with languages.
Yeah, I only speak English.
So anyway, what I like to do at the beginning is just ask my, my guests to introduce themselves for anybody who's not read you who's not familiar with you.
And help us get you.
Like, what are you proudest of in terms of your accomplishments?
What are you known for?
What are your passions?
That sort of thing.
Yeah.
Who am I?
So my training is in science.
So I've always been curious and in a sort of scientific and methodical way of understanding nature.
And I've been interested always in biology and all beings, especially plants.
Since I was a kid, I was a bit of a strange kid, kind of always kind of growing plants from seed and just doing things that a normal kid doesn't really do.
So I was a little botanist from the age of five.
I just had a very high, I guess, sensitivity for living things.
I guess I was born with an environmental conscience, if you want to call it that.
And I've, I've seen many plants go extinct in my actual lifetime over in Greece, in northern Greece, where I grew up.
So, you know, I grew up on the beach with lots of sunshine and natural environment.
And my, my parents would take me up to, to the mountain where there was a lot of wild nature and rare kind of plants and species that I would kind of look up on books.
And I then, you know, life became busy.
I grew up, I got three degrees and, you know, got in the system and then started working in the corporate world and life got really serious and very kind of.
What were your degrees?
Chemistry, food, microbiology and plant molecular biology.
So still in the biology world kind of on the edge of biology, but from the very, from a very, I guess, human centered perspective of, you know, what plant can we genetically engineer next?
How are we going to turn this plant into a food?
You know, what's, what's in it for us?
You know, it was very, very industrial, especially when you go to the food, food chemistry and food, food science side of things, you kind of start realizing how artificial our food is.
Yes.
So I studied all that because deep down I could see a connection because I wanted to explore the connection, my connection, my understanding of the physical and the biological world that surrounds me and that is the basis of all life.
And like I said, it just, you know, I became another corporate person, you know, helping different companies increase their profit, profit margin.
And then I had a really, I guess it was a wake up call.
I had a difficult experience in a company with lots of working in a very toxic environment with lots of bullying and backstabbing and I kind of woke up after that realizing how toxic our entire civilization is.
Everything is done for profit. Everything is done for power. And we try to bully each other and bully nature.
All for the benefit of the profit of not just the corporation, our entire society is built on profit, is built on money, is built on exploitation, because exploitation is necessary for profit.
And, you know, I always say that, you know, human rights and nature are the enemy of profit.
Hold on a second. Yeah, human rights and nature are the enemy of profit. Absolutely. I like that. I'm always alerted to memes, things that are tight, concise, and that communicate something worldview significance.
I like that. Thank you.
Profit, I mean profit, and this is how capitalism began when it began to take off, really. It was through slavery. It was through the more efficient, fast and upscaled destruction of nature, which hasn't really changed in principle, even when there was just bands and tribes of us going through the savannah.
We were still using up things without realizing that, hey, you know, these animals, if we kill all of them, there isn't going to be a flock for next year. And there wasn't. We made them extinct even back then.
So we've been doing it since the beginning of time. This is another thing that I think lots of environmentalists sort of try to challenge. No, no, no, we used to be this really benign animal.
No, we just didn't have the guns and the manufacturing, processing technology back then to have such a huge impact on the world. And of course, there wasn't 8 billion of us on the planet.
Right.
So I became a writer. I became a disillusioned human being questioning my purpose on this world as the only species out of the 8 million species on this planet who offers nothing to Earth, if you think about it.
We are the only species that has nothing to offer to this planet. I know it's a very harsh reality, but since we are not part of an ecosystem anymore, we are more of a parasite.
So we need the ecosystem, but we don't give something back to that ecosystem. We are actually the only species that Earth would not miss.
Yeah, I agree with everything with the one caveat that one of the things that I've spent a lot of time studying in the last nine years, especially, but you know, my wife's most significant mentor who was a dear friend and mentor.
We stayed at his house a number of times. Paul Martin, who's, of course, the father of the over hill, overkill hypothesis. And, you know, my wife even led a song at his memorial service, bring back the elephants.
And I think Paul would, I think I can confidently claim that Paul would be turning over in his grave if he thought that his, his theory which is now accepted as fact widely, in terms of human overkill of the of the megafauna was being used to support the idea that that humans are incapable of living in
a place without the destroying the place. So one of the things that one of one of the places where we could lean into because I think we have a different understanding but I don't want to really spend a lot of time on this call is I really want you to share all your stuff, but I just wanted to mention that that.
For example,
this book here, tending the tiles back we're tending the wild.
About 95% of human history in terms of cultures that lived with an eye thou relationship to the living world, treating the living world as a greater thou not a lesser it basically a kin centric understanding.
They knew that they.
If they were migrating, they always wiped out the big mammals whenever they whenever humans show up with a spear or any kind of ability to kill at a distance.
The big mammals go out. But once that occurs and they actually become native to place they can live and did live for thousands of years without destroying the place, which is why the taboos are set up.
Unfortunately, once human beings started mining metals and competing, they all got wiped out and so I fully agree with you that that virtually all human beings and all societies now play no positive role but there is a long tradition of humans not just tending
the wild, which is the title of this book, but actually making it by paying attention, making it more fecund more, more rich and diverse, not just for humans.
So that's something I can meet you halfway.
Because it is true that the more our civilization becomes advanced, the more we don't even know what a tree even looks like the less we're able to appreciate it.
People who were surrounded by nature, every minute, every hour, they had developed almost a an unspoken connection.
And yeah, yeah, I actually have not as much because I'm part of this right, of course, right.
Yeah, I mean, I would never use the word advanced for our civilization or our technology. I mean one of the things that always drives me crazy when I see astronomy magazine say something like you know, are we alone.
The implications are we the only advanced consciousness in the universe and to define ecocidal consciousness consciousness that's all about taking from nature exuding waste and thinking that human well being and well, you know and wealth and
progress are one way.
That's actually insane from a from a earth systems perspective so I refuse to grant the word advanced for that.
In any case, I want to come back to your story.
What I always say is, however many innovations we make, however many planets, we go to, however many solar systems we conquer, we will still bomb the children in Ukraine.
We still will, even then, we will be bombing the children.
Do you actually believe that we'll get off the I mean what I'm curious what is your view of, let me back up.
Okay, so the time.
I don't think it's going to happen.
Yeah, okay, okay, good.
Because, because one of the things that I want to well actually at first just just finish like in five minutes just give people that you know your books mentioned mentioned some of your things and then we'll come back to your story in terms of how you grew up and how you came to your current
worldview but I want people to, to just understand, you know, what you now do and are known for you haven't touched on that yet.
Sorry, I was avoiding it.
In a nutshell, I am a writer.
I write mostly essays around the collection of toxic crises of humanity, not just climate change, but you know, it is a whole syndrome of climate change, burnout, climate justice, exploitation,
extinction, the six max extinction, it is all very much connected.
And sometimes I go into poetry, so there's books out there.
There are poetry collections and I've recently written a climate fiction book actually which I never thought I would do.
So check that out, it's called The New Earth, The Apocalypse Locusts.
It's about a bunch of scientists that come across a gene that's a very ancient gene that goes back to the origin of life and they end up finding some explanation for why we are where we are and anyway.
Okay.
So that, that's mean and nutshell.
Okay, cool. Well, I'm sure there's a hell of a lot more. I already know that just from exploring your website.
But I would love to know, okay, first of all, I'm just curious, this is just, you know, personal curiosity, are you first born only child last born like where are you in the birth order.
I'm an older sister.
Yeah, yeah.
And, and you were born in like the early mid 70s.
Yeah, mid 70s. Yeah.
So how, what was your worldview as a child growing up in Greece.
And then how did you come to the world view that you now have and were there any major crises or mentors or books or, you know, like, a little bit about your trajectory from how you understood things growing up.
Any big events that then have gotten to where you are now and how you hold the nature of our predicament and then the nature, you know, how you, how you view the future.
So I grew up as a normal kid, in a way, I had everything at my disposal, my, my, I had both my parents, I had my education.
I ended up going to university. I always had a certain sensitivity.
My mother always called me a sensitive kid. I guess that was the first indication that I was an empath.
I could feel not just people, but I could feel nature, you know, when somebody stepped on a, on a flower, I would hurt, you know, it was just for me.
It was just something that I knew I was different from other people in that respect, other humans.
But for quite a long time, I ignored it. I tried to be normal.
I tried to be a person that is ambitious and aggressive about their career, a person who is studying biology and plants and animals, but studies them for human exploitation to go into a corporate job.
Not to protect the environment. I was in denial in many ways of, of who I am.
And then events in my life around my, my forties mostly.
And my, I guess, perhaps the biggest turning point for me, funnily enough, was the moving convenient truth by Al Gore.
I think that we're talking 2007. I think for me, it was, it was the moment because I'm a scientist.
So just looking at the data, especially the famous chart where he superimposes CO2 over how many million years and the temperature and it actually matches.
To me, that is just an iconic moment.
Yes.
Did that. And it literally sent shivers down my spine when I saw that.
Yeah.
So after that, after, I guess, 2007, I kept sort of going back and forth, you know, still being very busy with my career and being, you know, a very selfish human.
Until I realized that I couldn't, I couldn't, I couldn't pretend anymore because it had reached me.
It was beginning to eat me. I was spending my time in toxic corporate environments, understanding what the chase for power and profit does to people and to colleagues.
And just being enmeshed into these pointless office games.
And I just, I just kind of put the two and two together how we create these toxic cultures and this toxicity goes to everything around us.
It goes into nature as well.
We exploit each other and we exploit nature so that we can keep building this exploitation machine.
It's just, it's, this is why it's an all encompassing crisis.
It's a human crisis.
It's a nature crisis.
It's a social crisis.
It's going to become an economic crisis because we are, we have gone past the overshoot, right?
And that made me compelled to begin to write because it was my, my therapy.
I think that's how many writers start to me had to tell my story, my personal story.
And from then on, I regarded it my, my life's purpose to awaken other people through my writing.
Yeah.
And are you able to, I'm curious, are you able to generate enough income through your writing to sustain yourself?
Or do you have to sort of supplement doing something else?
Absolutely not.
Yeah, I do something else.
So I, I still work for, you know, an employer and the writing, I'm, I'm lucky enough to have free time mostly in the evenings.
And that's when I do a lot of the writing.
Yeah, yeah.
So I'm assuming, I don't want to assume anything because I don't know enough about, I don't know anything about your personal life.
So you're, you're single and don't have kids, which gives a lot of more time to write.
Exactly.
Yeah, sure.
Yeah.
Because when I was 23 years old, I got married and immediately got, I also got pregnant.
So I grew up with kids to the only time I could write my first book, Earth Spirit.
The subtitle was a handbook for nurturing and ecological Christianity.
It's a little 117 page thing.
I wrote it between four and six AM over a period of two months because if I woke up at four, and the kids didn't wake up to usually 630 and Allison.
So it was the only time of the day that I was either not pastoring because I was at that time pastoring a church in New England, or parenting.
That was my soul time to write is between four and six AM.
I lived in New England.
I lived in one of my degrees in Massachusetts.
I lived in Amherst and Northampton for three years.
Oh, sure.
Yeah.
Absolutely loved it.
Yes.
No, I love Western Massachusetts.
I lived, we lived in Granville.
I was pastor of the only church in the town of 1500 people.
So it was like, I was the town person in the old New England sense.
And we would go up to Amherst and Northampton all the time.
I just love the foothills of the Berkshires.
It's just wonderful.
Yeah.
Cool.
So I'm curious, how do you understand our predicament now?
And like when you look out, say two, five, 10 years, what's your sense of things?
Well, our predicament to me is very simple.
I think it's very simple to any one with a science background so far.
I mean, depending on the personality, there are still some scientists that have the denial
sort of personality that a lot of us have that we're born with the survival technique to deny reality.
It's a fantastic mechanism that the human brain has to deny reality and to create its own reality.
Other animals can't really do that.
But I think for someone who is pragmatic and realistic about numbers and evidence, it's very clear that I think over
I think overshoot is the word that really very in a very cold and quantitative way defines where we are.
I'm a passionate anti-natalist.
I believe that it's a function of, you know, a population is the biggest culprit because, you know, Earth just can't feed us all.
And we can't decrease our consumption and our emission per capita to such a spectacular degree that we can even sustain the current population.
And that gets me in trouble.
So I'm very, very much alone in that sense.
And to your question about the two to five years, I don't get hung up on like, when is it going to happen?
I think what's important is that it's going to happen soon and it's happening already.
So yeah, that's my sense is that we're already well into overshoot and we're well into the collapse of the bio.
I mean, we're 200 years into the collapse of the biosphere, the health of the systems that we depend upon.
And so a couple of decades at least into the collapse of Holocene stability in terms of the climate and civilizational contraction and collapse too.
It's just that most people have not studied the rise and fall of civilization so they don't understand that collapse isn't like a building falling down.
It's a step by step process and, you know, that often takes many, many decades.
I absolutely love your video on I think what was it, the 81 or 80s something civilizations that have collapsed.
That is absolutely brilliant. I enjoyed watching that and it does bring it to life.
Yeah, it has happened 80 times before.
You know, we're not crazy doomers here.
But none of us or almost none of us grew up in either families or churches or synagogues or mosques or schools where we were taught that so you know we're taught this myth of perpetual progress.
And so we think of civilization singularly you know there was the hunter gatherers and Neolithic and then you got civilization and now you've got us and aren't we the most advanced creatures and I didn't learn anything about dozens and dozens of previous civilizations and the patterns.
I didn't learn anything stuff.
One thing that trips people is that they falsely connect the progress of technology.
Yes, seems pretty linear or even exponential to an expectation that this means that everything else is going to be more positive, better.
And which is not true.
Right from an ecological perspective that's a delusion but most of us don't have an ecological education.
Yeah, ecological education is actually really important if if any of us if all of us each of us took one ecology course.
And if we had courses in in university called you know, extinction ecology.
Or, you know, I just in my recent book in my fiction book I've made up this university of the future and all the courses in the university are like, you know, collapse biology extinction ecology one on one, you know, advanced principles of ecological apocalypse.
Because that's that's all they had to study.
Yes.
20 years from now.
Right.
You know, things like, you know, people don't know that there were flocks as as big as massive clouds of passenger engines flying over the United States, that the American chestnut tree there were something like 12 billion of them.
And it was an absolutely massive tree that even humans, entire human communities depended on those chestnuts which were the most sweet chestnuts that the world has ever seen.
You know, our human memory is as as brief as our lifetime.
And even in my lifetime, I am recognizing things like, you know, there's no insects on my windscreen anymore when I'm driving.
You know, it's, it has really accelerated so much.
Yes.
And the more it does, the more we're actually preoccupied with other things.
Yes.
So things are really becoming, I think the worst scenario is actually coming that sort of Mad Max scenario.
Now we have this war.
And you can, I mean, you can argue that all of this is a result of overshoots.
In my opinion, the pandemic was a result.
We got in contact with more wild animals because of our exploitation of nature.
And because the increase in temperature also, you know, increases the expanse that the habitat of organisms.
Many scientists have made this point.
So this overshoot has caused climate change, has caused plague.
You can say it has caused the war in Syria.
A lot of people are now admitting that Syria was because of climate change.
And, you know, conflict unfortunately brings more conflicts and the more resources dwindle, the more humans will murder each other for the resources that are left.
And I'll forbid we're not going to run out of wheat in the next three months because of the war in Ukraine and Russia.
I think inflation is really interesting because inflation now is, in my opinion, going to enter a permanent state.
And it is a measure of how dear the price of everything becomes.
It's a principle again of overshoot.
It's the same curve that you see when you're growing bacteria.
When I was doing that in university, when the weeds are top of the curve, all the bacteria go, wait, there's no food.
So they start shutting down and they start eating each other and all kinds of different things happen.
We are an organism just like that.
Yes, exactly.
No, I'm with you 100% on all that.
I mean, that's why I found William Catten's book overshoot to be so helpful and insightful because it helped me realize that population pressure is such a unseen dynamic that actually affects everything and you add that to his understanding of the
difference between a time of carrying capacity surplus and then a time of carrying capacity deficit and the social dynamics is just absolutely huge.
It is no different from a Petri dish.
There is a finite amount of food inside the Petri dish.
So, yeah, once the population goes over.
Yeah.
Well, George, I'm curious.
Well, who have been the authors or the people who you feel that have either been mentors for you or that you've really greatly appreciated their, their impact on your intellectual or, you know, your life.
That's one question and then what do you do? How do you think or feel like what practices or exercises or whatever.
Do you make use of to help you wake up each day excited to be alive and to contribute the ways you can that you know what what's in your toolbox for not just coping but doing even better than that.
I'm always interested in what have been the influences on people in terms of their mentors or teachers or schools of thought or whatever, but also in terms of what helps them stay mostly saying mostly inspired mostly on purpose, mostly
Rather than just utterly depressed or freaked out or whatever. So those are two different questions would love to hear.
Um, my influences are quite diverse. There's too many too many authors to to mention. I think, for me, people that have been involved in directly involved in activism have always inspired me.
Extinction Rebellion has been a huge inspiration for me.
You know, from George Mombio, you know, the whole team at Extinction Rebellion, they had a way of illustrating the urgency.
And yeah, and you mentioned before we started recording this, you mentioned that you live part time in London and part time in Greece.
Yeah, so I don't know if you can see it. Oh yeah, sapiens. Yeah, sapiens. Absolutely love it. You know, people who are able to
who are brave enough to
to show us the mirror so that we can see the human that we really are and the human that we could be
the potential that we have to to be a different a different human.
Um, so it's come really from different places and most of most of the, I guess, authors that I've been in all of our people that are actually not very known.
Some of them are more active in Facebook. Some of them are quite
like Gabramate, for example, you know, he's, he's a treatise on the way that we process trauma and how we push it further inside of us.
And then it comes out in a very, very destructive way.
So, you know, our relationship with trauma by Gabramate, our relationship with death, which is also very toxic because we have a
we have this sort of and I think what's the name of the guy, something Solomon.
Oh, oh, yes.
I forget his first name. Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I've watched a lot of his stuff.
It begins with an S something Solomon.
Yeah, I know you're talking about.
He is brilliant because these people are not talking about environment, they're going much deeper.
They're going back to the human because this is a human caused crisis and it's a crisis of the human souls.
It's about our relationship with trauma, our relationship and how we process death, which we are terrified of.
And in our, in our search, in our attempt to win over death and becoming mortal, we are killing everything around us.
Now, consumption is actually a death cult.
Yes, it is. Absolutely.
Because consumption and capitalism, the principle of capitalism is to put a price tag on everything and to put an expiration date on everything.
So capitalism, the principle of capitalism is to kill everything, even if it's something like a fridge that is supposed to be made to last decade.
We put obsolescence in it as an industrial design technique so that it breaks down and we have to buy a new, you know, everything, you know, from from milk to electronics, everything is made to die.
And this is a cult that then carries on to other things, you know, even, you know, employees, they are expendable.
Everything is expendable and everything can be basically thrown out, not recycled thrown out.
The invention of garbage, which is just makes no sense on this planet.
What is garbage?
But there is no such thing as garbage on earth.
Everything ends up somewhere.
There is, there is before humans came, there wasn't a single item on this planet that could be classified as there's no use for it.
Yeah, now we have things like radioactivity and plastic.
So we've actually created materials that there is no use for.
Well, and even worse than that, that continue to persist as toxic for, you know, geological time scales.
Oh, it's Sheldon Solomon.
Yeah, Sheldon Solomon.
Yes, yes, yes.
Love the guy.
Yeah, me too.
Are you familiar with Stephen Jenkins and by any chance.
I'll send you link because he's one of my favorites up there with Sheldon Solomon.
I mean, Stephen Jenkins is just amazing.
He's a death worker and sort of has a whole.
There was a documentary an hour and 10 minute documentary done on him in Canada, the Canadian film board is called grief walker.
And he brings sort of a science based and and ecologically oriented understanding of death and the rhythms and cycles of nature. It's just really brilliant stuff. It's great stuff.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, so who are some of the other people that you either consider colleagues that you really respect and admire and sort of feel aligned with or just, you know, I'm trying to get a sense of your own sense of your, your, your in group in terms of the people who think
and feel and that you get inspired by and that you in turn are an inspiration to.
I wouldn't say I have a tribe.
I'm kind of a, I'm kind of a loner in many ways.
My personality is what is it?
What am I INFJ, which is just 1% of the population.
We are complete loners.
We are very much big picture.
We alternate between different states.
We have a very kind of split personality almost in a way.
But that also allows us to be very objective and to lean on many different.
I like anyone who is from from the most sort of like academic and eloquent sort of environmentalist like for example take Naomi Klein, who is in the circuit of academics to people who are complete doomers.
I'm going to swear I'm going to tell it like it is.
I don't know if Chris Hedges, for example, might be in that category, but I'm, I'm, and I alternate also between these worlds.
So as long as someone has an honest voice, they are, they are always good in my book and someone who speaks the language of nature because I, I, this is, this is to a very big level.
What I try to do is I try to shine the light back on humans being like, you know, it's not the only species on this planet.
There's eight million species and they actually deserve the same rights as you.
So humans might have houses, passports, permits to live in America, UK, Greece.
Plants and animals are not given residence rights, passports.
They have the right to life.
They have the right to well being.
Right.
And, you know, we have this, you know, we have what we call it.
I used to be in Amnesty International.
I used to head that up in, in when I was a college student.
And we always weren't really defended, you know, the Human Rights Act.
And I feel like, well, we need one for plants and animals.
Yes, I couldn't, I could not agree more about my mentor.
One of my great mentors in addition to William Catton was Thomas Berry.
And he regularly spoke about, you know, that democracies are a conspiracy against the natural world, because they give all rights and privileges to individuals and corporations to basically do what they want.
Where what we need is a biocracy where the voices and the presence and the beings of the living world also are represented in the systems of jurisprudence and the systems of governance.
Yeah, we are really, I mean, it's sad that it looks like the world is going to end without us actually even coming close to realizing the bias of being human centric.
And the narcissism that we have in terms of thinking that we are intelligent and that, you know, a cat is not intelligent because it cannot verbalize or it cannot make emotional faces.
You know, because you know how cats are just very kind of, but, you know, they just don't speak your language.
Exactly.
They have other ways, you know, go wild with their tail.
They have, you know, we put an octopus in a little cage with treats and see if it's going to be able to find the way to unlock the...
You know, we think of intelligence as a way of getting yourself out of trouble.
Right.
Being able to find food and being able to overcome obstacles.
What about emotional intelligence?
Right.
What about the intelligence to be able to be aware of your surroundings and your connection to everything?
Yes.
I like, I know this is going to sound cheesy, but I love that movie Avatar.
Oh, yes.
Because the message is about this connection, this thread that runs through all life.
That is this common language, almost like a neural network.
And Earth does have this.
We have this on Earth.
And we've, obviously we've burned out that connection in our mind because we are now, you know, we're all little laboratory animals living in these houses with electricity and, you know, buttons everywhere and everything.
It's just like, you open the fridge and there's everything in there.
You don't even know where it came from.
Right.
Yeah.
Sorry, I'm just babbling.
To my mind, defining intelligence in any way that isn't connected to ongoing a reciprocal relationship with the living world where you are benefited by the living world, the biosphere, and where you in whatever ways contribute, you know, rather than just using.
And that's what we've done.
We confuse intelligence with processing power.
Yes.
Yes, exactly.
As if we are computers.
And I mean, this is the tragedy of humanity that we suddenly, at some point in evolution, developed this brain.
You know, our brain size suddenly exploded.
And even to this day, we still don't know how to use this brain.
It's like you gave the kids suddenly a mega computer, a quantum computer.
You moved that kid from a tiny little, you know, disk suddenly to make a computer and it's now able to send nuclear missiles to wherever it wants.
You know, we are still after creating all this civilization, we're still not able to harness and control this brain, which can do, of course, all these great things because it's a huge brain, but it is very selfish.
Exactly.
The way that we've done has been for us. We have no actually given anything back how we've done it. Yeah.
Well, yeah, the we is one that I might challenged only because one of the main things that I've studied the last nine years is the difference between eco-centric cultures and anthropocentric cultures.
And that measure wealth and well being in terms of how well is the soil doing decade by decade, how well the forest doing decade by decade, how well the other species doing decade by decade, that that's the measure of wealth and well being, and that we as a culture only survive
and thrive when we attend to that first that's what I call eco-centrism or life-centered versus human centered or anthropocentric.
It seems to me every anthropocentric civilization that I know of, I don't know of a single counter example that hasn't gone into overshoot unless like a volcano wiped them out or something.
And so I did find the Teddy Goldsmith quote though so he says again this is Edward Goldsmith who was the founder and editor of the Ecologist magazine for close to 40 years.
It may not be irrelevant to note that even very modest forms of life like earthworms, dung beetles and fiddler crabs have no trouble identifying the real problems that they must deal with if they're to survive.
So, calling our kind of intelligence, the most advanced is where I sometimes bristle not that you haven't done that.
I was five minutes last week just looking at this worm that had emerged bravely from a hole in the concrete.
And I could tell that it was completely blind, but its body was just swerving and the thing could probably sense different wavelengths or smell things.
You could see that it was sensing the whole world around it.
Yes.
Yeah, no, that's great.
Well, George, I want to begin winding this down but I want to come back to the question what helps you on a day by day week by week basis like what inspires you what supports you.
Do you have any practices, exercises like what is it that allows you to know what you know, and yet to be engaged I mean I see you.
In fact, when I first encountered you I saw you sort of in an archetypal pattern of more of a shaman which is more the sort of the solitary the person the big picture and that sort of thing.
But how do you know very far.
I, my, I guess my, I don't know what we want to call it my coping mechanism let's call it coping mechanism I mean you know the world.
I've, especially in the last few years, and I would say the pandemic sort of accelerated that and in a way enabled it.
It led an almost monastic life.
And it is unbelievably relaxing.
Because this is the problem this is why we're all asleep, because we are too busy to saturate it with, you know, from social media to going from this meeting to that meeting jumping on this train on that car.
Essentially, my, my, I guess my coping mechanism is just removing things from my life, whether they are physical things.
So I'm an actual minimalist.
I live in a flat with no pictures on the walls.
I've got two plates in the kitchen.
I just love this.
You cherish thing, you know, I eat soup from the same cup where I make my coffee and I absolutely love it because everything then becomes so special.
So, and this allows me to, to keep things simple so that my, I guess my never sleeping brain is able to feel inspired and to find, find meaning in a way that's free of distractions and the manipulations of, you know, Netflix and, you know, all of this and all of that.
And I do struggle even, I mean, I know that a lot of my fans are on Facebook and they message me and I do struggle to have conversations with them.
But it is, it is still a good medium because people send me amazing information or amazing quotes and my, my fans write better than me.
I swear to God, some of them really need to start writing because they just send you the most amazing messages.
Yeah, the big thing that I've done the last eight four months. I've started doing these, what I call post doom no gloom zoom calls twice a week. So on here in the East Coast United States time.
It's on Wednesday nights, 830 and then, and then Saturdays at 1pm. And we get 3035 people on every call and it's basically just a, just a space, a virtual space for two hours, where people can be authentic about, you know, their understanding
of collapse, their understanding of overshoot their understanding of abrupt climate change their understanding of whatever challenges they're dealing with in there because people are all over the world.
You know, most people are in North America. But, but a lot of people feel lonely there's not a lot of people they can talk to I mean they don't have the kind of internet Facebook community or Facebook, you know connections that that that you and I have.
And so they just, they can't talk sometimes they can't talk to their spouse, or the people closest to them. And so this is a safe space to be authentic about things like collapse that they can talk to, and not feel like they're, you know, pariah or you know,
stay away don't talk to me about that stuff. So.
Well, no, go ahead.
I was just going to say, I think that's a wonderful idea and I think it also helps to keep things positive in the sense that what I've observed about myself is I did go through a big depression.
And then I realized that it was almost a bit selfish because I was grieving about my life and humanity, and the nature that was attached to humanity, you know the world that we have now.
But Earth will continue without us and this is something to actually look forward to.
Yes, well and that takes an ecocentric worldview that takes a larger than human worldview to relax into that and to trust the process I mean I evolution and ecology or my sort of sacred disciplines I mean I've got a little credo that I've sometimes used where I say reality is my God.
Evidence is my scripture.
The epoch of evolution is my creation story.
Ecology is my theology.
My integrity is my spiritual path and promoting accountability to the future is my mission.
And that's including even if we go go, not if but when we go extinct as a species, however soon or far that is and I think it's probably pretty likely it'll be soon.
My wife for example is one of the North America's leading point people in terms of assisting trees in migrating faster than any other animal can move their seeds it's just the field of assisted migration and so that gives her life joy I mean all she's doing is increasing the odds of some
species of trees of moving forward but I think that that's something that we humans can do that's bigger than us.
We can cap the nukes or at least we can try to do what we can to prevent, you know, dozens and dozens of nuclear meltdowns you know there are a few things that we can do.
Even just building topsoil you know you might help some worm or some, you know species of whatever survive on your little plot of land so eco centric actions that can nourish us in the process, and that are pro future regardless of whether we survive or not.
I think that's that's the stuff that that's brilliant. That's yes, this is such a healthy attitude it does take bravery it does take a leap of faith to reach that element but to reach that level but that is absolutely.
Yeah, brilliant.
Yeah, thank you.
Well George anything you'd like to say to bring this conversation to completion and then where do people go to get your stuff and read more about you and from you.
I'd like to reiterate what you said that you know you guys watching you are not alone.
You are not alone. There are millions of us and there's going to be even more of us. There's millions more each day. I think you can check me out on Twitter.
I babble all day.
99 black balloons with one L check out my website.
Oh, my blogs are in there.
My, my books are on the evil capitalist website Amazon. Best I could do.
Yeah, Google me.
Yes, good. Thanks. And I'll put that in the, in the description box of the YouTube video as well.
George blessings on you brother thank you for the work you do thank you for your heart thank you're bringing together sort of science the best of the scientific tradition with this deep ecological.
Again, we need both. Yes, both the heart and the evidence for more information about this project. Go to post doom.com.
