Hello everybody, this is Serge Rosemondric and I'm going to demonstrate a number of features of jessesh 7.5.5.
The most powerful new feature is in fact an improvement of an existing feature.
It's an improvement of the search engine in jessesh.
When you use jessesh you can make search in a folder in which you can define a folder and you will search in jessesh files which are in this folder.
So I'm going for example to try a search in the jessesh folder itself.
Okay so I'm searching in the jessesh folder and now you can search for instance this was already possible for a sequence of glyphs say this
and it will display all the text which contains those glyphs.
But something more interesting is that sometimes you want to search for word and you don't know the exact autography of the word.
So suppose you want text about the visor and so you know there will be the char sign and normally a t after that but maybe the t will be separated from the char sign by another sign.
So what you can do is add a skip.
A skip represents a number of glyphs, an arbitrary number of glyphs between two glyphs.
So if I type this and another skip and this a1 then I'm going to look at text which contains the char sign then any number of glyphs then the t sign, then any number of glyphs then the a1 sign.
If I do that I will get way too many results because the signs can be separated by any number of signs so you can very easily have the char sign at the beginning of a text and then much later on a t.
So what you can do now and which didn't work very well before is that you can give us set a value to max skip lengths which is going to say how many signs this star can represent.
Zero means in fact any number of signs.
If I choose for instance two which is very often a good value then both stars will represent at most two signs.
And then I can start my search and you see that I find another number of texts.
If I click on them it will open a jessish window and I get a nice visor here and with a by the way z1 sign between the t and the a1 and if I click on this one I will get another spelling from the teaching
of tarotep without the z1.
Okay so this is very nice.
This is the new stuff in 7.5.5.
I'm going to say a word or two about existing features you may not know.
Suppose you want to look for the particle poo and you know that it might be written both with the quail chick or this sign so what you want to do is to do one search for both of them.
And of course you could do both search one after the other but you want to do only one search and what you can use is those brackets.
When you put signs between brackets like this in the search it will search for one of those signs so this will search for a p and then one of those two signs.
So if I start the search I've got quite a few answers and if I look at the values then I've got a poo here.
And if I look at stillars for instance.
Okay if I look at stillars I will get probably something, okay.
Okay stillars at stillars.
If I look at stillars I will get something with the quail chick here.
Okay that's it.
There is something which might be a powerful system but which will need just as to evolve a lot about the sign description which is the use of variants.
You can search for variant signs so if you do this normally you will probably search for both poo with the quail chick and poo with the rope.
So for instance here is one example.
The problem is that it doesn't always work very well for instance because the notion of variants I use is very extensive so for instance if you look at this sign, the just sign, if you ask for its variants you will get those variants.
Some of them are actual Bonafide variants of the just signs and others are simply because they look like the just sign.
They might not be real variants of it and if you click multiple times on variants you will get variants of variants and for instance this one is also an oak so you will get the oak sign.
And if you do this until there are no more variants you will get for instance basically all birds and quite a few signs which are very removed from the first sign.
So it's a notion of variants which is not precise enough for our purpose so this basically is not very useful.
You can try it but the current results won't be very good.
It's supposed to evolve but the data itself in the just sign list is not currently up to what it should be for having meaningful and useful results there.
Other new functions of this new j sesh system, there is a system to add new lines in a very efficient way.
So basically you can edit line numbers in j sesh, for instance I'm going to add a line number here and say for instance it's x plus 1.
Obviously it should be 1 but I use x plus 1 just to demonstrate the new system.
And once you have done this and you want to insert a new number for a new line you can use insert next line number and there is a shortcut for it.
And the advantage is that it will take the last number in the previous slide, you have typed and increase it.
So here for instance I can add line numbers as much as I want.
Obviously when you change your page number for instance you have to type again the whole number but it's a very very nice system when you want to add line numbers for instance for all your lines in the j sesh text.
A new function also which you will like is that at least it has been missing from day one of j sesh.
So something like 14 years after I've finally taken the time to add a proper enclosure drawing.
So I will probably add at a later date a round enclosure but now there is square enclosure and I find it might be useful and it covers the whole manual decodage now.
So this is it for the j sesh itself. There are a number of new export functions.
So suppose you want to use the new unicode system for glyphs in another software.
For instance you have a database and you want to use glyphs for unicode glyphs there.
Then you have a copy to unicode copy as simple unicode text and you paste and there you have unicode glyphs.
You see this is not the j sesh glyphs it's unicode text.
You have also normally but it will probably be more problematic.
A copy has unicode 12 which will add between the glyphs a number of formatting characters but it depends on the font.
Not all fonts will support those characters.
So the last new thing is that you might know there is at last a code in unicode for the egyptological yard.
So basically j sesh proposed two systems for the egyptological yard because there were a number of systems in unicode for this but none of them was fully usable.
And now there is a specific code for egyptological yard so you can check it and if your text font uses this code you can use it.
Currently the most notable font with the unicode yard is atina unicode.
Hopefully a number of other systems will include this sign.
Ok that's all for this demonstration of the new features of j sesh.
Thank you for listening and goodbye.
