Hello everyone and welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll.
Here's a classic question. What is the use of education? What is the value of being educated?
I'm thinking particularly here of post-secondary, post-high school education, college university,
even graduate school and so on. Why do this? Why get that much schooling into you?
There are lofty answers to this question about becoming a more well-rounded human being,
understanding the human condition, picking up reasoning skills and learning skills.
There's also socialization issues, meeting people, getting to know the world in a certain way.
That's absolutely an important function of going to college. But there's also a lot of down-to-earth
practical issues. You're being trained perhaps for a trade, for a job to become employable.
That's an absolutely valid reason to get an education. In the modern world, especially,
we point toward science and technology as skills or fields for which we would like it
if people had good training in these fields. We invent the acronym of STEM, science, technology,
engineering and mathematics. This is government speak or education speak for the kinds of
sciencey, techy kinds of areas that both governments and also employers place a lot of emphasis on.
If you're not within academia right now, you might not know that there's a lot of hand-wringing
and angst about the decline of the humanities and the more classic parts of the broad-based
humanistic education that we purport to care about and too much emphasis maybe is being put on
science degrees and related areas. But there are good reasons, economic reasons. You want
people to get a good job that's able to pay them and you give them a fulfilling life after
college, so maybe it's fine to have a bunch of people specializing in STEM areas. Today's guest
is John Screntany. He's a sociologist at UC San Diego and actually someone I've known for a long
time. We went to graduate school at the same time together and used to play basketball together,
as you'll find out if you hang out for the very end here. But he's written an interesting book
called Wasted Education, How We Fail Our Graduates in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math.
The idea behind John's book is, sure, employers and governments want a healthy and rapidly growing
scientifically and technologically educated workforce. But does that mean that once created,
that workforce is actually fulfilled? Are they happy? Do you get a science degree and are you
therefore able to get a good job that keeps you having a good kind of life? And the answer,
not always certainly, but in a growing number of cases the answer is no. So it's a very interesting
argument. I mean, we have to say over and over again and John will say very explicitly in the
podcast, of course, certain individuals get very rewarding careers out of science education,
but we also have to take into account those that don't. And we're not primarily talking here about
people who go into academia or even want to go into academia. We're talking about tech workers,
which is a huge fraction of the people who go from STEM degrees into the workforce. They work for
computing, technology, software, engineering kind of corporations. And it can be a tough
road to hoe, as a matter of fact. For one thing, novelty and innovation is, of course, valued.
It turns out, for various reasons that we'll discuss, that it can be easier to just get rid of
your workers and hire newer, younger ones, rather than retraining the existing workers,
the new workers already have the skills, right? They just learn them, they're fresh in their minds,
they're cheaper, and then a decade or two later, they can be fired and they can be replaced.
It might not actually be a sustainable way to think about our workforce or what it means to be a
scientist or what it means for colleges and universities to do their students a good service
by providing them with an education. Harder to come up with solutions to this issue than to
diagnose it. Certainly, very deep features of capitalism and our economic and political system
are involved here, but it's an important issue to highlight one way or the other. We need to know
what we're doing when we're training people in these different areas that I personally value
very much, but we have to be explicit, we have to be conscious of what's happening. We can't just
say, oh, science is good, therefore do it. We have to look into what happens when we try to do that.
So I think it's not exactly what we usually talk about here on Linescape, but sociology.
It's an important part of the liberal arts spectrum. So let's go.
Don Scrantini, welcome to the Linescape podcast.
Happy to be here. I'm excited to talk to you, Sean.
You know, since we're old friends, I thought I would start you off with a couple of soft balls
to get the ball rolling here, as it were. So what is this STEM acronym and why is it a terrible
acronym? Actually, compared to the alternatives, it's pretty awesome. So do you prefer STEM over
SMET? I prefer not using an acronym. Oh, okay. Well, I got to tell you, the government has
been searching for an acronym for quite a while. And that's because they've been trying to count
people in these fields for quite a while, really, since the Cold War. In the book, I include a
New York Times story in which there's this panicky headline in the New York Times
about how the United States is falling behind the Soviet Union in the number of technicians.
Would you prefer that? Probably not. Probably not. They were talking about scientists and
engineers. The National Science Foundation has scientists and engineers, or S and E, S ampersand
E. So not exactly that euphonious, one might say. But it appears so often in the educational context
and like no one majors in technology. That's not a thing, right? You major in science,
engineering, or math. They're very different from each other. So I don't like lumping them
together. So I kind of like using words rather than acronyms. Yeah. Yeah. So the technology
I saw a government report that used the acronym SET, Science, Engineering, and Technology. So
people really like technology. Sorry, you might not like that. And then there was some use of
SMET, Science, Math, Engineering, and Technology. And that had a rationale to it where science and
math are the foundations of engineering and technology. So by putting them first, it's
sort of kind of a temporal ordering of what comes first. You do the basic science, you understand
the math, and then you develop the technology. But SMET sounds like not a monopeia, something
unpleasant. Oh my God, a SMET. So it didn't really catch on. And then a Judith Romaly is her name.
She was one of the higher ups at the National Science Foundation. She apparently is the one who
coined the STEM acronym, just changing the order a little bit, making it sound a little bit better.
And then it just took off. I had a graduate student kind of look who's doing research
assistance for me. And she looked at the rise of the STEM acronym, and it just started to appear in
bills in Congress, and it just took off. And so you may not like STEM, but a lot of other people
like it. It's a much more detailed and serious answer than I was hoping for. So good start.
So we're kind of stuck with it. And what exactly it means, that's a different question. But STEM
seems to have taken off internationally. People use that acronym. They seem to understand when
I talk to them about STEM. So STEM seems to be here to stay. Does it include the social sciences?
That's a good question. The National Science Foundation officially includes social scientists
in its understandings of S&E science and engineering. And then they also talk about STEM.
We could go down a very tedious rabbit hole about some of this. But they, idiosyncratically,
I would say, include social scientists. Because when most of the government policymakers are
talking about STEM, they're not thinking about me. They're thinking about you. They're thinking
about a lot of other folks. And I can explain why that is. And people might protest that
sociologists, economists, demographers can be highly quantitative, political scientists as well,
and really use advanced statistical computational methods. So why aren't they included in STEM?
And I think that that has a lot to do with what the government wants with its
investments in STEM education. And they don't really want more of me. I arguably don't be offended.
They probably don't want more cosmologists either. Experts on general relativity,
they're not saying we need more of those. Give us more of those. They are looking for people to,
first of all, fulfill employers' demands. And these employers have been crying shortages
for quite a while. They want people to innovate. They want people, you know, that technology,
that tea that you were so skeptical of, that's really what they kind of want.
Oh, I know. I think they're riding on my coattails, honestly.
They are. They are. And they have this hope that by cranking out more experts in STEM fields,
they will innovate. And they will create new technologies that will boost American competitiveness
and boost American national security and grow the economy and provide jobs for everybody.
I wrote this book chapter a few years ago in which I kind of traced the history of American
policymakers and what they wanted, I'm using the acronym anachronistically now,
what they wanted STEM workers to do. Obviously, they weren't using the STEM acronym during the
Progressive Era. But during the Progressive Era is really when you saw the government trying to
think about, hey, we've got these experts in these science and engineering fields,
we should deploy their expertise. And so the interesting thing about the Progressive Era
was that they wanted to deploy the existing expertise, if we can use existing in relation
to expertise, what people already knew. And so like Pure Food, the Pure Food Act,
wow, we know why food spoils now. We know how to prevent food from spoiling. We know how to keep
meat safe. Let's keep those, let's deploy that expertise and make sure that we can make food
better. Progressives were real excited about all the new knowledge being generated. And
they wanted to just deploy it as strategically as possible. Then you had a sort of a change
that happened during World War II, which I'm sure you're familiar with, with the Manhattan
Project and developing the nuclear bomb, developing radar. And that was a little bit
different in the sense that the government really wanted to deploy scientific and engineering
expertise to create specific technologies that they really wanted. So they brought together
a lot of experts and said, hey, we want you to develop a system that can detect enemy aircraft,
or hey, we want you to come and develop a system that can produce a weapon that could potentially
end this war, the nuclear bomb. So it was very targeted use of expertise, even though they
didn't yet have the expertise. So you can see we're one step away from the progressive era.
But by the Cold War, we started to get into a phrase that I kind of called it alchemy,
because it suggested this hope that by putting stuff together, something amazing would happen.
It wasn't as rational. And the government really didn't even have an idea of which fields were
going to create the most innovations, or the most innovations that would create the most jobs,
or the innovations that would boost national competitiveness, the most economic competitiveness
I'm talking about here. It was just the sense that by creating more people with STEM educations,
amazing things were going to happen. And we don't know what, but amazing things are going to happen.
Just get them together, kind of like Bell Labs maybe was a little bit like that,
bring them together and amazing things are going to happen. And in this kind of understanding of
STEM education and STEM expertise, there was a lot of hope and faith, kind of a faith. And I like
that use of the word faith. We normally connect that with religion, but it was almost like that.
It was like, wow, these people are going to save us and let's invest in them and let's make them go.
So techno optimism at an early era. Yeah, yeah, that's a phrase that's
bounced around a lot in this. So you've already implicitly answered this question a little bit,
but I'm wondering, since we're going to be talking about STEM education and what happens
to people who get STEM degrees, in what sense is this a job for sociologists to think about? We
haven't had that many sociologists on the show. We had a great talk with Brooke Harrington about
offshore wealth management, but we haven't really gone into enough for the listeners,
who I assume listen to nothing but the Mindscape podcast, to really get an idea about what
sociologists do. So are you doing mainstream sociology or are you kind of branching out
a little bit with this topic? That's a great question. One of the reasons I went into sociology
was that I see it as the big picture social science. I think that economists produce a
lot of great knowledge. I think political scientists produce a lot of great knowledge,
but I tend to think of the knowledge they produce, especially economists, as kind of
looking through the world through a rolled up piece of paper, creating that right now
with my hands here. And you can see something, you can focus on something really clearly,
but you don't necessarily see all the different things that might be connected to that thing that
you're really, really focusing on. So economists can lead us astray sometimes in ways that I think
if sociologists were more inclined to study some of the issues that economists focus on,
they might have provided a little bit of a corrective. So for example,
the world is filled right now with a lot of folks who are upset about free trade and how free trade
produced a lot of economic dislocation, people losing their jobs, people who used to work in
manufacturing, not having those jobs anymore, those jobs have gone abroad. This should have
been obvious. And I think that the economists tend toward, and sorry for any in the audience,
I think they tend toward a kind of really basic sort of utilitarianism. And so they might think,
well, we might lose some manufacturing jobs, but overall we're going to be happier because
you can produce televisions more cheaply in Mexico or China. Now these are going to be cheaper for
us to buy and these workers can move like water, they'll just flow around to the places where
the economic opportunities are and everyone's going to be better off. But what they don't
understand is that people have identities, their identities are often linked to their jobs,
and so they struggle with economic dislocation. So sociologists I think can look at this big
picture, see all these things going on and that's kind of what I love to do. I often think of the
knowledge that I do compared to the knowledge that you do or that you generate. I think of
the kind of science that you do, Sean, is like vertically integrated. Like it's really, really
deep and like if you are focused on a problem of general relativity, I just keep bringing that up
because I know you wrote the textbook on it. But and someone knocks on the door and like,
Sean, we got to talk to you. You lose your concentration, the whole thing falls down
and then you got to get back into it. Whereas the stuff that I do and why it's hard to do this
podcast just to give you a heads up is like horizontally integrated knowledge. It's a lot
of stuff at a more superficial level, but really broad. So I'm trying to understand
investments and education and what employers in software and oil and gas and chemicals and
biopharmaceuticals, like all this stuff is just, it's kind of at a superficial level,
but there's a lot of it. And I love that though. And I think it fits more with my undiagnosed
ADD, you know, that it's easier for me to get back into it. If someone knocks on the door,
because there's a lot of different footholds I can grab on to rather than that really narrow one.
Does that make sense to you when I'm talking about? We did have Herb Gintis on the podcast.
I don't know if you know his work, but it reminds me very much of that, even though he
self identified as an economist, but game theory, evolution, physics, it all came in. And I absolutely
see the appeal of that. That's why I do a podcast rather than just sitting in my office writing
papers. Right, right, right. Exactly. So the sociology, when I looked at this issue, I got
a little pushback from some, some STEM workers themselves, like, who are you? What are you doing?
You're a sociologist. Why are you looking at this? I would like to think I'm the guy who can look at
the big picture here. I can see things that you can't see. I can bring together different,
different ideas, different systems of thought that maybe you're not aware of and use those things to
illuminate social reality in a unique way that actually adds some value that makes a contribution.
All right, well, we'll see over the next hour whether we do that.
Wow, I just realized I put a lot of pressure on myself.
Yeah, I know. You really just set yourself up there.
This better be amazing.
So let's, for people who are not professional sociologists or hang out there with, let's set
the stage. You know, we have people who get degrees in the STEM. And I guess the two questions I
want to ask, you can address them in whatever order is. One, what kinds of jobs do they go into?
Within academia, we love it when people go into academic jobs and we imagine getting a PhD and
becoming a professor, but you and I also know that's a small fraction of all the people who get
degrees in these fields. And the other is, how does that compare to all the other jobs? What is
the fraction of people when they go into jobs? They say, oh, this is a STEM job versus what?
Management, factory jobs? I don't even know what the categories are.
Right, so that's a good question. The government talks about the policymakers in the U.S.
government, I know your audience is international, talks about STEM and non-STEM as a binary.
It's one or the other. And there's a few people who go beyond that, but in general,
they talk about STEM and non-STEM jobs. And they do that because of what I talked about before,
this hope that by putting people into these STEM occupations, the sort of traditional STEM
occupations, software developer, chemist, biologist, things that you knew in high school as science and
engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, that by getting people into those
occupations, these amazing things are going to happen. In reality, as I'm sure a lot of your
listeners know, STEM and non-STEM is more of a continuum. I spent a lot of time thinking about
that. It ended up getting cut from the book for various reasons, but it's definitely the case
that there are a lot of jobs in which STEM expertise, college level STEM expertise,
is very, very helpful. So if any of your listeners are software developers,
they would almost certainly prefer a manager who understands software development.
And so there's a lot of people who get STEM degrees do go into management.
A lot of people who get STEM degrees go into practicing medicine. Now, the government does not
consider practicing medicine to be a STEM job. And people might think, yeah, they might think,
why is that? What's going on? It's because of this thing about trying to create innovation.
And practicing medicine does a lot of great things for people, as obvious for anyone who's
ever been to a competent physician, but they typically do not innovate and create patents
and jobs and things like that. We've got STEM, we've got MD, PhDs who might do that,
but for the most part, practicing medicine is about deploying existing expertise.
And another area where people with STEM degrees will go that are not the traditional STEM
occupations is finance of various kinds. Very much. Yeah. Now, we're, we're, we are,
I know you're aware of people in physics who went into quantitative finance and do some very
high powered things there. The National Science Foundation data, the National Science Foundation
runs this great survey called the National Survey of College Graduates. And I relied on it a lot
for this book. It shows that people go into this category of, you know, accountants, auditors,
financial specialists, it tends to group them together. We don't know exactly what those folks
are doing. It's probably not a lot of black souls equations and some of the stuff that our friends
in on Wall Street do. But, but so that's another area where folks go. And then a lot of folks go
into jobs that don't use STEM expertise at all. And there's just too many to mention. It's hard
to make generalizations that it's a, it's a very wide variety of potential occupations for people
with, with STEM expertise. But I want to emphasize, and I do in the book, that when the government
invests in STEM, in STEM education, they want people to go into STEM occupations. And I should say
at the outset right here, that about 50% of all STEM workers in the United States
are in computers in some way. Like that, that's like, that's like the 800 pound gorilla of STEM.
And we're talking software developers, that's one of the most in demand, in demand jobs.
You know, computer engineers of various types, people, web developers, there's just a whole range
of occupations that involve computers. And one of the things that's really unique about that
particular STEM sector is that whereas chemical firms like DuPont hires chemists, trucking companies
or shipping companies probably don't hire chemists. But computer experts of various types,
they're their own silo where tech companies will hire these folks. But then they're also
like a band across the economy, where just about everybody hires some computer experts to, you
know, do things run their payroll, do their logistics, I always think of trucking, because
we don't think of trucking as being very high tech. But actually, they hire a lot of data people
and to manage this whole complicated system. So that computer related fields information
technology is a band across the whole economy, retail, you know, all kinds of occupations or
all kinds of sectors will use that. Life sciences, that'll be used in biopharma, you know, all that,
you know, life science kinds of sectors. So computer is really the 800 pound gorilla. And so
when we talk about STEM workers, people have commented on the book a little bit, like they're
saying, Hey, man, this book seems to be really about tech and really about computer workers.
And there's two reasons for that. One is what I just told you that so many workers go into that
field. And the other reason is that those are the employers who argue and complain the loudest
about shortages. They're the ones who are saying, Hey, man, we need more workers, where are these
workers? What's wrong with your universities? What's wrong with your society for not giving us
more STEM grads so that we can hire them? Well, that's good. Because that's exactly where I wanted
to go next. Because is the feeling that we get within academia that the humanities are on the
decline? And STEM majors are kind of taking over? Is that accurate? And nevertheless, there's a lot
of companies that are complaining, we don't produce enough STEM majors. Yeah. So I should say
at the outset that the book is really about this puzzle. I've been talking for quite a while
here already, and I haven't even gotten to the puzzle. We'll get there. My apologies. The puzzle
is that there's all these claims of the shortage of STEM grads. And according to some measures,
and this is the Census Bureau, only 28% of STEM grads work in STEM jobs. There's different ways
of counting and different data sets. My counting is about 40% of STEM grads work in STEM jobs.
So it's a little bit higher, but still a minority. So the puzzle is there's all these
complaints about shortages, what's going on, why aren't you producing enough? And yet the data
looks like we're producing a surplus. So that's kind of the puzzle there.
And is that for those figures that you quote one way or the other, are they sort of
lifetime? Like sometime 20 years ago, 50 years ago, I got a STEM degree, and now I am or I'm not,
or is it right out of college? So basically what they do is the National Survey of College
graduates comes out every couple of years, and they ask a sample of college graduates,
what did you get your degree in? What are you doing now? So it's a slice of people. So it includes
people right out of college and people who have been out for a while. But that's a great question
because I was really interested in whether people kind of go in massive numbers into STEM
early on and then move on to something else. But there's a lot of data that suggests,
even in high demand fields like electrical engineering, that some data suggests upwards
is 50%, right out of college say, nah, I'm not going to go the STEM route, I'm going to go do
something else. So really it's a leaky pipeline, that's a metaphor that's often used, you've probably
heard that metaphor. It's a leaky pipeline that leaks at all stages. If we think about STEM as
something important in elementary school, people lose interest there, high school, college, and
then right out of college, and then throughout their work lives, people can exit the STEM pipeline.
That's one of the things I really wanted to emphasize in this book is that too many people
studying this focus on the STEM pipeline is just about education from K through 16 K through college.
But really, people have to keep, and we can talk about this later, people have to keep their STEM
skills up to date. And STEM education, if you want to be successful in STEM, you got to keep
your skills up to date, your education doesn't end at college, doesn't end at a PhD, you got to
constantly re-up, you got to constantly, I call it the STEM skills treadmill, I apologize for the
transparent attempt to create jargon. But I really wanted to capture something here, which is the
idea of moving while standing in place. STEM workers really have to keep moving, they really
have to keep learning just to be able to keep their job. And I feel like I'm getting off
what your original question was. That is ultimately where we want to go, but that's okay,
because we can go back and forth. But just to drive it home, it's okay to get the point halfway
through the podcast. One gets the impression that a successful undergraduate majoring in
a STEM field is going to come out of college thinking of themselves as elite and well-trained,
et cetera. But one of the messages of your book is it's exactly those people who the employers
think of as basically cheap and disposable, right? They're going to use them for a little while
until their skills are not quite as cutting edge anymore, and they're not going to really mind if
they just fire them and hire new graduates. Right. I talked to a CEO of a STEM, an innovation economy
sort of company, and they hired a lot of STEM workers. And this CEO used the phrase that I
titled a chapter of the book, burn and churn. And it was striking. He said, just so matter of
factly, yeah, we burn and churn through them. They have a lot of enthusiasm, and we take advantage
of that. And when their skills fall out of date, or when they get kind of burned out, then we hire
some more. And there's other studies that show STEM employers like to get new blood. They like to get
new folks coming in there. They like this churn. And so that's seen as a positive.
And there's not that much concern about what happens to people who get burned out. There's
a lot of research. It's funny because for years, I've advised students, and maybe you have as well,
to major in the field that you're passionate about, to choose a career that you think you
can be passionate about. But leave it to the social scientists to find something negative
about that. And there's new research mainly from my field in sociology about how employers exploit
this passion. They think, wow, we've got these workers who really love this. And let's get them
to work 60, 70 hours a week. We don't even have to pay them extra because they're so passionate.
They've had great teachers and professors who've fired their excitement about this field.
And let's ride that wave until it crashes or Peters out or something. And maybe we can then hire
the next group of passionate workers. So what leads these companies to complain about a shortage?
Is it just that they want even more cheap workers just out of college?
So I kind of played dumb in the book a little bit. I'm like, all right, employers,
you say that there's a shortage, I'm going to take that at face value. If there really is a
shortage, are you behaving like there's a shortage? Are you acting like STEM grads or scarce and
valuable and can just produce magic that's going to benefit all of us? Or are you treating these
folks as disposable? There's a lot of good metaphors, Sean, that work here. One of the
ones I think about is squeezing an orange, getting that juice out of it. In my LA Times op-ed, I
suddenly thought about fast fashion, something that kind of works or that's like really great for a
short time, but you don't expect it to last. You move through it. And so that's what they do. And
I just kept believing them, pretending to believe them and saying, all right, let's see if your
actions match your words. And they just really, it just really doesn't. The New York Times has a
headline today. It's, I don't know if I can mention the date in this, but it could be almost any day.
There's a new round of layoffs at major tech companies. These are the firms, they created
this lobbying group called Forward US that their whole, their whole reason for being is the idea
of a STEM shortage. Their whole reason for being is lobbying the government for both more STEM grads,
more STEM education, and also more STEM migrants to come. And a lot of these companies, and it's
part of the reason I talk about these tech companies, they, they're rich. You know, I mean,
some of these are, are, are all near monopolies. We're talking Google, we're talking Amazon, we're
talking, well, Alphabet, you know, Google is tedious, they changed their names, Facebook's now
meta, but huge, you know, 2 billion people have Facebook, they own Instagram. Apple has like a
billion dollars in cash. They're, they layoff workers. They, you know, they just, we're done with
you guys. We don't know, we hired too many, sorry, we don't need you guys anymore. I, I met a guy who
was a former HR expert at a major tech company. And he had a brilliant idea. And I'm not going to
give him credit because he actually wanted to remain anonymous. But he moved into the education
field like elementary education and high school education. And in that field for students with
learning disabilities, there's this thing called the IEP, which stands for individual education
program or individualized education plan, something like that. But the idea is, you have a student
with some kind of learning disability, you monitor their progress, you figure out what their strengths
are, you figure out what they need to know. And, and he thought that was a great model for these
really rich tech companies that are constantly complaining about shortages. If, if it looks
like, and who's going to know better than the employers themselves, if it looks like some
skills are about to be obsolete, why not tell these workers, Hey, you've already got this great
foundation in STEM education. Your specialty is kind of going, going down. We need something new.
This looks like it's going to be the new thing. We're going to put a little bit of money in there.
And we're going to train you and deploy you somewhere else in the firm.
They, they typically don't do that. They let you go. Google, I think it was Google was basically
told companies are told employees, you've got this many months to figure out what skill you
want to develop, you're on your own to figure that out. How do you know? How do you know what's
going to be the next in demand skill? And so they moved into that, you know, they, they were given
the opportunity to move into that, but without guidance or without, without paid training.
So that, that's really tough. I got to lay another metaphor on you. And this came from someone,
a STEM worker, an engineer who emailed me after my, my LA times op ed came out. And I loved, you
know, I love to get the, the voices from the field. It's so interesting to hear their stories.
This engineer told me that he thought STEM work was, was something like
prospect, prospecting and mining in the 1800s. And you've got these people who chase the, chase
the latest gold rush. We're going to go do that thing. It's going to be really hot for a while.
Maybe some people are going to get rich. Maybe some, you know, STEM workers are going to
stock options. There's going to be a lot of STEM people are going to get rich,
but then it's going to peter out. And then those folks got to find the next big thing.
And this engineer told me he didn't want his children to go into these fields because
he said it gets tiring chasing these gold rushes, chasing these, you know, the next,
the next mine to be exploited and just really, really, you know, people really dig into it.
You know, I can give your, your readers can probably think of examples, but blockchain was
really huge for a while. AI is now the huge one. You know, it goes up and down. If you're in oil
and gas, you know, the, if the price of oil is super high, they're like, wow, we need more,
look at, we can pay them a lot. And then suddenly that price plummets. And then that goes down
for people in the life sciences, there could be some promising new technologies in life
sciences. Like right now MRNA is really big. Maybe there's going to be some limitations there.
Gene editing really big. Might be some limitations there. We'll see. But you get these fields that
get super hot. And then they try, they hire a lot of folks. If they don't get FDA approval,
if the clinical trials don't work out, see you later. And, and, and life sciences will lay off
a bunch of workers as well. Is it possible to oversimplify your argument by saying that there
might possibly be downsides to capitalism?
I would say that the problem isn't necessarily capitalism per se. The problem really is,
and this is where I really put on my sociologist hat. And I'm, but I'm borrowing from some ideas
that come from, from economists as well. There are cultural practices that characterize American
capitalism, especially American capitalism today, and certainly over the last few decades,
which are creating this problem. And there's a lot of folks who've written about this, but
there's expectations that investors have that they didn't used to have. And that is that they,
it, they call it maximizing short term shareholder value, various permutations of that phrase,
various versions of that phrase. But sharehold, like there's, there's a whole movement to create
this thing that, that the, that the stakeholders who really matter for a corporation are the
shareholders, not the employees, the shareholders, not the customers, not the customers as anyone
who's tried to do customer service in almost any field, any sector, not the people in the
regional economy where the company might be based. It's the shareholders. And they should
expect value on their investment in the short term. And there's a lot of complicated stuff about
how this came about. There used to be these massive conglomerates that are all these diverse
sort of companies under one roof, underwear and apple pie, Sarah Lee owned Haynes,
the Sarah Lee company, you know, like under underwear company, like all these crazy things
put together. And they were doing that to hedge them, you know, kind of hedge their bets if the
apple pie market collapsed, at least they can make some money on t-shirts. So, but shareholders
were like, no, no, no, we want you to do what you do, find your core competency, do that thing.
It was a massive redefinition of what corporations were really about. And there was a redefinition
of what workers were. And workers became costs. And investors began to applaud corporations that
shed workers. This was a big shift, you know, you would always have companies that would lay
off workers when the economy was bad. But by the 1980s, as we got this shift to this maximizing
short term shareholder value kind of approach to corporations, you got companies that shed workers
even in good times. And, and the stock price would go up. I give the example of Sarah Lee,
because it's just such a, it's such a great example. And the CEO complained, you know,
that like, my God, you know, what the investors just want us to get rid of workers, that's what
they want. And, you know, investors, they don't like training in the United States, especially
the Europeans are better at investing and training than the American American corporations are. Why,
you know, sociologists like to talk about training as investing. But investors see that as spending
money. And why are you spending money on that when you should be maybe doing stock buybacks or
is something to boost the value of your stock? So I wouldn't say it's capitalism. I would say
it's this version of capitalism that we have right now. We have similar kinds of short term
expectations among venture venture capitalists, which I think are very important. It drives them
to put their money into software at the expense of other industries, which I think we need very
badly. In the book, I'm very transparent about what I want STEM workers to do. I want them to
save the planet. I really want them to develop clean energy, better plastics, carbon capture
technologies. There's so many things we badly need. But investors want software. They love
software. You know, Instagram was worth a billion dollars when it had 11 employees.
Instagram was software. And the reason investors love software is because
that is, from the perspective of an investor, that's a fantastic investment. You can easily
demonstrate that technology works unlike new battery technologies, unlike things that we
badly need like fusion energy. There's some startups doing fusion energy, but boy, when are
we going to get that? Can we really demonstrate that that works? With software, you can pretty
much show that it works pretty quickly. You don't need a factory to create it, which is a major
advantage. If you don't need a factory, you don't need employees. You just need a few people to
do the software. And then you can make massive amounts of money that the return on software
investments are 10 times much percentage higher than returns on clean energy, which is what I
think we badly need. And so investors, they just keep blockchain, AI is the new ones that I mentioned,
but any kind of software, fintech technology related to finance, social media, surveillance
capitalism, which is another term coined by Shoshana Zuboff, tracking us on the internet,
wow, we can sell you more things and not necessarily have to produce things. So we don't
need factories. We don't have what investors call the valley of death, where you kind of go from the
innovation to the actual manufacturing phase, which can take a while, making sure the prototype
works and all that kind of stuff. So that's a long way to say, capitalism is not the problem.
I think it's the version of capitalism that we have right now.
Okay, and there's probably like a whole other podcast we could devote to how that version of
capitalism came to be, but we'll stay a little bit focused here. And I do want to give you a
chance to mention that the fear of becoming obsolete and then getting fired is not the only
thing that is keeping STEM grads slightly unhappy. I mean, there's the overwork aspect. There's other
things where the grass isn't quite as green as they hoped it would be once you've gotten your
bachelor's in electrical engineering and enter the job market.
Yeah, so I tend to think, again, taking at face value these employers that there are these
dire shortages and it's a crisis and those are the words that they use, take that at face value.
But what are they doing? How are they treating these STEM workers? And one of the things that
they do is they incentivize movements out of STEM. And they do that by paying their managers more.
And I know you're an NBA basketball fan. I know you love the Sixers. You've got your passions there.
Do you still love the Sixers? We had Daryl Morey as a guest on the podcast.
Okay. So it's interesting because in professional sports, the players who have these
scarce skills are paid more than the managers. In STEM, the managers are typically, not always,
typically paid more than the folks who have the skills that are supposedly scarce.
And employers control wages. They decide how much to pay their workers. This is an area where I
think sociologists have done a little bit better than the economists. The economists,
they have some theories about wages, but understanding the starting point of the wage,
I don't think they've been very good at. And I think sociologists are a little bit better at this.
I talked to the COO of a tech company. I'm using an anecdote here. And he was telling me,
we need more user experience designers, the folks who design the interface of the software that
we're using right now. And I don't want to pay them what they're demanding. And he showed me,
there's these services that kind of do surveys of how much people are paying people in different
fields, including user experience designers. And he's saying, look at how much they make.
I don't want to pay them more than this. That's a sociological kind of dynamic. It's called,
it's, you know, isomorphism is the jargony thing. But, you know, we want to look like we're doing
what other folks are doing. We don't want to be someone who pays their user experience designer
too much. This, this, this, this guy decided, I can't find people here to do it. I'm going to
outsource this job. So he went around the world, Eastern Europe, China, Mexico, India, looking for
cheaper user experience designers, until he found some that he thought were competent,
and he could pay them less. So, and then that's, you know, the more that kind of thing takes off,
the less you incentivize people to move into that field in the United States. And the more
you become dependent on outsourcing that thing. But, but a big argument that I make in the book is
that there's a lot of self-inflicted wounds here, if indeed there is, there is scarcity,
and the decision to pay your STEM workers less than their managers, and to incentivize movements
out of STEM, which not every firm does, but it's very common. It's one of, it's one of the problems
in this area. Well, and there is also the idea that because there truly are so many STEM graduates
that these employers can hire, that they can kind of abuse them once they're there, right,
that they can kind of give them overtime. There's these schedules that are invented to hit targets
and really crush people. And it can be, it can be kind of a soul destroying to just
toil away this job for a few years before you get outdated.
I think that that's exactly right, Sean. And I, I rely pretty heavily on to kind of explore the
detail of this a ethnography, an ethnography by a sociologist named Ofer Chiron. I want to give
him a shout out because I think he did such great work where he spent some time at a
big tech company. He had to keep it anonymous, but it's a, it's a major tech company that,
that folks know and that is, you know, has deep pockets. It has a lot of money. And
boy, they work, their workers really hard. And, and he, he kind of captured this thing. And I,
I actually use this for my, in my intro to sociology class to kind of, in my sociology of
work to talk about, again, the sort of social scientists making everything seem bad, but
even these jobs that are supposedly great, even these jobs that looks, that look fun.
And the media image of some of these STEM jobs is people playing foosball, people playing ping
pong. There, there was a STEM employer here in San Diego that had this big swirly slide in the
atrium of their, of their workplace. This, Ofer Chiron went to this company and saw that people
didn't really use this stuff, that it looked like a lot of fun stuff was around, but people didn't
use it. And that was because for much of the year, these workers were in what they call crunch mode
or crunch time. And that is the time when they're racing to deliver a product that has been
promised at a, for, for a delivery date at a particular time. And they've got to make sure
that it works. And they've, they've start working, he found workers worked an average of 67 hours a
week. That's a long time. And, and they, and they did it sort of voluntarily. The, the managers
have these clever ways of managing workers to, if they didn't come with the passion to sort of
coax the passion out of them or make them behave as if they're passionate. It's these pretty bruising
performance reviews where every worker is ranked. It's, it's called stacked ranking or forced ranking.
Sometimes it's called cynically rank and yank, where you rank up the workers and you yank out the
ones that are ranked in a low, in a low position. But the workers themselves choose their hours
and they choose the hours based on this idea that they want to impress their manager. So the
manager might go to them and say, Hey, we got this product we want to deliver. We want it to have
this and that capability. We need someone to do this particular aspect of this software, for
example. And do you think you could do it? And how long do you think it'll take you? And they want
a high ranking. They want a high evaluation for their performance evaluation. So they kind of
overpromise or they certainly promise very ambitiously. Because if they say, Oh, that looks
hard. Oh, I don't know about that. Maybe you should dial down your expectations that that
manager is going to think, I don't know if I want this guy. I mean, the obvious analogies to graduate
school cannot have missed your notice. Yes. Yeah, there's, there's, there's definitely a lot of
analogies to graduate school. You were absolutely right. My mind is racing right now with some of
them, but trying to stay focused here. So, so what you have is workers seemingly voluntarily taking
on these excessive hours, and then working themselves very, very hard. One software developer
compared it to drinking out of a fire hose, just trying to keep up with all the stuff that's going
on and, and developing the skills that they need. Maybe they promise something that involves a skill
that they don't have yet. So they got to work to develop that. And that stuff is very difficult.
And one of the things that maybe some of your listeners are familiar with, I know some of the,
some of the STEM workers with whom I've spoken are familiar with this.
It's often a young person's game. And, and part of that, there's, there's reasons for that. One of
them is that some young people kind of realize, wow, I'm going to have to keep my skills up to date
all the time. That's going to be hard. And I can do this for a little while, but I kind of burn out.
And then I move on to something else. The other thing is that older workers often have families.
And if you have families, they take time, unfortunately. Maybe that's fortunate. That's
okay. It's not, it's not, it's, it's something, it's a job that you have to do. And it doesn't
go away. And, and these workers, they have a, they have a second shift at home. If they're not
shunting that off onto a spouse. And, and it gets harder and harder to self train in your, in your,
in your own, your own time. And so it just creates, it creates more and more stress.
So these, these deadlines happen and, and it does put a lot of pressure on, on workers. And again,
this might sound very software-y, very tech focused, but, but those are the employers who
say their shortages. Those are the employers who often are the richest. Those are the employers
getting all this investment from investors. And if there's any place where we would expect
STEM workers to be treated really great, it should be these employers. And, and I don't think we see
that. And there is, there's a point you make in the book. And I wasn't sure whether this was
in your mind more aspirational or factual, but the idea that a lot of, there's some idealism
in the young STEM workers, they want to, or they should want to, I'm not sure, make the world a
better place. And that turns out not to be the most lucrative job opportunity, the making a world
a better place kind of fields. Yeah. So this is where I was able to explore some of the issues.
I was a double major in sociology and philosophy. And I've always been interested, like you, in the
meaning of life, what is this all for? I don't get much opportunity to really study that. But in
the last chapter of the book, I wanted to really explore this question of STEM education for what?
What are we, what are we, what are we as a society hoping to get with these innovations that STEM
workers are producing? And I think that some STEM workers, and I want to be really clear about this,
I'm sure there's some very, very happy STEM workers who are listening to this right now. I hope
they're still listening and they're thinking, I love my job. I'm not working 70 hours a week.
This is fantastic. I'm making tons of money. I can retire early. There are those folks,
I'm talking about the aggregate. And there are folks who are really excited to be working on
interesting STEM problems, regardless of what it is. Some, some STEM workers are,
and I admire them, they're kind of pure scientists in a way, they love particular ways of thinking.
And so they could move from cosmology or astrophysics into data science and predictive
algorithms and things like that thinking, I, I, there's a guy, I don't know if he ended up in
the book or may have, I may have had him in there, I may have cut him out, but he was an astrophysics
major who couldn't get a job or decided not to get a job in academia. And then he worked for a
clothing retailer that needed experts in AI and machine learning and that sort of thing,
so that they could give customers suggestions of new clothes to buy. Now, I would find that to be
kind of soul destroying, to go from thinking about general relativity, to be thinking about
how can I get someone to buy things that they don't need. But, but from a pure science standpoint,
from the pure complexity of problem standpoint, some folks can make that transition.
But not everybody. And so there's a literature in sociology and management and psychology
about how some jobs can produce moral stresses or even moral injuries. Anyone who's seen
at their workplace, workplace bullying, that, you know, they might have felt a moral stress
if they've known that their employer is someone at their job is embezzling that could create,
create a moral stress. But what I was interested in the last chapter of the book asking STEM
education for what are the STEM workers who are uncomfortable morally with the business model of
of their firm. And it's easy to pick on social media, but it's easy to pick on social media
because there's a lot of evidence that social media produces a lot of social harms. And so I
quote some workers at Facebook, who said Facebook is hurting people at scale. Another worker,
another worker more, more graphically said, I feel like I have blood on my hands for Facebook's
role in promoting disinformation and promoting political conflict in societies other than the
United States. Other people have said, Well, they actually promote conflict in the United States.
There's new research coming out about rises in depression, especially teen depression,
especially teen girls. And there's, there's, there's, there's evidence that suggests
hard to prove these things definitively causal inferences are very difficult in social science.
But there's evidence that suggests social media use is part of the reason we're seeing
very alarming rises in teen depression. So, you know, some STEM workers can think, Oh,
we're doing interesting things. Analytically, these are exciting problems to solve. I'm working
with smart people, they can get really jazzed about that. Other workers can kind of think,
when I go home at night, I don't feel good about what I'm doing here. Yeah. You know, they're even
like, I don't know if any, I don't know if any of your, you or any of your listeners have kind of
gone on these YouTube rabbit holes where you start watching a video and then YouTube saying,
what about this one? What about this one? How about that one? You like that? Check out this one.
And they, they tend to lead you into more extreme content or more shocking or emotionally
provocative content. There's a phrase, engagement equals enragment, or maybe you could reverse it
and rage equals engagement. But the idea is getting this emotional hook into the users
by outraging them is a way to get them to use the app longer. And so, you know,
Google, the Google owns, Alphabet owns Google, Google owns YouTube. They're involved in this
stuff as well. Very rich company using, using different technologies to get people very upset.
And you can imagine workers not being happy with this. Well, before you
defended capitalism a little bit, saying that there's a particular type of capitalism,
which we've evolved to, and, and I appreciate the benefits of capitalism in certain circumstances.
Markets are good at solving certain problems. But a lot of what you're describing really just
sounds like capitalism that's gotten better at being efficiently capitalistic because of
faster information flows and faster decisions and more scales and wider labor markets and things
like that. Whereas as a globe, as a species, we produce a lot. We produce abundance. And, and
do we need to think radically is late in the podcast. This is where we let to, you know,
get to speculate a little bit. So do we need to think more radically about the system that lets
this all happen? I actually don't think we need to think more radically about it. I think that
we have the tools available now to get more out of our investments in STEM education than we are
getting now. One of the things we could do is create more incentives for innovators in the
fields that we desperately need. I often think, you know, if, if we're all made extinct by climate
change or something like that, and you know, when alien civilization comes down and they look at us
and they think, well, what were you guys investing in when the planet was falling apart and there
were pandemics and the signs were all around you that you were in big trouble. And if we say
cryptocurrency, blockchain, AI, surveillance economy, you know, it's going to look a little silly.
So I think some intervention is needed, but not a radical change. So one of the things we could do
is create more government incentives in investment in clean energy, better plastics that don't
create micro nanoplastics that are in our bodies and human breast milk, incredibly,
forever chemicals that we don't know what are doing with us. We can create, we can create incentives
through tax rebates or tax incentives to make these movements happen. The Inflation Reduction
Act, which is a very general name for a very big bill, did create these incentives, and it's
created stakeholders who are moving into the clean energy space. So one thing you can do is
create incentives for more of the investments we need. That'll produce more opportunities for
STEM workers to deploy their skills in ways that might feel morally resonant with them.
And another thing you can do is simply make illegal some uses of STEM skills. There's a lot
of debate among legal experts about whether targeted advertising should just be banned
so that you remove the incentive for these companies to endlessly find ways to
surveil all of us on the internet, because if they can't do this targeted advertising,
then they don't have an incentive to do that anymore. So you can legislate things away.
And then another thing you could do is just think about moral limits on investors and business models.
You know, cannabis is legal in my state of California, but my understanding is the cannabis
business is a little shaky because banks are a little nervous working with those folks.
There's this kind of sense that they're sort of cordoned off like, whoa, you guys are a little
bit different. I hesitate to use this word, but pornography is a very lucrative field that's also
kind of like, whoa, we don't want to invest in that. We don't really want to be a part of that.
So we already have moral limits that shape investor behavior and what people are willing to
spend their time on in terms of business practices and investing. But for some reason,
it's okay to take away people's privacy, to stoke division and conflict, to encourage
disinformation, this bed of disinformation in society. A lot of things that you might argue
are more harmful than cannabis are okay for investors to invest in. Mass layoffs,
which disrupt families, there's a lot of things that investors tolerate right now,
which perhaps they shouldn't. Perhaps a little more moral education
could go a ways here as well. You know, I'm not a cannabis guy, but I was an online poker player,
and it used to be done by many, many people, and the government swooped in one Friday and
seized all their assets and basically can't play poker online now. Certain states you can,
but it used to just be all over. And I agree, that's a lot less harmful than some of the things
you just mentioned. Yeah, so there's research that suggests that you can tweak capitalism,
you can fix it in ways that will generate the productive energies, the innovation,
the riches, the capitalism that can produce and minimize some of the harms that we see.
Well, I don't quite, so the thing that I'm still missing though is the innovation disrupting
the kinds of jobs that people grew up having. If as is plausible, the rate of innovation and
which skills are relevant is increasing, the rate, so it's faster now, we're always going to have an
issue where people who hit 50 are no longer valued, and that does seem a bit harder to solve. I'm
not quite sure how to do it. Yeah, so the National Survey of College graduates, they
asked this broad range of college graduates, did they take skills-related training in the past
year or two? And we looked at the time since their degree and about 60% have taken skills-related
training in STEM up to 30 years after their degree. So we're getting into the 50s. It
starts to go down when we're getting into people's 60s. So you're absolutely right that that is an
issue. So one of the things that we need to do is, I don't like this phrase, Sean, because it sounds
so 1970s, the lifelong learning. We have this model of education that you graduate in your early
20s and then you're gone. And I really think we need to change that. We're in a different era now,
and we need a model where we think of college as a place you return to periodically for skills
updating or re-skilling something in a different area altogether when your skills become obsolete.
Maybe something like a subscription model or something where you can go back to your Alma
Mater or a different university. But this expectation that we have of college as something you do when
you're young and then you move on maybe needs to be changed a little bit. I still think that
college education is absolutely essential for creating, but I like to think of as foundational
skills, the basic skills that a college graduate has. One of the things is to learn how to learn.
PhD training really makes you good at that. But even with the bachelor's, you kind of learn how to
learn. You can discern good knowledge from bad knowledge. You learn how to sort of sort through
what's good and bad in trying to find the skills that you might need or the knowledge you might need.
But you'll have that core foundation, but then on top of that, the skills that you actually
deploy at work might change many times throughout your career. So I would argue, and I'm working
on a book on this with a colleague right now, college education is great for that foundation,
but circling back to college to get a skills updating, not for another degree,
but kind of a short-term certificate, kind of very specific, narrow kind of skill that can
be deployed now might be something that many people will have to do repeatedly throughout
their careers. I mean, of course, I'm very much in favor of lifelong learning. I do wonder though
about the model because what is that a very different life stage at age 40 than age 20,
right? When you're 20, not only you're learning it for the first time, but there's a certain
freedom to fail because your obligations are relatively low. But once you have a kid and
mortgages and things like that, and also you've been happy for the last 20 years doing some job.
I mean, I'm in favor of efficiency, but I feel the human cost of having to say,
I need to do something different than what I've been doing before.
Yeah, I agree with that, but the reality is upon us. You are going to have to do something
different. There was a great study that was done. Social scientists love a natural experiment
where something happens and you can, something happens that's rare and you could examine how
human beings respond to it. So Steve Jobs decided that the iPhone was no longer going to support
Adobe Flash software. He said, you know what? We're not going to do Adobe Flash anymore. We're
going to use something else. And there were a lot of software experts on Adobe Flash,
not necessarily employed by Adobe, but that was what they did. Suddenly that was gone.
They had to respond. So that reality is already there where a skill that has maybe been developed
over a few years is just no longer needed. And so that reality is already there. So how are we as
a society going to deal with the regular obsolescing of technical skills? And you're right. It's
definitely hard. People's identities get wrapped up in their jobs and their skill sets get more
and more fine-tuned. And then to lose that can be really tragic, especially as you say, if they have
a family. So that's going to be difficult. I think if shareholders don't punish companies for investing
in the training of their workers, especially the richest companies for investing in their workers,
that should be something that's encouraged and applauded. I got to tell you, I don't want to go
off the subject too much here, but Google invests a lot of money in schools. They give away Chrome
books to students. They do a lot of things to train the next generation of software developers
at that stage, but they could do more for their incumbent workers. That's the odd thing. And so
social scientists, they talk about corporate social responsibility and some things are done
kind of as corporate branding. They look how good we are. We give away this money. Some of it's done
to kind of create market share. Let's get a bunch of people using Chromebooks and they're going to
love Google. So there's money that's being spent in this area, but I would argue they could do more
for their incumbent workers to manage these sometimes very difficult to navigate career
changes or job skill changes later in life. Maybe as a final thought, we can be more idealistic
ourselves because, of course, we want people to get lucrative, rewarding jobs that they can have
in some level of security throughout their career, but that's not the only reason to get an education,
right? When people ask me about applying to graduate school in physics, my line is typically
that you will probably go in hoping to be a professor. You probably will not succeed at being
a professor, but getting a PhD in physics is actually an intrinsically good thing. You'll be
able to do something else. You'll learn a lot of skills, etc. I don't feel the same way about
being a postdoc, but that's a different conversation. But where does that fit in to this conversation?
Just the idea that getting a degree in STEM or related fields has some value, whatever your
future life trajectory turns out to be. So I've seen that argument and I appreciate your honesty
when you tell people that the odds are they will end up doing something different. I think that's
an important message to give them. Say, yes, this is a great thing to do. You're going to get
some very important skills, but keep an open mind toward career trajectories that don't look like
physics. So one of the disturbing findings I had in some research with a colleague when we looked
at the National Surrey of College graduates and we looked at people with STEM degrees who went into
non-STEM jobs is they were significantly less likely to report being satisfied with their jobs
overall. And interestingly, they were significantly less likely to be satisfied with the intellectual
challenge of their jobs. So they're less satisfied, they seem to be a little bit more likely to be
bored. I don't feel so great about that. And so being honest with people and telling them,
hey, there's a good chance you'll be doing something else, I would encourage folks to develop a broad
range of skills. We've got this, I call it STEM mania in the book at my university, Sean, University
of California, San Diego. It's sort of like a public Caltech. I always thought of it as that.
It's really STEM focused. It was born, it is in San Diego because that's where the
Scripps Institute of Oceanography was and that sort of STEM tone really kind of dominates the
university. And the students who major in the humanities and social sciences other than economics
regularly have to defend themselves to the STEM majors who are like, what are you going to do
with that? What's wrong with you? This is crazy. And so this also sounds self-serving. But I tell
my STEM majors who do take sociology classes, it is important to get a broad range of skills,
skills related to communication, written, oral, critical thinking outside of technical skills,
because chances are you're going to move into something outside of STEM or sort of STEM adjacent.
And college is a time to really develop that broad range of skills. You always had that. You
really always stood out. You're double major in philosophy and astronomy, as I recall. So you
always had that message, but that's not typical. And so you could segue into this whole podcast
thing and this whole range of stuff that you do because of that undergraduate training.
I'm trying to make a world of little miniature Sean Carroll's so that they will have that
flexibility to plug into different places in the economy. STEM expertise is great to have. I would
think the best thing that you could have to prepare yourself for the workplace of tomorrow
is STEM skills and non-STEM skills, foundational sorts of skills like you have.
Yeah. I mean, you're not going to get any argument from me that the broad base is important. But
if it's true that people who get STEM degrees report dissatisfaction with their jobs once
they get them, what are the data about humanities degrees or social science degrees?
No one cares about them. So I didn't have a grant to look at them. I didn't really look at those
folks. There are, I initially wanted to explore this. There are a pretty significant percentage.
Different studies have different percentages, but a good 15% of STEM workers don't have STEM
degrees. And so you have folks who majored in humanities sort of subjects and they moved into
technical fields. One of the great things about software development is it's a field that's pretty
porous. It's not like electrical engineering. It's hard to break into electrical engineering.
Life sciences without those degrees. But software is wonderfully porous. You can be this sort of
kid who worked on a computer in high school, went and got, I actually have a friend of mine who
was a creative writing major, but he tinkered with computers in high school. He developed some
software, sold it to a major software company, did really well, even though his major was creative
writing. So software is really welcoming to people. You can do these boot camps where you
get your foundational skills in writing and communication. Then you do a boot camp encoding
or data analytics or something. Then you can plug into the STEM economy that way. So that's
definitely something that you can do. So I applaud those folks, but for the most part,
people are not worried or valorizing our humanities majors. I don't want to say we need
to treat our STEM majors and our STEM grads better than the other grads, but if we say that there's
shortages of STEM grads, if we say that STEM grads are so important for the economy, we should at
least treat these folks really well and hopefully treat everybody really well, but at least these
folks who we're constantly saying are so important in such short supply.
Well, okay. I'd like your final message, which is everyone should major in creative writing. I
think that's a very wonderful world going forward. So John Scranton, thanks so much for being on
the Mindscape podcast. Thanks, Sean. It was great to be here. And I just want to end with one thing.
I've listened to podcasts before where people know the interviewer, the host of the podcast,
and they tediously kind of say, oh, we had also many great times in the past.
You can cut this out, my friend, but probably not many listeners know that you were a double threat
on the basketball court. Not in all of them, no. That you had a sweet jump shot from the outside.
I still remember the sound of the ball going through the net and nothing but the sound of that.
And you had a pretty good drive to the hoop as well. If someone covered you too close to the
three-point line, you could blow by them. So not many of your listeners may know that about you,
but that's definitely you were a multifaceted, skilled guy. And still are. Sorry to use the
past tense. You must remember that that lefty hook shot was so annoying to everyone else, yours,
that so many people complained about it that you started complaining about them complaining about
it because they weren't used to a lefty. That's right. But if everyone expects a right-handed
jump shot, then the left-handed hook is going to keep me going for quite a while.
Something to remember. Thanks very much, Sean. Okay. Thanks, Sean.
