Hello everyone, welcome to the Minescape podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll, and we're very excited these days
here at Minescape World International Headquarters for Book Publication Week. As some of you know, on Tuesday,
I guess May 14th, here in the United States anyway, we're gonna have the publication of
Quanta and Fields. This is Volume 2 in the Biggest Ideas in the Universe series. The series will be a three-part series that aims to explain
modern physics, the part of modern physics that we know. Not the speculative stuff,
we're not gonna be talking about the multiverse or quantum gravity or anything like that. The kinds that
ideas in modern physics that we think will last for a very, very long time, and the gimmick is we're explaining them in a way
that involves the equations. So we're gonna show you the equations, and that means it's not for everybody,
but it's very much for some people. If you've ever read descriptions of physics where you
thought that there was something going on, but there's a bunch of metaphors and stories and analogies, and you weren't quite sure
why things were working out the way they were working out,
these are the books for you.
In the Biggest Ideas, you'll really get to see why, for example, the Higgs mechanism gives mass to
particles and things like that. You don't need to just wave your hands in any way. And
the general theme of the book is quanta and fields. That's the name of the book, as opposed to the first volume called
space, time and motion, which was really classical physics. This book is about quantum physics. The third book on complexity
and emergence. Both is a collection of the things that didn't fit into the first two books, but also is about larger scale
things, right? Thermodynamics, complex systems, stuff like that. And it's kind of a
appetizer, main course dessert kind of thing. This book, volume two, quanta and fields, is a book
I've been wanting to write for decades. This is a book that I really have thought for a very long time,
would be super duper useful for a lot of people, because quantum field theory in particular is a part of modern physics
that is absolutely central and gets very, very little airtime in popular discussions. We talk about quantum mechanics
a lot. We talk about entanglement in the measurement problem and all these weird things, bell inequalities and so
forth. And then we skip to speculative stuff about string theory or quantum gravity or the multiverse or inflation. But
the actual physicists doing their jobs are thinking about quantum field theory all the time. And you rarely get a very
full discussion of that in popular media. We recently did talk to Matt Strassler, who wrote a wonderful book Waves
in an Impossible Sea that talks about quantum field theory, but it is the opposite level of mathematical
explicitness. It's all about trying to explain in words as carefully as you can how quantum fields work,
whereas quanta and fields, the book that I've written is a short action packed introduction to both quantum
mechanics and to its specific implementation in the context of field theory, which is where modern physics lives.
That's what we're really thinking about. So we need to understand why in the world you could take a field,
quantize it and have it look like particles. That's the big mystery of quantum field theory. But that one, you know,
historically was figured out relatively early on. And it opens the floodgates. Once you understand that, once you
understand that you can quantize fields and get particles out of them without putting particles in explicitly,
there's a whole bunch of things that can happen, ways that fields can interact with each other and influence each
other that leads to interactions that we measure with Feynman diagrams. I should say that we predict using Feynman
diagrams that we measure in experiments, of course, all sorts of conceptual questions with infinities and
renormalization, but also new phenomena that can happen like gauge symmetries giving rise to forces, breaking those
symmetries with the Higgs mechanism, confining things inside nucleons and violating parity conservation and things like
that. So it's a whole wonderful zoo of things that we've spent the whole 20th century and beyond trying to understand.
So there's a lot to discuss in a short solo podcast. I'm not going to cover it all. Sorry about that. You can read the
book. I did do the audio book version of the book. It's about 10 hours of me talking. If you don't get enough from the
podcast, you can download that. And I just read the book and I try to explain what's in the pictures and the equations
and everything like that. So here I'm just going to hit some highlights. I really do want to focus on that idea of why
quantum fields, how you get particles out of that and the door that it opens to other things. So we'll be very
explicit about where the particles come from, be a little bit more hand wavy and gestural about where all these other
symmetries and how they get involved. But it's important stuff. It'll give you, I think, a feeling for the kind of thing that
we're going to be talking about in the book if you are so inclined to go more deeply. So with that, let's go.
I think it's useful to get one thing straight right away. Sometimes you will hear quantum mechanics came first, and then we
invented quantum field theory. It's fine to say that because these are words that we make up definitions of, right? You know, you're
always allowed to define the words however you want. It's not the best way of thinking about things. Quantum mechanics is a
broad framework that includes quantum field theory as part of it. It is literally the quantum theory of fields. Quantum
mechanics applied to fields. That's what it is. And it's a very simple statement, obviously, but I remember literally taking
quantum field theory in graduate school. And it took me a while to figure out, you know, Oh, it's just quantum mechanics. It's
the same quantum mechanics we had before just applied to a different system. It's a subset of quantum mechanics. The thing that we
usually call quantum mechanics is the quantum mechanics of particles. And quantum field theory is the quantum mechanics of
fields. So the very first thing we need to understand to wrap our brains around the idea of quantum field theory is the word
of. Now this does this isn't some sort of Bill Clinton esque parsing of language at a very deep level. We're really trying to
understand, you know, what do you mean when you say you have a quantum theory of some thing, like particles or fields, or for that
matter, strings or loops or or what, whatever, what does it mean to have a quantum theory theory of some thing? And the answer to
that is that when we do quantum mechanics, whether it's particles or fields or whatever, the usual way we start, not always, but
usually we start with a classical theory. And then we have a cookbook, we have a set of procedures for converting a classical
theory into a quantum theory. We call this quantization, surprisingly enough. And there's a lot hidden in that word quantization
or to quantize. We don't really have a well defined map from the space of all classical theories to quantum theories. So think of it as a way to
find quantum mechanical theories, starting from a classical theory. Okay, and usually we start from particles. That's what we do. When we first
learn quantum mechanics. And it makes sense when we developed quantum mechanics in the early 1900s, people were more focused on the
particles, the fields were always there, they were thinking about them. But they wanted to get the particles right first. So when you say you
have a classical theory of something, you know the vague idea of classical physics, Allah, Isaac Newton, you have some particles and they
have positions, and they have velocities, or equally well, if the mass of the particles have fixed number, you can talk about the
momentum of the particle momentum is just mass times velocity. For technical reasons, that Professor Hamilton figured out it's
actually better to think about momentum than velocity, but it really doesn't matter, they're completely convertible back and forth. And the point
is that for any one particle, once you know those two things, position and momentum, you can figure out what's going to happen to it. Right, you
can plug into Newton's laws of motion or Hamilton's equations or Lagrange's equations, there's many different mathematically equivalent ways to do
classical physics. These are all explained in volume one of the biggest ideas, space, time and motion. And the thing that is the same in all
these different ways of thinking about classical physics is the amount of information you need to say what's going to happen next. If you were
Laplace's demon, if you were able to predict exactly what was implied by the laws of physics, the data you need to be given is the position and
momentum of all the particles. And then it's deterministic, right, the wonderful thing about classical mechanics is it says what's going to happen,
it's not ambiguous about it. So quantum mechanics says, Okay, think about this one particle, just to start, we have position and momentum, throw away the
momentum, forget about momentum just for a minute. Okay. And quantum mechanics says, instead of having a position, we now describe the particle by having a
wave function, psi of x, if x were the position, psi, the Greek letter psi is the wave function, which assigns a number to every possible position.
That's the wave function. And usually that number will be zero or very, very close to zero almost everywhere. And then in some little blob,
like region of space, that number will not be zero. That's the wave function for any possible place, you might see the particle were you to look for it,
there's going to be a number, a complex number in particular. And what the wave function tells you is the probability of observing the particle to have that
position. So in particular, you calculate the probability by squaring the wave function, or since it's a complex number, you take the modulus squared of the wave
function. And in the new book, quantum fields, we go through quantum mechanics really quickly. First three chapters, we do it wave functions,
measurement, entanglement, and then we're moving on and devoting most of the book to quantum field theory, because that's a very rich and very
complicated set of ideas. So where did momentum go is one obvious question. And the answer is, you know, when I said that the wave function varies
with space, how fast is varying, how fast the wave function is wiggling up and down, basically tells you the momentum, or more accurately, you can turn it into a
prediction for measuring the momentum to have any particular value in exactly the same way wave function squared kind of procedure. So the point is the thing I don't want to get lost,
the thing you need to understand for the rest of the discussion is, when you go from classical mechanics to quantum mechanics, you start with some object
with a definite state position and momentum, and you switch to a wave function that will tell you the probability of getting different
observational outcomes. That's the evolution or the transformation from a classical theory to a quantum theory. And in that case, we were talking about
particles, and it's natural to talk about particles, because if you think about the development of quantum mechanics, what were they thinking
about? We often attribute the birth of quantum mechanics to Planck and Einstein. In 1900, Planck understood black body radiation, in terms of chunks of energy
being given off by vibrating electrons and atoms. In 1905, Einstein really said, you know, all electromagnetic radiation can be thought of as coming out in these
particle like quanta, which we now call photons. But subsequent to that, the work by people like Niels Bohr and Louis de Broglie and Werner Heisenberg, etc. was more focused on particles, in particular
on the electrons orbiting atoms. So they were trying to understand the structure of atoms, how atoms would give off radiation, things like that. So it was the particles that were really front and
center. And then therefore, it makes sense when you're an undergraduate physics student, you learn about the quantum mechanics of particles. I should say, vis a vis the book that is coming out, the reason why I can pack a whole
discussion of both quantum mechanics and quantum field theory into a relatively short book, even though I do include all the equations, is because you're not trying to solve the equations, you're not going to come out of reading
this book, being able to calculate the scattering probability of two particles or the decay rate of the Higgs boson or anything like that. You will understand what those words mean. And you will have an idea what the equations are behind
them. But I'm not training you to be a practicing physicist. And that philosophy is remarkably liberating. So you know, just to be super clear here, very, a very small percentage of people who get
bachelor's degrees in physics ever learn quantum field theory. In fact, plenty of people get PhDs in physics without ever learning quantum field theory. Just like in volume one, we did Einstein's equation for general
relativity, that's still a classical theory, Einstein's theory of gravity, many, many people get a physics education and do not learn general relativity. So part of the reason why I'm writing these books is because I want more people to be able to
grasp these ideas, even physics majors, plenty of physics majors don't get to learn about these things. And they're not that inaccessible, honestly, you can learn them, I promise that you'll get that you had a feeling for here in the podcast. Okay, so, so I'm going to keep referring back to, you know, what we study as physics
students, even though I don't expect you to grow up to be necessarily a physics student or a working physicist, that's the idea. Okay, so the first thing we would learn, if we were undergraduates,
sometimes in your sophomore year, or your junior year, maybe, sometimes the universities will split it up, so you'll sort of get like a little hint, even in your very first year about quantum mechanics, and you'll do it seriously later on in your junior or
sophomore years. And you'll be mostly taught the quantum theory of particles. So you're imagining that the system you're studying is an electron or something like that. Okay, orbiting in an atom, and you have this wave function, and you have an equation that tells you how the wave function behaves, and that's the short of your equation, there's
different, again, mathematically equivalent ways of thinking about it, but that's the basic idea. And from that, you can predict things like the spectrum of radiation being absorbed or emitted from the atoms. So the general idea is, as we said, start with
particles, make wave functions, and then give you a set of rules for how the wave functions behave. They evolve according to the Schrodinger equation. When you're not measuring them, when you are measuring them, they collapse, and you get a
probability of observing something. Then you discovered that there's this thing called entanglement. To be very honest, you could possibly take an entire one semester intro to quantum course as an undergraduate and never hear about
entanglement. I know that's weird, because if you if you hear the popular level discussions, they'll talk about entanglement all the time. But you can easily spend a semester just solving the Schrodinger equation for, you know, different kinds of potential
energies that the electron could be moving in. So let me tell you, taking that undergraduate course is not necessarily as sexy as you might imagine that it is if you just heard popular level discussions of quantum mechanics. And all this stuff you learn about the
particles, about the wave functions, about the Schrodinger equation, it gives you a wonderfully precise, quantitative, and experimentally testable understanding of what happens in atoms of the ways that there are different energy levels, different
orbitals, and so forth, and how they show up experimentally. And let me emphasize that bit about different energy levels, because this is absolutely crucial to the essence of quantum mechanics, in a way that I think is misunderstood by a lot of people who don't study it
professionally, which is the word quantum is a little bit misleading, I would say. What does quantum mean? Before you knew about quantum mechanics, the word quantum was still around. It meant a discrete amount.
Of something, one chunk of something, right? The idea of a quanta, sorry, a quantum or many quanta would be the plural is rather than having a smooth distribution of things, you have individual pieces, discrete elements. Okay, those are the quanta. So
particulate particle like pixelated or whatever you want to call it. Okay, that's the sort of philosophy behind the word, quanta or quantum. And calling this theory that we're discussing, quantum mechanics, or quantum field theory makes you think informally that
maybe the world is divided up into chunks, right, into pieces into discrete bits that the world is not fundamentally smooth, but rather fundamentally discrete. Maybe this inspires you to think that once you include gravity in the game, space and maybe space time will be divided up into chunks and to make a little lattice, it'll be little pixels or something like that.
This is a fundamental, deep, terrible, awful, no good understanding of what quantum mechanics actually says. Because if you think about what I just said, if we take the idea of a particle, replace it by the idea of a wave function, and that wave function obeys the Schrodinger equation, nowhere there is the idea of chunks of anything.
Nowhere there is the idea that the world is broken up into discrete bits of matter or energy. It's as smooth as it could possibly be. Everything is continuous and smooth. The wave function is a function that spreads out all over the place. The Schrodinger equation smoothly evolves that wave function, right? Where does this idea of quantum come from? And the answer is that, well, it's exactly analogous to the very well
known analogy that we use of plucking a guitar string. So if you have a guitar string that is tied down at two ends and you pluck it, there's a fundamental wavelength at which it vibrates, which leads to a fundamental frequency of sound being given off. But there are also harmonics, right? If you imagine, if you can visualize in your head, I know this is an audio podcast, but visualize in your head a string being held down at both ends and vibrating sort of uniformly
smoothly up and down, except at the ends. So in the middle, it's vibrating up and down, tied down at the end. So the amplitude of the vibration kind of goes down to zero at both ends where it's tied down. That is the fundamental frequency at which is vibrating. And then the first harmonic frequency is it looks kind of like an up and down wave like shape. So it starts at one tie down end goes up halfway through the string, it comes back down to zero again. And in the other half of
the string, it's going down on the right hand side where as it was going up on the left hand side. And so the wavelength is half of what it was. And therefore the frequency is twice what it was. And these are two different things that can happen to the same string. And then of course you have even higher harmonics where the wave goes up down up again, and vice and all the way up for higher and higher
frequencies, shorter and shorter wavelengths. The reason why I'm talking about this guitar string analogy, and if you're a talented guitar player, you can actually play the harmonics, get them to come out of your guitar, even without getting the fundamental notes to come out of your guitar. But that's a different podcast discussion entirely.
The point is, the string that you're plucking has nothing discreet about it. It's not that the string is only allowed to do certain things, the string could have any shape that it wants to as long as it's tied down at both ends, right? But it naturally has a set of ways of vibrating that are sort of easiest to make it vibrate at that are very natural and direct. In fact, at the technical level, we would say
these are the ones that have a definite energy in their vibrations. And so the discreteness comes not because the string itself is discreet, but because its behavior falls into a discrete set of possibilities, the fundamental frequency, the first harmonic, second harmonic, etc. And you can calculate exactly what the frequencies are, and so forth. So there's kind of an emergent nature to the discreteness. The discreteness
is not built into the system. It is a feature of the solutions to the equations that govern the system in some high level way, but you can just see it pictorially. You can tell why. You can understand that it makes sense that there is, you know, the lowest note, a little bit higher note, a little bit higher note than that, and so forth. That phenomenon is exactly why, in quantum mechanics, we see discrete behavior for things like the energy of
radiation being given off by one of these atoms. So instead of thinking of the guitar string being tied down at both ends, think of the wave function of an electron in an atom. Let's make our lives easy. Let's make it a hydrogen atom. So there's only one electron and there's only one particle in the nucleus, a single proton. Okay. Well, the electron wave function is not tied down. It can extend very gradually out to infinity, right? But the wave function has to go to zero.
At infinity, as it gets very, very, very far away from the proton, it's going to go to zero because there's only, you can only have a finite amount of wave function. The wave function can't spread uniformly over all of space. It has to be sort of concentrated somewhere. And we're imagining that it's concentrated near the proton in the atom.
So even though the electrons wave function is not literally tied down, effectively it is, it goes to zero as you get far away from the atom. And you can play exactly the same game with the electron wave function that you play with the plucked guitar string. There are technical differences because the energy is a little bit different and also because it's a three dimensional thing, the electron wave function, rather than the single one dimensional guitar string.
But the essence of the issue is the same. There will be a lowest energy state of the electron, which is analogous to the fundamental frequency of the guitar string. And that's the lowest energy the electron can have in hydrogen atom. And then there is a next highest energy level state that has some discrete extra amount of energy.
It is not, it is not the case that the electrons wave function can't do anything at once. It can vibrate in whatever way it wants.
But there's a natural set of ways that it can vibrate or ways that it can sort of arrange itself around the proton.
And these are the ways that have definite energies. And these are the natural places for the electron to settle down into and what we actually observe.
So the discreteness of the energy levels of an electron, which by the way you learn about in chemistry class, we learn about the orbitals of an electron around an atom. That's exactly what's going on.
These are not because you've put in any fundamental discreteness into the nature of the reality that you're talking about.
The reality is a smooth function obeying a smooth equation. It's the behavior of the solutions to that equation that has a discrete character.
And I'm really sort of dwelling on this and emphasizing it because it's going to become super duper important when we get to quantum field theory.
So the lesson here is you start with a completely smooth, continuous, arbitrarily varying thing, the wave function of the electron.
And then you examine its behavior under very certain special circumstances, namely it's sitting there glued to a proton in a hydrogen atom.
And you find that the possible places you could find, the possible states you could find the electron wave function in come in a discrete set.
So again, that discreteness is emergent because it's a property of the different solutions to the equation.
In this case, the Schrodinger equation rather than the equation for a string in a guitar.
So that's where quanta come from.
It's not because you pixelated the universe.
It's because you've solved an equation and the solutions come in a discrete set.
OK. And historically, this was all done in the 19 teens and 20s.
And we figured this out.
Quantum mechanics was great success. Great.
But we always knew, even back in the 20s, that the world was not simply made of particles, right?
As we said, the very first glimmers of quantum mechanics came from thinking about fields, not about particles.
In the 19th century, we had figured out that electricity and magnetism were two sets of phenomena that were unified in a description that involved two different fields, the electric field and the magnetic field.
And in fact, once Einstein and Minkowski came along with special relativity, we realized that the electric field, the magnetic field were literally two different aspects of the same underlying field.
So at some point, we just call it the electromagnetic field.
And a field is a very different thing than a particle.
A particle, classically, let's just think classically now, we haven't quantized anything yet.
A particle has a location, as we said, it has a position, it has a velocity.
That's what a particle is, basically.
Whereas a field is everywhere, okay?
And I need to be very, very careful here as careful as I can be to distinguish the different conceptual things that sound very, very similar to each other.
In this case, a classical field is very, very different from a quantum wave function, okay?
They seem similar because a classical field has a value at every point in space.
The electric field has a value at every point in space.
It's a little vector because the electric field is not just a number, it's a little arrow with a direction and a magnitude at every point in space.
You can't see it, it's invisible, it's all around you.
The magnetic field, likewise, you know, you can detect it.
If you put iron filings on a piece of paper near a magnet, they will line up with the magnetic field, showing the influence of the magnetic field around you.
Also, a compass that you can carry around will point toward the North Pole for exactly that same reason, and you can detect the electric field, likewise, but they're there, they're around you at every point in space around you right now,
including inside you, for that matter, and also, you know, out in interstellar space, every point in space has a value for the electric field and the magnetic field.
That's what a field is.
A field is an entity that takes a value at every point in space.
You're very tempted to say, well, what are the fields made of?
That would be a bad question to ask.
I mean, you're welcome to ask it, but the answer is there isn't anything that the fields are made of.
The world is going to be made of the fields, okay?
The fields are the bottom layer of reality, according to quantum field theory.
Now, quantum field theory might not be the final answer.
I'll leave it in gesture at the very end toward the idea that it's not the final answer.
But according to quantum field theory, the rules are that we start with fields and we build everything else out of them.
Now, that idea that there is a number, a quantity, something like that at every point in spacetime,
sounds very similar to the wave function of an electron, right?
I told you that the wave function of an electron assigns a complex number to every point in space.
And that number squared will give you the probability of observing the electron there.
But what if you had two electrons, right?
You do know that there is this thing that we talk about in chapter three of the new book called Entanglement.
An entanglement says that when you have two electrons, and let's say if you were actually even better,
let's make it more clear because electrons are identical particles, and that's going to get in the way of being correct sometimes here.
Let's say we have an electron and a proton.
So two particles, but very distinguishable.
You know which is the electron, which is the proton.
And call the position that you might observe the electron at
x1, and the position you might observe the proton at x2.
You know if you looked for these particles, whether you found the electron or proton, they're very different looking particles.
Then the phenomenon of entanglement
tells you that the combined state of both particles is not a wave function for the electron
and a wave function for the proton.
It is a single wave function for the system
that is made of the electron and the proton. In other words, there is only one wave function.
Ultimately, it will be called the wave function of the universe because it actually includes the whole universe, not just these two particles.
But for right now, it is a wave function of these two particles.
And it is a function of x1 and x2.
For every possible position you could find the electron at and position you can find the proton at,
there will be a complex number.
And you ask the question, where are these two particles simultaneously?
And the wave function tells you a complex number that you square to get the probability
of seeing those two particles at that place.
So this seems like a little detail that might not be very important, but it's actually super duper crucial here.
Namely that the wave function doesn't depend on space.
In this case, in the case of the electron and the proton, the wave function depends on two copies of space.
One copy saying, where is the electron? One copy saying, where is the proton?
So in a very real sense, even though it sounds like a technicality, the wave function is not a field.
The wave function of the universe, the wave function of the real world, the wave function that we care about when we do quantum mechanics,
is not a field in the same sense that the electric field or the magnetic field is.
The magnetic field doesn't care how many particles you have. It still has a value at every point in space.
The wave function of a two particle system doesn't have a unique value at some point in space.
It the thing it depends on is the configuration space of all the particles and for that matter, as we will see all the fields
in the universe.
So it's a different kind of thing. There is sort of an accidental
coincidental resemblance of the wave function of one particle to a field.
But the idea, the conceptual notion of a wave function is a very different kind of thing than a classical field, okay?
Classical fields really, literally, honestly are things that have values at each point in space.
The electric field, the magnetic field, also the gravitational potential field and other such kinds of fields.
Gravity was always thought to be a little bit trickier even before general relativity came along.
So most of the attention in the early 20th century was being focused on the electromagnetic field.
So there was this big idea near the turn of that century that matter
was made of particles, electrons, protons, and we eventually discovered neutrons and other things like that.
Whereas forces were being carried by fields because we knew about gravity. We knew about electromagnetism, etc.
So we thought,
roughly speaking, even though it was not completely laid down explicitly,
that the world was going to consist of these two kinds of things, particles and fields, matter and forces, right?
Matter from the particles, forces from the fields.
And so once quantum mechanics came along in its more robust form in the 1920s,
and you understood the quantum mechanics of particles,
it was very, very natural to say, okay, now we will turn to the quantum mechanics of fields.
And that's what the word of means. This is where we started this digression, understanding the word of.
The word of means we're starting with a classical theory of something,
particles to start, now fields, and we're going to construct a quantum theory of it. What does that mean?
It means take the classical theory,
take the
thing that plays the role of a position for a particle, right? For a field, fields don't have a position.
Fields are everywhere. You can't just say what the position of a field is.
But the role of position is basically played by the value of the field at every point in space.
And then you're saying, well, okay, what's the what's the role of the momentum or the velocity?
Well, it is the rate of change. It's the time derivative of the field at every point in space.
But again, happily, we don't need to think about that too deeply, because what happens when you
quantize a particle is you temporarily forget about the momentum and just focus on position.
When we quantize a field, we're going to start by thinking hard about the space of all possible
profiles of the field. That is to say, at every point in space, we imagine the field has a value.
And conceptually, we can ask, you know, so what is the space? What is the set of all possible
values that can have it all at once?
So I'm not asking, you know, what is the value at this point x and this point y and this point z,
et cetera, et cetera. I'm saying all throughout space, all at once, the field sort of has a shape,
right? The field has an individual value at every point. So an infinite number of values,
one value at every point, that is a profile of the field, okay? That is a possible answer to the
question. If I could imagine measuring the field instantaneously all throughout the universe,
what would it look like? That is a profile of the field. And that is the idea that plays the
analogous role to the position of a single particle. So you can see that, you know, mathematically,
conceptually, this is a little bit more intimidating than particles. For a particle,
you just had a position. It's at a location. Here it is. I can give you three numbers, x, y, z.
That's where it is. For the field, you have to tell me what it's doing at every point throughout
an infinitely big universe. That seems much harder to do. But fields existed. So we have to try to
deal with them. In fact, I should also mention that beyond the existence of the electromagnetic
field, there was also the phenomenon of radioactivity, okay? There was the experimental
discovery that particles could turn into other kinds of particles. Particles could
decay and give off particles. Particles could be created and destroyed, right? Even at the level
of particles. And the reason why I'm mentioning this is because if you take the Schrodinger equation
for a system of one electron or two electrons or three electrons or whatever, the number of
electrons never changes, according to the Schrodinger equation. If you just do particle quantum
mechanics, you're going to be stuck with the same number of particles that you always had.
You need to sort of generalize it a little bit, give it, you can do this. You can sort of say,
all right, I'm going to imagine ways that the number of particles can change. But as we'll see,
or as we'll become natural at some point, basically what you're doing is inventing field
theory when you do that. Field theory is a very natural way of accounting for the fact
that the number of particles in a system can change over time. Okay, that was just an aside.
I'm going to get back to the electromagnetic field just for a second. So we knew about the
electromagnetic field. We knew that we would have to incorporate it into quantum mechanics at some
point. And people tried to do it very early on in the development of quantum mechanics,
people like Paul Dirac, Heisenberg and others tried to quantize the electromagnetic field.
People like Enrico Fermi wrote down theories where numbers of particles could change using the idea
of fields. So the question became, you know, what does it mean to take something that is
already a field like the electromagnetic field, and to quantize it to give it a wave function
of some sort. So I can tell you the answer, and it's the correct answer, it's just sort of
presented in a way that doesn't seem very helpful. To every possible profile of the field,
that is to say to every possible configuration of the field all throughout space,
we will attach a number, a complex number, that is the wave function of the field. And
were we to imagine observing the field everywhere throughout space simultaneously all at once,
we would take that wave function and square it to get the probability we would observe
the field to be in that configuration. So I hope that that made a little bit of sense,
but I also hope that it's a little intimidating and a little baffling as to how we would actually
make any progress at a practical level with that. It was relatively easy to handle the idea of a
wave function of a particle, but the wave function of a field just seems like a completely,
you know, impossible to wrestle mathematical beast, right? To every possible field configuration,
we assign a number that just seems impractical to write it down. What would that wave function
really ever look like? And indeed, were you to take a quantum field theory class at a university
somewhere or pick up a real quantum field theory textbook, they almost never do this. This thing
that I just told you, assigning a complex number to every possible field configuration,
that is a perfectly valid way of thinking about quantum field theory, but it's not really the
practical way. And so that's the reason why I could take a quantum field theory course
as a graduate student and have it remain hidden to me for a long time that really what we were
doing was just quantum mechanics because it's presented in a very different way using very
different mathematical tools. But I think that it's conceptually easier if we try to stick as
close as possible to the same notion of quantization and converting a classical theory into a quantum
theory in the field context that we usually use in the particle context. So the continuity of the
ideas remains as explicit as it can be. So what are we supposed to do with the fact that we're
imagining profiles of fields stretching all throughout space and attaching complex numbers
to every possible profile, squaring those complex numbers to get the probability that we would
observe the field to look like that. The answer is Fourier transforms. That's honestly the answer.
If you look online, if you look at the webpage that I have for quanta and fields, you look at the
table of contents that I published there, you will see an appendix. There's like 12 chapters,
plus an appendix, and the chapters all have punchy titles like atoms and interactions and
effective field theory and matter or whatever. So there's a lot of, you know, basic ideas that are
pretty big. It's pretty obviously big important ideas. And then the appendix is Fourier transforms,
which seems like a little bit of an ugly duckling in the collection, right? Like some specific
mathy sounding idea that hopefully I didn't have anything to do with. Indeed, I tell the story
that when I was an undergraduate myself, I first learned Fourier transforms, I literally was thinking
like, this is a quintessential example of a mathematical technique I will never actually use in
real life. And then you discover, once you take quantum field theory, as well as other parts of
physics, the Fourier transforms are the single most important thing in lots of areas of theoretical
physics. So what is a Fourier transform? It's just another way of thinking about the value of a
field. Okay, we said a value of the value of field, the profile, the configuration of a field,
whatever you want to call it, is basically a function of space or a function of space time.
Let's just think space. Let's not, we don't need to worry about evolution right now, although we
can, we will evolve through time at some point. So at every point in space, there's a value of
the field, that's the field profile. Okay, so to give you the information about what the field
profile is, requires in principle, an infinite amount of data, right, I have to list every
point in space, that's an infinite number of points. And at each point, I tell you what the field is
doing. Now, realistically, for fields that we might care about, maybe there's some simple
ways of compressing all that information into a compact notation or whatever. But in principle,
that's what I have to give you. The idea of a Fourier transform is, I can represent that
information in a much more convenient way, the information about what is the field doing at
every point in space. Think of a simple kind of field configuration, namely a pure wave,
a pure sine function or cosine function, a sinusoidal wave, that is just a fancy wave saying
a wave that literally just goes up and down with an absolutely fixed wavelength and an absolutely
fixed amplitude. Okay, the typical idea of a wave, a plane wave that stretches all throughout space
that you might see in a picture, you know, very wave like thing, not complicated ripples and going
in different directions, just a very smooth, regular wave stretching all throughout space.
That's an example of a simple wave, a wave that a configuration of the field,
waves are just configurations of fields, by the way, there's almost no difference between the
word wave and the word field, except sadly, we have attached the word wave to wave functions,
which are different kinds of things. I know, that's very annoying. Sorry about that. I wasn't
to blame for that. Anyway, this particular kind of simple wave, a sinusoidal wave,
a wave with a definite wavelength that remains absolutely constant all throughout infinitely
big space. That is a plane wave. It is something we can represent mathematically using sines and
cosines. Okay, if you know a little bit about your trigonometry functions. And we call a wave
of a definite wavelength a mode of the field. And of course, most field configurations aren't
going to be that simple, right, they are going to be more unpredictable as you go from place to
place. But we're choosing just for a moment to focus on very, very simple, very, very regular
configurations of the fields, one that ones that look like absolutely uniform sine waves all throughout
space. So back in, I don't know, but I think it was the 1800s. Professor Fourier noticed that if I
took different waves, that is to say waves of different wavelengths, right, so waves of each
wave has a definite wavelength, I'm imagining a mode is what we call it a mode is a wave of
definite wavelength. So I'm imagining different modes. And he says, if I add them together,
I can get something that is not a mode, right, because if I add two waves together with different
wavelengths, I will not get a simple sine wave, we'll get something that looks more complicated
than that. And if I add three or 100 billion waves together, then I can get things that look more
complicated than just a simple sine wave. And I don't know what his actual thought process was,
it was probably a little bit more systematic than that. But Fourier asked himself, is it possible
that if I add an infinite number of waves together, I can get any shape of the field I want?
And the answer is yes, otherwise we wouldn't be going through this, right? The answer is,
I can express any field I want any configuration of the field, any, any increase and decrease and
change in direction of a field all throughout space, you give that to me, I'm going to express it as a
sum of these nice simple modes, modes with a definite wavelength, I add up different wavelengths
together, I get something that doesn't look like it has a wavelength at all, it's an arbitrary
mess, literally any profile of the field can be written as a sum of modes. And the point is,
that's the Fourier transform, rather than giving you the information about what the field value is
at every point in space, I give you how much of each mode contributes to the field. I guess I
should be super duper careful here, say not only can you take any profile, any configuration of
the field you want and express it as a sum of modes of fixed wavelength, but that expression is unique
that to say given a profile, there is one and only one way of expressing it as a sum of modes
of fixed wavelength, that's what the Fourier transform does, it tells you what that way is,
that way of expressing some wildly varying function as a sum of nice sine waves and cosines.
And the information is now been transformed, the information that used to be at every point in
space, I tell you the value of the field, now the information is, I tell you how much of a
contribution the field gets from each mode, from each sine wave with a definite wavelength.
Some of them, some wavelengths might be very important, so there's a big contribution,
so there's a big number times the sine wave in the sum of all this infinite number of them,
some might not be that important. And this fact is kind of amazing, this fact is not at all
intuitive, you take a bunch of perfectly regular up and down waves and in principle you can add
them together to get any behavior you want, you might not have guessed that you could do that,
but you can mathematically show that it's true. So in some sense that's nice, it's cute, right,
it's a mathematical fact, but have we really learned anything useful by doing this? The Fourier
transform is a way of saying I can start with whatever field profile I want, I can turn it into
an infinite sum over waves of different definite wavelengths. Well, yes, it turns out to be super
important for the following reasons. If I think about the energy of a field, okay,
the very first thing we're going to think about when we quantize our fields is think about what
energy the field has, and we're going to look at solutions of definite energy, right? So what is
the essence of the energy of a field? A particle has two kinds of energy, it has kinetic energy,
so a particle has an energy that depends on its velocity squared, one half mv squared,
in terms of the mass and the velocity of the particle, and it might also have a potential
energy. So if the particle is moving in an electric field or something like that,
the value of the electric field in charge of the particle will contribute to the potential
energy of the field. Sorry, the potential energy of the particle will get a contribution from
the electric field. The field itself has three kinds of energy, it has a kinetic energy just
like a particle does, but it means something different, we call it a kinetic energy, but it's
not the field is moving, it's that at each point the field is changing its value, okay? The field
has a value at each point, if that field is just constant, then the kinetic constant with time,
then the kinetic energy of the field is zero at that point, but if it's sort of vibrating up and
down, for example, then it has a non-zero kinetic energy. A field can also have a potential energy,
but it means a slightly different thing, because for the particle, the potential energy means how
it's sort of moving through space and feeling different values of the electric field or the
gravitational field or whatever. For a field, what we call the potential energy, I know it's
very annoying, we use exactly the same words to mean different things, but mathematically they
look the same, that's why it's useful to look at the equations. For the field, we think about the
field interacting with itself, so an electron gets a potential energy from interacting with the
gravitational field or the electric field or the magnetic field, the fields get potential energy
from interacting with themselves, and different fields will interact with themselves in different
ways, but all that matters for that is the value of the field, so the kinetic energy depends on the
derivative, the time rate of change of the field, whereas the potential energy only matters,
only depends on the value of the field, it does not matter how fast things are changing.
And you might guess what the third kind of energy is, first kind was kinetic,
second time was potential, there's something that is new for fields that doesn't exist for
particles, which is the gradient energy. The idea is that not only can the value at each point in
space of the field change with time, but as you go to a nearby point in space, there can be differences
in the values of the fields, like the fields can be stretched a little bit or distorted a
little bit from point to point, if the field was exactly constant through space, then there wouldn't
be any stretching or distortion energy, what we call the gradient energy, but usually the field
is changing from place to place, that will contribute to the energy of the field. Indeed,
those of you who have read volume one, space, time, and motion know about relativity, and you
know that the difference between space and time will change depending on your point of view,
and therefore you will not be surprised to learn that for fields, which I didn't say this explicitly
yet, but these fields are deeply embedded in the context of relativity, okay, so there's a
relationship between the kinetic energy, the rate of change with respect to time, and the gradient
energy, the rate of change with respect to space, because space and time are related to each other,
so we have three kinds of energy, okay, kinetic energy, gradient energy, potential energy,
and to solve the equations for what the field does, you need to know all of these, so you need
to know what the field is doing at every point in space, because what it's doing at a nearby
point in space will affect what the field does at one point in space, so that's just a simple
very basic dirty technical level, it's kind of annoying to have these different kinds of energy
floating around, now remember the question we're trying to answer here, why do we bother thinking
about Fourier transforms, why do we bother thinking about the profile of the field as a sum of plane
wave modes, rather than as just values at each individual point in space, well think about
those energies, think about the kinetic energy, the potential energy, the gradient energy,
if you write the field as modes, if you take the Fourier transform, it still has a kinetic energy,
it's the same kind of thing, still has a potential energy, the same kind of thing, but the gradient
energy is a different kind of thing now, because by telling you that we're looking, we're focusing
in on one particular mode, one particular wave with fixed wavelength stretching throughout
all of space, I've told you how the wave changes from place to place, because it has a fixed wavelength,
right, I've given you that information, I don't need to separately give you that information at
every point, if I'm just looking at one mode of the field, then I have the gradient energy
sussed, I know what it is, I don't need to give you that extra information over and over again,
so it turns out that when we're solving the equations for the behavior of a field,
it's much easier to write down the solutions if we look at a mode of the field, or if we look at
modes of the field one at a time, rather than looking at positions in space and values of the
fields at positions in space, so that may or may not have been a convincing explanation,
in this audio podcast, I cannot show you the equations, but the equations make it super
duper clear, I promise you, and it is possible to follow them, do not get intimidated by the
equations, it's just an alien language, you can learn it, and once you learn it, you have a good
warm feeling of accomplishment, so it's worth doing, so the lesson, the upshot of all this
digression is, take a particular kind of field configuration, one with a absolutely fixed wavelength,
I happen to know that I can write any field configuration as a sum of many such things,
but let's keep that in the back of your mind and focus on one of them, pick a mode, pick a wave
that has a wavelength, a definite, very, very specific frequency it's vibrating at, ask what
it is doing, so in other words, when I quantize this, instead of assigning a complex number,
complex valued wave function to every field configuration, let me focus in on this one
mode of the field, and assign a complex number to every possible value of the mode, what does it
mean value of the mode, the wavelength is fixed, but the amplitude is not, so it might be a wave
of a certain wavelength that is very gently vibrating, just very slightly up and down,
or it could be vibrating by a lot, right, those are different ways that this mode could be vibrating,
and to each different amplitude, to each different height of the wave that it goes
up and down, I will assign a complex number, that is the wave function of this particular mode,
okay, and you can kind of see how this would be easier to make sense of, you know, modes that
are vibrating by a lot, right, modes that are, again, the wavelength is fixed, so through space
we imagine, you know, from point A to point B, it goes up and down with a certain wavelength,
but the amount by which it goes up and down in between where it's zero, one wavelength away,
the amount by which it goes up and down is arbitrary, and there's more energy when it
goes up by a lot than when it goes up by just a little bit, and here's where the miracle occurs,
okay, you might have thought this was a little bit dry and technical, and why are we bothering with
this, but a miracle is about to occur, I promise you, we're thinking of the wave function of a
single mode of a vibrating quantum field, and the mode itself that we're assigning a wave function to
is, now that we've told you its wavelength, it's just characterized by a single number, the height,
call it h, okay, the height of the wave that is vibrating up and down, so instead of psi of x for
a particle being a wave function, we're going to have psi of h, the wave function of the height of
the vibrating mode, and the exact thing that happened to the electron in the hydrogen atom,
where we said the wave function's got the taper off at zero, and you're going to get a set of
discrete solutions on the inside that look like orbitals and explain the different energy levels
of atoms, that exact same thing is going to happen to our mode of the quantum field. At very, very
large height functions, very, very large amplitudes of the wave shaking up and down, the wave function
is going to have to go to zero, because it can only be sort of localized in some particular set of
values, and therefore, when we solve the equation, we will get a discrete set of solutions, a discrete
set of possible wave functions for this one mode of this one field. There will be a lowest energy
wave function, and there will be a simple, separate, next highest energy wave function, and there will
be one higher than that, and there'll be a discrete tower of wave functions for this one particular
wave with one particular wavelength. Why do you care about that? Okay, I mean, maybe you're with
me this far, and you say, okay, I've taken my wave, I've decided to think about my wave as a sum of
modes of fixed wavelength, I've focused in on one particular mode, I have assigned a wave function
to it, and I've found that the wave function of that mode has a discrete set of solutions.
Well, we're going to poke around, and this is something that's going to be hard to, I can't
explain it really over words, but you can, you can check out the book, but I'm going to tell you
some facts, and you can choose to believe me or not. So look at that lowest energy wave function,
it's lowest energy, we're going to say it's the vacuum, as we call it, okay, there's sort of nothing
there. And then there's the next highest energy wave function, it has an energy, let's call it M,
the letter M, and it turns out that it's not unique, the vacuum, the lowest energy mode,
the lowest energy wave function is unique, there's only one such thing, but there's an infinite
collection of next highest energy modes, which basically correspond to looking at the same kind
of behavior, but in different reference frames, with different velocities, if you like, and you
can calculate the energy of all of these different modes, basically the same, sorry, of all of these
different wave functions, basically the same kind of wave function just looked at from different
reference frames, and they get more and more energy, the more velocity you have with respect to
the rest frame, okay, and then you look at the next highest energy wave functions, and it, if the
first one had a lowest energy of two M, so you have a vacuum state with energy zero, a next highest
one with energy M, or higher depending on if you have velocity with respect to it, and the one after
that has an energy two times M, so what's going on, it's going to be one with three times M,
four times M, etc., absolutely uniform growth of energies of these different particular wave
functions, well, I'm not going to keep you in suspense much longer, the vacuum state is what
we, what we interpret as a quantum state with no particles, it's empty space, that first excited
state as we call it, with energy M, I should say, yeah, I'm sorry, I should, this is back in my mind,
and it certainly will be in your mind if you're reading the book, but I didn't say it out loud,
we always in particle physics use units where the speed of light is set equal to one, so C,
the speed of light equals one to me, and so when I say it has energy M, what I really mean is it has
energy MC squared, what is that, where have we ever heard that before, the energy of something is MC
squared, ah, that is the energy of a single particle with mass M in its rest frame, if you move to
another rest frame, the energy will go up because it will also have a little bit of kinetic energy,
as well as the rest energy, what about this wave function that has an energy of two times M, well
that's really two times MC squared, what is that the energy of, it's the energy of two particles
with mass M, and then you have a set of other related wave functions where the particles are
moving with respect to each other, and then you have a vibrational wave function with energy three
times MC squared, etc, and they are all related to each other by exactly the ways that you would
expect a set of particles and their energies to be related to each other, that was a lot, and you
know in the book I go through this super explicitly, and I know that the actual manipulations are kind
of boring and tedious, right, but the result is so important, it's one of the most important
things literally in all of human knowledge, this particular result, because the result that we got
here through talking about Fourier transforms and thinking about quantum fields in terms of
modes with different wavelengths, and then the different ways that you could get a wave function
for that mode, the result we got here is saying that when you take a field which by itself is
continuous and smooth and nothing discreet about it, and you assign a wave function to the field
which is also by itself continuous and smooth and nothing discreet about it,
the solutions to the equations, the different kinds of behavior that that wave function of
the field can exhibit come in a discrete set, they look like particles, and you can go much
further than this in explicating the fact that they behave like particles, these are what particles
are according to quantum field theory, according to quantum field theory the world is not made of
particles, the world is not made of discrete lumps of energy, the world is made of fields that have
wave functions, if you want to you can just say the world is made of the wave function of the
fields, that's a that's a foundations of physics question that we're not going to get into right
now, but the point is there's nothing discreet or lumpy about what the world is made of, the
discreteness comes in how the world behaves, and it comes because we have quantized our fields,
this is a slightly more mathematically careful and sophisticated way of saying something you may
have heard me say before in other contexts, particles are vibrations in quantum fields,
that's what particles are, when you apply the rules of quantum mechanics to fields you get a set of
solutions that look like particles in exactly the same way that when you solve the Schrodinger
equation for an electron in an atom you get a set of discrete orbitals with discrete energies,
or for that matter when you pluck a guitar string you get a set of discrete frequencies at which
it vibrates, all the discreteness is emergent, that's where particles come from out of quantum
field theory, and you get literally everything that you expect from particles, many different
particles will have different energies going in exactly the same way, etc. Good, so I hope that
was convincing, I hope that you see a little bit now when you start with fields they can look like
particles and you know this means two things, it means that you know it putting yourself in the
mindset of a physicist in 1920s when quantum mechanics was being invented, okay? One is I
can take the electromagnetic field which I know and love since the time of Maxwell in the 1800s
and I can quantize it, I can do all this, I can treat it in terms of modes and I can assign
wave functions and I can get lumps of energy which I interpret as particles which we will
call photons, that's what photons are. The other thing is that these other things we had lying
around, the electrons, the protons, etc, the things we thought of as particles, we can now say well
maybe those are vibrations in quantum fields, so secretly without even trying very hard we have
stumbled on an enormously powerful unification of different kinds of physics in the late 1800s
we might have thought that the universe is made of fields and particles, particles being the matter
in the universe and fields being the forces, but now we're getting a glimpse of the idea thanks to
quantum mechanics that it's actually all just fields and the fields show up both as big classical
fields under the right circumstances and also as discrete individual particles under other
circumstances and so one challenge that we're faced with right away is why do electrons and
photons seem to behave so differently from each other and the answer basically comes down to
symmetry, the idea of symmetry as I say in the book it's very helpful in classical physics,
super helpful in relative in sorry particle-based quantum mechanics but it becomes absolutely
central in quantum field theory so much so there's a whole chapter in the book devoted to symmetry
where I teach you group theory, you will learn what SU2 and SU3 and all those things are, this is
one of the chapters that I actually wrote a lot more than appears in the book I wrote a lot and
then I'm trying to you know even though we're doing the equations I don't want it to be overwhelming
so I pared it down there was a lot that I had put in the original version of the chapter that
was a little bit more than you need to just do quantum field theory but the specific symmetries
we're talking about right now are spacetime symmetries so there's two different kinds of
symmetries you can get in quantum field theory there are symmetries of spacetime itself you
know there is translation invariance it doesn't matter where you do the experiment there's time
translation variance doesn't matter when you do the experiment rotational invariance boost
invariance doesn't matter how fast you're moving in space but then there's also what do we call
what we call internal symmetries where you don't change where you are or how you're oriented in
spacetime you just rotate fields into each other and and both of those are gonna be very important
but for the question at hand right now the difference between photons and electrons one of
the differences comes down to how these fields change when you do a rotation in space we're
dealing here with relativistic quantum field theory that's sort of implicit when we say
quantum field theory but you know it's not necessarily that you need to be relativistic
that you need to be thinking about relativity when you do field theory relativity in this case in
this sense means that it's everything is relative including the velocity of two different objects
with respect to each other right there's no such thing as the velocity of an object there's just
the relative velocity of two different kinds of objects now you can have circumstances where it's
appropriate to do non relativistic field theory so if you're a condensed matter physicist so
you're not a particle physicist thinking about smashing two particles together in otherwise
empty space but you have a chunk of material here and maybe there's some vibrational modes
of the material right we were talking about modes before ways that a field can vibrate with a
definite wavelength well when you have a crystal or a metal or something like that there are ways
that the material can vibrate and you can separate that into modes and you can quantize them and
you're basically dealing with a non relativistic quantum field theory because there is a rest frame
that is well defined in that case the rest frame of the material that you're looking at but anyway
we're not doing that we are doing relativistic quantum field theory but for this question we
really care about rotations in space how do fields change as you rotate in space and really
we're dealing with the wave function of a field as we said and that makes things a wee bit more
complicated but i'm gonna again try to distill it down to the basic essences imagine you have
some wave function for some field uh in fact imagine that the state of the field is such
that it looks like there's one particle there remember we said that there are quantum states
of the field and an arbitrary quantum state of a field is basically a superposition of
different kinds of particles different numbers of particles there is a particular wave function
the field that could could have representing zero particles and different other ones representing
one or two or more in general you could be a superposition of all sorts of different kinds
that's quantum mechanics for you right that's what let that is what let's quantum field theory
describe changes between the number of particles because a single wave function for a single field
implicitly includes zero particle states one particle states two particle states and so on
upward so let's zoom in on a wave function representing a single particle so i want to i
want to emphasize this even though what is really going on is a quantum field there are
certain circumstances in which it's perfectly sensible to think of a single particle that is a
kind of excitation of a single quantum field so it's not incompatible we're not cheating when we
say let's think of one particle within the context of quantum field theory you can talk about what
an electron is doing in the context of quantum field theory so let's do that let's talk about a
single electron and let's ask what happens when you rotate your frame of reference in that for
that wave function of a single electron in fact let's not rotate by like 90 degrees let's rotate
all the way around 360 degrees two pi radians we scientists would say well your naive expectation
is that if you just do a whole rotation by 360 degrees the wave function is going to come back
to where it started right that's a reflection of the symmetry of rotations but if you think about
it a little bit more carefully there's another possibility what if the wave function gets
multiplied by minus one when you rotate by 360 degrees that's interesting because it leaves
all of the predictions unchanged because the predictions in quantum mechanics quantum field
theory included come from squaring the wave function now there's a philosophical question
that arises here is it true that all we care about are the observational outcomes or should we
care about other things good go ahead and contemplate those things but for these books for this book
series we're not dwelling on those philosophical questions we're thinking like hard-nosed physicists
said the physicists will just say look i care about the observations it's just as good if a
wave function picks up a minus sign when i rotate by 360 degrees as it is if it remains completely
unchanged and this in fact there's more subtle things you can say what what happens when you do
rotate by 180 degrees or by 90 degrees etc and long story short you get all different possible
kinds of fields every individual kind of field will give rise to a single kind of particle
that has a definite property when it's rotated in space and the properties might be that the
wave function remains the same under 360 degrees or that it picks up a minus one and that corresponds
to what we call the spin of the particle this actually this this fact that the transformation
properties of wave functions under rotations is related to the spin of the particle is the
quantum mechanical version of a statement that we know in classical physics from nerder's theorem
nerder's theorem says that conserved quantities arise from symmetries of the theory and one such
symmetry is rotations in classical mechanics and the conserved quantity that arises from that
is angular momentum of which spin is one kind so the quantum version of this is that the transformation
of the wave functions under rotations tells us the spin of the particle and basically again
very long stories being made very short here the kinds of particles that arise from fields in
such a way that their wave function is unchanged under a rotation by 360 degrees have spins that
are an integer value 0 1 2 3 etc secretly just like we set the speed of light equal to 1 before
now we're setting Planck's constant equal to 1 Planck's constant h bar is the fundamental unit
of quantum mechanics and it turns out to have the same units as angular momentum so the spin
of a particle is actually measured in units of h bar but we said h bar equal to 1 so rather than
saying spin 0 spin h bar spin 2 h bar we just say spin 0 spin 1 spin 2 those are all different kinds
of particles that come back their wave function comes back to the same value when you do a 360
degree rotation if it picks up a minus one then it turns out that the spin is a half integer value
so it's spin one half spin three halves spin five halves etc there's a long mathematically intricate
conversation to have about representations of the symmetry groups of spacetime on quantum fields
and the mathematical object that tells us that that lets us describe these spin one half three
half particles are called spinners sp in or s there it's a coinage that comes from tensors
which are other kinds of objects so spinners are these spin one half spin three half fields
so keep that in mind okay there are kinds of particles like electrons like neutrinos like
quarks lots of different particles that have a wave function that picks up a minus sign when we
rotate by 360 degrees now think about something that is highly analogous to that but different
instead of thinking of one particle and what happens when we rotate it by 360 degrees think
about two particles in fact think about two identical particles as a footnote here I will
mention you might have heard of this story that John Wheeler and Richard Feynman were talking about
why do all electrons have the same mass and the same charge maybe because they're all the same
electron because an electron going backward in time is kind of like a positron and maybe there's
only one electron that just bounces forever and ever backward and forward in time that is false
that did not did not work it was a nice idea but and it led Feynman to think about Feynman diagrams
and things like that but it was it's just a pretty story the actual reason why all electrons have the
same mass and charge is because they are all vibrations in the same underlying electron field
so what that means is that two electrons are absolutely identical to each other and this is a
technical term in quantum field theory they are identical particles okay so if I have a state of
two electrons and there is a position of one particle of one electron x1 and the position
of the other electron x2 not again they're not they don't have definite positions they have positions
we could observe them to be at but there's no difference between x1 and x2 there's a symmetry
there uh there's no way you can say oh it's this electron who I name Alice who is at position x1
and electron Bob is at x2 all you know is that there's one electron at one position and one
electron at the other so we can ask what happens when we take two identical particles
that is to say the wave function corresponding to a quantum state
representing two identical particles and we interchange them okay so we're not rotating we're
not changing our physical coordinate system or anything like that we're physically taking these
two particles and exchanging one for the other by moving them through space but again they're
identical particles so you might think well if I exchange one for the other the wave function
doesn't change but by exactly the same argument the wave function could also pick up a minus sign
overall and guess what both possibilities are realized in the real world there are particles
who when they get interchanged identical particles when they get interchanged their wave
function is unchanged and we call those bosons and there are other particles whose wave functions
when we interchange them pick up a minus sign and we call those fermions and the physical behavior
of these kinds of particles is very different think about fermions because that's the really
interesting case here a fermion set of fermion particles have the property that when you take
these two particles and you interchange them then the overall wave function picks up a minus sign
okay so what happens if you try to take two fermions and put them in the same exact quantum state
right you could imagine trying to do that two electrons with exactly the same wave function
just overlapping each other but then interchanging them doesn't do anything they are literally
already in the same state you didn't do anything to it when you interchange them but we have a
rule that says the wave function has to pick up a minus sign how is it possible for a wave
function to pick up a minus sign when you didn't change the wave function at all and the answer
is it's not that wave function would have to be strictly zero so these fermions these particles
that pick up a minus sign under interchange of identical particles have a property that they
cannot be in the same quantum state for any quantum state there can only be one fermion in it at a time
or more informally fermions take up space bosons are the opposite bosons if you have two identical
particles in the same quantum state that's great because when you interchange them nothing happens
and indeed if they're already in the same quantum state nothing would happen so physically this
corresponds to very different behavior the fact that that fermions cannot be in the same quantum
state is the pauli exclusion principle which pauli actually meant before we really understood
fermions and bosons but it's why atoms are interesting it's why matter has the shapes and
configurations that it does because you can't put electrons over and over in the same quantum
state orbiting an atom electrons have spins they can be spin up and spin down so in any one
spatially definite wave function you can put two different electrons in there because their spins
can be absolutely aligned but then that's all you can do then you got to go into more complicated
looking spatial wave functions and that is the origin of all of chemistry so the the pauli
exclusion principle which can be derived in quantum field theory from the properties of
identical particles that get a minus sign under their interchange is really really super duper
important whereas for bosons they like to pile up on top of each other right they actually prefer it
so bosons like photons for example very naturally pile on top of each other and that's what gives
rise to classical looking force fields that's why the electric field the magnetic field the
gravitational field these are all fields that we absolutely come into contact with in the
ordinary classical macroscopic world why because they are boson excitations that have piled on top
of each other by a huge amount until they look classical that's perfectly allowed whereas fermions
take up space that's why matter is solid that's why the table in front of me right now doesn't
collapse because the electrons have definite shapes the wave functions of the electrons
i won't go into it right now but one thing i've rant about at a brief
period in the book is this idea that elect that atoms are mostly empty space no they're not
atoms are mostly wave function and those wave function takes up space and that fact is not
merely philosophical it's crucially important it's why matter is solid don't listen to people who
tell you that atoms are mostly empty space anyway you might have noticed if you hang around on the
wrong street corners and know a little bit about particle physics and quantum field theory that
i defined the fermion boson distinction as what happens under the interchange of two particles
and i defined the spin distinction the distinction between particles of spin 0 1 2 etc versus
particles with spin one half three halves etc as what happens under the rotation of a single particle
now you might be confused because you might be remembering that people told you that bosons
are particles of spin 0 1 2 fermions are particles of spin one half three halves five halves etc
why did that connection not get made the answer is that connection exists but it's not a definition
it's a theorem that you can prove you can relate using techniques from relativistic quantum field
theory the transformation properties of a single wave particle wave function under rotation to
the transformation properties of a two particle wave function under interchange and those minus
signs that we talked about in both cases cancel each other out so there's a theorem the spin
statistics theorem that says that the particles that pick up a minus sign under a 360 degree
rotation are exactly identical are the same as the particles who pick up a minus sign under the
interchange of two particles in the wave function so therefore you can prove that fermions which
are defined as particles that can't be in the same quantum state particles that take up space
must have half integer spins one half three halves etc electrons or fermions neutrinos quarks etc
bosons the particles whose wave function are unchanged under a rotation are exactly
nope sorry i said that exactly wrong didn't i bosons the particles who whose wave function are
unchanged under the interchange of two identical particles coincide exactly with those particles
who pick up whose wave functions are unchanged we do a 360 degree rotation that's the spin
statistics theorem we didn't just prove it right there in fact there's like controversy in the
literature about who really has proven the spin statistics theorem because there's a lot of
hand wavy arguments that kind of sound like a proof but really don't rely on relativistic
quantum field theory and therefore they can't be right because the theorem itself actually does
rely on relativistic quantum field theory but what we're trying to do here is give you a feeling
for why there is this relationship between spin and statistics the statistics meaning being the
question about whether or not the field particle excitations act like fermions or bosons okay
so that's an example of how you start from this single unified idea everything is fields subject
to the rules of quantum mechanics and you ask yourself okay so what kinds of fields could there be
and the answer are you know fields whose wave functions change in different ways under rotations
and you invent bosons and fermions it naturally comes out of the combination of relativity
with quantum field theory which is really quite fun now of course the real fun comes when you let
these particles or these fields interact with each other okay and that's where you get into
Feynman diagrams and renormalization and infinity and effective field theory and the whole bit if
you want to know what a virtual particle really is read the book it's a way of talking about
the behavior of quantum fields virtual particles are not real particles but they are useful ways of
talking about the behavior of quantum fields when other particles scatter off of each other
now i will confess when i was thinking about this solo podcast to advertise the book
i uh you know i was overwhelmed with the number of things i could possibly talk about and really
the thing that i think is the most important thing that i talk about in the book is the idea
of effective field theory and effective field theory comes from thinking about the fact that
when you scatter particles off of each other and you use Feynman diagrams to calculate the
likelihood of that scattering event happening very frequently the answer is infinity right the
famous infinities of quantum field theory and Feynman and Schwinger and toman aga and others
figured out ways to subtract off the infinities and get finite answers and it all works very very
well but it was never very satisfying so effective field theory is an idea that came along in the
60s and 70s and is the way that modern physicists think and you were never told this and this is
very frustrating to me that the popular discussions of quantum field theory never mentioned this
central organizing principle of the field the effective field theory paradigm and basically
ken wilson said look the reason why you get infinities when you scatter these particles
off of each other is because you're summing up contributions from virtual particles with
arbitrarily high energies and in quantum field theory high energy means short wavelength okay
there's a relationship short of the wavelength the higher the energy same thing is true in ordinary
light right a photon with a short wavelength corresponds to a higher energy particle and
wilson says you don't know what's going on at these short distances and high energies so you
should just be honest you should admit you don't know it and he figured out a mathematical procedure
for putting on a cutoff on your theory and saying here is the energy below which I think I understand
physics and above which I don't understand physics so I can use my quantum field theory
knowledge to write down a theory that only is supposed to apply in those regimes with energies
below the cutoff that is to say only in the regime I understand I'm ignoring things that go on at
higher energies that I don't understand except for the effects that they have on lower energy
longer wavelength particles and fields that's the effective field theory paradigm it works
super well it's the most important thing but I will confess so I did a you know I want to give
the people what they want you know me I'm here to serve and so I went on to patreon where I'm the
mindscape podcast has a patreon page with wonderful supporters and so you could be a
supporter by the way patreon.com slash Sean M carol and I asked I said like what are the things
in quantum field theory you most want to hear about in the solo podcast effective field theory
did not get a lot of votes I got to say the votes were for you know where do particles come from
symmetries things like that so that's what we're here talking about if you want more on the beauty
and elegance and power of effective field theory read the book I promise you that it is there a
lot is hiding at short distances and high energies but we know how to deal with it so giving the
people what they want let's instead turn to the completing this picture of what kinds of fields
are there I said there are bosons and fermions these are two different kinds of fields they're
related to the spins of the particles that you get when you look at the quantum wave functions okay
but we know that there's more to it than that we know that photons and other force carrying
particles have special properties they're bosons they're spin one bosons except for the gravitan
which is spin two but they're you know a little bit different there's something going on there
what is going on there and the answer is once again a question of symmetry but now it's an
internal symmetry question rather than a spacetime symmetry question so spacetime symmetry is like I
said rotations translations in space boosts changing the velocity and so forth but we can also in
quantum field theory there's a new thing that can happen we have a set of fields and rather than
rotating in space we simply rotate the fields into each other at each point in space okay so
imagine I have two fields phi one and phi two the Greek letter phi is the simplest thing that we use
for a spin zero scalar bosonic field in quantum field theory we always call it phi ever since I
don't know ever since the day and so if we have two fields with exactly the same masses and the
same interactions phi one and phi two we could transform them into each other we could exchange
phi one for phi two or we could even think of phi one and phi two is defining a little two
dimensional vector space and rotating them by some arbitrary angle into each other and if
they're truly identical if they're truly the same kind of field we would have no way of knowing
that we had done that rotation it would be a symmetry of the theory that's really what a
symmetry is a symmetry is just a way of saying there's something we can do that doesn't matter
that has no physical effects when we were talking about rotations or spatial translations we said
it doesn't matter how you rotate your experiment time translations say it doesn't matter when you
do your experiment spatial translations say it doesn't matter where you do your experiment boosts
say it doesn't matter how fast you're moving when you do your experiment right so these internal
symmetries are saying it doesn't matter how we rotate these fields into each other so naturally
this is something that could happen it turns out it does happen it's going to happen a lot
in quantum field theory and so we need to think carefully about the mathematics of these symmetry
transformations and so group theory is the mathematical structure for thinking about that
and we talk in the whole chapter on symmetries a lot about group theory but let's simplify it here
down to the bare bones let's imagine we have three fields let's say three fields that are more or
less identical to each other okay but we can rotate them into each other so what is the set of
possible ways to rotate three fields into each other it's just like space like space is three
dimensional we have x y and z axes we can rotate those together and the set of all possible
transformations in a three-dimensional space rotating things and not doing anything else so
not stretching them just rotating them into each other is called s o three the special
orthogonal group in three dimensions if you had eight fields that were identical to each other
but there were eight different ones and you could rotate them into each other you would say they had
an s o eight symmetry and so forth there's just a number of fields that matters more often in
quantum field theory you will come across the group s u three or s u two or s u eight or whatever
and that change from s o to s u reflects the fact that very often our quantum fields are complex
valued fields so each field is not a number at each point in space but a complex number at each
point in space so this is all to say don't be intimidated when you hear people say the standard
model of particle physics has a gauge group s u three cross s u two cross u one that's just a way
of saying there are three fields that are complex value they get rotated into each other there's
a separate set of two fields that are also complex value that get rotated into each other that's s
u two and then you could have a single complex valued field that can still in some sense rotate
into itself because a complex valued field has a real part in an imaginary part there is something
called the complex plane where we have a complex number we write the real value of the number on
the horizontal axis the imaginary value on the vertical axis well you can rotate the complex
plane and that rotation is called u one so these are all just fancy ways of talking about rotating
fields into each other okay and it doesn't matter it doesn't matter what rotation you do the same
physical predictions will be made that's what makes it a symmetry indeed this idea of having
three fields that we rotate into each other is a very simple example they are called quarks
okay you may have heard that quarks come in three colors there are red quarks green quarks
and blue quarks that's not quite right like so many things that you've been told you've been
told something that is not quite right but good enough and now you're ready for the real stuff the
real stuff is not that there are three different quarks but there is a three-dimensional space
of quarks so the subtle difference i'm pointing to here is it's not that there are red quarks
green quarks and blue quarks there are quarks that every quark i should say should be thought of as
a combination of a bit of red a bit of green and a bit of blue and you can choose you can rotate
your axes so you define what you mean by red green or blue there's no actual reality to it has nothing
to do with the real colors okay you're not looking at a blue quark and it looks blue or anything like
that this is just a label r g and b are completely equivalent to each other these three-dimensional
vector space of quark colors and the real statement is not there are three different
colors of quarks but that quarks every quark field is an element at every point in space of this
three-dimensional three complex dimensional i should say vector space so there is an su
three symmetry rotating the red green and blue axes into each other three different kinds of
quarks we conventionally label them by color there's a symmetry where we can rotate them into
each other su three very very nice and then we'll talk about in the book what that means su three
etc etc how to implement it great so what what difference does that make really well you you
instantly know there is a conserved quantity because there is a symmetry in nerdy's theorem tells you
there's always a conserved quantity when there's a symmetry so that's nice but it isn't quite the
punchline the punchline comes from this let's imagine we have an even better symmetry so we
have these three fields we can rotate into each other call that rotation su three that's nice
but what if i want to rotate the axes of my red green blue space in one way at some point
and in a completely different way at some other point i didn't say that i could do that i'm just
asking whether it would be possible so there is something called a global symmetry transformation
where we take what we've defined to be red green and blue and we've we rotate them everywhere all
at once in some particular way so we do a global transformation of what we mean by red green and
blue that's fine no one really is bothered by that but if you want if you have the aspiration of saying
i would like to separately define what i mean by red green and blue independently at every
point in space can i do that that would be an enormously bigger symmetry right because i'm
separately able to define what i mean by red green and blue all throughout space that's a lot going on
and the answer is you can do that but you have to sort of figure you have to make sure that you're
allowed to that it's a well-defined thing because whether we call a quark at any one point in space
a quark field whether we call it red green or blue or some combination thereof that's completely
arbitrary right that makes no physical difference but if we have a two different points in space
we have the same quark field remember the quark field will take values at every point in space
unless ask the following question at these two different points in space does the quark field
have the same color or does it have some different colors it rotated by 90 degrees or whatever
that should be a well-defined question right is it the same color or different color well
if i'm allowed to rotate my axes separately at every point in space it seems like i can't answer
that question because i could have some quark field that i am just simply defining to be red
at one point in space by appropriately rotating my little red green blue axes and again these axes
are completely imaginary like not imaginary in the imaginary number sense but conceptual
they're not axes of literal space they're in quark space okay there's three different directions
the quark field can be vibrating the red direction the green direction the blue direction and likewise
okay so i have a red quark at one point in space and i i rotate my axes so that at some other
point in space it's also a red quark but is that legit i mean i could have rotated it so
it was a blue quark and there's a physical difference there so what i'm getting at is
if you want to be able to have this mega symmetry that lets you rotate in red green blue space
independently at every point in space you also need some way to compare you need some
way to answer the question what is the value let's put it this way how does the value of
the color of the quark change as i travel along some path okay i can connect these two points
in space with some path and i can ask how the axes that define red green and blue are changing
as i move down the path so i need some information that lets me answer that question how do these
axes change as i go down the path how does the definition of red green and blue change it's
not a rigid structure like it would have been if i just had that global symmetry now i'm able to
change what i mean by red green and blue independently everywhere something needs to absorb the information
of how i did that what would do that what would carry that information about how i defined red
green and blue at every point in space the answer is a field i need another kind of field i already
have the quark field in fact i have this sort of three different kinds of quark field the red
green and blue three different directions in which the quark can rotate but now i need an entirely
new kind of field to carry the information that tells me how to relate the red green and blue
axes at different points in space and the mathematicians know how to do this this is called
a connection field and the mathematical subject that studies these things is called fiber bundles
it's a form of it's a subject within differential geometry you can read all about it again we're
not going to go into all those details but the point and this is a big point and it's another
one of those miraculous points that that is very very important is that you can do these independent
symmetry transformations at different points but only if you introduce a new field that lets you
keep track of the information relating what's going on at different points so these symmetries
that can happen independently at every different point are called gauge symmetries or simply local
symmetries in contrast with the global symmetries that we were talking about to start gauge symmetries
unlike look unlike global symmetries come along with the new field the gauge field aka the connection
those are the same thing the gauge field the connection field the field that keeps track of
how your axes are changing from point to point in space okay it's much like in spacetime if you go
back to book one of the biggest ideas in spacetime just to compare the the question what direction
is a vector pointing in you need to be able to parallel transport vectors from one point to another
and you need a connection field to be able to do that that connection depends on the metric
in general relativity here in gauge theories of particle physics there's no metric there just is
the connection that's a field that shows up as the gauge field and so what does that field do what
are its dynamics how does it behave how does it interact with other fields there's a whole bunch
of questions you're going to read the book so you're going to know the answer to these questions
but the punchline is that field that connection field you need to implement the gauge symmetry
is the force field it is the electromagnetic field for electromagnetism or the gravitational field
for gravity and it gives rise to particles photons for electromagnetism gravitons for gravity
and there's also the nuclear forces the strong and weak nuclear forces
mathematically they are boson fields and you can derive that and there are interactions with other
fields the way that the force carrying fields interact with the non-force carrying fields the
electrons and neutrinos and quarks and so forth is entirely determined by the demands of this
symmetry okay given the fact that you want this symmetry to exist not only do you need this gauge
field but you know how the gauge field interacts with other fields and you know more than that the
symmetry is super powerful this is why physicists sort of start jumping up and down when they talk
about symmetry they get very excited because it really is a very powerful concept you can derive
features of the dynamics of the gauge fields all by itself so in particular there's one very very
important feature that kind of puzzled people for a long time let me let me back up to just mention
the idea of a gauge field was kind of understood by max well you know he understood that his
electric field and magnetic field could be derived from a more fundamental single thing that we would
now call the gauge field it wasn't until the 1950s that yang and mills suggested generalizing this
idea of the electromagnetic gauge field to more complicated gauge fields su2 su3 etc and it took
a while took until the 70s really for us to figure out how to make that happen okay but it turns out
that that symmetry this su2 or su3 symmetry or whatever it is has a very direct implication
for the particles that arise from these gauge fields and the the implication is the particles
have to have zero mass and again this is something where you will be delighted when you read the
book because you will see why that's true because it right it comes right out from of the equations
given what you mean by mass mass is a particular kind of potential energy that the fields can have
and there's no way to have that kind of potential energy and respect the symmetry at the same time
so there's a direct line from saying there's a gauge symmetry to saying and there's a massless
particle and that's beautiful and lovely because we have the photon which is a massless particle
we have the graviton which is a massless particle i know we haven't detected gravitons yet and
people get fussy about it but if you believe the basic features of general relativity and
quantum mechanics gravitons will exist they're just too weakly interacting to ever be detected
i would not have any skepticism that they really exist the problem is that those are the only two
massless gauge bosons that we know about the photon and the graviton right at least that we
knew about back in the day so when we're thinking about this back in the 50s and 60s people were
like wait a minute this is a problem we would love it if this beautiful mathematical structure of
gauge symmetry and the associated fields could somehow help us understand not only electromagnetism
and gravity but also this the nuclear forces there are two nuclear forces the weak nuclear force
and the strong nuclear force not the most romantic names i know but that's what we're stuck with okay
the weak force and the strong force both of them are short range forces that's why you don't notice
them in our everyday lives in our everyday lives we really only notice electricity and magnetism
or gravity as far as bosonic force fields are concerned so if yang and mills have this idea
about gauge symmetries but gauge symmetries imply that that the force carrying particles are massless
and there's this little mathematical trick you can do to show that massless particles
always give rise to long range forces which it seems that you can then we're stuck right because
the things that we want to explain experimentally are short range forces and it seems like the
idea doesn't work of course physicists are not as easily as easily dissuaded by as that they
will keep trying because and they should keep trying and you know this is also true for modern
theories where we're thinking about the multiverse or string theory or loop quantum gravity or whatever
you will very often say okay if my theory works in a certain way i predict x x is not true right
but you don't give up you say well maybe i didn't think hard enough about what my theory really
predicts that's absolutely the situation they were in in the 50s and 60s thinking about gauge
symmetries the idea was so incredibly attractive they wanted to make it work even though it predicted
massless bosons that were not observed so what is going on well it turns out there are several
different ways to get rid of these massless bosons and nature uses all of them well there's two very
very straightforward ways and nature uses both of them let's put it that way so we can think about
this in terms of phases of our gauge symmetry just like water can be in the liquid solid or gas phase
a gauge field can appear in different phases not really depending on temperature although that's
also true but it really depends on other fundamental variables fundamental properties of the underlying
physical equations of motion so one phase is the so-called coulomb phase coulomb's law is just the
electromagnetic version of newton's inverse square law for gravity so you could call it the newton
phase if you wanted to the coulomb phase is the phase where the gauge bosons are massless and can
easily travel throughout the universe photons and gravitons both qualify for that and in that case
you have long range forces with an inverse square law and indeed for both electricity
magnetism and gravity you have long range forces with an inverse square law it's fun and and amusing
to see the fact that coulomb's law and newton's law of gravity are both inverse square laws coming
out of an underlying gauge symmetry for the forces that give rise to them but there are other phases
these gauge symmetries can be in so one phase happens when you have the symmetry okay you have
this symmetry um this gauge symmetry that would give you that does would and does give rise to
gauge bosons but the symmetry is broken spontaneously what does that mean spontaneous breaking of a
symmetry means when the symmetry is broken not because the fundamental deep down equations of
motion violate the symmetry but because the specific configuration of the world violates the symmetry
for example rotations in three-dimensional space are a symmetry of the laws of physics
but here on earth there's a difference between up and down right there's an arrow of space in a
very very direct kind of way and that is not surprising to us no one thinks that's because
of the fundamental laws of physics i mean maybe Aristotle did but now we know better
we know it's because we have the earth underneath our feet the actual configuration of matter
is breaking the symmetry between up and down even though the laws of physics do not now
strictly speaking that's not a great example of what we're calling spontaneous symmetry breaking
because spontaneous symmetry breaking in quantum field theory happens again because the configuration
of the world breaks the symmetry but even in the vacuum that's the new thing so the earth is not
the vacuum the earth is a big you know pile of energy pile of matter and particles and so forth
so that can break the symmetry but what if empty space itself could break a symmetry that would be
a whole different kind of thing and this was studied i i forget whether it was the 50s or 60s
where they started studying it but uh Yoshiro Nambu my four colleague at the University of Chicago
and Jeffrey Goldstone and others studied how you could break a symmetry and the idea is actually
quite simple you have yet another field right and guess what this is going to grow up into what we
now call the Higgs field so the Higgs field is an example of this kind of field but we'll get there
in a second if you have another field not a fermion not like a quark or an electron or something
like that but a scalar field a bosonic field that transforms under the symmetry okay so so
let's say you have an su2 symmetry because you kind of do in the weak interactions which is what
we're going to get to so you have an su2 symmetry so for this scalar field uh you have two directions
in which the scalar field can vibrate and there's an su2 rotation that rotates them into each other
okay but if the value of the field in empty space were zero then not only would the fields plural
be invariant under this symmetry but the configuration of these fields in the vacuum
would be invariant under this symmetry because the configuration would be centered around zero
and if you rotate a plane around the origin nothing seems to happen but what if in empty space
the field was at a non-zero value what if the energy of the field were lower when it had some
non-zero value then when it were at zero when it was at zero you could do that you can easily
write down equations that make that happen if you want to look up the details it's the Mexican hat
potential that you might have seen under under discussions of spontaneous symmetry breaking
and when that happens the specific value that the field takes in empty space is not invariant
under the symmetry so the equations are invariant but the value the field has is not invariant
that is what is called spontaneous symmetry breaking because it kind of doesn't matter
what direction the field is pointing in it's pointing in some direction even in empty space
and so now there's an answer to the question when some other thing like a quark or an electron
vibrates you can ask the question is a vibrating in the same direction as the scalar field that's
breaking the symmetry or perpendicularly to it or whatever the symmetry has been broken in a way
that it wasn't before okay sadly this is not immediately solve the problems because goldstone
proved a theorem goldstone's theorem that says that when you have spontaneous symmetry breaking
you will have a new kind of massless particle the scalar field will turn into a massless particle
and again those particles were not observed and so people were still a little flummoxed
but what they soon realized is that there's a big important difference between the global
symmetries that we talked about originally where the symmetry has to be done everywhere uniformly
versus the gauge symmetries where you have this connection field that keeps track of what
direction you're pointing in the goldstone's theorem analysis that that predicted the existence
of a new kind of massless particle was only for global symmetries when you do the same thing
for gauge symmetries you do not get a massless particle not only is the scalar field not giving
you an extra massless particle but your gauge fields like the photon or the equivalent of the
photon get heavy they go from being massless to being massive and in every single quantum field
theory textbook in the world what you're told is that the gauge bosons eat the scalar bosons the
Higgs bosons and they become massive by doing that so you go from a theory with a lot of massless
particles to a theory with no massless particles through spontaneous breaking of a gauge symmetry
and that is the origin in the standard model of particle physics of the W and Z bosons
you have the Higgs boson which is a spin zero boson that is as we say charged under the SU2
symmetry it is it rotates under the SU2 symmetry and so do all the other particles of the standard
model the electrons and the quarks etc but that Higgs boson gets an expectation value that is not
zero in empty space and that gives mass to the gauge bosons which we observe at the end of the
day as the W and Z bosons and they are indeed massive and it is because those particles are
massive that the force they give rise to is a short range force rather than a long range force
so that is one way that we can have our cake needed to that we can have massless
particles because of the gauge symmetry but they don't appear to us at the end of the day
because they have gained mass because of spontaneous symmetry breaking
there turns out to be a whole another way to hide the massless particles from us and nature
takes advantage of that way in the SU3 part of the standard model SU3 is the gauge group
the group of symmetries for the quarks the red green and blue quarks the three dimensions of
quark space that get rotated into each other by this SU3 symmetry and because those are colors
we call this quantum chromodynamics or QCD in analogy with QED coinage from Murray Gilman
so QCD is a theory of the gauge symmetry in the associated force that comes from
invariance under rotations in red green blue internal space that the quarks live in
and there there's no spontaneous symmetry breaking the SU3 symmetry is unbroken in empty space so
the gluons which are the gauge bosons of that force what we call the strong force
are massless gluons are still massless why then do they not give rise to a long range
1 over r squared force the answer is because of the difference between SU3 and u1 and again
some details we're gliding over the buzzwords are abelian versus non-abelian these are different
kinds of symmetry groups that you can have and the SU3 symmetry group is just more complicated
than the u1 symmetry group electromagnetism has a very simple symmetry group u1 it's just rotations
in a complex plane the su3 symmetry group has more things going on and at the level of the fields
that has a crucially important implication namely the fields the gluon fields interact with each
other directly in a way that photons don't interact with each other photons are the
particles of the u1 gauge symmetry gluons are the particles of the su3 gauge symmetry but
photons interact with charged particles like electrons and quarks they don't directly interact
with other photons indirectly they can do because of electrons at center but not directly
whereas the gluons can interact directly with other gluons because gluons also carry color
in a way that photons do not carry electric charge and what that means is it opens up a
possibility that nature in fact takes advantage of which is what we call confinement you might think
that since the gluons are massless like electrical fields around an electron they should spread out
in an inverse square kind of potential but in fact the gluons keep interacting with each other
they acquire energy by their mutual interaction with other gluons as well as with the quarks
and that energy dramatically changes the way that the gluon field arranges itself around
individual quarks it is not an inverse square law the force between two gluons or between
two quarks mediated by gluons grows with distance rather than decreasing with distance as one over
r squared so if you take two quarks and they're pulled together by gluons if you try to pull them
apart it takes more and more and more energy to get the quarks to pull apart and so much energy
that at some point it makes more sense just to make more quarks or a quark anti quark pair to be
a little bit more precise so you just snap the string if you like that is connecting the flux
tube as we call it that is connecting the two quarks to each other because of this you can never
see one quark all by itself every quark is connected to other quarks held together by these
gluons and that's why the particles we see are protons neutrons mesons things like that not the
individual quarks as i am recording this and after i wrote my book there has been a claim an
experimental claim that we have experimentally detected what are called glu balls which are
particle like excitations made of nothing but gluons no quarks at all so that's very exciting
it's too bad for me because i said in the book that we haven't detected gluon glu balls yet but
apparently we have anyway this is why the strong force is short-range not because of spontaneous
symmetry breaking but because of confinement because the gluons interact with each other
so strongly that you can't separate individual particles from each other and they completely
distort the shape of the gluon field away from being a long-range 1 over r squared force
so there's a lot going on this is why when you take general relativity as a graduate student
physics you know different people react differently to different courses but
general relativity is beautiful you know when you take that one semester course you start from
you know simple geometric postulates and you derive the equation of einstein and then you derive
all these consequences black holes and everything and it's so pristine and logical and lovely
and then when you take your quantum field theory course not only is it at least two semesters
often three or four semesters of quantum field theory but it's not beautiful really not in the
same way it's a mess there's a lot going on with all these different forces all these different
symmetries um and the field itself is just complicated you know you can easily take quantum
field theory courses again and again hopefully from different instructors with different textbooks
and learn more and more every time no one would ever take general relativity more than once if
they learned it correctly the first time there's so much we didn't even get to talk about parity
violation is very very important in the standard model of particle physics there are uh families
of particles right um there's different ways that neutrinos and electrons hook up with each other
versus how quarks hook up with each other um there's let me just let me hint at one kind of thing
that i haven't been able to tell you about this gauge group of um the strong force su3 right like
i said it's more complex not it's not super duper complex but it's a little bit more um going on
there a little more structure than the u1 gauge symmetry of electromagnetism the su2 is much
like su3 they're very similar but because su2 is spontaneously broken it's a different conversation
that we have about it su3 is not spontaneously broken but it's confined and one of the things
that can happen because su3 is a slightly different gauge group than u1 is that you can have different
vacuum configurations of the gauge fields what do i mean by that a vacuum configuration of the
fields is a configuration has zero energy right but when i say a field configuration you now know
since you've listened to this podcast you now know that a field configuration is a specific arrangement
of the field at every point in space but you also know that there is a symmetry the gauge
symmetry i can rotate what i mean by red green and blue of su3 separately at each point in space
so really what i mean by the vacuum configuration of the field is one particular
reference configuration of the field plus any gauge transformation i want to do on it a gauge
transformation is a symmetry it doesn't really change the actual field right okay so that's
it sounds like a mathematical detail that i don't need to think too hard i should just
be careful when i say what i mean by a field configuration to say really what i mean is a
field configuration up to a possible symmetry transformation that you might want to do but
it turns out that in su3 in the strong interactions there are what we call small gauge transformations
and large gauge transformations and what does that mean what does small and large mean it means
that there is a topology to the possible gauge transformations we can do it's exactly once
again this is an example of an underlying smooth thing the gauge fields of su3 quantum
chromodynamics but having a discrete set of possible arrangements of those fields so it's
kind of like wrapping a circle around another circle it's actually very analogous to that
if i have one circle if i think like a topologist now and i'm going to map a different circle to
my first circle i can just take the first circle and i can map it the whole thing to a point
or i could wrap it once around the other circle or i could wrap it once around the other way
or i could wrap it twice around etc right even though the circles themselves
are smooth manifolds there's a discrete set of ways that i can wrap one circle around another
one these are called the winding numbers of these different maps turns out and again you
don't need to understand this because this is just like hinting at some fascinating work that
happened in quantum field theory in the course of the 1970s turns out that there are topologically
non-trivial gauge transformations in su3 that wrap the gauge field around itself and they're associated
with a winding number okay so you know once again you say all right they're still all it's all empty
space it's just empty space and increasingly complicated configurations because they're all
equivalent to each other under the symmetry transformation but it turns out the field can
dynamically flip from one topological configuration to another and that is not just the vacuum that
is it can sort of pop out of the vacuum for a second as it winds around itself and then settle
down into a different winding number so you start with empty space the vacuum you end with empty space
the vacuum but through some quantum fluctuation called an instanton you change dynamically the
winding number of the field and this is all you know this is a whole conversation that could only
be had because we're doing quantum field theory right because the fields are what the universe
is made of they have these mathematical properties things can happen and the kicker is that these
instantons that are quantum transitions that change the winding numbers of the gauge fields
have a physical effect they give rise to masses for different mesons in different ways and this
is called the eta problem in qcd that is solved by thinking carefully about the structure of the
vacuum and the existence of topologically non-trivial gauge transformations all of which that I hope that
everything before the last five minutes was completely crystal clear and you understood
everything the last five minutes was just to make you sort of intrigued there's not enough detail to
possibly be completely understandable the point is there's a lot going on in the standard model of
particle physics it is an amazing structure that I didn't even mention but of course the the real
punchline is it fits the data it fits so much data you know when we turned on the large hadron
collider of course eventually you know we turned it on like 2006 blew up fixed it turned it on 2008
again by 2012 we discovered the Higgs boson right but before we discovered the Higgs boson we rediscovered
the entire rest of the standard model you know all the other particles that had been discovered before
all the different quarks and the w and the zebozons and so forth the LHC sees them in exactly where
they should be doing exactly the things they should do there's no more rich and quantitatively
accurate theory in the history of physics than the standard model of particle physics
so it's very messy it's very it does a little bit of everything it's not like one beautiful
principle just continues on as a line that gives you the entire theory many many ideas come in
from seemingly different corners of physics and mathematics etc and combine to give us the standard
model and it works beautifully explains all the data that we have so far good news bad new situation
of course for reasons that we get into in other podcast conversations and the final thing to say
is and it's probably not the final answer right I mean the standard model of particle physics
even if you include gravity you can include gravity in the standard model as long as the
gravitational fields are weak and we call that the core theory dubbed by frank wilcheck
but we don't understand a whole bunch of things we don't understand the big bang or black holes
right we don't understand conditions where black where gravity is strong we don't know what the
dark matter is that's some other kind of energy that is apparently not there in the standard
model and there's things about the standard model that are just puzzling there's both sort of
mildly puzzling things and deeply puzzling things there are numerical unnatural numbers right the
cosmological constant of course is a famous unnatural number the mass of the Higgs boson
even though we can measure it etc it's very different from what we would expect it to be
according to the logic of effective field theory that we mentioned earlier so these are apparent
fine tunings in the standard model there's also the fact that that u1 part of the standard model
right the standard model is su3 cross u2 cross u1 the su3 symmetry is quantum chromodynamics
the su2 and u1 parts are the electroweak unified theory the part the theory that gives us both
electromagnetism and the weak force but the u1 part is really not well behaved at high energies
there's something called a landow pole that we're not going to get into here but the u1 part of the
standard model apparently doesn't make sense at arbitrarily high energy scales it shouldn't this
doesn't bother people because gravity is going to be important at ultra high energy scales at low
energies where you and I live gravity is a very weak force but at high energies it should become
important so there are gaps there are things the standard model is not up to the task of accounting
for even if they're mostly kind of conceptual things rather than experimental things so
not only the standard model itself but probably even quantum field theory as an overall picture
is probably not up to the task of being the final complete theory of everything in physics
so the reason why i've been wanting to write this book for 20 years and i'm very excited to
finally have done it is both to impress upon you how wonderful quantum field theory is how amazing
it is that it fits all the data in so many intricate and weird and fun ways but also to prepare you
for the fact that it we might do better someday whether it's emergent spacetime or string theory
or whatever it happens to be physics isn't done yet we're still moving on we understand a lot
we don't understand everything we have to accept and celebrate
both of those features of our knowledge and try to increase the amount that we understand
let's get back to work then thanks
