Hello, everyone. Welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll.
Probably everyone listening has heard the phrase, a theory of everything, right?
The origins of this phrase are actually a little bit murky.
You know, it's not such a weird collection of words that it hadn't appeared in the literature a long time ago.
You know, people have talked about the idea of a theory of everything.
But the context in which we currently usually talk about it is either super string theory in physics,
or some other competitor to super string theory.
As far as I can tell, that coinage came from John Ellis, who is a theorist at CERN.
He wrote a little article in the early days of the super string revolution, 1980s,
called the super string, a theory of everything or of nothing.
But it wasn't completely triumphant, right? He was actually talking about whether or not this possibly could be a theory of everything.
It was immediately pointed out by non-physicists and even some physicists that the idea of a theory of everything in this sense
is actually very, very restricted to a certain reductionistic way of looking at the fundamental constituents of nature,
the idea being that, nevertheless, those fundamental constituents make up everything else.
But there's no sense in which that idea of a theory of everything would be the final theory that we ever need in science, right?
Because we do have higher level emergent things. We have biological organisms.
We have economies and societies and we have people in psychology, all this stuff, right?
That is certainly not covered, not to mention easy questions about astrophysics or chemistry or so forth.
So the root from that kind of theory of everything to many other scientific questions is a complicated one.
Therefore, we still have room for other theories of large grandiose scope.
And today's guest is Michael Muthukrishna, who has a book coming out called A Theory of Every One.
That's intentional play on words from the theory of everything idea.
The subtitle is The New Science of Who We Are, How We Got Here and Where We're Going.
Obviously, kind of an ambitious book trying to synthesize many kinds of ideas.
Michael is at the London School of Economics.
He's sort of, I think his official title is a Professor of Economic Psychology.
So there's both economics in there and psychology.
He's actually collaborated with some of our previous Minescape guests, Joe Henrich and Edward Slingerland.
So he thinks about the grand scope of human history and how we are influenced by biology and evolution, cultural evolution,
how we pass down ideas from generation to generation.
And a big thing, as he'll say in the episode, a big thing for him is the fact that human beings, unlike other animals,
do have this sort of distributed cultural knowledge that we can pass down.
Human beings have schools, right? Have an educational system in a way that other animals don't.
Other animals do teach their young. Some of them do.
I don't know. Lions, I'm told, teach their cubs to hunt by pretending to be in pain when their cubs bite them a little bit.
So they're teaching them, like, oh yes, that's the right thing you should do.
But they don't have a curriculum. They don't have a syllabus.
They don't have it quite as organized and systematized as human beings do.
So that plays a large role in the exceptionalism of human beings.
And of course, it's tied to other capacities, our brains, our languages, things like that.
So we'll talk about all of that. But then Michael wants to go much further.
He talks about not only economics, but the technological side of economics,
the importance of different ways we have of harnessing energy,
from, you know, just burning wood to burning fossil fuels to solar energy
and how these allow for expansions of the economy and therefore of human opportunity in a very clear way.
And then he brings it back or brings it down, I should say, to the current era,
our political polarization, our stagnation of innovation, if that's true,
and what we can do about it, how we can do better.
There are parts of this long, elaborate story that I am 100% on board with.
Other parts that I will wait to see, let's put it that way, not 100%,
but I'm open to it. I think it's fascinating stuff.
And Michael's very clear and very well educated on a whole bunch of things.
So I think it's a very good listen. With that in mind, let's go.
Michael Muthukrishna, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast.
Thanks for having me, Sean.
So you've written what sounds to the average reader of titles like an ambitious book.
It's called A Theory of Everyone.
And I like that you're kind of making fun of the physicists there.
It is, you know, it's a modest title. It could have been A Theory of Everything, right?
Yeah, exactly. Just people.
Yeah, no, it's a play on A Theory of Everything, of course.
But, I mean, the title hints at the central claim of the book,
which is that, you know, we are, so I'm sure your listeners know already,
but, you know, the theory of everything in physics is this grand, unifying theory,
you know, general relativity meets quantum mechanics, whatever.
The idea or the central premise of the book is that we have reached this point
in the human and social sciences where we have this overarching theoretical framework
that unifies things that makes sense of an otherwise chaotic and confusing world
and turns it into a real science.
And so, you know, I tell the story of how this happened in the more mature sciences
to illustrate how this has happened for the human and social sciences.
So, you know, like in physics, right?
We used to think that Thor was banging his hammer
and the physical world was the result of capricious gods.
And then, you know, folks like Newton and Maxwell and Einstein come along
and they write down equations.
I mean, Maxwell was crazy, right, at the time of like whale oil and horse-drawn carriages.
He's writing down equations for like a magnet.
It is. It's amazing, yeah.
But suddenly, like the world is less chaotic and confusing.
We know, like the weather is still difficult to predict, actually,
but we know that it's not caused by capricious gods.
It's caused by these rules. We have the rules.
And once we have those, we can also turn them into technologies, right?
Like we can eventually land, you know, a spacecraft on an asteroid.
And the same thing happened to chemistry.
Now, Newton's not a dumb guy, as we just said, but he's trying to turn lead into gold.
And again, it's not because he's a dumb guy.
It's because he doesn't understand like collusion theory.
He doesn't know the world is made up of elements that fit into a periodic table.
But once you have a periodic table, you know, then alchemy becomes chemistry.
So, you can do stuff before you have a periodic table.
Like we got to gunpowder, for example.
But, you know, why is it that when you pour this acid on a metal,
you're creating this gas and it's bubbling away?
Like what's happening there, right?
And can we turn lead into gold?
Maybe it seems like another chemical reaction.
But once you have a periodic table, you can be like, yes, we can make gunpowder.
And it's like, okay, yes, we know what's going on here.
But no, we can't learn to turn lead into gold.
Those are different elements.
The world is less chaotic and confusing.
And eventually you make your way not only to chemistry, like, you know,
turning oil into plastics or whatever,
but even, you know, eventually to things like protein folding.
And, of course, this happened in biology too, right?
So, it was a chaotic and confusing world.
Why do some animals have live words and others lay eggs?
And why does the peacock have this giant elaborate tail and the peahen doesn't?
And then along comes Darwin and later on the modern synthesis with, you know,
Fisher and Wright and Hamilton and so on.
And suddenly the world is less chaotic and confusing.
It's still difficult to predict the trajectory of species or the behavior of ecologies.
But if you're trying to do that without the rules that underlie the system,
you're running blind.
Right.
So, yeah, in other words, what I hear is that this underlying theoretical perspective
on what's going on can be helpful at a higher practical level.
And let me guess, you want to extend this to human beings?
Exactly.
I mean, the claim I'm making is not that, like, I have extended to human beings,
but actually we are in the midst of a revolution on the scale of Newton and Maxwell and Einstein
and the scale of the periodic table and the scale of Darwin and the modern synthesis.
That is, we know the rules.
We know why humans are different to other animals.
We know the rules by which humans acquire and synthesize information.
We know the rules by which societies are changing over time.
And that should allow us to build the equivalent of technologies,
like do a better job of public policy, for example, by applying that.
So, part one of the book is kind of laying out that theory of everyone,
that theory of human behavior.
And then part two is like, okay, well, take me at face value and assume that I'm correct about what I'm saying.
Here's what this means about inequality and innovation and how we design the Internet
and, you know, what the future of education should look like
and how we get past energy transitions and so on.
And how many pages is this book?
Like 5,000?
Like 480 pages or something.
You know, I mean, I lean heavily. It is a book for the public.
So, you know, what I try to stay away from, like you'll read some behavior books
and it's like, in this study we showed XYZ.
I mean, the studies are there.
But what I'm really trying to say is like, there is a tapestry.
There's a world that everything is connected up.
It's like once I explain the periodic table to you,
everything makes a lot more sense.
And so I rely heavily on, like, let me explain it to you
so you can check it against your own life.
Like you should have new insights that allow you to see the world as you never saw before.
And once you see it, you can't unsee it.
So maybe a good starting point then is the classic question
of what makes human beings so special.
What makes us different than the rest of our animal cousins
even though we're actually very similar at the DNA level, right?
Yeah.
So what humans are a different kind of animal
that have a third line of information or a second line of inheritance.
And this is really fundamentally what allowed us to build the world that we have today.
So we not only have a genetic inheritance like hardware
that we get from our parents, right?
And we not only have kind of a lifetime of experience where we learn things,
but we have cultural software that has accumulated over time
and is literally running on our brains,
allowing us to think new thoughts,
see the world in richer new ways,
and understand the world as no other species ever has.
And that cultural line isn't just learned.
It is evolving.
It's not an analogy to genetic evolution.
It is an extension of population genetics into the world of culture.
We call this cultural evolution.
And it's evolving beyond conscious awareness.
So we have a set of behaviors and values and sometimes technologies
that are not only...
The world is not only more complicated
than the smartest among us could ever recreate,
but often we don't really understand why it is that we do the things we do,
certainly at an individual level and sometimes at a population level.
You probably brush your teeth twice a day.
And if I ask you why, you'll tell me something about plaque and tartar or something like that.
But you don't really have a good causal model of that.
You probably finish your course of antibiotics to avoid superbugs.
And you probably have a causal explanation for that.
But you have an illusion of explanatory depth that stops you from checking further.
I'm going to say to you, obviously, Sean, not every one of those bacteria are going to die.
And so surely if not all of them die,
surely finishing your course of antibiotics would have the most resistant bacteria left?
That's what would create superbugs.
And now you're like, oh, wait a minute.
But you don't have to worry about antibiotic kill curves
or the optimal dosage or anything like that.
You have just acquired the interfaces to interact with the world.
You check your emails on a device that may as well be magic.
So the book is about how we evolved to have that,
how it is that we became a different kind of animal, how that connects everything up,
and what that means about how we should study ourselves and think about our future.
If you want to understand the secrets of pivot tables in Excel,
if you want to understand how chatGPT works, you don't look inside the CPU and GPU.
It's not in the brain. It's not in the neuroscience, actually.
It's in the software that's running on that hardware.
So the difference, in other words, obviously other kinds of animals and so forth
do have behaviors that are passed down from generations,
but they're not through learning, right?
It's always a worry when you talk about vast generalizations to other species
that there's going to be counter examples.
Are there any counter examples of things that are not genetically encoded
but are knowledge that other animal species pass down from generation to generation?
Yeah. So this area is called dual inheritance theory
or gene culture co-evolution or the extended evolutionary synthesis.
And particularly the extended evolutionary synthesis does,
it is about like these other transmission, like so environments are transmitted, right?
An earthworm can inherit the environment created,
that more moist environment created by its ancestors.
There's also information being transmitted,
just not to the degree that humans do, right?
So like chimps, for example, learn from their mothers
and they have traditions of, you know, wadding up leaves into sponges
and sponging up water or using sticks for digging termites or whatever.
And those do seem to be trying, or cracking nuts is another example of this.
They're entering the Stone Age, if you like.
They do have that, but humans, for reasons I explained in the book,
and maybe I can say a little bit about that now,
rely on that social information
and agree to use that information, if you like.
We use that information at the expense of our own everyday experience.
And chimps do not do that.
Like, let me give you an example.
You're the worst person to give this example to,
but I'm going to give it to you anyway.
You'll see in a moment why that is.
Like, if I ask the average person, right,
or the average person will swear up and down
that we are on a spheroid rotating around a star,
one of many stars in the Milky Way, you know,
one of many galaxies in the universe,
they will swear that up and down.
And every day, they look outside at a flat Earth
with a sun tracing the sky from east to west, right?
Now, you might be, you know, you're among a handful of people who checked, right?
But for most people, they don't.
They just believe it because the smartest people in their society,
most people in their society, they believe that, right?
For the longest time, UFOs were, like, in the realm of the flat Earth, right?
And maybe they still should be.
But at the moment, because, like, the reliable sources are talking about,
what are they called now, UAPs or whatever, and aliens.
Now people are like, wait, is that actually a thing?
Like, should I be reconsidering my model of the world?
We should go back to the previous consensus understanding, I think, there.
But this is interesting because you're saying two things,
one of which I was expecting and one of which is a little bit...
I've heard it before, but it's unexpected in this context.
The expected thing is, you know, we not only have knowledge,
we have some kind of symbolic knowledge, right?
So, you know, we can package the knowledge and spread it more efficiently between ourselves.
And that's obviously some kind of phase transition in human behavior that we can talk about.
But you're putting more emphasis than I would have guessed on our limitations, you know,
which I think are very important, but it's interesting to hear in this context.
You know, we're finite, we don't have infinite ability to do our own research in the current parlance.
So we kind of have to rely on our social networks a bit.
That's right. And so it's actually because of those limitations
that we ended up with this cultural evolutionary system.
It's because of those limitations that we deferred the calculation,
the computation, the innovation to the population level.
So because we couldn't, you know, we couldn't fit all of that in our heads,
we ended up like selectively learning and copying without really understanding
that we were able to surpass it.
So I'll give you, there's an experiment I talk about in the book that really illustrates this,
what humans do compared to other great apes.
So this was an experiment done with young children and young chimps, right?
And so the experimenter has a box and the box has a hole on the top and the hole on the side, right?
And the experimenter takes a stick and pokes it through the hole on the top
and pokes it through the hole on the side.
And when they do this, they poke it through the hole on the side.
They get a piece of fruit, which the chimps love, and they get a sticker, which the kids love.
So the experiments are pokes a hole through the top, pokes a hole through the side, you know,
hands it to the chimp. What does the chimp do?
Pokes a hole through the top, pokes a hole through the side.
All right, experimenter pokes a hole through the top, pokes a hole through the side,
hands it to the child. What does the child do?
Pokes a hole through the top, pokes a hole through the side.
Okay, now in the key variation in the treatment you have the same box,
but it's no longer a black box.
It's transparent. You can see into it. Okay, and you realize that that that first action doesn't do anything
There's actually like a ceiling or a floor, you know where that it just hitting that it's to retrieve the fruit and the sticker
You just need the second action
Okay, but again the experiment to take some stick poke the hole through the top poke so hole through the side hands into the
Chimp now if you've ever watched like a chimp, you know doing a working memory task or spinning through Instagram chips are smart man
Very good
So what do they do ignore that first action go straight to the second action and they retrieve their fruit and they're a happy chimp
What does the child do experiments a poke so hole through the top folks all through the side hands the child
What does the child do folks a hole through the top folks a hole through the side?
So children this you have a head full of recipes that you don't fully understand interesting
That you've accumulated a new choir from from the you know from the smartest people since you were a child around you
Some of those you've checked some of that many of those you haven't and if your life is going well
You've never had a need to check some of the beliefs that you hold and the behaviors you engage in
But because we were smart because we're dumb
You know we're smart because we ate better than apes do and because we are willing to defer to that body of information
culture
We don't sit naked in the rain like they do they want to figure everything out from first principles
They want to understand it before they do it and so they you know, they're stuck
They're stuck at a particular limit by their brains. That's a wonderful example
I love that experiment because the cynic might have said see the children human children not as smart as the chimps because they can't figure it out
but your spin on it is
Whether or not they're smarter
They're relying on a whole thing that the chimps don't have access to the sort of collective knowledge that gets us through the
Complicated social environment we're in that's right, but you see that collective knowledge isn't just about kind of behaviors and beliefs
It's also about mental tools like literal
upgrades to our cultural software for thinking and we know some of this through
History thanks to history, which is the cultural fossil record if you like right so if you take something like numeracy, right?
Like some small-scale societies still count one two three and then many and our ancestors probably counted like that too, right?
We were able to get further using a metaphor
So many societies would use stones, you know think calcium calculus
You know, maybe stones pressed into clay
So you've got notches as well or you know cut into wood many societies use body parts
So we have a decimal system, which is super annoying to be honest. It doesn't translate well to binary
It's the worst of all systems, you know
And other societies use phalanges so they count 12 with their with their thumb the finger bones
And various other body parts, right? I wish we'd landed on 16, but here we are
Yeah, you know and so as a result of this
We now had a metaphor for thinking that we no longer had to use we just like store it in our heads represented in our heads
And now we could count the natural numbers above one
but stones and you know fingers and whatever they don't make zero obvious because
Zero stones is nothing and nothing is well. It's nothing and so it took centuries before zero was recognized
as a number and
Centuries it was actually the 17th 18th century the negative numbers became more obvious and again, it became it was an upgrade
Thanks to a the number line
So we moved away from objects to position, right?
And you know, there's this quote I have in the book from a British mathematician Francis Mezry's and he's something like you know
Negative numbers darken the very fabric of reality. It's like way melodramatic, right? And he's right
But once you have a number line, it's simple enough that you can teach it to young children, which is what we do
Yeah, but it's given us a new ability because obviously once you can count
You can count to do anything and then the number line itself gets extended, right?
So it's like what if you have another number line that is you know orthogonal to the other one?
It's like oh a complex plane emerges, right?
and
So you don't you don't you can't see this because we live in a bubble a very big bubble
So I don't mean like you and I you know in our ivory towers, you know, I don't mean like coastal elites and rural small time
I mean, we're all every person we ever meet went through education through school and
School has become since the industrial revolution the primary means by which we download a cultural package to the next generation
Because we are a species that relies on socially transmitted information
You have every child has to catch up on the last several thousand years of human history and we try to do it more efficiently because if we lose that link
We literally become dumber. We did literally lose lose a bunch of technology, right?
We have to transmit that every generation
But as a result of that many of the things that we think of as being human
Are in fact endowed by us by accumulated cultural knowledge and you can't get it by measuring it
So the strupe test, I don't know if you've ever seen the strupe test
Basically, you've got words the color words and they're written in the color like red written in red blue. Oh, yeah
I do know what you're talking about, but go or mismatched, right?
and
You ask people don't say don't read the word
Just say the color so you know say even though it says red. It's written in blue. So say blue
and people struggle
Reading has become an instinct that overrides color perception now. Imagine, you know a psychologist from Venus, you know
Like the anthropologist from Mars a psychologist on Venus comes down and studies these crazy apes on you know on the planet
And and they give them the strupe test and they're like, oh it appears that humans have an innate ability to read
But no innate ability or it overrides any kind of color perception, which would be wrong, of course, right?
Yeah, but
Because this this these culturally endowed skills have become part of our thinking they're and they're ubiquitous at this point
You can't measure it, you know all of experimental psychology all of
Even IQ tests were developed after the advent of
truancy laws and compulsory formal education
So even something like the ability to reason so I talk about some of my own work, right?
So Alexander Luria we were replicating some of his work
So Luria goes out to Uzbekistan he wants to understand how education is changing people's psychology
And he uses if he then Q reasoning. Okay, so he's this is actually one of his questions
He says where it snows the bears are white in Novia Zemlya. It snows. What color the bears now you didn't say it
But you're thinking white, you know, like Uzbek's with education white my six year old white, you know
but
What happened to the to the Uzbek's who didn't have education? How do they answer? They're like, hmm?
I think probably brown. I've never been there once
You're like, let's listen to what I'm saying and you're like, well, I don't know what color the bears are
I haven't been to Nova Zemlya
So it's not that humans can't reason of course we can right but it's a grounded cultural
reality-based reasoning and it becomes an ability and a hypothetical ability to reason through our education system and
Then the whole world becomes more complex, right? Like a new baseline is achieved
So if you you know, if you think about TV shows, right?
Like think of like wham-bam Batman for the 1960s vertices like the dark night from that from the early noughties, right?
like even the most low-brow television has more
Convoluted storylines more characters than you know what our parents and grandparents watched, right?
So that is that that is that is the central premise and so the book is all about well
How does that software get written and how do we write better software for the future because although IQ test results have been going up?
They have now stagnated and so have our schools. Let me ask the sort of chicken-and-egg problem here because when we talk about human exceptionalism
There's a whole bunch of things that happen and maybe they're all
Related there was some kind of phase transition, right? Like some people will emphasize
Language and symbolic manipulation of information
Some people I had Adam bully on the podcast who is a part of a group that likes mental time travel the ability to
Hypothesize the future and speak counterfactually as something that is uniquely human and you're you know like other people emphasizing this communal aspect the sort of
offloading certain cognitive tasks to the collective
Which came first is there some causality there or is it a package?
So actually the book is about it tackles this very problem. So, you know the people who
People who posit things like so I know Adam, you know, and I know the language people
I'm not sure who you spoke to but people who posit language
As an explanation are wrong because language is part of the package of humans
It doesn't explain anything because you you know in in in evolutionary biology. You have a startup problem, right?
So let's say I'm the first person with like some genes for language. Well, that's useless because nobody else speaks, you know
So like you've got it. You've got a startup problem and language only works if you've got something worth transmitting
So fair enough so
Language isn't an explanation and a lot of the other features of our cognition are also this part of this package
So, you know the story the
Here's what here's what a mix of kind of the models and evidence and what you can kind of piece together tells us
Okay, so the first thing that happened was that
There was a transition across the animal kingdom
but certainly for humans because of our generation like toward relying on social information and
It is it is if you look at the models and population genetics
These are the models where you can branch off into a world of social learning
So if you when when the environment is highly stable
Then genes do the best job of adapting to that environment
So even among humans right skin color is a genetic adaptation that is well predicted by latitude because of UV radiation
You don't want so much UV radiation that you get cancer
Yeah, but you don't want so little that you have vitamin D deficiency, which also leads to cancers and other diseases, right?
But the time scale is very long for those adaptations to happen. So a stable environment
They're fairly long but they happen right for for for hour for the human generation length, which is not, you know
Last several thousand years a hundred thousand years, right?
It's not sometimes if there's selection is strong enough. It can be quite fast. Okay, and if there's variation in the population
And so by the way, you know remember like humans like part of this puzzle is that humans when most animals encounter a new environment
They're forced to genetically adapt and we did a little bit like human skin color, right? But you know like
More more fat for the Arctic more, you know proteins to process the local plants
We treat we as hunter-gatherers before, you know physics chemistry biology psychology all of this stuff and even before agriculture
We marched across the planet and
We figured it out in each stage, you know, we figured out how to process the proteins
Using, you know, like new technique new techniques and so that we could eat them, you know, we we we didn't
Get much more fat and fur we hunted the local animals and avoided prey and war sometimes the predators, you know
Skins as our own, right? Yeah, so this is what we need to explain
This is what we need to explain. So genes do a great job if if the environment is highly stable
If the environment is highly unstable
Then genes are not a good solution because you know today the red berries are edible tomorrow
It's the the blueberries and the water is here. The water is there or whatever, right?
Instead
Evolution has to rely on trial and error learning across the lifespan to figure it out
You got to have a big brain to do that and you got to do a lot of trial and error and it's really inefficient
And so these key models developed by you know, mostly by a right Rob Boyd and Pete Richardson and also by, you know
Kbelly Schwartz and Mark Feldman over at Stanford
There's an intermediate zone
of environmental variability where it is matched to generation length such that your parents and grandparents have some knowledge worth paying attention to
And it is it is at this point that we begin to rely on the information they have so imagine something like a cyclical drought
Yeah, maybe, you know, you've you've never experienced one and the lag is too long, right?
Maybe your parents haven't either but grandma remembers that when she was a child
There was a drought and they went left to the forest past the mountain and you know, she leads her tribe to safely
You know, I was I was recently
Talking to an anthropologist is like that actually happens, you know, oh, yeah, you know, this is this is a real thing
Kim Hill, you know was telling me, you know from his group. Yeah, check
So so now in this zone, so this was a nice model developed in the 1980s, right in 1981 and 1985 these models were developed
And everyone was like, oh, that's cool. Yeah, maybe that's what happened
And what happened was in the late 90s and early 2000s. We actually got ice core data
So we could see climatic variation
What did we find massive amounts of variation followed by a moderate zone as you know
In exactly the moment when humans evolve
Now you should have to you should pause for a second be like, well, wait a minute all those animals surely they all experience, right?
There is there is a link to there is a link to generation length for the first half
But you also need something else to kick this thing off. You got this bootstrap problem. Okay, so I suspect
You know in the book this is going a little we don't have a model of this
You know, by the way, you know theories only become theories if you can write them down
So, you know this what I just said, we've got good models for a good good
Empirical evidence what I'm about to say we don't have as good models except when it comes to brain evolution, which is some of my own work
So I suspect bipedalism actually did a lot for us. Okay, and the reason for that
So we were we probably bipedal for completely separate reasons, right?
This is kind of an early adaptation and by being bipedal it did two things
One it freed our hands for you for making tools and carrying them around, right?
So you can invest in that stone axe because you can carry it to the next location and use it again
Whereas if you're a quadrupedal ape like a chimp or a orangutan or gorilla, whatever like you don't want to carry this big
Ass rock around so you don't you have to reuse it so cheapen the cost of tools
The second thing that it did is what I'm doing with you right now that unfortunately audio listeners can't see which is talking with my
Hands, right? Let's do that. Yeah, we all do it. I saw you do it. You know, we talk with our hands
And so that opened up a new modality for communicating with
So now now we can begin to solve that language problem, which as I said, it's not an explanation as part of that package
So imagine I should say more so the information begins to accumulate
Because cultural evolution becomes a second line of inheritance and that happens because of what I described there
So for any evolutionary system needs three ingredients
The aeration like diversity
Easy to solve for culture people do all kinds of things for all kinds of reasons different information different personalities, whatever
Transmission so you need reliable. You don't want too much information to be lost during the transmission process
So for for it for genes, of course
It's because genes are not mutating at a very high rate and you need variation reduction
And if you wanted to it be adaptive you need selection where more of the good stuff sticks around and less of the bad stuff
Yep, and if you meet those criteria, you have an evolutionary system. It's how genetic algorithms work, right?
So genes, we know how that works for culture. I just gave you the transmission
We copy without understanding and so we don't lose too much information and we do it selectively
We copy people who are more successful. We copy people who other people are copying. We copy people who are experts
You know, we have a we have a psychology that leads us to for example
If a celebrity says I'm drinking this drink, you're like, I want that drink we do it instinctively
Why it's got nothing to do with their success, right? But other people, you know, but we don't know it's a black box
I don't know why you know
Beyonce is such a great singer. So I'm just gonna I'm gonna wear her perfume and I'm gonna dress like her
I'm gonna do everything because you know, you know, if I'm trying to copy the best hunter
maybe it's because of the shoes he wears or
You know his weapons or where he goes hunting
But equally it's because of the his kick-ass beard or fact that he shaves his head or the gods he worships
So a little hunter copies everything about them
Now if you have that system, you've already deferred to the population level and the information begins to accumulate
Okay, now we have evidence for early accumulation of information because
One of the best pieces of evidence from in my view that this is absolutely why humans evolve is the fact that we rely on cooked food
Our jaws are too too weak for chewing on like a gorilla on leaves all day
And our guts are too short to process that food anyway, even if we could right so that means we were cooking food
We had fire
Now, I don't know if you've ever tried to light a fire, but it's hard man. It's it's hard
What's your thought it's hard, right?
And so like that meant that we needed fire to survive and we don't have in genes for it
It's gotta have been culturally transmitted. You couldn't have figured it out
So that's a very early very early bit of information
Maybe the stone tools to and probably before the stone tools the bone tools and the wooden tools that didn't survive the passage of time
You say very early. What years are we guessing?
So we're talking like millions of years
Millions of years ago one and a half. Yeah. Yeah, so this is like very early on so before like modern humans
Yeah
And we have evidence for this right like we have little bits of evidence for for it
So that meant while we were bipedal we had information worth transmitting
Right and so that means you can get what's called a Baldwinian process in evolution
So Baldwinian process is one where you can get to a place through learning
But if you can get there through genes more efficiently those genes can be selected
So in this case, I can there is a bunch of gestures
I can give you so you can build the tool or light the fire or know that you know
I can I can have guttural utterances and I can wave my hands in a particular way
And you can learn that that means just through you know reinforcement learning figure out what I'm talking about
But now if you have cognitive changes that allow you to acquire that bit of language that bit
You can do it more efficiently and that means the next generation
You can do a little bit more and a little bit more and a little more now
You have the ratchet to get up in the presence of an accumulating body of knowledge
You see where I'm going. Yeah, I do and
Go ahead keep going there. Yeah, so so you have you have you can begin to accumulate this knowledge, right?
And so some of the genetic changes by the way like made us more susceptible to choking
So as I say in the book, we were literally dying to speak to you
And and so, you know, and so we had so this did a few things so one now we had all this knowledge
We had language begin to evolve language continues to evolve by the way. So for example, it becomes more efficient
Some of my research and and our brains grew so they tripled in size compared to our last common ancestor
You know five to seven million years ago with a chip
Our brains were to the point where if you look at the medical literature today
Once you get about the 85th percentile
So doctors used to think it was like big babies were difficult to birth turns out not big babies as big heads
Once you get about the 85th percentile it hockey sticks up in terms of
Emergency cesareans and emergency, you know forceps. So basically you need these so that means for our species
Like it was kind of the curse of Eve, right? Like we had all this knowledge big brain
It's painful and dangerous childbirth for mother and baby. Yeah
So so we did other things we began to for example extend our childhoods
Right. So what one change that that seems to have happened for us is we had a self-domestication and we became neotonous
Which is an easy change for evolution to make. I mean, we turned the magnificent wolf
You know, so we neotonized dogs into permanent puppies and the same thing happened for us
We are permanent youthful apes able to learn for a very long time
So we had a longer child along a juvenile period and we created an adolescence
Which is the period from when you could reproduce to when you actually do
Which has been growing and growing as the body of knowledge has begun to grow used to be that like a high school degree was enough to
Get a good job
Then it was a high school degree plus any college degree then a STEM degree then also master's degree and an unpaid internship itself
And so now we're actually hitting a new limit
So before I think the primary selection was on like being able to give birth to these bigger heads
Now it's like about giving birth at an older age, right? Yeah
This all of this completely changed our societies in a variety of ways that puts the whole human package together
It's what created grandmothers. It's what created, you know, the the difference between men and women like you created dads very unusual among great apes
it
Yeah, I mean the division of labor, you know, the division of information all of this emerges
So it's not what you know, the theory of everyone isn't like so I make fun of what I call
I love this genre of book by the way
The one thing that explains everything, you know, that's okay
You know, it's like let me show you why my little bit of research that I just love happens to explain the whole damn world, right?
Yeah
This is this is a toty adjacent book like toty's like an acronym for that, you know, it's a Jason, right?
Sure, but I'm not like doing this one thing like I've got you know
I kind of talk about the role that energy like the big theme of the book is the role that energy and particularly excess energy
Has played in all of life and certainly in our civilization
And I talk about the fact that there are kind of four laws and you're gonna hate this as a physicist
But I don't mean Newtonian laws. I mean kind of lenses of how in which we can view the world, you know
the law of energy
Which is fundamentally life is competing over excess energy
The law of innovations and efficiency
So life is evolving new ways to use that energy more efficiently the law of cooperation that the scale of cooperation
It's the level at which the individual unit be they cells or individuals or you know in a society
Or in a or the employees in a business is the level at which that per person per unit
Return on energy is not going to be higher in a larger or smaller group
And the law of evolution, which is that both through genetic and cultural evolution and the interaction between these
We find the space of how to cooperate how to innovate at a population level and how to and how to unlock new bits of energy
Which you know, thanks to the fall
So if you'll revolution with the industrial revolution, we now live in that world
Well, let's talk about energy a little bit because the story that you just painted reminds us of this
Idea that history is basically a search for calories, right?
food calories back in the day and then when we invent industrial technology
We're just we need even more calories in the sense of of an energy source and and
Part of the theme of your book is how much of a central organizing principle that is for human history. Correct
Yeah, that's exactly right. So, you know for for us the the first
um
This is an ancient thing, you know, what you just said about calories and you know, I put it in terms of jewels or watts
Like this is fundamentally what matters, you know, the first organisms whenever we turn from RNA into the first self-replicators or whatever
um
Sorry the other way around, you know, the first several applicators into RNA and eventually organisms
um
The only energy we had is like the fact that we got a large moon
Which was closer to the earth sloshing the water back and forth over the you know, the land of the seas
So you got some gravitational energy there, but some of it's the sun falling. So we have the earliest proto photosynthesis, which was
Which didn't use any oxygen, right, right?
and
Then we had a mutation which led to a more efficient photosynthesis, which you know
Polluted the world a great oxygenation event mass mass extinction, but there was also a new opportunity
So once we had photosynthesis turning solar energy into chemical energy in the form of like ATP and little sugar little sugar cubes
Basically, it meant that other organisms could begin to find a new niche of not directly converting the sun into
Into organisms and moving at plant pace but eating other organisms and moving a little faster, right?
There were like a little bundle just as a story of colonialization actually
You know an energy rich little corner of Eurasia creates the largest empire the world has ever seen
Out competing other less energy less less less cooperative societies in devastating ways
um
And so, you know, and so the same pattern happens throughout life. You got prokaryotes getting eaten by eukaryotes eukaryotes being eaten by
Uh multicellular life complex multicellular life and eventually all the way to you
Who is more like
An ecosystem an amazon rainforest of a microbiome and you know and interacting differentiated cells more than you are a single organism
And if you run out of energy, you're going to get defeated by the lower scales by the bacteria
Or are you going to get your stuff stolen from you by the bigger scale same pattern across the across everything?
So uh for humans the in terms of our calories the the first unlocking of energy was the one I described before which is fire, right?
Uh, we it was a chemical energy technology that allowed us to pre-digest foods and make them those calories more bioavailable
Which allowed us to grow those brains and shrink those guts
Right occupy a new niche the next major revolution was agriculture, which was a solar technology, right?
Where now rather than spending all that energy walking around searching
You know hunting and gathering like trying to find plants and small animals or large animals in a group you
domesticate
And look after animals and you you you grow food
More efficiently it was a law of innovation if you like and the law of energy and you grow your population
To the point where you out compete the hunter-gatherer groups to the margins that are not suitable to agriculture
Which is still where they live today, right?
And those larger groups are able to innovate more and you lay the foundations for the beginnings of cities as kind of
massive nodes of collective intelligence, right?
This continues and we live in a Malthusian world, right of because because the pattern in this story across every scale
Is that when you get this unlocking you get an era of abundance?
And that would have been that first era of abundance and then because carrying capacity has gone up
The number of individuals meets that carrying capacity and you once again enter an era of scarcity
Where the per person calories or energy is lower the the next major unlocking that is most relevant to us was the industrial revolution
Which if you look at any metric of progress the size of our polities the you know child survival rates anything you care about
It just shoots up into the sky, right?
And as in maris puts it it made a mockery of all the world's earlier history scientific revolution black death renaissance
blips in anything we care about
And that's because we exploited stored solar energy in the form of like peat turned to black rock coal and you know
algae, you know, whatever turned to oil and natural gas, right?
And we unlocked that in a matter of centuries we began to burn that down and we using that excess energy
We multiplied ourselves in our efforts. We had another agricultural revolution the green revolution, you know, norman borlag
Where we synthesized through the hub or brush process. We synthesize fertilizer with nitrogen in the air and
You know natural gas
And this allowed us like four billion people half the population along our lives today. Thanks to that process
We're literally eating our fossil fuels. We use them to develop new technologies. Now. Here's here's here's where we transition to
you know part two of the book and which is that
The energy return on investment, which is a key metric I care a lot about
is decreasing
So the excess energy is shrinking and economics and a lot of what we do
We focused on efficiency because they all developed long after the industrial revolution, right?
Or after the industrial revolution
And so if you look at one metric like oil discovery and all the metrics look like this
In 1919 one barrel of oil found you another thousand barrels. Okay, a massive return on energy
By 1951 barrel oil a barrel of oil found you another hundred and by 2010 one barrel found you another five
So so the the level of cooperation is governed by this
If you like the space of the possible created by an energy ceiling and an efficiency floor and that is shrinking
Our ability to innovate new efficiencies is is decreasing the rate of that is decreasing
And the and the ceiling is rapidly falling on us and so our societies all of the fractures are cracking
We're falling back to lower scales of cooperation as a result of this
Let's let's actually get out of this is let's let's pause and dwell on this because I think this is an important thing
uh
First let me just
Sort of summarize this this point, which i'm going to be very much in favor of as a physicist that
the progress
Progress in the sense of just change not necessarily improvement of human society
Is a story of transitions, right? It's more punctuated equilibrium than gradual improvement. We you know innovate gradual and occasional punctuated
Yeah, sure. Yeah, but the but the idea that we do innovate
We find some new mode for doing something whether it's producing energy or technology or whatever
And then that gives us space, right? We can then grow into that
But you're saying that as we do grow into that as we sort of reach what might be a new equilibrium. We also
Because there's less spare excess
Wealth in various forms to go around
Things get squeezed a little bit our social fabric gets a little bit harder to uh maintain
That's right. So I mean our not only does population grown and so that alone is but that's a good thing for the most part because it means more
Innovation right like more people more in so far as everyone is
Able to access all of that cultural knowledge and you know opportunity matches talent and all of that stuff
Which as we both know isn't often not always true. Yeah
Um, but but you know the other side of it is simply that the space itself is shrinking because not only is abundance turning to scarcity
For the usual reasons, but we're re-entering a Malthusian world simply because our excess energy is decreasing
Like it doesn't matter how fancy your gadgets and technology are if you can't charge them
Like our ability to access energy isn't just like price. It's a proxy for it. That's affected by a bunch of other things
It's literally how much energy do I need to get some amount of energy back
Ideal world you want a small energy sector. It's like five percent of the economy at the moment, right?
That's great
But as because that means that the returns on that energy allow you to do everything else that makes life worth it
Like traveling on flights across the planet and you know hanging out with your friends and eating great food
That he requires ingredients drawn from all around the world all of that stuff
relies on
abundant energy
And I I guess yeah, I think you're gonna have to convince me of this one a little bit more because
I can imagine you know the same kind of general story, but then saying well once we
Reach some equilibrium
Once we have some steady flow of energy in and things out then we can
Figure out a way to organize our society that fits in to that equilibrium
You know the moments of change in a different telling than what you just gave the moments of change are the scary ones
Where we're not sure what's going on, but once everything is a steady flow there
We might reach a happy equilibrium, but you seem to be saying that's not empirically
It's a very physicist answer
No, I mean in biology regardless of our you know our evolutionary game theory
There are no equilibrium and the reason for that is because
You know in a world
So, you know, I tell the story in the beginning of the book like why I got into this
I'm trained as an engineer, you know
Originally and I kind of switched fields and the reason that I did that is I got really concerned
Around climate change and I got concerned about a lot of I lived in a lot of different places
Like Africa and New Guinea and things like that
I was concerned that people don't understand culture first off and second climate change
We're all focused on mitigation
But as the world changes, we're also going to have to figure out how to live in a climate changed world
And some of that we get like carbon capture and those kinds of technologies
But how do you deal with a million bangladeshi's underwater coming into India? How do you like
Not have civilization come apart? What does that mean for uh, you know the Middle East and then for Europe?
Like the Syrian migration crisis is the first example of that, you know
You had climate change probably induced droughts. You have a bunch of people coming into cities
There's not enough jobs to go around not enough infrastructure to support them
eventually they start to you know to
And then the geopolitics kicks in eventually you have a difficult problem at europe store stuff, right?
That's what I wanted to work on
So the the thing is that in a world like, you know, I remember watching al gore's documentary in 2007
And I was like gore and I started reading the IPCC reports
I was reading the pentagon reports and I was like gore is absolutely right about the problem
But he's crazy like are we gonna slow the economy to save the planet if we do amazing?
I'm happy, but I just I just don't believe that because in a world where
Every every country is trying to outcompete every other country
Every company is trying to outcompete every other company and every individual wants more than their neighbors
You're not going to get this equilibrium sustainable, you know, whatever you're all you're going to do is encourage a zero-sum
Malthusian world where your success means my loss because there's a limited pie from which we are taking stuff
Unless you somehow equalize everything and people don't like that
So, I mean any theory of change or any theory of society that requires a complete shift in human nature
And not just constraining in some way
Is broken. It's it's broken from the beginning. It's broken before you got there
So this is an example. There isn't you know, so like ideas like degrowth or you know
Like just pure sustainability of stagnation are dangerous because they will shove us back into a zero-sum environment
Is that what it was like back in the hunter-gatherers?
Yeah, so hunter-gatherers are really interesting
So we have some new work where we're trying to so hunter-gatherers are well
Some hunter-gatherer groups are known for their egalitarianism, right?
They do equalize, right?
If you move to like pastoralists and chiefdoms, you start to see a bit more inequality and things like this
And so people sometimes interpret that as the ancestral state was
Uh, you know was was an egalitarian humans are by nature egalitarian. No
That is probably an adaptation to those zero-sum conditions where there are weak property rights
Why because in a world that is zero-sum and that means your your gain is my loss and vice versa
If you like you start a pizza business, right?
Pizza and i'm like you started pizza. You took a piece of that limited market
I'm gonna like burn your business down or take from you. That's what it incentivizes
It incentivizes destructive competition in a world. That's positive. Some you start a pizza business
I'm like, yo, I got to start my own chain of pizza. You know, like obviously the pizza business is booming very different psychology productive competition
So hana gathers in a world of destructive competition and there's two equilibria that emerge of the model
one
They just kill each other to extinction because of these destructive cycles or two they they managed to flatten
But the consequence of that flattening is a decrease in productivity because what is the point if you can't rise higher, right?
It's a little decrease in production
And it is a kind of stagnation if you like right that that eventually gets you out competed
By the pastoralists by the agriculturalists by, you know, the larger societies that are not engaged in that
And so that's the central problem with what I think the solution you're alluding to
Well, it's not even a solution. I'm just wondering what the space of possibilities is but you're you're pointing out that
To put it in the harshest possible terms inequality can be a driver of innovation
Correct and we an evolution
like life
Is is competing now you could get cycles if you like, you know
Like predator prey model type stuff, you know
Where it's like you you get a nice bird and the rabbits go up and you know the hair go up and then
You know the foxes will catch up and then you get a lie
You can get these kind of equilibria emerge
But it's not a it's a Malthusian world that most animals inhabit
We escape the Malthusian trap simply because we got a little boost
So the question is so my my view is that in order to tackle these very real problems around
Sustainability climate change and not destroying ourselves in our planet
We need the next era of abundance not right, you know an era of scarcity
Because you know the countries that are it's first off
It's easy to be nice to people when there's plenty to go around
Right and second the countries that can invest in looking after their environment and preserving blocks of land and and wanting to live in a
Clean environment of those that are wealthy enough energy rich enough that they're not worried about simple things like food
And you know having enough resources for hospitals and education and other infrastructure
Those are the countries like, you know, I was in australia recently
Australian citizen actually, you know, like so I you know, I was I was at the Great Barrier Reef
I was there as a as a teenager and I remember like oh my god, like I was in these areas
It was like so bleached right this was in I don't know
Early 2000s or something and I was back again last year and I was astonished
I was talking to people like how did you manage to restore the reef they have money
They have resources and they care about it enough
Because they have the highest household wealth in the world and the only country in the world that has you know positive migration from america, right?
Um, so they were able to invest in it if they want to
You do that in a world of abundance not scarcity
So I'm yeah, I mean and I don't want to disagree because I don't know enough to be able to disagree
But I'm curious about uh the possibilities like I said
Is that
That story you just told is is compatible in my mind with an equilibrium zero sum game
Where everybody has that level of wealth, right? I mean, I haven't quite seen the connection to
Inequality and competition. It's just exactly what you said. So there is no baseline, right? There's no like now. I'm satisfied
You know, like I have enough
Like progress and you know and and competition like we want more we want more than our neighbors and there's always problems to be solved
And even if you as a society even if you as an individual decide, you know what? I have enough
We as a society you're going to get out competed by the mutation cultural or genetic
Right where that says actually I want a little more. Yeah, it's not inequality. In other words, it's invadible by that other mutation
Okay, I'll make I'll make one more stab at utopian egalitarianism and then you then we move on
Even if we bought the idea that inequality is is going to happen unless it's sort of we enforce some kind of rigid
You know equitability that everyone is unhappy
Um, can we imagine that we're in a world of such abundance now that we can have some equality some competition
Some motivation for innovation and yet the worst off people are still much better off than they are today in the actual world
Yeah, I mean, I I think the the issue is um
So I kind of survey the the energy technology is available to us and I really apart from solar
Uh, if we solve the battery problem and hydro, which is fantastic
If you've got fast rolling rivers please use them. Good on you Canada. You know, uh, it's really it's really nuclear
As having the right numbers apart from fossil fuels and the fact that those are decreasing we're in real trouble
And you know, there are there are you you can have a society that's more redistributive and it comes at a cost or
Look at the top 100, uh, European companies, right?
Um
They're old, you know very few were you know invented
You know created like this this century if you like look at the top 100 american companies
How many of them right?
Europe redistributes a lot and so it squashes, you know, it's a good it's like I live in europe, right?
I live in the uk somewhere between it squashes things and so productivity is lower
Production is low and so you end up, you know with america doing a lot of the innovation
And there's a little bit of free writing, you know
Where you get to benefit from all of those drugs and all of those technologies you get to use the iphone
You get to use, you know the internet you get to use all of these different technologies
But it's being driven by this american, you know, uh
This creation of inequality in america driven like, you know, so I talk about silicon valley, right silicon valley is a
People think of it as like a bastion of success now man. It's a grave. You're at a failure
Right. Oh, yeah
And and and that's what america, you know america says you do you everybody go try you can do this too, right?
It's terrible at an individual level the asian model like the you know asian tiger mom, you know, japan
Whatever is you know, you don't do you you do me like you do this you follow the script
And everyone is better off but it leads to incremental innovation like you have to believe in a crowded market where everybody also thinks this
And most people still fail that you are going to make it
Yeah, and a society that encourages that in a large enough marketplace with enough energy
Results in finding the few apples what we call unicorns for a reason right the apples the amizons the alphabets the whatever's right
And the graveyard of failure is forgotten because america is richer as a result of this
And you you draw a
Good i'm going to give up on the utopia there, you know the egalitarian. I'm actually not highly committed to it
I would enjoy this actually not highly committed to it, but i want to learn but um you
Then take this picture
I know we've given it very short shrift because it's a it's a a deep book with a lot of things going on
but you take this picture of human nature and
The development of history through these transitions and getting the energy and you apply it to current
Issues that we have i mean climate change is one of them of course
But also political polarization. I mean what about you know
The growth of populism and authoritarianism and so forth. How do we understand that through this lens?
So I mean the first thing is you know like ideally you want to predict you want to explain
But then you want to be able to do something about it. I mean so I see the rise of
There are always fractures that exist in a society right there are always fractures. They are the class divisions ethnic divisions, you know
Um
Regional divisions there's all these fractures that exist, but in a world where there's plenty to go around people just mumble and grumble
so, you know
I have this analogy imagine the buses buses coming along right that's the rate of economic growth
and uh people are waiting for the buses and you know
You got some people who like have special passes the one percent get to the front of the line first
And you've got groups that like favor their ingroup and like they're like come on you can come in front
And you're waiting there, but if the buses are coming every five minutes you mumble you grumble
But you put up with it because you're gonna get a seat
Just wait five minutes more, but if the rate of buses slows down one an hour
one a day
It's like driving around at car park where there's plenty of spaces versus only one and now some asshole
So can I say that?
Someone like tries to take your your place, right?
um
It's a very different psychology
so
And and it doesn't even have to be like a reality like the perception that that is happening the created perception can create the reality
Right or or if you're looking at if you if you if we have a psychologist sensitive to rate of change
Right and you feel like things are slowing down a little bit
Right that alone is enough to trigger this those fractures becoming something more
So then you can have the rise of the right wing you can you end up with more ethnic fractures
You get political polarization you get all of those fractures becoming something more
And the solution to that is one if you've got the resources invest right
You can have a million people turn up at your door if you don't have enough food and water and prepare for those guests
Right, so you need to invest in infrastructure so that already stretched schools
You know the good schools the hospital lines people are not waiting and waiting and now they're annoyed because you're giving things to newcomers
Like that's a recipe for an ethnic conflict
But if you're investing and you're like, you know alongside this this new group of people
We're going to put in all this money so that there's enough space for everyone
That's a good thing
And if you don't have that you need to be investing in energy technologies that allow us to raise that ceiling
So I talk about the umbrella model of multiculturalism is really fusing all of these solutions into something that would work
In a way that current melting pots or mosaics or you know
No, no hyphen french models really just don't so just to try to rephrase it because I do think this resonates with something that I
had believed for a while
They're one of the things the the major factor that the what is the acronym you use that you know the one thing that explains everything
when it comes to
You know populism etc
Is the idea that people who are not well off
Which you might think are going to go for like leftists who are who want to spread the wealth
But they really are feeling powerless and both in the sense that their political voices aren't heard and that their lives are getting worse
Right. Yeah, and then they that
That combination pushes them toward appealing to a strong figure who can shake things up
Yeah
Yeah, look, you know, as I pointed out in the book, I don't think there's good evidence that people don't like inequality
What people don't like is a double negative. So you're saying that they're people like it like equality
No, I'm not saying that people like equality or inequality or whatever what the people want is fairness. Yeah, okay
Right, like people want the outcomes to be matched to the input, you know
Like they want a return like they don't want necessarily the hand out. Maybe some people do right, but like people want the opportunity
So that what they do that they're hard work
If they choose to wake up early and get to the front of the line at that bus stop
They will get at their seat and when that stops happening no matter how early they wake up
Or because of where they're born or who they're born to they just never get that seat
That is the problem. That's when society starts to come apart
And that's what we need to resolve. So, you know, in the section on inequality, I differentiate between
You know wealth creation
versus wealth appropriation
Wealth appropriation is rent seeking. It's monopolistic behavior
It's like land, you know, like holding on to land for centuries as in the country I live in, you know
Where you're just you're just you're just taking, you know, a rent on the land providing no additional value, right?
This is why we need like land value taxes are kind of a way out of this
It's like a huge thing that I talk about in the book
Whereas wealth creation is like you created apple or you created, you know windows or you created amazon
Yeah, you put like a bunch of high streets and malls out of work
But you made things more efficient that consumers like and you actually
You created wealth in some sense either through the efficiency the law of efficiency
Sorry, the law of innovations and efficiency or because you've you've found some new energy technology or something, right?
You've literally created a new you've increased the space as possible
And you are allowed to keep a part of that space
And you are allowed to make other bets that we hope will continue to expand the space
But the issue is that under an intergenerational transmission of wealth that entrenched that inequality
Slowly over time having the remaining people fight over smaller and smaller scraps
That is when society comes apart and that's what we need to solve
So you'd be in favor of larger estate taxes
Would be great, uh, as I pointed out in the book that would be great
But it runs up against a few issues. One is uh, smart estate planning, uh, wealth flight where people take their money out of the country
And it also goes against, you know, it goes against kind of instincts about like
Provisioning for your children and working harder later in life. It's it would be great
What here's the outcome you want you want to create a world
in that is
Every generation has a fairly fair playing field to start with
So that the best and brightest of every generation can push forward our species to where we need to go
And over time things accrue that prevent that happening. So what I actually so there's a you know, there's a
There's an open secret within economics where across the political spectrum, you know, people agree that most taxes are distortionary
You know, they affect your behavior in negative ways like your income tax, right?
Like if you are afraid you're going to earn a little bit more and move into the next income bracket
You're like that marginal gain is not worth it for me
So now it's distortionary on your productivity or production
Um, you know sales tax like I'm not going to buy that because of the sales tax. It's distortionary on commerce
There's one tax that is non distortionary
And there's a moral case for it and it is fair and it would do away with the need for the other taxes
You could get rid of income tax
You can get rid of sales tax and get rid of capital gains tax and you could still pay for the u.s. Military and medicare
And you know this country many more things. So that is land value taxes
So the one asset
That people own that they did not create the one asset that stands above all others
Is land and I don't mean like what you do on the land
You shouldn't be taxed for your buildings or anything you do on the land
But the land itself is common
And there's a moral case almost like slavery where we really need to get rid of this ability to own land
Or at the very least those who take that land should be taxed
For you know
For that use of that land for its most and this does all kinds of things. So it's it's non distortionary
It leads to the most productive use of that land. It solves a lot of housing issues
And the only barrier to it that people agree is is going to require revolution unless I guess the middle class realized that because we all
You know, I own land you own land, you know, like we own land
But what you don't realize is how little you own relative to you know, many others
25 000 britain's you know Brits who own half of the country or you know, the 10 percent of americans who own
I think 60 percent of the country
But just to just to point out this is very radical as a proposal and there's probably, you know
Unanticipating consequences here
The difference in utopia and you know in a better world are constraints
Yeah, and what you want, you know, there are real constraints on this and so what I what I suggest
You know, I suggest pathways out of this. So the path dependence leads us into a world
Like it's hard to rewrite the constitution. It's hard to like change the tax code overnight
but what you can do is
Do what for example
So, you know last week I was in Estonia because I want to understand how they are the top of the pizza tables in the western world
Beaten only by a handful of other a handful of east asian countries
And they do it while spending less per per student than the rest of the the oecd average and certainly less than the us
Canada uk australia, you know, then and they have better outcomes. How do they do that?
Sorry, explain what these tables are that you're talking about. Oh, sorry. Yeah, sorry the
the oecd's pizza tables test students around the world on mathematics on
Reading and on science good. Okay, and Estonia tops that table their students top the table, right?
Uh a part as I said from a couple of a few asian countries. How did they do that?
So I went there to understand and you know, I spoke to the former education minister
I spoke to the person who founded what was called the tiger leap foundation. So after the fall of the
Well after the soviet occupation ended in 1991 only half the country had a telephone
So, you know, when Estonia became its own country, they were like, okay, if we want to leap ahead
We're gonna have to do something different. We're not like super wealthy. We don't have like a bunch of resources
We just have our people, right? That's it. We got to invest in our people
And so, you know, you can tell you can see how why the people who did this thought of it because of their own experiences
But they decided to really invest in technology
So they created what was called the tiger leap foundation where they overnight gave it the access to computers
You know for every student they internet connected everybody they trained the teachers and so on, right?
They were able to do this because they have radical decentralization
Every school has autonomy over what they do every municipality has autonomy and the central government can't just say let's do this
They have to incentivize
So teachers were incentivized to share knowledge through this teacher social network called school life. They
Gave them opportunities and incentivized by sharing that knowledge. They increased their pay
They gave them opportunities to travel to other places to borrow the best from things from around the world
creating a brand new curriculum
And they tested them onto things at a local level and when it worked it got spread to the rest of the country
Many, you know, so, you know, in this case, for example robotics is taught
Like they were the first country to teach reading writing arithmetic and now algorithms to like elementary school students
they
Uh, they trialed and you know Conrad Wolframs
I don't know if you come across Conrad Wolframs criticism of math education where he says, you know, uh
Math education recapitulates history for some reason. Like we you know, we're like, we're gonna learn numbers now
The greeks and Pythagoras for some reason
And you know, eventually get to algebra and eventually calculus, right?
Many students never get to calculus and we don't learn any
20th century math in high school let alone 21st century
Like we're missing huge swaths. Why is that really the most efficient way to do it?
so Conrad, you know, uh, obviously wanting to sell some wolfram products, but um, you know, he he
You know, he argues well in the real world you and I do math on computers, right?
Like we're not you know, look back at the envelope calculations. That's not where the hard stuff gets done, right? And so
um
What you want is for kids to understand what it means to take a derivative
What it means that what an integral actually is and how it can be used and maybe some stats and you know, like
You want them to have mental models and work alongside computers and you can teach that before you and what's hard about calculus
Is not the derivatives and integrals. It's the chain rule. It's the mechanics the quadratic, you know
It's those that are difficult. I agree with you. That's not what's important
That was built for world before you know one middle school teacher was like make sure you learn how to do mental math
You're not gonna carry a calculator in your pocket
He didn't force it
Right, so we so they were able to trial that and now they're trialing this really radical new education system
Uh, where they the learning happens at home
Right where homework and schoolwork are swapped basically like how can a teacher teach to 20 to 30 kids of different abilities?
They can't so the the lower end get left behind the upper end are ignored
Right and so in order to do that what happens is if you and you're at home
You get educational material you get teachers and whatever you get this from the best minds
And then you come to school to practice that you do the homework where the teacher is not the deliverer of knowledge
That the facilitator helping you use the internet and ai to practice your skills
In a very kind of practical real world focus and you do that through radical decentralization
So the u.s. Works the same way by the way, you know just as brand ice referred to each state as a laboratory for democracy, right?
Arizona you want to try something go try it if you fail you fail it at an arizona level
And if it works we bubble it up to the top
Such a nadella converted microsoft from a monolith to a series of startups using the same principle, you know
It's like
You're gonna try different things and we're gonna bubble it up to microsoft and it works and that they invested in chat gbt
And open ai right great moves and the shares have been have been sorry the catholic church works this way by the way
You know, it's like lasted for so long because they're like well
We got a central authority, but you know jesuits you go do your weird thing and we're gonna laugh at you for most of it
Oh, now we have a jesuit pope because that worked out, right?
You have to have space to to kind of explore these possibilities to get out of that trap
So what do I why am I saying talking about all this because land value taxes are something you can do in what I call startup cities
Right like cities are the place where we all live
And countries are increasingly
Untenable in some ways like how do you get that?
But if you empower cities give them more autonomy allow them to learn from one another
Have a more startup ecosystem around that. This is a way out, right?
This is the engine of development that hong kong represented for china
This is why singapore is is at the top of the piece of tables, you know
It's it's how guangzhou works and now there's a bunch of startup cities or charter cities sometimes, you know in in africa
But this is a way past
current democracy and eventually maybe programmable politics
But I don't have time to explain that it's in the book
It's in the book
I think there's a lot in the book and you know, we've covered a lot of it
but
I do want to encourage people to check out the book because it paints a much folder picture
but maybe we can sort of wind things up by
Returning to something that we talked about right at the beginning
The the children learning from the adults rather than using their reasoning, right that we rely on our cultural
Transmission of knowledge. I want to feed that back into what we were just talking about in terms of
Inequality and and fairness and and innovation and things like that
How much of a problem is it that in the modern era?
We're able to get that cultural knowledge in a in a quite fine-tuned or at least
quite differentiated way even within one culture, right like if I
in your bus analogy
If I am constantly told that the buses come very rarely and discriminate against me
Even if it's not true that becomes a problem for how society works
Yeah, you know, like, you know, people talk about this is like the Walter Cronkite problem
You know, like once upon a time we all got our news. Well, not me. I'm too young
Yeah, Walter Cronkite, you know was I was on the evening news
Um, and now like we all read different. We you know, we read Breitbart and you know and Huffington Post and New York Times
We're all getting it from like different places
So I think the internet is interesting in that so I argue that the internet is actually creating
We are not in the midst of a fourth industrial revolution or fifth industrial revolution
We are in the midst of a second enlightenment
Okay, one driven not by coffee shops and pamphlets and books but by tweets
And you know and shared articles on social media that piss you off
And they piss you off because they expose you to ideas that are not in your in group
Now alongside that is a countervailing force
Which is that we are also able to assort in smaller and smaller groups
And those groups can compete with one another. In other words, the internet creates new tribes, right? So, you know, um
There's a show here Little Britain and there's a there's a character, you know, he's like, he's the I'm the only gay in the village
You know, it's not true. He actually there's lots of other
Gays in the village, but um
And once upon a time you might have been like if you had if you were a small minority in a small village
You were you did not have a critical master do anything
Right, but the internet enables you to find so, you know, I point to a couple of examples. So are you um
Are you into carrying sand in your pocket? Sean? I am not I'd never have done
Well, you know like 30 000 people on like our, you know reddit subreddit on pocket sand talk about all the benefits of carrying
Sand in their pockets, but that's actually kind of a niche interest unlike stapling bread to trees
Like listeners go and google bread staple to a tree. It is a hobby held by around 300 000 people, right?
So, yeah, you get these different groups
But it's very hard. It's very hard to generalize whether that is silo
Like it's an empirical question
Whether we are now in silos or actually exposed to more information and both are true
I think what is actually the case is it's not about the information. It was never about the information
It was never about misinformation. It was about whom we trust and what has happened
Is that our trust in our institutions and to some degree as a result of that in each other has decreased
And that is resulting in selective access to that information and greater assortment
And the ultimate issue here the ultimate level problem needs to be solved and that is it's an energy problem actually
Sorry, I you made a leap there that I need to to figure out. I mean, I agree
That the trust in institutions has waned
It seems to me like in some ways that's an outcome of the same game theoretic analysis of you know, different groups
Jockeying for space and things like that
And of course with the caveat that some institutions are super untrustworthy. So it's it's correct to not trust them
But so how do you bring it back down to energy?
So sorry, so, you know, why I say that it's you know, it's about the information is like
There are always people always
Calling for the end of the world or saying that, you know, we live in a racist society or that, you know
We live in a society where you're getting screwed over or there's always people
There's always a bunch of people saying everything
But whom people listen to
depends on on circumstances
Right and so what I'm arguing is there is a both a perception and a reality and yes
They can like feedback on each other and the reality is that out truly our space of the possible has indeed trunk
The amount of excess energy available to each of us has actually shrunk and you know round about the 19
You know the the oil crisis 1980s 1970s, you know, like it was around, you know, what the fuck happened in 1971 1973
This was when it all happened the american dream died around then because you suddenly had a 50 50 probability of being better off than your parents
That has truly happened. Right
And so that is fundamentally an issue of excess energy which ultimately drives gdp growth
So like 50% roughly of gdp growth is energy or 50% is about it, you know innovations and efficiency
Okay, I I do get it now. So it comes back to this
Shrinking distance between the ceiling and the floor basically in our society
Yeah, you know the amount the amount that we have to all live in together the scale of cooperation
That is that is incentivized and I will let you close the these sets of thoughts with your optimistic spin on how we're eventually going to
Work our way out of this
Well, you know, so as I said, you know part one of the book lays it all out lays out the science lays out the problem
but then part two is
Is exactly about you know, how do we like do the chapter titles are like how do we reunite humanity?
How do we create a new forms of governance for the 21st century?
How do we shatter that glass ceiling of inequality?
How do we trigger a creative explosion that maybe gets us diffusion and becoming the first generation of a galactic civilization?
How do we improve the internet? How do we as individuals become brighter?
And because like imagine you are the first generation to have the periodic table, right?
We can stop doing alchemy. We start doing some chemistry and there are actual
Solutions given the constraints that we face real life solutions that are possible for tackling each of these problems
And that means that a brighter future is possible if we so choose
I cannot close on any better sentence than that. So michael muthukrishna. Thanks very much for being on the mindscape podcast
Thank you so much for having me. Sean. I loved it
You
