Is it secularism or is it just a loss of narrative?
If we'd have gotten rid of the God stuff, but kept this real attachment,
I mean, people often quote or used to quote the founding fathers of this nation
as if they were quoting Hadiths of the Prophet Muhammad.
Like, they've just, like, an argument was settled in politics
by figuring out what the founding fathers thought.
Can you imagine that today? In a debate today, someone says,
ah, but didn't you know that, you know, that Thomas Jefferson
thought there should be a separation between churches?
Who cares what Thomas Jefferson thought?
You know, these were sort of, you know, these crazy white old men
and that's how people see it now, right?
And so the thing that's lost is not necessarily religion.
It's this American narrative.
It's the narrative that's important now, I think.
We don't have a socially recognized, legitimated home
outside of the religions for people who want to ameliorate their foolishness,
who want to enhance their connectedness.
If you'll allow me a little bit, a high-fluten word,
who want to cultivate wisdom.
Some people are saying that atheism is going out of fashion.
You are doing a good job of trying to bring it back into fashion.
Do you find something in that atheistic philosophical line of inquiry
to fill your soul?
I think we're screwed as long as people keep looking in the wrong place.
And that place is this realm of the propositional, right?
You stop bloody talking all the time and you start doing other things.
I mean, isn't that a bad thing to say at a conference?
My name is Freddie Sayers. I'm in charge of Unheard.
We are partnering this weekend with the Amazing Discipline Dialogues.
Thanks, everyone, for making out to this extraordinary place.
We've struggled to find a way.
What an opportunity we have now for the next couple of days
to actually get to know each other and have proper conversations.
And I personally am really, really excited about it.
Without further ado, our first panel, our first deep dive,
we're going off the deep end straight away today,
is addressing the question of meaning.
And to help us do that, we have two amazing people.
The first you will know as Cosmic Skeptic,
but he is no longer Cosmic Skeptic.
He is an artist formerly known as Cosmic Skeptic.
He's Alex O'Connor.
And he is joining John Vaveki, who is a professor of psychology
from the University of Toronto, who has coined...
John Serebio.
You might know John's YouTube series,
Awakening from the Meaning Crisis.
So this question, we could not have two better people to help us solve.
So, what do we do when we don't go to church?
Is there underlying all of these culture wars, political crises,
identity crises, some big, hard-to-define question,
which is basically the gap where religion used to be?
Will people come to big industrial buildings in Brooklyn
to gather and find meaning in the future, do we think?
Alex O'Connor, is there a meaning crisis?
I want to say yes. I want to say a misleading yes,
because I think that people often...
I think the title of this panel is Finding Meaning in a Secular Age.
I'm not sure that the meaning crisis that we're in
is strictly due to or related to secularism in particular.
I think that if there is a meaning crisis,
it can be described as the human condition.
If you look at what people say on some self-help YouTube video
about Albert Camus talking about going into work, coming home,
tide comes in, tide goes out, sun up, sun down,
and none of it means anything.
Sure, you can find that there,
but you can also find it in the book of Ecclesiastes.
This isn't a new thing.
And so when people talk about the meaning crisis
and feel a bit pessimistic about the fact that, you know,
you're struggling to find a reason to be and a reason to act,
the first thing that I'd like to point out
is that this isn't some modern phenomenon.
It's exacerbated by new specific modern phenomena,
social media, phone addiction, this kind of stuff.
But the idea of, like, struggling to find meaning
is no new problem.
So you're an atheist?
Yes.
A proud atheist?
A reluctant atheist.
Where do you get your meaning from?
Well, I was trying to think about what meaning actually means,
and generally when talking about it,
I try to give some, like, clever-sounding academic definition,
but I was reading Blaise Pascal's Ponce, The Thoughts.
It's a marvellous, marvellous volume,
and I don't think it was ever supposed to be published,
but in the first part, Man Without God,
he talks about the concept of boredom.
There's this wonderful passage on the concept of boredom,
and he says, it's where you get this famous quote
that all of man's troubles spring from his inability
to sit alone in a room in silence,
and he imagines somebody who tries to pass their boredom
by gambling.
Every day, he goes and places a stake
in the hopes that he'll win some money,
and this is how he stops himself from being bored.
And Pascal says, well, give this man all of the money
that he could have won in the gambling game
on the condition that he can't play anymore,
and you'll make him unhappy,
because there's no thrill in it, there's no excitement.
Okay, so he doesn't just want to win the money,
he wants to play the game.
Okay, says Pascal, allow him to play the game,
but he's guaranteed not to win the money.
You're also going to make him upset.
Okay, so what is it then?
It's something like not having the thing desired,
along with the illusion that once you achieve the thing
that's desired, it's going to make you happy,
but because having the thing on its own
isn't actually going to make you happy,
you also need to not have it.
So meaning has to be something like
that slightly self-deceptive position
of identifying happiness in something you don't have,
believing that you can achieve it,
and then constantly not achieve it, right?
Because it used to be the case that the things that...
I mean, with the sort of centers of meaning,
the self-help stuff that I was mentioning a moment ago,
they say, you know, seek discomfort, cold showers,
and go to the gym and eat healthily, and this kind of thing,
and it's because, you know, it used to be that when you wake up,
it was a gamble.
You don't know if you're going to have a shelter over your head,
you don't know if you're going to have food to eat every single day,
the thing resets.
Now, you've got the money without the game,
you've got the food, you've got the shelter, you're fine.
So what people are doing is they're seeking out the game
without the prize.
This is why religion does it so well,
because religion is the definition of something
which you don't have now,
and for your entire life will not have,
and yet believe that you can have
and think that that thing is desirable.
That must be the thing that religion serves.
So, look, I was really happy to be invited and speak here,
and I think it's wonderful,
but when somebody asks me where do I find my meaning,
I'm as much in this struggle as anybody else.
There's nothing that I can do to help you find it,
except for firstly helping to try and recognize
what it is that we're actually looking for,
and I think it's maybe something like that.
John, do you recognize that struggle, that description,
or do you have a bit more of a sort of purposeful view of it?
Well, no, I mean, I respect Alex what he's saying,
and I think there's important truths in it.
I would say, initially, I agree with Alex,
there's a perennial problem of meaning,
Ecclesiastes or books of the same ilk,
and I think this has to do with the fact
that we are perennially prone to despair,
because the very processes that make us intelligently adaptive
also make us perpetually susceptible to self-deception,
and we can get bound up and cut off
and disconnected from ourselves and other people.
So, I think there's definitely a perennial aspect,
cross-cultural, cross-historical aspect to it.
I think what's specific about what I call the meaning crisis
is that those perennial problems
usually have had perennial solutions.
There have been, and the solutions are not
what we call belief systems.
They are systems, or better, make it more sort of dynamic.
Ecologies of practices, ways of transforming consciousness,
cognition, character, community,
they give people a sense that they're ameliorating
this self-deception and enhancing their connectedness
to themselves, to other people, to the world.
And those ecologies of practices have been housed
in various things, or homed is better.
They've been homed in religions,
but they've also been homed in these things
that sort of hang on the border between philosophy and religion,
like Buddhism and Taoism, and maybe stoicism.
And so what seems to be the case, though,
is we don't have a socially recognized,
legitimated home outside of the religions
for people who want to ameliorate their foolishness,
who want to enhance their connectedness,
if you'll allow me a little bit, a high-fluten word,
who want to cultivate wisdom.
And because of that, and that has to do with
some very important historical factors.
Do you think it's new, though?
Alex was saying it's been around forever.
Just a mile away, we have the Columbia campus.
It has nothing to do with this conversation, in a way,
but the intensity of the political disagreement,
the sense that people are fundamentally unreconciled,
do you think that is just another manifestation of this?
Do you think we are in a particularly...
Very much, and I think from an anthropological point of view,
not a theological point of view,
from an anthropological point of view,
these are religious events, these are people...
Well, I want to do what Alex said.
What is it that we're seeking, we're seeking meaning?
So in cognitive science and psychology,
we try to distinguish between the meaning of life,
which is some grand metaphysical claim,
and meaning in life,
and philosophers like Susan Wolfe and others.
So what this is is that it sort of has a bunch of factors,
but one is does the world make sense to you?
Think of all the things you have in a video game
and why people want to be in video games.
Does the world make sense to you?
Is there a story that you can play a part in?
And is there a way for you to level up,
for you to get better as a person,
to enhance your agency?
And so it's this fundamental sense of connectedness.
And so you can determine meaning in life
by asking people three questions.
What do you want to exist even if you don't?
How really real is it?
What difference do you make to it now?
These people in these events,
they want to connect to something,
a cause that's bigger than themselves,
and they want it to exist.
They think the universe is a better place
if this cause is there.
They think it's really real.
They think these are real events.
This is significant, important.
This isn't like going to the store and buying milk.
And they think they can make a difference
by participating in it, committing to it.
And so I think it's very much,
an act about trying to get this connectedness.
And the fervor means
that it's being driven by a tinge of anxiety,
a tinge of hunger,
a tinge even of potential despair.
I mean, they would say,
if they were here right now on this panel,
they'd be pretty cross
by that suggestion, I think,
because they would say there are big problems.
These are issues which they're engaged with
in a practical way.
Alex, do you look at the news?
Do you look at stuff happening like in Colombia?
There are now these,
what appear to be completely
unrecognizable battles.
Do you
see something existential
in them? Or do you think it's just
politics or cultural war?
Well, existentialism is always
at the basis of
political and cultural disputes.
There's always something, there's always some
bedrock that people are working from.
Because if they weren't, then you could just solve these disputes
by using reason. You could just figure out
what their disagreement is, figure out
who most agrees with the
bedrock that you both share, and there you go.
Problem solved. But no, there's some kind of
philosophical
bedrock. The thing that people are looking for,
the reason why you can't just argue people out of this stuff,
and it's something that I've spoken to John about before,
and I think we'll agree on, is that
wherever this meaning thing exists,
if you look at traditional centers of meaning,
art and poetry and religion,
one of the unifying features
is that it is non-propositional.
It's not something that you put into a syllogism,
it's not something that you sort of rationalize and argue.
Will you just explain what that means?
So, it's like,
the way I'll explain it is, I imagine,
I kind of wanted to make like a sketch.
What I'm trying to say is that
the way of doing philosophy that
arises with the analytic philosophical tradition,
so trying to translate all philosophy
into
if p then q, p
therefore q, like that rationally
follows logical deduction, that kind of stuff.
This is not how people interact with the world.
This is not how people behave.
If you open the Bible, you do not find a single syllogism.
Like, this is not why people come to believe in God.
This is probably something you'll talk about
with Richard Dawkins and Ayan Hirsi Ali.
I imagined, for example, this sketch
I wanted to make, there's like a man
who is in desperation
about to throw himself off a bridge,
and someone comes up to him and says,
what are you doing? You know?
And he says, I'm just so hopeless, you know?
Life has no meaning. And the guy says,
have you ever thought about the question of God?
And he says, you know, I've thought about it sometimes.
Maybe I feel like I'm being listened to.
And then he recites a poem to him.
And he's overwhelmed with beauty.
And he considers getting off of the ledge.
And the man talks him through this narrative.
He tells him about his own struggles with meaning and purpose.
And the man's like, okay, you know,
I feel heard, I feel seen,
and he's about to climb back over the ledge.
But then he remembers that
the principle of sufficient reason fails
because of modal fatalism in the academy.
So he throws himself off the bridge.
It's not how people think.
It's not how people behave, right?
Like Keith says that...
he says, do not all charms fly
at the mere touch
of cold philosophy.
Philosophy will clip an angel's wings,
conquer all mysteries
by rule and line.
But you have a whole show devoted to philosophy.
This is your topic.
Yes.
Is that the time?
I think...
Yeah, I do.
Presumably, your finder helps you.
I'm really fascinated to know
you are...
where some people are saying
that atheism is going out of fashion.
You are doing a good job
of trying to bring it back into fashion.
Do you
find something in that
atheistic philosophical line of inquiry
to
fill your soul?
But atheism doesn't really have
that kind of content,
right?
You're right that my show is all about philosophy,
but whereas when I was
a 17 or 18-year-old getting started,
my whole show, my whole stick
was doing the
well-actually thing.
That commits that logical fallacy
and therefore that doesn't actually follow from that.
And you know what, it worked. People liked it.
They thought, oh, this is cool and they watched it.
The reason I'm saying this now is because
I'm not a 17-18-year-old anymore.
I realized that that's not...
it's not what connects with me.
I can't remember where it comes from,
but C.S. Lewis at one point
talks about how,
when he made this shift, and what I'm trying to say is that
where I used to do that, I still talk about philosophy,
but I am trying to encourage my audience
to instead of getting down
and analyzing every brush stroke
of a painting and trying to understand
the Mona Lisa by looking at it through a microscope
and trying to figure out what the pigment is,
by just stepping back and looking at the picture
and realizing that that's what you were supposed to be doing all along.
C.S. Lewis, when he made this kind of shift,
because C.S. Lewis used to be an atheist.
He used to be the rationalist-atheist type.
And then, okay, he becomes a Christian,
but before that he realizes the importance of narrative
and the non-propositional.
And he realized that he was being asked
by what I see
as now sort of the popular philosophical
analytic tradition. He's being asked
to deny that which is most real to him,
meaning,
purpose, narrative,
stories that connected with him.
He was being asked to deny that
and accept as true the things that were most
unreal to him, like numbers
and abstractions and sort of
geometric shapes that sort of exist
somewhere in the platonic realm of forms
or whatever. And that's just not how humans work.
So you're already
on the C.S. Lewis journey then.
You did two steps out of three.
Get you back here in ten years.
You mentioned my previous
YouTube name. It's why one of my good friends used to
call me his second favorite C.S.
I
can't see something like that coming around the corner,
but I've learned a lot from the man
about specifically this. But C.S. Lewis himself,
even being one of the most
prolific apologists
for Christianity in the world, realized
that it's not about the
the apologia. He wrote a poem
called The Apologist's Evening Prayer,
which he imagined sitting down
and
though spending days and days arguing successfully
for God's existence,
I can do it
if you want. It's like two paragraphs. It's quite short.
I don't want to take too much time. It's wonderful.
He says, from all my
lame defeats
and oh, much more, from all the victories
I seemed to score,
from cleverness shot forth on
thy behalf, at which
whilst angels weep
the audience laugh,
from all my proofs of thy divinity,
thou who'd give no sign
deliver me.
Thoughts are but
coins. Let me not trust
instead of thee, their thin-worn
image of thy head.
From all my thoughts, even my
thoughts of thee,
thou fair silence,
fall and set me free.
Lord of the narrow gate and needle's eye,
take from me all my trumpery
lest I die.
And coming from
C.S. Lewis,
that is an extraordinary revelation
about
what all of this is really about.
Well, you know, we promise surprises
to have the famous atheist
quoting beautiful C.S. Lewis poetry
is a great beginning to this conversation.
APPLAUSE
John,
you don't recite C.S. Lewis.
What do you do to...
Are you a theist?
Are you a halfway to being a theist?
I would describe myself as a non-theist.
A non-theist thinks
there is still an open
question about the reference of words like
sacredness without
agreeing to the proposal
that the only way that can be captured
is by a supernatural
super-thing, super-person.
So that you could, like
there are religions that
are properly non-theistic, like Taoism,
Zen within Buddhism,
things like that.
I want to pick up on something Alex said.
First of all,
like you,
I'm
very impressed with
the flexibility
and depth of Alex's thought.
I want to pick up on
what he said about the non-propositional.
This is a big chunk of my work as a cognitive scientist.
I've been arguing
that there are four kinds of knowing.
There is one, the propositional, where Alex
is critiqued.
This is how we know
that they're actually distinct things.
And then there's your procedural memory.
This is knowing how to do things.
You knew how to walk and sit down.
You didn't do that by running an argument.
That's a skill. It's not a belief, it's a skill.
But it's a way of being in contact
with reality.
Then you have your perspectival knowing.
You know how to notice things.
How to focus your attention.
How to be present or absent
with people.
You know
that you have a kind of memory attached to this.
This is your episodic memory.
This is when you remember specific events
and the perspectives you took on them.
Then there's a deeper kind of memory
that's called your participatory
knowing.
This is your knowing by how you and the world
fit together, given biological constraints,
cultural constraints, historical constraints.
For example, there was all kinds of things
laid out for you culturally and biologically
about walking on the stage and sitting in a chair.
That was all available to you in which
if I dropped you into Papua New Guinea
you'd be going like, you wouldn't know.
So all of those things. Now why is that important
given what Alex said? Well
the argument is that those
non-propositional kinds of knowing are where most
of your cognitive agency is.
That's where most of your meaning making is.
Let me give you an example.
We think we're talking
abstract thought
when we're talking propositional. Listen to the word
abstract, lift out. We talk about
moving around and progressing
through an argument or getting to the
end. Or what's underneath this argument
or what does it stand on?
We use all this language
and what's becoming apparent from cognitive
science is we take all of that
non-propositional machinery that we use
for navigating the world
I mean like the physical world
and what we do is we bootstrap it up into
navigating the intellectual world.
And so this world up here, the abstract world
can't actually function
autonomously. It has to constantly
get nourished
by the non-propositional.
That's what he did with the poem.
So what do we
what do we do
with all of that? How do we
stop bloody talking
all the time and you start doing other
things. I mean isn't that a bad thing to say
at a conference?
But what you do is
practices. You have to do
individual and what the research is
doing. You have to do collective
collaborative practices.
So I do
Tai Chi Chuan. I meditate. I
contemplate. I do a journaling practice
from stoicism. And what you do
is you find sets of practices
and there's formal reasons
for this but they have sets of strengths
and weaknesses and you try to get them
so that they're as self-corrective as possible
so that you are comprehensively
intervening in this
meaning making machinery. Because here's
the thing. It's not
optional. It will run regardless
of what you're doing up here.
The issue is can you get it run
in a way that is actually at least
responsive to good
argument and evidence up here? And the
answer is you can.
It's not optional. You can't like
I just won't pay any attention to that. That's
not optional for you. But what you can do
is make practices. This is like play-doh.
You want to get the man
and the lion and the monster
properly talking to each other. And a lot
of that talking isn't through speech.
It's by engaging in
new ways of noticing.
New ways
of taking a stance
towards a situation. New ways
of assuming an identity and a role in a
situation. It feels
somewhat mechanical though
doesn't it? I mean both of these
processes
whether it's creating a task
that you can never quite conclude
that's what we talked about at the end
that offers a
false promise or engaging in
practices that almost seem to trick
your soul.
Are you
doing these with a sense that there is a
truth that you are
getting closer to?
Is this a purposeful
faithful activity? Well I'm going to
challenge you because you used the property
of propositions to ask me the questions
which means you're still prioritizing them.
Is it true or false? They're
powerful or not. And power
is another way we judge realness.
Your perspectives aren't true
or not. It's whether or not they make
you feel present in a situation
like you're foregrounding
the right things and backgrounding
the right things. Are you taking
the right role that your participatory
knowing? That's real because if you don't
take the right role you can't engage
with the correct set of problems that you're
being faced and you can't be responsible
for it.
We don't have a single sense of
realness. We have multiple
senses of realness and part of what I
think we're trying to do
is relearn how to
re-coordinate those senses of
realnesses so they are not
operating orthogonally or antagonistically
but so they're mutually correcting
and affording each other so that we get
the fullest possible connectedness
to what we think is most reliably
real, not just abstractly
putting all that together
and trying to zoom out
to look at how
the whole of society might or might
not shift.
Do you think we're screwed? Do you think
are we going to have
millions of people engaging in this
kind of purposeful activity and therefore
changing the
direction of the meaning crisis
or do you think we are headed in a
direction that only gets worse?
I think we're screwed as long as people keep
looking in the wrong place
and that place
is this realm of the propositional
right? That's why I think John and I
get on so well in our podcast that we did
together as well because this is something we can
completely agree on that
obviously sorry to
disappoint you, I can't tell you how to find
meaning. Like that's not something that I'm
going to be able to do in 6 minutes and 53
seconds. I don't think anybody seriously thinks
that I'm going to be able to do that
but you're still here listening, we just want to
talk about what meaning is. So I can't
tell you where it is found
but I can tell you where it's not and it's not
found at the bottom of a microscope
it's not found
in these syllogisms. People don't
anything that brings people meaning
being talked into it or being
talked out of it never happens
rarely happens
because of syllogistic
argumentation. It's something else
I was reading Leo Tolstoy's
Confession. It's a wonderful
book. It's brilliant. It's only like 100 pages
and he talks about how he was
he knew somebody who'd been on a camp
with his brother or something
and it stunned me as well because it was so long
ago. It reads as if they're talking about the
modern world and its abandonment of religion
due to technology and all of this kind of stuff
but this is Tolstoy. He says that this friend
he's up with his brother
and they're in a tent and at the end of the night
he sort of bows down to pray, do his nightly
prayers like they were trained to do as children
and his brother says
do you still do that?
And that question alone, that just that
was enough
such that that man never got down on his knees
and prayed ever again. There's no argument
there's something
that isn't syllogised that's
sort of brought about by that kind of attitude
that completely changed his mind
and Tolstoy himself concluded that
while looking for questions of meaning he realised
that the more precise the answer
the less interesting the answer was
and the closer it was
to answering the question that he was interested in
the more vague it necessarily became
you know I can tell you
in principle exactly how many
molecules are in that jug of water over there
but who cares
it doesn't mean anything
and I think we're sort of stuck
the reason that we are sort of perpetually screwed
is because of that sort of
that
this correlation, that anti-correlation
that the more specific the answer becomes
the less
interesting a question is answering
with relation to meaning. Wherever meaning is
in other words it has to sort of lie within
the gaps there and that's
an old story, that's nothing new
Is that pessimistic
or optimistic? I'm trying to work it out
what is the answer to while we
screwed? I mean do you think
we're putting all that together
we have a secular society
the numbers
for religious faith
are continuing to plummet
do you think there are mechanisms
narratives
poems
structures
that will help rebuild
something out of this? I don't think it's
because I'm speaking very
the people who have said
that I'm on some kind of C.S. Lewis conversion
story might get excited by the things I'm saying
don't be fooled
the reason I talk about religion
so much is just because it's the best example
of a narrative of a story, it's the most successful example
of a narrative of a story
but the thing that's providing the meaning
the thing that I think is causing people
to not be despairing
if they're really sort of
head first into this religious stuff
it's not because of the religion, it's not because of the
again, the thing that makes religion different from any other form of narrative
it's its propositional content
the belief in a God, the belief in a specific
set of ethical codes
I've already said that that I don't think is the important thing
the important thing is the narrative
the reason the United States did so well for a time
the most foundational nation myth
the meaning
in an American's life
after the Revolutionary War
was not found in the fact that
Washington swears in on a Bible
but because the man who's swearing in is himself
something of a mythical figure
but it seems to have lost confidence in that myth
and so you point to
the crisis of secularism
in modern America
is it secularism or is it just a loss of narrative
if we'd have gotten rid of the God stuff
this real attachment
people often quote, or used to quote
the founding fathers of this nation
as if they were quoting Hadiths of the Prophet Muhammad
an argument was
settled in politics
by figuring out what the founding fathers thought
can you imagine that today
in a debate today someone says
Thomas Jefferson thought there should be
a separation between churches
who cares what Thomas Jefferson thought
these were sort of crazy
white old men and that's how people see it now
so the thing that's lost is not necessarily religion
it's this American narrative
it's the narrative that's important now I think
John do you think
we're coming to the conclusion of this
half hour
do you think there are narratives
that are on the up
do you think there is cause
to feel like this is not just a
downward trajectory
I think there's increasing sign
for what I call
the advent of the sacred
people who
because I'm in conversation with them
and I both study them scientifically
and participate with them
there's all these emerging communities of practices
all these new ways
in which people are trying
to get at
a home for
their desire to connect and to transcend
sort of the prison of their
egocentric way of life
and they
are generally
open to the fact that
they think the traditional way of talking
isn't working for them
the fastest demographic group
fastest growing demographic group are the nuns
the NONES's
they'll overtake Christianity
in the United States probably in the next
two decades or so
something like that or maybe a little bit longer
and these people are not
by and large
sort of
just dyed in the wool analytic atheists
they're very much
you know people like Alex
people who are
I think appropriately called seeking
they're seeking in some way
they're open they're trying to
consider new ways of thinking about this
and
I think that is predicting that there is going to be
a fundamental
change I mean barring
that we don't destroy the world and other things along the way
because any attempt to
and this would be my critique of all ideological
political endeavors
any attempt to top down this into existence
is going to fail this has got to
bottom up it's got to come up
like I said out of that non propositional
out of people doing new practices
forming new kinds of communities
then the narratives
will be born they'll be born out of that
they can't just be made and imposed
on people or sold to people
that won't take that won't work
ladies and gentlemen
thank you so much to both
of our panellists on this
conversation
