My hardship will show you who your real friends are.
That's for sure.
Can you read the quote once more?
Don't eat with people you wouldn't starve with.
The following is a conversation with Andrew Huberman,
his fifth time on the podcast.
He is the host of the Huberman Lab podcast
and is an amazing scientist, teacher, human being
and someone I'm grateful to be able to call a close friend.
Also, he has a book coming out next year
that you should pre-order now called Protocols
and operating manual for the human body.
This is the Lex Freeman podcast to support it.
Please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's Andrew Huberman.
You think there's ever gonna be a day
when you walk away from podcasting?
Definitely.
I mean, I came up within
and then on the periphery of skateboard culture.
And for the record, I was not a great skateboarder.
I always have to say that
because skateboarders are relentless
if you call something you didn't do or whatever.
I mean, I could do a few things
and I loved the community
and I still have a lot of friends in that community.
Jim Thebo at Deluxe, you can look him up.
He's kind of the man behind the whole scene.
I know Tony, Hawke, Danny Whale,
these guys, I got to see them come up
and get big and stay big in many cases.
Start huge companies like Danny
and Colin McCase are DC.
Some people have a long life and some don't,
but one thing I observed and learned a lot from
in skateboarding at the level of observing the skateboarders
and then the ones that started companies.
And then what I also observed in science
and still observe is you do it for a while.
You do it at the highest possible level for you.
And then at some point you pivot
and you start supporting the young talent coming in.
In fact, the greatest scientists,
people like Richard Axel, Catherine Doolock,
there are many other labs in neuroscience called Diceroth.
They're not just known for doing great science,
they're known for mentoring some of the best scientists
that then go on to start their own labs.
And I think in podcasting, I am very fortunate I got in
in a fairly early wave, not the earliest wave,
but thanks to your suggestion of doing a podcast,
fairly early wave, and I'll continue to go
as long as it feels right.
And I feel like I'm doing good in the world
and providing good, but I'm already starting
to scout talent.
My company that I started with Rob Moore, Psychom Media.
Couple other guys in there too, Mike Playback,
our photographer Ian Mackie, Chris Ray, Martin Phobes.
We are a company that produces podcasts.
Right now that's Huberman Lab Podcast,
but we're launching a new podcast,
Perform with Dr. Andy Galpin.
Nice.
And we wanna do more of that kind of thing,
finding a really great talent,
highly qualified people, credentialed people.
And I've got a new kind of obsession
with scouring the internet,
looking for the young talent in science, in health,
and related fields.
And so will there be a final episode of the HLP?
Yeah, I mean, Bullet Buster Cancer aside,
someday there'll be the very last,
and thank you for your interest in science.
And I'll clip out.
Yeah, I love the idea of walking away
and not be dramatic about it.
Right.
When it feels right, you can leave
and you can come back whenever the fuck you want.
Right.
Jon Stewart did this well with The Daily Show.
I think that was during the 2016 election
when everybody wanted him to stay on
and he just walked away.
Dave Chappelle for different reasons, walked away.
Disappeared, came back.
He gave away so much money.
Didn't care.
And then came back and was doing like stand up
in the park, in the middle of nowhere.
Genius.
You have Habib who undefeated,
walks away at the very top of a sport.
Is he coming back?
No.
It's not.
At least we don't know.
Yeah.
Right, you don't know.
He bears everywhere a word.
Yeah, I think it's always a call.
The last few years have been tremendous growth.
We launched in January, 2021.
And even this last year, 2024 has been huge growth,
you know, in all sorts of ways.
It's been wild.
And we have some short form content planned.
That's 30 minute shorter episodes
that really distill down the critical elements.
We're also thinking about moving to other venues
besides podcasting.
So there's always the thought and the discussion.
But when it comes to like when to hang up your cleats,
you know, it's like, there just comes a natural time
where you can do more to mentor the next generation coming in
than focusing on self.
And so there will come a time for that.
And I think it's critical.
I mean, again, I saw this in skateboarding,
like Danny and Colin and Danny's brother Damon started DC
with Ken Block, the driver who unfortunately passed away
a little while ago, rally car driver.
And they eventually sold it, I think,
to Quicksilver or something like that.
But they're all phenomenal talents
in their respective areas.
But they brought in the next on the next line of amazing riders
for the plan B thing, you know, Paul Rodriguez.
For skateboarders, they know who this is now in science.
There are scientists like Feynman, for instance.
I don't know if anyone can name one of his mentor offspring.
So there are scientists who are phenomenal,
like beyond world class, right?
Multi-generational world class who don't make good mentors.
I'm not saying he wasn't a good mentor,
but that's not what he's known for.
And then there are scientists who are known
for being excellent scientists and great mentors.
And I think there's no higher celebration
to be had at the end of one's career.
If you can look back, I'm like, hey,
I put some really important knowledge into the world.
People made use of that knowledge.
And guess what?
You spawned all these other scientific offspring
or sport offspring or podcast offspring.
I mean, in some ways, we look to Rogan
to some of the other earlier podcasts,
like they paved the way.
Rhonda Patrick, first science podcast out there.
So it eventually, the baton passes.
But fortunately, right now everybody's active
and it feels really good.
Yeah, well, you're talking about the healthy way to do it,
but there's also a different kind of way
where you have somebody like Grisha Gregori Perlman,
the mathematician who refused to accept the Fields Medal.
So he's one of the greatest living mathematicians
and he just walked away from mathematics
and rejected the Fields Medal.
What did he do after he left mathematics?
Life, private, 100%.
Yeah, I respect that.
He's become essentially a recluse
is these photos of him looking very broke.
Like he could use the money.
He turned away the money.
He turned away everything.
You know, you just have to listen to the inner voice.
You have to listen to yourself and make the decisions
that don't make any sense for the rest of the world
and make sense to you.
I mean, Bob Dylan didn't show up
to pick up his Nobel Peace Prize.
That's punk.
Yeah, he probably grew in notoriety for that.
Maybe he just doesn't like going to Sweden,
but it seemed like a big fun trip.
I think they do it in a nice time of year.
But hey, that's his right.
He earned that right.
I think the best artists aren't doing it for the prize.
They aren't doing it for the fame or the money.
They're doing it because they love the art.
That's the Rick Rubin thing.
You got to verb it through, download your inner thing.
I don't think we've talked about this,
this obsession that I have about how Rick has this way
of being very, very still in his body,
but keeping his mind very active as a practice
when he spent some time with him in Italy last June.
And we would tread water in his pool in the morning
and listen to a history of rock and roll and 100 songs.
Amazing podcast, by the way.
It is.
Yeah.
And then he would spend a fair amount of time during the day
in this kind of meditative state
where his mind is very active, body very still.
And then Carl Deisteroth, when he came on my podcast,
talked about how he forces himself to sit still
and think in complete sentences late at night
after his kids go to sleep.
And there's a state of mind, rapid eye movement, sleep,
where your body is completely paralyzed
and the mind is extremely active.
And people credit rapid eye movement sleep
with some of the more elaborate emotion filled dreams
and the source of many ideas.
And there are other examples.
Einstein, people described him as taking walks
around the Princeton campus then pausing
and would ask him what was going on
and the idea that his mind was continuing to churn forward
at a high rate.
So, you know, this is far from controlled studies,
but we're talking about some incredible minds and creatives
who have a practice of stilling the body
while keeping the mind deliberately very active,
very similar to rapid eye movement sleep.
And then there are a lot of people who also report,
you know, great ideas coming to them in the shower
while running.
So it can be the opposite as well
where the body is very active
and the mind is perhaps more on kind of like a default mode
of network, not really focusing on any one specific thing.
You know, interesting, there's a bunch of physicists
and mathematicians I've talked to,
they talk about sleep deprivation
and going crazy hours through the night
obsessively pursuing a thing.
And then the solution to the problem comes
when they finally get rest, right?
And we know, we just did this sixth episode
special series on sleep with Matt Walker,
we know that when you deprive yourself of sleep
and then you get sleep,
you get a rebound in rapid eye movement sleep,
you get a higher percentage of rapid eye movement sleep.
And Matt talks about this in the podcast
and he did an episode on sleep and creativity,
sleep and memory and rapid eye movement sleep
comes up multiple times in that series.
There's also some very interesting stuff
about cannabis withdrawal and rapid eye movement sleep.
People are coming off cannabis often will suffer
from insomnia, but when they finally do start sleeping,
they like dream like crazy.
Cannabis is a very controversial topic right now.
Oh yeah, I saw that, what happened?
There's a bunch of drama around episode you did on cannabis.
Yeah, we did an episode about cannabis,
talked about the health benefits and the potential risks,
right, it's neither here nor there.
Depends on the person, depends on the age,
depends on genetic background, a number of other things.
We published that episode well over a year ago
and it had no issues online, so to speak.
And then a clip of it was put to X
where the real action occurs, as you know,
your favorite box.
Yeah, the four ounce gloves,
as opposed to the 16 ounce gloves
that is X versus Instagram or YouTube.
There was kind of an immediate dog pile
from a few people in the cannabis research field.
To PhDs and MDs, yeah.
There were people on our side,
there were people on our side, I mean, yeah.
The statement that got things riled up the most
was this notion that for certain individuals,
there's a high potential for inducing psychosis
with high THC containing cannabis.
For certain individuals, not all.
That sparked some issues.
There was really a split, you see this in different fields.
It, there was one person in particular
who came out swinging with language
that in my opinion is not like of the sort
that you would use at a university venue,
especially among colleagues, but that's fine.
You know, we're all grownups.
Well, for me, from my perspective, it was strangely rude.
And it had an era of like elitism
that to me was at the source of the problem during COVID
that led to the distrust of science
and the popularization of disrespecting science
because so many scientists spoke with an arrogance
and a douche baggery
that I wish we would have a little bit less of.
Yeah, it's tough because most academics
don't understand that people outside the university system
are, they don't, they're not familiar with
like the inner workings of science and the culture.
And so you have to be very careful how you present
when you're a university professor.
And when, yeah, so, you know, he came out swinging
at some, you know, a four letter word type language
and he was obviously upset about.
So I simply said what I would say anywhere,
which was, hey, look, come on the podcast, let's chat.
And why don't you give your tell me where I'm wrong
and let's discuss and fortunately he agreed.
And initially he said, well, no, how can I be sure
you're not gonna misrepresent me?
And so I said, we got on a DM, then an email,
then eventually phone call and just said,
hey, listen, like you're welcome to record
the whole conversation.
We've never done a gotcha on my podcast.
And let's just get to the heart of the matter.
I think this little controversy is perfect,
kindling for a really great discussion.
And he had some other conditions that we worked out
and I felt like, cool, like he's really interested.
You get a very different person on the phone
than you do on Twitter.
I will say he's been very collegial
and that conversation is on the schedule.
I said, we'll fly you out, we'll put you up.
He said, no, he wants to fly himself.
He really wants to make sure that there's like kind of a
space between, I think some of the perception of science
and health podcasts in the academic community
is that it's all designed to sell something.
No, we run ads so it can be free to everyone else.
But I think, look, in the end, he agreed
and I'm excited for the conversation.
It was interesting because in the wake of that little
exchange, there's been a bunch of press
from traditional press about cannabis
has now surpassed alcohol in many cultures
as within the United States as, when I say cultures,
I mean demographics, the United States as the drug of choice.
There have been people highlighting the issues
of potential psychosis in high THC containing.
And so it's kind of interesting to see
how traditional media is sort of on board certain elements
that I put forward.
And I think there's some controversy
as to whether or not the different strains,
the Indicas and Sativas are biologically different, et cetera.
So we'll get down into the weeds, pun intended,
during that one.
And I'm excited.
It's the first time that we've responded
to a direct criticism online about scientific content
in a way that really promoted like,
oh, here, the idea of inviting a particular guest.
And so it's great.
Let's get a guest to his expert in cannabis.
I believe, I could be wrong about this,
that he's a behavioral neuroscientist
is slightly different training.
But look, he seems highly credentialed to be fun.
And we welcome that kind of exchange.
And I'm not being diplomatic.
I'm just saying like, it's cool.
Like he's coming on.
And he was friendly on the phone, right?
He literally came out online and was basically like,
kind of like FU, like F this and F you.
But you get someone on the phone and it's like,
hey, how's it going?
And then they're like, oh yeah, well,
there was an immediate apology of like,
hey, listen, I came out.
Normally I'm like, not like that, but online.
You get a different.
So it's a little bit like,
it's a little bit like jiu-jitsu, right?
People say all sorts of things, I guess.
But if they, if you're like, all right, well, let's go.
Then it's probably a different story.
It's not like jiu-jitsu
because in jiu-jitsu people don't talk shit
because they know what the consequences are.
Let me just say on mic and off mic,
you have been very respectful towards this person.
And I look up to you and respect you
and admire the fact that you have been.
That said, to me, that guy was being a dick.
And when you graciously, politely,
invited him on the podcast,
he was still talking down to you the whole time.
So I really admire and look forward to listening
to you talk to him, but I hope others don't do that.
Like you are a positive, humble voice,
exploring all the interesting aspects of science.
Like you want to learn.
If you've got anything wrong, you wanna learn about it.
The way he was being a dick,
I was just hurt a little bit, not because of him,
because there's some people I really, really admire,
brilliant scientists that are not their best selves
on Twitter, on X.
Definitely.
I don't understand what happens to their brain.
Well, they regress.
They regress and they also are protected.
You know, when you remove the,
I mean, no scientific argument
should ever come to physical blows, right?
But when you remove the real world thing
of being right in front of somebody,
people will throw all sorts of stones at a distance,
you know, an over a wall.
And they've got their, their wife or their husband
or their boyfriend or their dog
or their cat to go cuddle with them afterwards.
But you get in a room and it's like, you know,
confrontational people in real life are pretty rare,
but hopefully if they do it,
they're like willing to back it up with knowledge
in this case, right?
We're not talking about physical altercation.
Yeah, he kept coming and he kept putting on conditions.
How do I know you want this?
And I was like, well, you can record the conversation.
How do I know you want that?
Listen, we'll pay for you to come out.
How do you know?
And eventually he just kind of relented
and to his credit, you know, he's agreed to come on.
I mean, he still has to show up, but once he does, you know,
we'll treat him right like we would any other guest.
Yeah, you treat people really well.
And I just hope that people are a little bit nicer
on the internet.
Yeah, well, you know, X is an interesting one
because it thickens your skin, you know,
to just to go on there.
I mean, you have to be ready to deal with
Sure, but I can still criticize people for being douchebags
because like that's still not good inspiring behavior.
Like especially for scientists,
that should be sort of symbols of scientific thinking
which requires intellectual humility.
Humility is a big part of that.
And Twitter is a good place to illustrate that.
Yeah, eight years ago, I used to,
I was a student in TA then instructor
and then directed a Cold Spring Harbor course
on visual neuroscience.
These are summer courses that explore different topics.
And at night, we would host what we hoped were battles
in front of the students where you'd get two people on it.
You know, would it be neural prosthetics
or molecular tools that would first, you know,
restore vision to the blind kind of arguments?
You know, kind of like it's kind of a silly argument
because it's gonna be a combination of both, right?
But you'd get these great arguments,
but the arguments were always couched in data.
And occasionally you'd get somebody would go like,
or would curse or something,
but it was the rare, very, very well-placed, you know,
insult, it wasn't, you know, coming out swinging.
I think ultimately, you know,
Twitter is a record of people's behavior,
that the internet is a record of people's behavior.
And here I'm not talking about news reports
about people's behavior,
I'm talking about how people show up online
is really important.
You've always carried yourself
with a ton of composure and respect.
And, you know, you just,
you would hope that people would grow from that example.
Well, I'll tell you that the podcasters that I'm scouting,
it's their energy,
but it's also how they treat other people,
how they respond to comments.
And, you know, we're blessed to have
pretty significant reach when we put out a podcast,
like someone else's podcast, it goes far and wide.
So like a skateboard team, like a laboratory
where you're selecting people to be in your lab,
you wanna pick people that you would enjoy working with
and they're collegial.
Etiquette is lacking nowadays,
but you're in the suit and tie, you're bringing it back.
Bringing it back, you said that your conversation
with James Hollis, a young psychoanalyst,
had a big impact on you, what do you mean?
James Hollis is a 84 year old union psychoanalyst
who's written 17 books, including Under Saturn Shadow,
which is on the Healing and Trauma of Men,
the Eden Project, excuse me,
which is about relationships and creating a life.
I discovered James Hollis in an online lecture
that was recorded, I think in San Diego, it's on YouTube,
the audio is terrible, called Creating a Life.
And this was somewhere in the 2011 to 2015 span,
I can't remember, and it was on my way to Europe
and I called my girlfriend at the time,
it was like, I just found the most incredible lecture
I've ever heard.
And he talks about the shadow,
he talks about your developmental upbringing
and how you either align with or go 180 degrees off
your parents' tendencies and values in certain areas.
He talked about the specific questions to ask of oneself
at different stages of life to live a full life.
So it's always been a dream of mine to meet him
and to record a podcast.
And he wasn't able to travel,
so our team went out to DC and sat down with him.
We rarely do that nowadays, people come to our studio
and he came in, he had had some surgeries recently
and he kind of came in with some assistance from a cane
and then sat down and just blew my mind.
From start to finish, he didn't miss a syllable.
And every sentence that he spoke was like a quotable sentence
with real potency and actionable items.
I think one of the things that was most striking to me
was how he said, when we take ourselves out
of stimulus and response and we just force ourselves
to spend some time in the quiet of our thoughts
while walking or while seated or while lying down,
doesn't have to be meditation, but it could be
that we access our unconscious mind
in ways that reveals to us who we really are
and what we really want.
And that if we do that practice repeatedly,
10 minutes a day here, 15 minutes a day there,
that we start to really touch into our unique gifts
and the things that make us each us
and the directions we need to take,
but that so often we just stay in stimulus response.
We just do, do, do, do, do, which is great.
We have to be productive, but we miss those important messages.
And interestingly, he also put forward this idea
of what is this, like get up, shut up, suit up,
yeah, something like that, like get out of bed,
suit up and shut up and get to work.
He also has that in him, kind of a Goggins type mindset.
So be able to turn off all this self-reflection
and self-analysis and just get shit done.
Get shit done, but then also take dedicated time
and stop and just let stuff geyser to the surface
from the unconscious mind.
And he quotes Shakespeare and he quotes Yong
and he quotes everybody through history
with incredible accuracy and exactly the way needed
to drive home a point, but that conversation to me
was one that I really felt like, okay, you know,
if I don't wake up tomorrow for whatever reason,
that one's in the can and I feel really great about it.
To me, it's the most important guest recording
we've ever done.
In particular, because he has wisdom
and while I hope he lives to be 204, chances are
he's got another, what, 20, 30 years with us,
hopefully more, but I really, really wanted
to capture that information and get it out there.
So I'm very, very proud of that one.
And he's the kind of guy that anyone listens to him,
young, old, male, female, whatever,
and you're gonna get something of value.
What do you think about this idea of the shadow
that the good and the bad that we repress
that hides from plain sight when we analyze ourselves
that's there?
You think there's like a ocean
that we don't have direct access to?
Yes.
Yeah, Yong said it, we have all things inside of us
and we do and some people are more in touch with those
than others and some people that's repressed.
I mean, does that mean that we could all be,
horrible people or marvelous people, benevolent people?
Perhaps, I think that thankfully, more often than not,
people lean away from the like violent
and harmful parts of their shadow.
But I think spending time thinking about one's shadow,
shadows is super important, how else are we going to grow?
Otherwise, we have these unconscious blind spots
of denial or repression or whatever the psychiatrists
tell us, but it clearly exists within all of us.
I mean, we have neural circuits for rage, we all do.
We have neural circuits for altruism
and no one's born without these things.
And some people, they're atrophied
and some people, they're hypertrophied,
but looking inward and recognizing what's there is key.
Or positive things like creativity.
Maybe that's what Rick Rubin is accessing
when he goes silent, silent body, active mind.
That's interesting.
What is it for you?
What place do you go to that generates ideas
that helps you generate ideas?
I have a lot of new practices around this.
I mean, I'm always exploring for protocols.
I have to, that's like in my nature.
When I went and spent time with Rick,
I tried to adopt his practice of staying very still
and just letting stuff come to the surface
or the diserothian way of formulating complete sentences
while being still in the body.
What I have found works better
is what my good friend Tim Armstrong does to write music.
He writes music every day.
He's a music producer.
He's obviously a singer, guitar player for Rancid.
And he's helped dozens and dozens and dozens
of female pop artists and punk rock artists
write great songs.
And many of the famous songs
that you've heard from other artists,
Tim helped them write.
Tim wakes up sometimes in the middle of the night
and what he does is he'll start drawing or painting.
So what he's done, and Joni Mitchell talks about this too,
you find some creative outlet
that's like 15 degrees off center
from your main creative outlet.
And you do that thing.
So for me, that's drawing.
I like doing anatomical drawings,
neuroscience based drawing, drawn neurons,
that kind of thing.
And if I do that for a little while,
my mind starts churning on the nervous system
and biology and then I come up with areas
I'd like to explore for the podcast,
ways I'd like to address certain topics.
Right now I'm very interested in autonomic control.
A beautiful paper came out that shows
that anyone can learn to control their pupil sizes
without changing luminance through a biofeedback mechanism.
And that gives them control
over their so-called automatic autonomic nervous system.
And I've been looking at what the circuitry is
and it's beautiful.
So I'll draw the circuitry
that we know underlies autonomic function.
And as I'm doing that, I'm thinking,
oh, like what about autonomic control
and those people that supposedly
can control their pupil size?
Then you go in and there's a paper published
in Nature Press, one of the Nature journals,
and there's a recent paper on this.
Like, oh cool, and then we talk about this.
And then how could this be put into a kind of a post?
Or how could this, you know, so doing things
that are about 15 degrees off-center
from your main thing is a great way to access,
I believe, the circuits for, in Tim's case,
painting goes to songwriting.
I think for Joni Mitchell, that was also the case, right?
I think it was drawing and painting
to singing and songwriting.
For Rick, I don't know what it is.
Maybe it's listening to podcasts.
I don't know, that's his business.
Do you have anything that you like to focus on
that allows you then an easier transition
into your main creative work?
No, I'd really like to focus on emptiness and silence.
So I pick the dragon out of the sleigh,
so whatever the problem I have to work on,
and I just sit there and stare at it.
I don't know how fucking linear you are.
And if there's no, if you're tired, I'll just sit.
I believe in the power of just waiting.
And usually I'll stop being tired.
Their energy rises from somewhere
or an idea pops from somewhere,
but there needs to be a silence and an emptiness.
It's an empty room, just me and the dragon, and we wait.
That's it.
Like if it's usually with programming,
you're thinking about a particular design,
like how do I design this thing to solve this problem?
Any cognitive enhancers?
I've got quite the gallery in front of me.
Oh, that's right, yeah.
So should we walk through this?
Yeah.
There's not a sales thing.
There's just, I tend to do this bounce back and forth.
Your refrigerator just happened
to have a lot of different choices.
So water, this is all my refrigerator.
I know, right?
There's no food in there.
There's water.
There's element, which they now have canned.
Yeah.
And yes, they're a podcast sponsor for both of us,
but that's not why I cracked one of these open.
I like them provided they're cold.
And that's, by the way, my least favorite flavors,
I was saying.
That's the reason it's still left in the fridge.
The cherry one is really good.
The black cherry.
There's a orange one.
Yeah.
I pushed the sled this morning and pulled the sled
for my workout at the gym.
And it was hot today here in Austin.
So some salt is good.
And then Matina Yorba mate, zero sugar, full confession.
I helped develop this.
I'm a partial owner,
but I love Yorba mate, half Argentine,
been drinking mate since I was a little kid.
There's actually a photo somewhere on the internet
when I'm like three sitting on my grandfather's lap
sipping mate out the gourd.
And then this, my fun interesting,
this is just a little bit of coffee
with a scoop of Brian Johnson gave me cocoa,
just like pure unsweetened cocoa.
So I put that in chocolate and I like it.
It just for the taste.
Well, actually nukes my appetite.
And since we're not going out to dinner tonight
until later, I figure that's good.
Yeah, Brian's an interesting one, right?
He's really pushing this thing.
The optimization of everything.
Yeah.
Although he just hurt his ankle.
He posted a photo of the hurt his ankle.
So now he's injecting BPC body protection compound 157,
which many, many people are taking by the way.
I did an episode on peptides.
I should just say, you know, BPC 157,
one of the known effects in animal models
is angiogenesis, like development of new vasculature,
which can be great in some context,
but also if you have a tumor,
you don't really want to vascularize that tumor anymore.
So I worry about people taking BPC 157 continually,
but and there's very little human data.
I think there's like one study and it's a lousy one.
So a lot of animal data,
some of the peptides are interesting.
However, there's one that I've experimented
with a little bit called pinealin,
which I find even if I've just taken it twice a week
before sleep, then it times,
it seems to do something to the circadian timekeeping
mechanism because then on other days, when I don't take it,
I get unbelievably tired at that time
that normally I would do the injection.
These are things that I'll experiment with
for a couple of weeks and then typically stop,
maybe try something else.
But I stay out of things that really stimulate
any of like a major hormone pathways
when it comes to peptides.
That's actually a really good question
of how do you experiment?
Like how long do you try a thing to figure out
if it works for you?
Well, I'm very sensitive to these things.
So I and I have been doing a lot of things for a long time.
So if I add something in, it's always one thing at a time.
And I notice right away if it does not make me feel good.
Like there's a lot of excitement
about some of the so-called growth hormone secretagogues,
hypermoralin, testimoralin, surmoralin.
I've experimented a little bit with those in the past
and they've nuked my rap and eye movement sleep
but given me a lot of deep sleep,
which doesn't feel good to me, but other people like them.
I also just generally try and avoid taking peptides
that tap into these hormone pathways
because you can run into all sorts of issues,
but some people take them safely.
But usually after about four or five days,
I know if I like something or I don't and then I move on.
But I'm not super adventurous with these things.
I know people that will take cocktails of peptides
with multiple things, they'll try anything.
That's not me and I do blood work.
But also I'm mainly reading papers and podcasting
and I'm teaching a course next spring.
Stanford, I'm gonna do a big undergraduate course.
So I'm trying to develop that course and things like that.
So I don't need to lift more weight
or run further than I already do,
which is not that much weight or far as it is.
All right, you're not going to the Olympics.
You're not trying to truly maximize
some aspect of your performance.
No, and I'm not trying to get down below whatever,
7% body fat or something.
I don't have those kinds of goals.
So hydration, electrolytes, caffeine in the form of mate
and then this coffee thing.
And then here's one that I think I brought out
for discussion, which is a piece of Nicarat.
They're not a sponsor.
Nicotine is an interesting compound.
It will raise blood pressure
and it is probably not safe for everybody.
But the nicotine is gaining in popularity like crazy,
mainly these pouches that people put in the lip.
We're not talking about smoking, vaping, dipping or snuffing.
My interest in nicotine started, this was in 2010.
I was visiting Columbia Medical School
and I was in the office
of the great neurobiologist Richard Axel,
won the Nobel Prize, co-recipient with Linda Buck
for the discovery of the molecular basis of olfaction.
Brilliant guy.
He's probably in his late 70s now.
Probably, yeah.
And he kept popping Nicarat in his mouth.
And I was like, what's this about?
And he said, oh, well, this was just anecdote, right?
But he said this.
He said, oh, well, you know,
it protects against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.
I said, it does.
And he goes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I don't know if he was kidding or not.
He's known for making jokes.
And then he said that when he used to smoke,
it really helped his focus and creativity.
But then he quit smoking because he went lung cancer
and he found that he couldn't focus as well.
So he would choose Nicarat.
So occasionally, like right now,
well, I do a half a piece, but I'm not Russian.
So I'm a little, you know,
you just pop the whole thing in your mouth.
So I'll do a couple milligrams every now and again.
And it definitely sharpens the mind
on an empty stomach in particular,
but you fast all day.
You're still doing one meal a day.
Yeah.
Yeah, I did a nicotine pouch with Rogan at dinner.
And I got high.
Yeah, that's a lot.
That's like usually six or eight milligrams.
I know people that get a canister of zinc,
take one a day, pretty soon they're taking a canister a day.
So you have to be very careful.
I will only allow myself two pieces of Nicarat total per week.
And you will notice that, you know,
in the day after you use it, you know,
sometimes your throat will feel a little bit like,
like a little spasmy, like you might want to cough once or twice.
And so, you know, if you're a singer or your podcast
or something you have to do long podcast,
you want to just be mindful of it.
But yeah, you're supposed to kind of like keep it
in your cheek and here we go.
But it did make me intensely focused
in a way that was a little bit scary.
Because the nucleus basalis is in the, you know,
basal forebrain nucleus has cholinergic neurons
that radiate out axons, little wires
that release acetylcholine into the neocortex and elsewhere.
And when you focus on one particular topic matter
or one particular area of your visual field
or listening to something and focusing visually,
we know that there's an elaboration
of the amount of acetylcholine released there.
And it binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptor sites there.
So it's a kind of an attentional modulation
by acetylcholine.
So you're getting in with nicotine,
you're getting an exogenous or artificial
heightening of that circuitry.
And the time I had Tucker Carlson on the podcast,
he told me that apparently it helps him,
as he said publicly, keep his love life vibrant.
Really?
It caused a visa constriction.
He literally said it makes his dick very hard.
He said that publicly also.
Okay, well, as little as I want to think about
Tucker Carlson's sex life, no disrespect.
The major effect of nicotine on the vascular,
my understanding is that it causes vasoconstriction,
not vasodilation.
Drugs like Cialis, Dodalaphyl, Viagra, et cetera,
vasodilators, they allow more blood flow.
Nicotine does the opposite, less blood flow to the periphery,
but provided dosages are kept low.
And I don't recommend people use it frequently or at all.
And I don't recommend young people use it 25 and younger.
Brain's very plastic at that time.
And certainly smoking, dipping, vaping, it's nothing,
aren't good because you're gonna run into trouble
for other reasons.
But in any case, even there, vaping's a controversial topic.
Probably safer than smoking, but has its own issues.
And I said something like that and boy,
did I catch a lot of heat for that.
I can't say anything as a health science educator,
not piss somebody off.
Just depends on where the center of mass is
and how far outside that you are.
For me, caffeine is the main thing.
And actually, it's a really big part of my life.
And one of the things you recommend
that people wait a bit in the morning to consume caffeine,
if they experience a crash in the afternoon.
This is one of the misconceptions I regret.
Maybe even discussing it for people
that crash in the afternoon.
Oftentimes, if they delay their caffeine
by 60 and 90 minutes in the morning,
they will offset some of that.
But if you eat a lunch that's too big
or you didn't sleep all the night before,
you're not gonna avoid that afternoon crash.
But I'll wake up sometimes
and go straight to hydration caffeine,
especially if I'm gonna work out.
Here's a weird one.
If I exercise before 8.30 a.m.,
especially if I start exercising
when I'm a little bit tired,
I get energy that lasts all day.
If I wait until my peak of energy,
which is mid-morning, 10 a.m., 11 a.m.,
and I start exercising then,
I'm basically exhausted all afternoon.
And I don't understand why.
I mean, it depends on the intensity of the workout.
But I like to be done, showered,
and heading into work by 9 a.m.,
but I don't always meet that mark.
So you're saying it doesn't affect your energy
if you start with exercising?
I think you can get energy
and wake yourself up with exercise if you start early.
And then that fuels you all day long.
I think that if you wait until you're feeling
at your best to train,
sometimes that's detrimental
because then in the afternoon,
when you're doing the work we get paid for,
like research, podcasting, et cetera,
then oftentimes your brain isn't firing as well.
That's interesting.
I haven't really rigorously tried that,
wake up and just start running.
This is the jocco thing.
And then there's this phenomenon called entrainment
where if you force yourself to exercise or eat
or socialize or view bright light at a certain time of day
for three to seven days in a row,
pretty soon there's an anticipatory circuit
that gets generated.
This is why anyone in theory can become a morning person
to some degree or another.
And this is also a beautiful example
of why you wake up before your alarm clock goes off.
People wake up and all of a sudden it goes off.
It wasn't because it collected
because you have this incredible timekeeping mechanism
that exists in sleep.
And there's some papers that have been published
in the last couple of years,
Nature Neuroscience and elsewhere showing
that people can answer math problems in their sleep.
Simple math problems, but math problems nonetheless.
This does not mean that if you ask your partner a question
in sleep that they're gonna answer accurately.
Like they might screw up the whole
cumulative probability of 20% across multiple months.
All right, listen.
What happened?
What happened?
Here's the deal.
A few years back, I did a four and a half hour,
after editing four and a half hour episode
on male and female fertility.
The entire recording took 11 hours.
And at one point during the,
and by the way, I'm very proud of that episode.
There's many couples have written to me
and said they now have children
as a consequence of that episode.
And my first question is,
what were you doing during the episode?
But in all seriousness.
We should say that it's four and a half hours.
And for people, then they should listen to the episode.
It's extremely technical episode.
Like you're not stopped dropping facts
and referencing a huge number of papers.
It must be exhaustive.
I don't understand how you can possibly.
It's about sperm health, sperm adgenesis.
It talks about the ovulatory cycle.
It talks about things people can do
that are considered absolutely supported by science.
It talks about some of the things
kind of out on the edge a little bit.
That are a little bit more experimental.
It talks about IVF.
It talks about ICSI.
It talks about all of that.
It talks about frequency of pregnancy
as a function of age, et cetera.
But there's this one portion there in the podcast
where I'm talking about the probability
of a successful pregnancy as a function of age.
And so there was a clip that was cut
in which I was described in cumulative probability.
And by the way, we've published cumulative probability
historians in many of my laboratories papers,
including one that was a nature article in 2018.
So we run these all the time.
And yes, I know the difference
between independent and cumulative probability.
That's just like, I do.
The way the clip was cut and what I stated,
unfortunately combined to like a pretty great gaffe
where I say, you're just adding,
I said, you're just adding percentages 20 to 120%.
And then I made a kind of,
unfortunately my humor isn't always so good.
And I made a joke.
I said 120%, but that's a different thing altogether.
What I should have said was, that's impossible.
And here's how it actually works.
But then it continues where I then described
the cumulative probability histogram
for successful pregnancy.
But somewhere in the early portion,
I misstated something, right?
I made a math error, which implied I didn't understand
the difference between independent
and cumulative probability, which I do.
And it got picked up and run
and people had a really good laugh with that one
at my expense.
And so what I did in response to it was
rather than just say everything I just said now,
I said, I just came out online and said,
hey folks, in an episode dated this on fertility,
I made a math error.
Here is the formula for cumulative probability,
successful pregnancy at that age.
Here's the graph, here's the,
and I offered it as a teaching moment in two ways.
One, for people to understand cumulative probability.
It was sort of interesting too,
a number of people that had come out critiquing the gaffe.
Also, like biology and folks came out pointing out
that they didn't understand cumulative probability.
So there was a lot of posturing,
the dog pile, oftentimes people are quick to dog pile,
they didn't understand, but a lot of people did understand.
There's some smart people out there, obviously.
I called my dad and he was just laughing.
He goes, oh, this is good.
This is like the old school way of hammering academics.
But the point being, there was a teaching moment
gave me an opportunity to say, hey, I made a mistake.
I also made a mistake in another podcast
where I did a micron to millimeter conversion
and we're sending me your conversion.
And we always correct these in the show note captions.
We correct them in the audio now.
Unfortunately, on YouTube, it's harder to correct.
You can't go and edit in segments,
we put in the captions.
But that was the one teaching moment.
If you make a mistake that's substantive and relate to data,
you apologize and correct the mistake,
use the teaching moment.
The other one was to say, hey,
in all the thousands of hours of content we've put out,
I'm sure I've made some small errors.
I think I once said serotonin 1M and dopamine
and you're going, you're riffing.
And it's a reminder to be careful to edit, double check,
but the internet usually edits for us.
And then we go make corrections,
but it didn't feel good at first,
but ultimately, I can laugh at myself about it.
Long ago at Berkeley when I was TAing my first class,
it was a biopsychology class between 1998 or 1999,
I was drawing the pituitary gland,
which has an anterior and a posterior lobe,
which is a medial lobe too.
I have 5,600 students in that lecture hall.
And I drew, it was chalkboard,
and I drew the two lobes of the pituitary.
And I said, my back was to the audience.
I said, you know, and so they just sort of hang there.
And everyone just erupted in laughter
because it looked like a scrotum with two testicles.
And I remember thinking like, oh my God,
I don't think I can turn around, like in face this, you know?
And I got to turn around sooner or later.
So I turned around and we just all had a big laugh together.
It was embarrassing.
I'll tell you one thing though,
they never forgot about the two lobes of the pituitary.
Yeah, and you haven't forgotten about that either.
Right, there's a high salience for these kinds of things.
And it also was kind of fun to see how excited people get
to see people trip.
It's like an elite sprinter trips and does something stupid,
like, you know, runs the opposite direction
out of the blocks or something like that.
Or, you know, I recall at one World Cup match years ago,
a guy scored against his own team.
I think they killed the guy.
Do you remember that?
Some South American or Central American team.
And they killed the guy.
But yeah, let's look it up.
I just said World Cup.
Yeah, he was gunned down.
Andres Escobar scored against his own team
in 1994 World Cup in the United States.
Just 27 years old, playing for the Columbia National Team.
Yeah, last name Escobar.
That's a good name.
I think it would protect you.
Listen, you know, so there are some gaffes
that get people killed, right?
So, you know, how forgiving are we for online mistakes?
You know, I said, just the nature of the mistakes.
People were quite gracious about the gaff and some weren't.
And, you know, it's interesting that we,
as, you know, public health science educators,
you know, we'll do long podcasts sometimes
and you need to be really careful.
What's great is AI allows you to check these things now,
more readily.
So that's cool.
And there are ways that it's now gonna be
more self-correcting.
I mean, you know, I think there's a lot of errors
out there on the internet and people are finding them
and it's cool, like things are getting cleaned up.
Yeah, but mistakes nevertheless will happen.
Are you, do you feel the pressure of not making mistakes?
Sure.
I mean, you know, I try and get things right
to the best of my ability.
I check with experts.
It's kind of interesting when people really don't like
something that was said in a podcast.
A lot of times I chuckle because I'm, you know,
at Stanford we have some amazing scientists,
but I talk to them, people elsewhere.
And it's always interesting to me how,
you know, I'll get divergent information
and then I'll find the overlap in the Venn diagram
and I have this like question,
do I just stay with the overlap in the Venn diagram?
Like I did an episode on oral health.
I didn't know this until I researched that episode,
but oral health is critically related
to heart health and brain health.
That there's a bacteria that causes cavities
streptococcus, you know,
that can make its way into other parts of the body
through the mouth that can cause serious issues.
There's the idea that some forms of dementia,
some forms of heart disease are
start in the mouth basically.
I talked to no fewer than four dentist, dental experts.
And there was a lot of convergence.
I also learned that teeth can demineralize,
that's the formation of cavities.
They can also remineralize.
As long as the cavity isn't too deep,
it can actually fill itself back in,
especially if you provide the right substrates for it.
That saliva is this incredible fluid
that has all this capacity to remineralize teeth,
provided the milieu is right.
Things like alcohol-based mouth washes,
killing off some of the critical things you need.
It's fascinating.
And I put out that episode thinking,
oh, I'm not a dentist, I'm not an oral health episode.
I talked to a pediatric dentist.
There's a terrific one, Dr. Downscore Stacey,
S-T-A-C-I on Instagram does great content.
Talked to some others.
And then I just waited for the attack.
I was like, here we go.
And it didn't come.
And dentists were thanking me.
I was like, whoa, you know?
That's a rare thing.
More often than not, if I do an episode about,
say psilocybin or MDMA,
you get some people liking it,
or ADHD and the drugs for ADHD.
We did a whole episode on the Ritalin, Vyvance,
Adderall stuff.
You get people saying, thank you.
You know, I prescribe this to my kid and it really helps.
And they're private about the fact that they do it
because they get so much attack from other people.
So I like to find the center of mass,
report that, try and make it as clear as possible.
And then I know that there's some stuff
where I'm gonna catch shit.
What's frustrating for me is when I see claims
that I'm against fluoridization of water,
which I'm not, right?
Like we talked about the benefits of fluoride.
It builds hyper strong bonds within the teeth.
And when looked at some of the,
literally the crystal structure,
excuse me, not the crystal structure,
but essentially the micron and submicron structure of teeth
is incredible and where fluoride can get in there
and form these super strong bonds.
And you can also form them with things like hydroxyapatite
and why is there fluoride in water?
Well, it's the best.
Okay, you say some things that are interesting,
but then somehow it gets turned into
like you're against fluoridization, which I'm not.
Or I've been accused of being against sunscreen.
I wear mineral based sunscreen on my face.
I don't want to get skin cancer
or I use a physical barrier.
There is a cohort of people out there
that think that all sunscreens are bad.
I'm not one of them.
I'm not what's called a sunscreen truther.
But then you get attacked for like,
so we're talking about there are certain sunscreens
that are problematic.
So what, and Rhonda Patrick's now
starting to get vocal about this.
And so there are certain topics that's interesting
for which you have to listen carefully
to what somebody is saying,
but there's a lumper or lumping as opposed to splitting
of what health educators say.
And so it just seems like like with politics,
there's this like urgency to just put people into a camp
of expert versus like renegade or something.
And it's not like that.
It's just not like that.
So the short answer is I really strive,
really strive to get things right.
But I know that I'm gonna piss certain people off
and you've taught me and Joe's taught me
and other podcasters have taught me
that like if you worry too much about it,
then you aren't gonna get the newest information out there.
Like peptides, there's very little human data
unless you're talking about Vileci or the Milana,
stuff in the alpha-Milana site stimulating hormone stuff
which are prescribed for female libido
to enhance female libido or Sermorellin,
which is for certain growth hormone deficiencies.
With rare exception, there's very little human data,
but people are still super interested
and a lot of people are taking and doing these things.
So you wanna get the information out.
Do you try to not just look at the science
but research what the communities are talking,
what the various communities are talking about?
Maybe research what the conspiracy theorists
are talking about just so you know all the armies
that are going to be attacking your castle.
Yes, so for instance, there's a community of people online
that believe that if you consume seed oils or something
that you're setting up your skin for sunburn
and if you don't, there's all these theories.
But I like to know what the theories are.
I like to know what the extremes are,
but I also like to know what the standard conversation is.
But there's generally more agreement than disagreement.
I think where I've been kind of bullish actually
is like supplements, like people go, oh, supplements.
Well, there's food supplements like a protein powder,
just different than a vitamin, and then they are compounds.
There are compounds that have real benefit,
but people get very nervous about the fact
that they're not regulated,
but some of them are vetted with for potency
and for safety with more rigor than others.
And it's interesting to see how people
who take care of themselves and put a lot of work into that
are often attacked.
That's been interesting.
Also, one of the most controversial topics nowadays
is Ozempic Monjaro.
I'm very middle of the road on this.
I don't understand why the, quote unquote,
health wellness community is so against these things.
I also don't understand why they have to be looked at
as the only route.
For some people, they've really helped them lose weight.
And yes, there can be some muscle loss
and other lean body loss,
but that can be offset with resistance training.
They've helped a lot of people.
And other people are like, no, this stuff is terrible.
I think the most interesting thing about Ozempic Monjaro
is that they are in the GLP-1 pathway,
glucagon-like peptide-1,
and it was discovered in Gila Monsters,
which is a lizard, basically.
And now the entomologists will dive on me.
It's a big lizard-looking thing
that doesn't eat very often.
And they figured out that there's this peptide
that allows it to curb its own appetite
at the level of the brain and the gut.
And it has a lot of homology, sequence homology,
to what we now call GLP-1.
So I love anytime there's animal biology
links to cool human biology,
links to a drug that's powerful
that can help people with obesity and type 2 diabetes.
And there's evidence they can even curb some addictions.
Those are newer data, but I don't see either or.
In fact, I've been a little bit disappointed
at the way that the, whatever you wanna call it,
health, wellness, biohacking community
has slammed on Ozempic Monjaro.
It's like, they're like, just get out and run.
Listen, there are people who are carrying
substantial amounts of weight
that running could injure them.
They get on these drugs and they can improve.
And then hopefully they're also doing resistance training
and eating better.
And then you're bringing all the elements together.
Well, why do you think the criticism has happened?
Is it that Ozempic became super popular
so people are misusing it or that kind of thing?
No, I think what it is, is that people think
if it's a pharmaceutical, it's bad.
And then, or if it's a supplement,
it's bad depending on which camp they're in.
And it wouldn't have been wonderful
to kind of like fill in the gap between this divide.
You know, what I would like to see in politics
and in health is neither right nor left,
but what we can just call a league of reasonable people
that looks at things on an issue by issue basis
and fills in the center.
Cause I think most people are in the,
I don't want to say center in a political way,
but I think most people are reasonable.
They want to be reasonable,
but that's not what sells clicks.
That's not what drives interest.
But I'm a very, like I look at issue by issue,
person by person.
I don't like in-group, out-group stuff.
I never have.
I've got friends from all walks of life.
I said this on other podcasts
and it always sounds like a political statement,
but like the push towards like,
you know, polarization is, it's so frustrating.
If there's one thing that's discouraging to me
as I get older each year,
I'm like, wow, are we ever going to get out of this?
Like polarization.
Speaking of which, how are you going to vote
for the presidential election?
I'm still trying to figure out
how to interview the people involved and do it well.
What do you think the role of podcasts
is going to be in this year's election?
I would love long form conversations
to happen with the candidates.
I think it's going to be huge.
I would love Trump to go on Rogan.
I'm embarrassed to say this,
but I would love to honestly,
we'd love to see Joe Biden go on Joe Rogan also.
I would imagine that both would go on, but separately.
Separately, I think it's, I think a debate.
Joe does debates, but I think Joe at his best
is one-on-one conversation really intimate.
I just wish that Joe Biden
would actually do long form conversations.
I thought he had done it.
I think it was on Jay Shetty's podcast.
He did Jay Shetty, he did it a few,
but when I mean long form,
I mean really long form, like two, three hours
and more relaxed.
It was much more orchestrated
because what happens when the interview
is a little bit too short,
it becomes into this generic political type of NBCCNN
type of interview.
You get a set of questions
and you don't get to really feel the human.
Expose the human to the light in the full,
we talked about the shadow,
the good, the bad and the ugly.
I think there's something magical about two, three,
four hours, but it doesn't have to be that long,
but it has to have that feeling to it.
Where there's not people standing around
and everybody's nervous and you're going to be
strictly sticking to the question, answer type of feel,
but just shooting shit,
which Rogan is the best by far in the world at that.
I don't think people really appreciate
how skilled he is at what he does.
And the number, I mean the three or four podcasts per week
plus the UFC announcement saying
plus comedy tours and stadiums,
plus doing comedy shows in the middle of the week
plus husband and a father and a friend in Jiu Jitsu,
the guys got like super human levels of output.
I agree that long form conversation
is a whole other business.
And I think that people want and deserve to know
the people that are running for office in a different way
and to really get to know them.
Well, listen, you know, I guess you can,
I mean, is it clear that he's going to do jail time
or maybe he gets away with fine?
No, I don't think I'm,
because I was going to say, I mean,
does that mean you're going to be podcasting?
In prison, yeah.
We're going to, in fact, I'm going to figure out
how to commit a crime so I can get in prison without.
Please don't.
Well, that's, I'm sure they have visitors, right?
That just doesn't feel an authentic way
to get the interview, but yeah, I understand.
You wouldn't be able to wear that suit.
You'd be wearing a different suit.
Yeah.
It's going to be interesting and you do,
I'm not just saying this because you're my friend,
but you would do a marvelous job.
I think you should sit down with all of them separately
to keep it civil and see what happens.
Here's one thing that I found really interesting
in this whole political landscape.
When I'm in Los Angeles, I often get invited to these,
like they're not dinners, but gatherings where,
you know, a local, you know,
a bunch of podcasters will come together,
but a lot of people from the entertainment industry,
big agencies, big tech, like big, big tech.
Many of the people have been on this podcast
and they'll host a discussion or a debate.
And what you find, if you look around the room
and you talk to people is that about half the people
in the room are very left leaning
and very outspoken about that.
And they'll tell you exactly who they want to see
in the presidential race.
And the other half will tell you
that they're for the other side.
A lot of people that people assume
are on one side of the aisle or the other
are in the exact opposite side.
Now, some people are very open about who they're for,
but it's been very interesting to see how
when you get people one-on-one,
they're like telling you they want X candidate to win
or Y candidate to win.
And sometimes like, really?
I can't believe it, like you?
Like, yep.
So it's what people think about
people's political leanings is often exactly wrong.
And that's been eye-opening for me.
And I've seen that in university campuses too.
And so it's gonna be really, really interesting
to see what happens in November.
In addition to that, as you said,
most people are close to the center
despite what Twitter makes it seem like.
Most people, whether they're center,
a lot to center, right?
They're kinda close to the center.
Yeah, I mean, here's to me the most interesting question.
Who is gonna be the next big candidate in years to come?
Like, who's that going to be?
Right now, I don't see or know of that person.
Who's it gonna be?
Yeah, the young, promising candidates,
we're not seeing them.
We're not seeing, like, who?
Another way to ask that question, who would want to be?
Well, that's the issue, right?
Who wants to live in this 12-hour news cycle
where you're just trying to dunk on the other team
so that nobody notices the shit that you fucked up.
Like, that's not only not fun or interesting,
it also is just like,
it's gotta be psychosis inducing at some point.
And I think that, you know,
God willing, we're gonna, you know,
some young guy or woman is like on this
and refuses to back down
and was just like determined to be president
and will make it happen.
But like, I don't even know who the Bible candidates are.
Maybe you, Lex, you know?
We should ask Sagar.
Sagar would know.
Yeah, yeah.
Maybe Sagar himself.
Sagar's show is awesome.
Yeah, it is.
Ian Crystal do a great thing.
He's incredible.
Especially since they have somewhat divergent opinions
on things.
That's what makes it so cool.
He's great.
He looks great in a suit.
Looks real sexy.
He's taking real good care of himself.
I think he's getting married soon.
Congratulations, Sagar.
Forgive me for not remembering your future wife's name.
He won my heart by giving me a biography of Hitler
as a president.
That's what he gave you?
Yeah.
I gave you a hatchet with a poem inscribed.
That just shows the fundamental difference
between the two.
With a poem inscribed in it.
Which was pretty damn good.
I realized everything we bring up on the screen
is like really depressing.
Like the soccer player getting killed.
Can we bring up something happy?
Sure.
Let's go to nature's metal Instagram.
Those are pretty intense.
We actually did a collaborative post on a shark thing.
Really?
Yeah.
What kind of shark thing?
So to generate the fear VR stimulus from my lab,
in 2016 we went down to Guadalupe Island
off the coast of Mexico.
Me and a guy named Michael Muller
who's a very famous portrait photographer
but also takes photos of sharks.
And we used 360 video to build VR of great white sharks.
Brought it back to the lab.
We published that study in Current Biology.
In 2017 went back down there.
And that was the year that I exited the cage.
That you lower the cage with a crane
and that year I exited the cage.
I had a whole mess with a air failure the day before.
I was breathing from a hookah line while in the cage.
I had no scuba on, divers were out.
The thing got both constricted up and I had an air failure
and I had to actually share air
and it was a whole mess, story for another time.
But the next day, because I didn't wanna get PTSD
and it was pretty scary,
the next day I cage exited with some other divers.
And it turns out with these great white sharks,
in Guadalupe the water's very clear
and you can swim toward them
and then they'll veer off you if you swim toward them.
Otherwise they see you as prey.
Well, in the evening,
you've brought all the cages up and you're hopefully all alive
and we were hanging out fishing for a tuna.
We had one of the crew on board had a line in the water
was fishing for tuna for dinner
and a shark took the tuna off the line.
And it's a very dramatic take
and you can see the just absolute size
of these great white sharks.
The waters there are filled with them.
That's the one.
So this video, just the neural link link
was shot by Matt McDougal,
who is the head neurosurgeon at neural link.
There it is, takes it.
Now, believe it or not, it looks like it missed
like it didn't get the fish.
It actually just cut that thing like a band saw.
So I'm up on the deck with Matt.
Yeah.
And so when you look at it from the side,
you really get a sense of the girth of this thing.
So as it comes up, if you look at the size of that thing
and they move through the water with such speed,
just a couple.
So when you're in the cage
and the cage is lowered down below the surface,
they're going around.
You're not allowed to chum the water there.
Some people do it.
But, and then when you cage exit,
they're like, well, what are you doing out here?
And then, you know, you swim toward them, they veer off.
But what's interesting is that
if you look at how they move through the water,
all it takes for one of these great white sharks
when it sees a tuna or something it wants to eat
is like two flicks of the tail and becomes like a missile.
It's just unbelievable economy of effort.
And Ocean Ramsey, who is, in my opinion,
the greatest of all cage exit shark divers,
this woman who dealt with enormous great white sharks,
she really understands their behavior
when they're aggressive,
when they're not going to be aggressive.
She and her husband, Juan, I believe his name is,
do they understand how the tiger sharks differ
from the great white sharks?
We were down there basically,
like not understanding any of this.
We never should have been there.
And actually the air failure of the day before,
plus cage exit in the next day,
I told myself after coming up from the cage exit,
that's it, I'm no longer taking risks with my life.
I want to live, got back across the border.
Couple of days later, I was like, that's it.
I don't take risks with my life any longer.
But yeah, MacDougall, Matt MacDougall shot that video.
And then it went, quote unquote, viral
through nature's metal.
We passed them that video.
Actually, I saw a video where an instructor
was explaining how to behave with a shark in the water
and that you don't want to be swimming away
because then you're acting like a prey.
That's right.
And then you want to be acting like a predator
by looking at it and swimming towards it.
Right towards them and they'll bank off.
Now, if you don't see them, they're ambush predators.
You know, you're swimming in the surface.
And apparently if they get close,
you should just like guide them away by,
like grabbing them and moving them away.
Some people will actually roll them.
But if they're coming in full speedy,
you're not going to roll the shark.
But here we are back to dark stuff again.
I like the shark attack map.
And the shark attack map shows that, you know,
Northern California, there were a couple,
actually a guy's head got taken off.
He was swimming north of San Francisco.
There's been a couple in Northern California.
That was really tragic.
But most of them are in Florida and Australia.
Florida, same with Australia.
The Surfrider Foundation shark attack map.
There it is.
They have a great map.
There you go.
So they look like they have all the scars on them.
So if you zoom in on, I mean, look at this.
If you go to North America.
Look at skulls.
There's a-
Yeah, where they're deadly attacks.
But yeah, Northern California, sadly,
this is really tragic.
If you zoom in on this one, I read about this.
This guy, if you click the link, 50 year old male,
he was in chest high water.
This is just tragic.
I feel so sad for him and his family.
He's just three members of the party chose to go in.
He was nine, it was in his chest high water,
25 to 50 yards from shore.
Great, breached water, seized his head and that was it.
So it does happen.
It's very infrequent.
If you don't go in the ocean,
there's a very, very, very low probability, but-
But if it doesn't happen six times in a row,
that's an 120% chance.
Yeah.
I think wins a saltwater crocodile or a shark.
Okay, I do not like saltwater crocodiles.
They scare me to know.
And Muller, Michael Muller, who dove all over the world,
he sent me a picture of him diving with salties,
saltwater crocs in Cuba.
It was a smaller one, but goodness, Chris,
have you seen the size of some of those saltwater crocs?
Yeah, I'm thinking the sharks are so agile.
They're amazing.
They've head cammed one or body cammed one
moving through the kelp bed and you look and it's just,
they're so agile moving through the water.
And it's looking up at the surface,
like the camera's looking at the surface
and you just realize, if you're out there,
you're not, and you're swimming and you get hit by a shark,
you're not-
I was gonna talk shit and say that a salty
has way more bite force, but according to the internet,
recently data indicates that the shark has a stronger bite.
So I was assuming that a crocodile
would have a stronger bite force
and therefore agility doesn't matter,
but apparently a shark.
Yeah, and turning one of those big salties
is probably not that, turning around is like a battleship.
I mean, those sharks are unbelievable.
They can hit from all sorts.
Oh, and they do this thing.
We saw this, you're out of the cage or in the cage
and you'll look at one and you'll see its eye
kind of like looking at you.
They can't really fove it, but they'll look at you
and you're tracking it and then you'll look down
and you'll realize that one's coming at you.
They're ambush prayers, they're working together.
They're fascinating.
I like how you know that they can't fove it.
You're already considering the vision system there.
It's a very primitive system.
Very primitive, eyes on the side of the head.
Vision is decent enough.
They're mostly obviously sensing things
with their electro sensing in the water,
but also a faction.
Yeah, I spend far too much time thinking about
and learning about the visual systems of different animals.
If you get me going on this, we'll be here all night.
See, this is what I have the smuggled on to.
I saw this in a store and I got it
because this is from a shark.
Goodness.
Yeah, I can't say I ever saw one with teeth this big,
but it's beautiful.
It's beautiful.
Yeah, it's probably your blood pressure just goes
and you don't feel a thing.
Yeah, it's not.
Before we went down for the cage exit,
a guy in our crew, Pat Dawson is very experienced diver.
Asked one of the South African divers.
So what's the contingency plan
if somebody catches a bite and they were like,
he was like every man for himself and they're like,
basically saying if somebody catches a bite, that's it.
Anyway, I thought we were gonna bring up something happy.
Oh, that is happy.
Well, nature is beautiful.
Yeah, nature is beautiful.
We lived, but there are happy things.
You brought up nature as metal.
This is the difference between Russian Americans
and Americans.
It's like maybe this is actually a good time
to bring up your ayahuasca journey.
I've never done ayahuasca, but I'm curious about it.
I'm also curious about Ibogaine, Iboga,
but you told me that you did ayahuasca
and that for you it wasn't the dark, scary ride
that it is for everybody else.
Yeah, it was an incredible experience for me.
I did it twice actually.
And have you done high-dose psilocybin?
Never, no.
I just did small dose psilocybin a couple of times.
So I was nervous about it.
I was very scared.
Yeah, I understand it myself.
I've done high-dose psilocybin, it's terrifying,
but I've always gotten something very useful out of it.
So I mean, I was nervous about whatever demons
might hide in the shadow, in the yunging in the shadow.
Like I was nervous, but I think it turns out,
I don't know what the lesson is to draw from that,
but my experience-
It must be the Russian thing.
I mean, there's also something to the jungle.
It strips away all the bullshit of life
and you're just there.
I forgot the outside civilization exists.
I forgot time because like when you don't have your phone,
you don't have meetings or calls or whatever,
you lose a sense of time.
The sun comes up, the sun comes down.
That's the fundamental biological timer.
Every mammalian species has a short wavelength.
So you think like blue, UV type,
but like absorbing cone and a longer wavelength
absorbing cone and it does this interesting subtraction
to designate when it's morning and evening
because when the sun is low in the sky,
you've got short wavelength and long wavelength light.
Like when you look at a sunrise,
it's got blues and yellows, orange and yellows.
You look in the evening, reds, orange and blues.
And in the middle of the day, it's like full spectrum light.
Now it's always full spectrum light,
but because of some atmospheric elements
and because of the low solar angle,
like that difference between the different wavelengths
of light is the fundamental signal
that the neurons in your eye pay attention to
and signal to your circadian timekeeping mechanism.
Like we are at the core of our brain
in the super charismatic nucleus,
we are like wired to be entrained to the rising
and setting of the sun.
Like that's the biological timer,
which makes perfect sense because, you know,
obviously as the planets spin and revolve.
I also wonder like how that is affected by, you know,
in the rainforest, the sun is not visible often.
So you're under the cover of the trees.
So maybe that affects the climate.
Well, there are social rhythms, they're feeding rhythms.
Sometimes in terms of some species
will signal the timing of activity of other species.
And but yet getting out from the canopy is critical.
Of course, even under the canopy during the daytime,
there's far more photons than at night.
You know, there's always when I'm telling people
to get sunlight in their eyes in the morning
and in the evening, people say there's no light,
no sunlight this time here.
I'm like, go outside on a really overcast day,
it's far brighter than it is at night, right?
So there's still lots of sunlight,
even if you can't see the sun as an object.
But I love time perception shifts.
And you mentioned that in the jungle,
it's linked to the rising and setting of the sun.
You also mentioned that on Iowa'ska,
you zoomed out from the earth.
These are like, to me, the most interesting aspects
of having a human brain as opposed to another brain,
of course, only ever had a human brain,
but which is that you can consciously set
your time domain window.
Like you can, we can be focused here,
we can be focused on all of Austin
or we can be focused on the entire planet.
You can make those choices consciously.
But in the time domain, it's hard.
Like different activities bring us into fine slicing
or more broad binning of time,
depending on what we're doing,
programming or exercising or researching or podcasting.
But just how unbelievably fluid the human brain is
in terms of the aperture of the time space window
of our cognition and of our experience.
And I feel like this is perhaps one of the more valuable
tools that we have access to
that we don't really leverage as much as we should,
which is when things are really hard,
you need to zoom out and see it as one element
within your whole lifespan and that there's more to come.
You know, I mean, people commit suicide
because they can't see beyond the time domain they're in
or they think it's gonna go on forever.
When we're happy, we rarely think this is gonna last forever,
but which is interesting contrast in its own right.
But I think that psychedelics,
while I have very little experience with them,
I have some and it sounds like they're just
a very interesting window into the different apertures.
Well, how to surf that wave is probably a skill.
One of the things I was prepared for,
and I think it's important is not to resist.
I think I understand what it means to resist the thing,
a powerful wave, and it's not going to be good.
So you have to be able to surf it.
So I was ready for that to relax through it.
And maybe because I'm quite good at that from
knowing how to relax in all kinds of disciplines,
playing piano and guitar when I was super young.
And then through jiu-jitsu,
knowing the value of relaxation
and through all kinds of sports,
you should be able to relax the body fully
and just accept whatever happens to you.
That process is probably why it was
a very positive experience for me.
Dude, do you have any interest in iboga?
I'm very interested in ibogaine iboga.
There's a colleague of mine and researcher
at Stanford, Nolan Williams,
who's been doing some transcranial magnetic stimulation
and brain imaging on people who have taken ibogaine.
Ibogaine, as I understand it,
gives a 22-hour psychedelic journey
where no hallucinations with eyes open,
but you close your eyes and you get a very high resolution
image of actual events that happened in your life,
but then you have agency within those movies.
I think you have to be of healthy heart to be able to do it.
I think you have to be on a heart rate monitor.
It's not trivial.
It's not like these other psychedelics.
There's a wonderful group called Veteran Solutions
that has used iboga combined with some other psychedelics
in the veterans community to great success
for things like PTSD and it's a group
I've really tried to support in any way that I can,
mainly by being vocal about the great work they're doing,
but you hear incredible stories of people
who are just like near cratered in their life
or zombied by PTSD and other things post-war,
get back a lightness or achieve a lightness and a clarity
that they didn't feel they had.
So I'm very curious about these compounds.
The state of Kentucky, we should check this,
but I believe it's taken money
from the opioid crisis settlement for ibogaine research.
I mean, so this is like no longer,
yes, if you look here, let's see,
did they do it?
Oh no.
Oh no, they backed away.
Kentucky backs away from the plan
to fund opioid treatment research.
They were going to use the money to treat opioid.
Now officials are backing off 50 billion,
what is on its way over the coming years?
50 billion dollars.
50 billion dollars is on its way to state
and local government over the coming years.
The pool of funding comes from multiple legal statements
with pharmaceutical companies that profited
from manufacturing or selling opioid painkillers.
Kentucky has some of the highest number of deaths
from the opioid.
So they were going to do psychedelic research
with ibogaine supporting research on illegal folks.
Psychedelic drug called Ibogaine.
Well, I guess they backed away from it.
Well, sooner or later we'll get some happy news
up on the internet during this episode.
Talk about the shark and the crocodile fighting.
Yeah, yeah, that's true, that's true.
And you survived the jungle.
Well, that's the thing.
I was writing to you on WhatsApp multiple times
because I was going to put on the internet.
Are you okay?
And if you're like alive
and then I was going to just like put it to Twitter,
just like he's alive.
But then of course you're far too classy for that.
So you just came back alive.
Well, jungle or not, one of the lessons is also,
you know, when you hear the call for adventure,
just fucking do it.
I was going to ask you, it's kind of a silly question,
but like give me a small fraction of things
on your bucket list.
Bucket list.
Yeah.
Go to Mars.
Yeah, what's the status of that?
I don't know.
I'm being patient about the whole thing.
Red Planet ran that cartoon of you guys going to Mars.
That one was pretty funny.
That's true.
That one was pretty funny.
One where Goggins is already up there.
Yeah.
That's a funny one.
Probably also true.
I would love to die in Mars.
I just love humanity reaching onto the stars
and doing this bold adventure
and taking big risks and exploring.
I love exploration.
What about seeing different animal species?
I'm a huge fan of this guy, Joel Sartori,
where he has this photo arc project
where he takes portraits of all these different animals.
If people aren't already following him on Instagram,
he's doing some really important work.
This guy's Instagram is amazing.
Like portraits of animals.
Well, look at it, look at these portraits.
The amount of personality,
because we don't want to project anything onto them,
but the eyes, and occasionally put them up,
moving like this is a little owl.
I delight in things like this.
I've got some content coming on animals
and animal neuroscience and eyes.
Oh.
Dogs or all kinds of things.
All animals.
And I'm very interested in kids content
that incorporates animals.
We have some things brewing there.
Like I could look at this kind of stuff all day long.
Look at that bat.
Like bats, people think about bats
as kind of like little flickering,
a little annoying disease carrying things,
but look how beautiful that little sucker is.
How's your podcast with the Cookie Monster coming?
Oh yeah.
We've been in discussions with Cookie.
The, it's, can't say too much about that,
but Cookie Monster embodies dopamine, right?
Cookie Monster wants Cookie, right?
Wants Cookie right now.
You know, like it was that one tweet.
Cookie Monster eye bounce
because cookies come from all directions.
You know, it's like,
it's just embodying the desire for something.
And, which is an incredible aspect of ourselves.
The other one is, do you remember a little while ago,
Elmo put out a tweet.
Hey, how's everyone doing out there?
And it went viral.
And you know, the surgeon general of the United States
had been talking about the loneliness crisis.
He came on the podcast.
And a lot of people have been talking about problems
with loneliness, mental health issues with loneliness.
Elmo puts out a tweet.
Hey, how's everyone doing out there?
And everyone gravitates toward it.
You know, so that the different Sesame Street characters
really embody the different,
that kind of aspects of self through very like narrow,
neural circuit perspective.
You know, Snuffle Luffy gets us shy
and Oscar the Grouch is grouchy, right?
And the Count won a tour.
The archetypes of, yeah.
The archetypes is very young in once again.
Yeah. And I think that, you know,
the creators of Sesame Street clearly either understand that
or it's an unconscious genius to that.
So, yeah, there are some things brewing on conversations
with Sesame Street characters.
It's not, I know you'd like to talk to Vladimir Putin.
I'd like to talk to Cookie Monster.
It illustrates the differences in our like sophistication
or something.
Well, that's illustrates a lot.
Yeah, illustrates a lot.
But yeah, I also, I love animation.
So I'm not anime.
That's not my thing, but animation.
So I'm very interested in the use of animation
to get science content across.
So there are a bunch of things brewing,
but anyway, I delight in Sartori's work
and there's a conservation aspect to it as well.
But I think that mostly I want to thank you
for finally putting up something
that like where something is not being killed
or like let some sad outcome.
These are all really positive.
They're really cool.
They're really cool.
And every once in a while, look at that mountain line.
But I also like to look at these
and some of them remind me of certain people, right?
So let's just scroll through.
Like for instance, I think when we don't try
and process it too much.
So like, okay, look at this cat, this amazing.
Like I feel like that somebody,
I feel like this is like someone I met once.
As a young kid.
Yeah, there's a curiosity in it.
Curiosity and a playfulness.
Carnivore.
Carnivore, frontalized eyes.
Found and forced at the area.
Right, so then you go down, you know,
it's like this beautiful fish.
Neon pink.
Right.
It reminds you of some of the,
like the influencers you see on Instagram, right?
Except this one's natural.
Just kidding.
Let's see, no filter.
Let's see, like I feel like...
Bears, I'm a big fan of bears.
Yeah, bears are beautiful.
This one kind of reminds me of you a little bit.
There's like a stoic nature to it, a curiosity.
So you can kind of feel like the essence of animals.
You don't even have to do psychedelics to get there.
Oh, look at that.
He's like the behind the scenes of how it's actually...
Yeah.
And then there's...
Wow. Yeah.
Yeah, in the jungle, the diversity of life was also stark.
From a scientific perspective,
just the fact that most of those species are not identified
was fascinating.
Right.
It was like a little, every little,
every little insect is a kind of discovery.
Right.
I mean, one of the reasons I love New York city so much,
just by its problems at times,
is that everywhere you look, there's life.
It's like a tropical reef.
If you've ever done scuba diving or snorkeling,
you look on a tropical reef and it's like,
there's some little crab working on something
and like everywhere you look, there's life.
You know, in the Bay Area,
if you go scuba diving or snorkeling,
it's like a kelp bed, you know?
The Bay Area is like a kelp bed.
Every once in a while, some big fish goes by.
It's like a big IPO.
But like most of the time, not a whole lot happens.
Actually, the Bay Area, it's interesting,
is I've been going back there more and more recently.
There are really cool little subcultures
starting to pop up again.
Nice.
There's incredible skateboarding.
The GX1000 guys are these guys that bomb down hills.
They're nuts.
Like they're just going like that.
So just speed, not tricks.
You gotta see GX1000.
These guys going down hills in San Francisco,
they are wild.
And occasionally, unfortunately,
occasionally someone will get hit by a car,
but GX1000, look into intersections.
They have spotters.
You can see someone there.
Oh, I see, there's somebody looking out.
But into traffic.
Yeah, into traffic.
In San Francisco.
Yeah, this is crazy.
Like this is unbelievable.
And they're just wild, but in any case.
What's on your bucket list that you haven't done?
Well, I'm working on a book.
So I'm actually going to head to a cabin
for a couple of weeks and write, which I've never done.
People talk about doing this, but I'm gonna do that.
I'm excited for that.
Just the mental space of really dropping into writing.
Like Jack Nicholson in The Shining cabin.
Let's hope not.
Okay.
Let's hope not.
You know, before, I mean, I only started doing
public facing anything for posting on Instagram in 2019,
but I used to head up to Walala on the northern coast
of California, sometimes by myself,
to a little cabin there and spend a weekend by myself
and just read and write papers and things like that.
I used to do that all the time.
I missed that.
So some of that, I'm trying to spend a bit more time
with my relatives in Argentina, relatives on the east coast.
See my parents more.
They're in good health, thankfully.
I wanna get married and have a family.
That's an important priority.
And put a lot of work in there.
Yeah, that's a big one.
Yeah, yeah.
That's a big one.
Yeah, put a lot of work into the runway on that.
What's your advice for people about that?
Or give advice to yourself about how to find love
in this world, how to find, how to build a family.
Get there.
And then I'll listen to it some day
and see if I hit the marks.
Yeah, well, obviously pick the right partner,
but also like do the work on yourself.
Know yourself at the Oracle, know thyself.
And I think, listen, I have a friend.
He's a new friend, but he's a friend who I met for a meal.
He's a very, very well-known actor overseas.
And his stuff has made it over here.
And we become friends and we went to lunch
and we were talking about work and being public facing
and all this kind of thing.
And then I said, you have kids, right?
And he says he has four kids.
I was like, oh yeah, I see your posts with the kids.
You seem really happy.
And he said, he just looked at me, leaned in,
and he said, it's the best gift you'll ever give yourself.
And he also said, and pick your partner,
the mother of your kids, very carefully.
So, you know, that's good advice coming from,
excellent advice coming from somebody who's, you know,
very successful in work and family.
So that's the only thing I can pass along.
We hear this from friends for hours as well,
but kids are amazing and family's amazing.
And, you know, that's the different people,
all these people who want to like be immortal
and like live to be 200 or something, you know,
there's also the old fashioned way of, you know,
having children that live on and evolve a new legacy,
but they have, you know, half your DNA.
So that's exciting.
Yeah, I think you make an amazing dad.
Thank you.
It seems like a fun thing.
And, you know, I've also gotten advice from friends
who are super high performing and have a lot of kids.
They'll say, just don't overthink it.
Right.
Start having kids.
Let's go.
Well, the chaos of kids is kind of the,
like it can either bury you or it can give you energy.
But I grew up in a big pack of boys
always doing like wild and crazy things.
And so that kind of energy is great.
And if it's not a big pack of wild boys,
it's, you know, you have daughters
and they can be, you know, different form of chaos,
sometimes same form of chaos.
How many kids do you think you want?
Hmm.
You know, it's either two or five.
Yeah.
You're one of two, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, I'm very close with my sister.
I couldn't imagine having another sibling
because there's so much richness there.
We talk almost every day.
All right.
You know, three, four times a week, you know?
Sometimes just briefly, but we're tight.
You know, we're really look out for one another.
She's an amazing person, like truly an amazing person.
And it's like raised her daughter in an amazing way.
She's like, you know, my niece is like,
gonna head to college in a year or two.
And like my sister's done an amazing job.
And her dad's done a great job too.
They both really put a lot into the family aspect.
Got to just spend time with a really amazing person
in Peru in the Amazon jungle.
And he is one of 20 kids.
Wow.
So he's got, it's mostly guys.
That's just a lot of brothers and I think two sisters.
Wow.
I said Jonathan Haidt on the podcast.
The guy who's talking about the anxious generation
calling in the American mind.
He's great.
But he was saying that, you know,
in order to keep kids healthy,
they need to not be on social media
or have smartphones until they're 16.
I've actually been thinking a lot about
getting a bunch of friends onto neighboring properties.
You know, everyone talks about this.
Not creating a commune or anything like that.
But I think Jonathan's right.
We were more or less, our brain wiring does best
when we, I'm raised in small village type environments
where kids can forage the whole free range kids idea.
And I grew up skateboarding and building forts
and dirt clod wars and all that stuff.
It would be so strange to have a childhood without that.
Yeah. And I think more and more as we wake up
to the negative aspects of the digital interaction,
we'll put more and more value to in-person interaction.
So I mean, it's cool to see, for instance,
kids in New York city,
just kind of moving around the city
with so much sense of agency.
It's a really, really cool.
The suburbs, like where I grew up,
like as soon as we could get out,
take the 7F bus up to San Francisco
and hang out with, you know, wild ones.
Like, you know, while there were dangers,
I mean, we couldn't wait to get out of the suburbs.
The moment that, you know,
forts and dirt clod wars and stuff didn't cut it,
we just like wanted into the city.
So bucket list, I will probably move to a major city,
not Los Angeles or San Francisco.
In the next few years, New York city, potentially.
There's all such different flavors of experiences.
Yeah. So I'd love to live in New York city for a while.
I've always wanted to do that, and I will do that.
I've always wanted to also have a place in a very rural,
some area.
So Colorado, Montana are high on my list right now.
And to be able to pivot back and forth between the two
would be great, just for such different experiences.
And also I like a very physical life.
So the idea of getting up in the sun,
with the sun in the Montana or Colorado type environment.
And I've been doing some,
putting some effort towards finding a spot for that.
And New York city to me, I know it's got its issues
and people say, it wasn't what it was.
Okay, I get it, but listen, I've never lived there.
So for me, it would be entirely new.
And, you know, Schultz seems full of life.
There is an energy to that city and he represents that.
I mean, there's, and the full diversity of weird
that is represented in New York city is great.
Yeah, you walk down the street,
there's like a person with like a cat on their head
and no one gives a shit.
Yeah, that's great.
San Francisco used to be like that.
The joke was like, you have to be naked and on fire
in San Francisco before someone takes it.
But now it's changed.
But again, recently I've noticed that San Francisco,
it's not just about the skateboarders.
There's some community houses of people in tech
that are super interesting.
There's some community housing of people not in tech
that I've learned about him and known people have lived there.
And it's cool, like there's stuff happening
in these cities that's new and different.
I mean, that's what youth is for.
They're supposed to evolve things out.
So amidst all that, you still have to get shit done.
I've been really obsessed with tracking time recently,
like making sure I have daily activities of habits
that I'm maintaining and I'm very religious
about making sure I get shit done.
Do you use an app or something like that?
No, just Google Sheets.
So basically I spread sheet and I'm tracking daily
and I write scripts that whenever I achieve a goal,
glow's green.
Yeah, do you track your workouts
and all that kind of stuff too?
No, just the fact that I got the workout done.
Yeah.
So it's a check mark thing.
So I'm really, really big on making sure I do a thing.
It doesn't matter how long it is.
So I have a rule for myself that I do a set of tasks
for at least five minutes every day.
And it turns out that many of them I do way longer
but just even just doing it, I have to do it every day.
And there's currently 11 of them.
And it's just a thing.
Like one of them is playing guitar, for example.
So do you do that kind of stuff?
Do you do like daily habits?
Yeah, I do.
My, I wake up, if I don't feel I slept enough,
I do this non-sleep-deep-rest yoga-needra thing
that I've talked about a bunch.
We actually released a few of those tracks
as audio tracks on Spotify.
10-minute, 20-minute ones puts me back into a state
that feels like sleep and I feel very rested.
Actually, Matt Walker and I are gonna run a study.
He's just submitted the IRB to run a study on NSDR
and what it's actually doing to the brain.
There's some evidence of increases in dopamine, et cetera,
but those are older studies, still cool studies.
But so I'll do that, get up, hydrate.
And if I've got my act together,
I punch some caffeine down, like some metina, some coffee,
maybe another metina and resistance train three days a week,
run three days a week and then take one day off.
And like to be done by 8.39.
And then I wanna get into some real work.
I actually have a sticky note on my computer.
It's like just like reminding me how good it feels
to accomplish some real work.
And then I go into it right now.
It's the book writing, researching a podcast
and just fight tooth and nail to stay off social media,
text message, WhatsApp, YouTube, all that.
Get something done.
How long can you go?
Can you go like three hours, just deep focus?
If I hit a groove, yeah, 90 minutes to three hours
if I'm really in a groove.
For me, I start the day actually.
That's why I'm afraid.
I'd really prize that those morning hours
I start with the work.
And it's a, I'm trying to hit the four hour mark
of deep focus.
Great, I love it.
Then the off-camping work, important.
I'm really, really faithfully.
It's often torture actually.
It's really, really difficult.
Oh yeah, the agitation.
But I've sat across the table from you a couple of years ago
when I was out here in Austin doing some work
and I was working on stuff you were,
and I noticed you were just like stare at your notebook
sometimes just like pen at the same position
and then you'll get back into it.
Like there are those,
I want you to building that hydraulic pressure and then go.
Yeah, I try and get something done of value.
Then the communications start
and talking to my podcast producer.
My team is everything.
I mean, the magic potion in the podcast is Rob Moore, right?
Who's been in the room with me every single solo.
Costello used to be in there with us because that's it.
People have asked, journalists have asked,
can they sit in?
Friends have asked, nope, just Rob.
And for guest interviews, he's there as well.
And I talk to Rob all the time, all the time.
We talk multiple times per day.
And in life, I've made some errors
in certain relationship domains in my life
in terms of partner choice and things like that.
And certainly don't blame all of it on them,
but I played my role.
But in terms of picking business partners and friends,
to work with, I mean, Rob, it's just, it's been bull's eyes.
And it's just Rob has been amazing.
Mike Blavak, our photographer
and the guys I mentioned earlier,
we just communicate as much as we need to
and we pour over every decision like near neuroticism
before we make, we put anything out there.
And so, including like even creative decisions
of like topics to cover all of that.
Yeah, like a photo for the book jacket the other day,
Mike shoots photos and then we look at them,
we pour over them together.
Logo for the perform podcast with Andy Gallop
and then we're launching like, is that the right contour?
Mike's the real, he's got the aesthetic thing
because he was at DC so long as a portrait photographer.
And he's cute with close friends with Ken Block,
to Jim Khanna, like all the car jumping in the city stuff.
Like, I mean, Mike is a master,
he's a true master of that stuff.
And we just pour over every little decision.
But even which sponsors, you know,
there are dozens of ads now.
By the way, that whole Jawsor Sizer thing of me saying,
oh, a guy went from a two to a seven.
I never said that, that's AI.
Like I would never call it number off somebody,
a two to a seven, are you kidding me?
It's crazy.
So as AI, if you bought the thing,
I'm sorry.
But like our sponsors, we list the sponsors
that we have and why on our website.
And like the decision, do we work with this person or not?
Do we still like the product?
I mean, we've got ways with sponsors
because of like changes in the product or change, you know,
most of the time it's amicable, all good.
But, you know, like just every detail
and that just takes a ton of time and energy.
But I try and work mostly on content
and my team's constantly trying to keep me
out of the other discussions.
But I, because I obsess, but yeah, you have to,
you have to have a team of some sort,
someone that you can run things by.
For sure.
But one of the challenges, the larger the team is,
and I'd like to be involved in a lot of different kinds
of stuff, including engineering stuff, robotics, work,
research, all of those interactions, at least for me,
take away from the deep work, the deep focus.
Unfortunately, I get drained by social interaction,
even with the people I love and really respect
and all that kind of stuff.
You're an introvert.
Yeah, like fundamentally an introvert.
So to me, it's a trade-off, getting shit done
versus collaborating.
And I have to choose wisely because without collaboration,
without a great team, which I'm fortunate enough
to be a part of, like you wouldn't get anything really done.
But as an individual contributor to get stuff done,
like to do the hard work of researching or programming,
all that kind of stuff, you need the hours of deep work.
I used to spend a lot more time alone.
That's on my bucket list, spend a bit more time
and dropped into work alone.
I think social media causes our brain
to go the other direction.
I try and answer some comments and then get back to work.
I'm really, after going to the jungle,
I appreciate not using the device.
I've played with the idea of spending certainly,
maybe like one week a month, not using social media at all.
I used it.
So after that morning block, I'll eat some lunch
and I'll usually do something while I'm doing lunch
or something and then a bit more work
and that real work, deep work.
And then around 2.30, I do a non-sleep deep rest
to go short nap, wake up, boom,
maybe a little more caffeine and then lean into it again.
And then I find if you really put in the deep work,
two or three bouts per day by about five or 6 p.m.,
it's over.
I was down at Jaco's place not that long ago
and in the evening did a sauna session with him
and some family members of his and some of their friends.
And it's really cool, like they all work all day
and train all day and then in the evening,
they get together and they sauna and cold plunge.
I'm really into this whole thing
of gathering with other people at a specific time of day.
I have a gym at my house and Tim will come over
and train or we've kind of slowed that down
in recent months.
But I think gathering in groups once a day,
being alone for part of the day.
It's like very fundamental stuff.
We're not saying anything that hasn't been said
millions of times before,
but how often do people actually do that?
And call the party, be the person
to bring people together if it's not happening.
That's something I've really had to learn
even though I'm an introvert.
Like, hey, gather people together.
You came through town the other day
and a lot of people at the house, it was rad.
Actually, it was funny
because I was getting a massage when you walked in.
I don't sit around getting massages very often,
but I was getting one that day
and then everyone came in and the dog came in
and like everyone was piled in, it was very sweet.
Again, no devices,
but choose wisely the people you gather with.
Right, right.
And I was clothed.
Thank you for clarifying.
I wasn't, which is very weird.
Yeah, yeah, the friends you surround yourself with.
That's another thing.
It's like, I understood that from ayahuasca
and from just the experience in the jungle
was like, just select the people.
Just be careful how you allocate your time.
I just saw on somewhere,
Conor McGregor has this good line.
I wrote it down about loyalty.
He said, don't eat with people you wouldn't starve with.
Oh.
That guy's, I mean, he's big on loyalty.
All the shit talk, all of that, set that aside.
To me, like loyalty is really big.
Because then if you invest in certain people in your life
and they stick by you and you stick by them
and what else is life about?
Yeah, well, hardship will show you
who your real friends are, that's for sure.
And we're fortunate to have a lot of them.
It'll also show you who really has put in the time
to try and understand you and understand people
like people are complicated.
I love that.
So can you read the quote once more?
Don't eat with people you wouldn't starve with.
Yeah, so in that way, a hardship is a gift.
It shows you, definitely.
And it makes you stronger.
It definitely makes you stronger.
Let's go get some food.
Yeah, you're one meal a day guy.
I actually ate something earlier,
but it was like a protein shake
and a couple pieces of Bill Tong.
I hope we're eating a steak.
I hope so too, I'm full of nicotine and caffeine.
Yeah, what do you think?
How do you feel?
I feel good.
Yeah, I was thinking you'd probably like,
I only did a half a piece
and I won't have more for a while, but a little too good.
Yeah.
Thank you for talking once again, brother.
Yeah, thanks so much, Lex.
It's been a great ride, this podcast thing,
you're the reason I started the podcast.
You inspired me to do it.
You told me to do it, I did it,
and you've also been an amazing friend.
You showed up in some very challenging times
and you've shown up for me publicly,
you've shown up for me in my home and my life
and it's an honor to have you as a friend.
Thank you.
I love you, brother.
Love you too.
Thanks for listening to this conversation
with Andrew Kuberman.
To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now let me leave you with some words from Carl Jung.
Until you make the unconscious conscious,
it will direct your life and you will call it fate.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
