The following is a conversation with Lee Cronin, a chemist from the University of Glasgow who's one of the most fascinating, brilliant, out-of-the-box thinking scientists I've ever spoken to.
This episode was recorded more than two weeks ago, so the war in Ukraine is not mentioned.
I have been spending a lot of time each day talking to people in Ukraine and Russia.
I have family, friends, colleagues, and loved ones in both countries.
I will try to release a solo episode on this war, but I've been failing to find the words that make sense of it, for myself and others.
So I may not.
I ask for your understanding, no matter which path I take.
Most of my time is spent trying to help as much as I can privately.
I'm talking to people who are suffering, who are angry, afraid.
When I returned to this conversation with Lee, I couldn't help but smile.
He's a beautiful, brilliant, and hilarious human being.
He's basically a human manifestation of the mad scientist Rick Sanchez from Rick and Morty.
I thought about quitting this podcast for a time, but for now at least I'll keep going.
I love people too much.
You, the listener.
I meet folks on the street or when I run, you say a few kind words about the podcast and we talk about life, the small things and the big things.
All of it gives me hope.
People are just amazing.
You are amazing.
I ask for your support, wisdom, and patience as I keep going with this silly little podcast, including through some difficult conversations.
And hopefully many fascinating and fun ones too.
This is Alex Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now to your friends.
Here's Lee Cronin.
How do you think life originated on earth and what insights does that give us about life?
If we go back to the origin of earth and you think about maybe 4.7, 4.6, 4.5 billion years ago, planet was quite hot.
There was a limited number of minerals.
There was some carbon, some water.
And I think that maybe it's a really simple set of chemistry that we really don't understand.
So that means you've got a finite number of elements that are going to react very simply with one another.
And out of that mess comes a cell.
So literally sand turns into cells.
And it seems to happen quick.
So what I think I can say with some degree of, I think not certainty, but curiosity, genuine curiosity is that life happened fast.
Yeah, so when we say fast, this is a pretty surprising fact and maybe you can actually correct me and elaborate.
But it seems like most like 70 or 80% of the time that earth has been around has been life on it.
Like some very significant percentage.
So when you say fast, like the slow part is from single cell or from bacteria to something more complicated organism.
It seems like most of the time that earth has been around, it's been single cell or like very basic organisms like a couple of billion years.
But yeah, you're right.
I recently kind of revisited our history and saw this and I was just looking at the timeline.
Wait a minute.
Like how did life just spring up so quickly?
Like really quickly.
That makes me think that it really wanted to like put another way.
It's very easy for life to spring.
Yeah, I agree.
I think it's much more inevitable.
And I think I try to kind of not provoke, but try and push chemists to think about because chemists are part essential to this problem, right?
Of understanding the origin of life on earth at least because we're made of chemistry.
But I wonder if the origin of life on a planet also the emergence of life on the planet is as common as the formation of a star.
And if you start framing it in that way, it allows you to then look at the universe slightly differently because and we can get into this I think in quite some detail.
But I think to come back to your question, I have little idea of how life got started, but I know it was simple.
And I know that the process of selection had to occur before the biology was established so that selection built the framework from which life kind of grew in complexity and capability and functionality and autonomy.
And I think these are all really important words that we can unpack over the next while.
Can you say all the words again?
So you said selection, so natural selection, the original A-B testing.
And then complexity and then the degree of autonomy and sophistication because I think that people misunderstand what life is.
Some people say that life is a cell and some people that say that life is a virus or life is an on-off switch.
I don't think it's that life is the universe developing a memory and the laws of physics and the way there are no laws of physics.
Physics is just memory-free stuff, right?
So there's only a finite number of ways you can arrange the fundamental particles to do the things.
Life is the universe developing a memory.
So it's like sewing a piece of art slowly and then you can look back at it.
So there's a stickiness to life.
It's like universe doing stuff and when you say memory, it's like there's a stickiness to a bunch of the stuff it's building together.
So like you can in a stable way trace back the complexity and that tells a coherent story.
Yeah, and I think, yeah.
Okay, that's by the way very poetic and beautiful.
Life is the universe developing a memory.
Okay, and then there's autonomy.
You said complexity we'll talk about, but it's a really interesting idea that selection preceded biology.
Yeah, I think.
So first of all, what is chemistry?
Like the sand still count as chemistry?
Sure. I mean, as a chemist, a card carrying chemist, if I'm allowed a card, I don't know.
I don't know what I am most days.
What is the card made of?
What's the chemical composition of the card?
So what is chemistry?
Well, chemistry is the thing that happens when you bring electrons together and you form bonds.
So bonds, I say to people when they talk about life elsewhere, and I just say, well, there's bonds, there's hope.
Because bonds allow you to get heterogeneity, they allow you to record those memories, or at least on Earth.
You could imagine, you know, a Stanislav Lemtright world where you might have life emerging or intelligence emerging before life.
That may be something like Solaris or something, but you know, to get to selection, if atoms can combine,
and form bonds, those bonds, those atoms can bond to different elements, and those molecules will have different identities
and interact with each other differently, and then you can start to have some degree of causation or interaction,
and then selection, and then existence, and then you go up the kind of the path of complexity.
And so at least on Earth, as we know it, there is a sufficient pool of available chemicals to start searching that combinatorial space of bonds.
So, okay, this is a really interesting question. Let's lay it out.
So bonds, almost like cards.
We say there's bonds, there is life, there's intelligence, there's consciousness.
And what you just made me realize is those can emerge, or let's put bonds aside, those can emerge in any order.
That's really brilliant. So intelligence can come before life.
It's like, panpsychists believe that consciousness, I guess, comes before life and before intelligence.
So consciousness permeates all matter, it's some kind of fabric of reality.
Okay, so within this framework, you can kind of arrange everything, but you need to have the bonds that precedes everything else.
Oh, and the other thing is selection.
So the mechanism of selection, that could proceed, couldn't that proceed bonds to whatever the hell selection is?
So I would say that there is an elegant order to it.
Bonds allow selection, allows the emergence of life, allows the emergence of multicellularity and then more information processing, building state machines all the way up.
However, you could imagine a situation if you had, I don't know, a neutron star or a sun or what, a ferromagnetic loops interacting with one another and these oscillators building state machines and these state machines reading something out in the environment.
Over time, these state machines would be able to literally record what happened in the past and sense what's going on in the present and imagine the future.
However, I don't think it's ever going to be within a human comprehension, that type of life.
I wouldn't count it out because, you know, whenever you, I know in science, whenever I say something's impossible, I then wake up the next day and say, you know, that's actually wrong.
I mean, there are some limits, of course.
I don't see myself traveling fast and light anytime soon.
Eric Weinstein says that's possible, so he will say you're up.
Sure, but I'm an experimentalist as well, so one of my, I have two superpowers.
My stupidity, and I don't mean that as a, you know, I'm like absolutely completely witless, but I mean my ability to kind of just start again and ask the question and then do it with an experiment.
I always wanted to be a theoretician growing up, but I just didn't have the, just didn't have the intellectual capability, but I was able to think of experiments in my head.
I could then do in my lab or in the, you know, when I was a child outside and then those experiments in my head and then outside reinforced one another.
So I think that's a very good way of kind of grounding the science, right?
Well, that's the nice way to think about theoreticians is they're just people who run experiments in their head.
I mean, that's exactly what Einstein did, right?
But you're also capable of doing that in the head, in your head, inside your head and in the real world and the connection between the two is when you first discovered your superpower stupidity.
I like it. Okay.
There you go.
What's the second superpower? Your accent or that?
Well, I don't know.
I am genuinely curious.
So I have a, you know, like everybody, ego problems, but my curiosity is bigger than my ego.
So as long as that happens, I can hope.
That's awesome.
That is so powerful.
You're just dropping some powerful lines of curiosity is bigger than ego.
That's something I have to think about because you always struggle about the role of ego in life.
And that's so nice to think about.
Don't think about the size of ego, the absolute size of ego.
Think about the relative size of ego to the other horses pulling at you.
And if the curiosity one is bigger than ego, do just fine and make you fun to talk to.
Anyway, so those are the two superpowers.
How do those connect to natural selection or selection and bonds?
And I forgot already life and consciousness.
So we're going back to selection in the universe and origin of life on earth.
I mean, selection is a force, I'm convinced that selection is a force in the universe.
Not me, not a fundamental force, but it is a directing force because existence,
although existence appears to be the default, the existence of what?
We can get to this later, I think, but it's amazing that discrete things exist.
And you see this cup, it's not the sexiest cup in the world, but it's pretty functional.
This cup, the complexity of this cup isn't just in the object,
it is literally the lineage of people making cups and recognizing that,
seeing that in their head making an abstraction of a cup and then making a different one.
So I wonder how many billions of cups have come before this one,
and that's the process of selection and existence.
And the only reason the cup is still used is quite useful, like the handle,
it's convenient so I don't die and keep hydration.
And so I think we are missing something fundamental in the universe about selection.
And I think what biology is, is a selection amplifier,
and that this is where autonomy comes in,
and actually I think that how humanity is going to humans and autonomous robots
or whatever we're going to call them in the future, we'll supercharge that even further.
So selection is happening in the universe, but if you look in the asteroid belt,
selection, if objects are being kicked in and out of the asteroid belt,
those trajectories are quite complex.
You don't really look at that as productive selection
because it's not doing anything to improve its function, but is it?
The asteroid belt has existed for some time.
So there is some selection going on, but the functionality is somewhat limited.
On Earth, at the formation of Earth,
interaction of chemicals and molecules in the environment gave selection,
and then things could happen because you could think about in chemistry,
we can have an infinite number of reactions happen,
but all the reactions that are allowed to happen don't happen.
Why? Because they're energy barriers.
So there must be some things called catalysts out there,
or there are bits of minerals that when two molecules get together on that mineral,
it lowers the energy barrier for the reaction, and so the reaction is promoted.
So suddenly you get one reaction over another series of possibilities occurring
that makes a particular molecule, and this keeps happening in steps.
And before you know it, almost these waves as discrete reactions work together,
and you start to build a machinery that is run by existence.
So as you go forward in time, the fact that the molecules,
the bonds are getting, there are more bonds in a molecule, there's more function,
there's more capability for this molecule to interact with other molecules,
to redirect them, it's like a series of little, and I don't want to use this term too much,
but it's almost thinking about the simplest von Neumann constructor,
the simplest molecule that could build a more complicated molecule,
build a more complicated molecule, and before you know it,
when that more complicated molecule can act on the causal chain that's produced itself
and change it, suddenly you start to get towards some kind of autonomy,
and that's where life I think emerges in earnest.
Every single word in the past few paragraphs, let's break those apart.
Who's von Neumann? What's the constructor?
The closing of the loop that you're talking about,
the molecule that starts becoming, I think you said like the smallest von Neumann constructor,
the smallest, the minimal, so what do all those things mean,
and what are we supposed to imagine when we think about the smallest von Neumann constructor?
So, John von Neumann is a real hero, actually, not just me,
but many people I think, computer science and physics.
He was an incredible intellect,
who probably solved a lot of the problems that we're working on today,
I just forgot to write them down,
and I'm not sure if it's John von Neumann or Johnny as I think his friends called him,
I think he was Hungarian mathematician, came to the US,
and basically was involved in the Manhattan Project and developing computation,
and came up with all sorts of ideas,
and I think it was one of the first people to come up with cellular automata.
Really? I didn't know this little fact.
I think so, and I think so.
Well, anyway, if he didn't come up with it, he probably did come up with it and didn't write it down.
There was a couple of people who did it at the same time,
and then Conway obviously took it on, and then Wolfram loves CAs,
there is his fabric of the universe,
and what I think he imagined was that he wasn't satisfied,
and this may be incorrect recollection,
but a lot of what I say is going to be kind of just way out of my...
You're just part of the universe, creating its memory, designing...
Exactly, rewriting history.
Exactly, imperfectly.
But what I mean is I think he liked this idea of thinking about
how could a Turing machine literally build itself without a Turing machine?
It's like literally how did state machines emerge,
and I think that von Neumann constructors,
he wanted to conceive of a minimal thing,
autonomous, that could build itself,
and what would those rules look like in the world?
And that's what a von Neumann kind of constructor looked like.
Like it's a minimal hypothetical object that could build itself, self-replicate.
And I'm really fascinated by that,
because I think that although it's probably not exactly what happened,
it's a nice model because as chemists,
if we could go back to the origin of life and think about
what is a minimal machine that can get structured randomly,
so like with no prime mover, with no architect,
it assembles through just existence.
So random stuff bumping in together,
and you make this first molecule, so you have molecule A.
And molecule A interacts with another random molecule B,
and they get together, and they realize by working together
they can make more of themselves.
But then they realize they can mutate,
so they can make AB prime.
So AB prime is different to AB,
and then AB prime can then act back where A and B are being created,
and slightly nudge that causal chain
and make AB prime more evolvable or learn more.
So that's the closing the loop part.
Closing the loop part.
Got it.
It feels like the mutation part is not that difficult.
It feels like the difficult part is just creating a copy of yourself at step one.
That seems like one of the greatest inventions in the history of the universe
is the first molecule that figured out,
holy shit, I can create a copy of myself.
How hard is that?
I think it's really, really easy.
Okay, I did not expect that.
I think it's really, really easy.
Well, let's take a step back.
I think replicating molecules are rare,
but if you say, you know, I think I was saying,
I've probably gotten into trouble on Twitter,
there's about more than 18 mils of water in there.
So one mole of water, 6.022 times 10 to the 23 molecules.
That's about the number of stars in the universe, I think, of the order.
So there's three universe worth.
Somebody corrected you on Twitter.
Yeah, I'm always being corrected.
But there's a lot of molecules in the water.
So although it's for you and me really hard to conceive of,
if existence is not the default for a long period of time,
because what happens is the molecules get degraded.
So much of the possibilities in the universe
are just broken back into atoms.
So you have this kind of destruction of the molecules
or our chemical reactions.
So you only need one or two molecules
to become good at copying themselves
for them suddenly to then take resources in the pool
and start to grow.
And so then replication actually over time,
when you have bonds, I think is much simpler and much easier.
And I even found this in my lab years ago.
I had one of the reasons I started doing inorganic chemistry
and making rust, making a bit of rust based on a thing called molybdenum.
Molybdenum oxide is this molybdenum oxide, very simple.
But when you add acid to it and some electrons,
they make these molecules you just cannot possibly imagine
would be constructed big gigantic wheels of 154 molybdenum atoms in a wheel
or icosidodecahedron 132 molybdenum atoms all in the same pot.
And I realized when I just finished experiments two years ago,
I've just published a couple of papers on this,
that there actually, there is a random small molecule
with 12 atoms in it that can form randomly,
but it happens to template its own production.
And then by chance it templates the ring
just an accident, just like just an absolute accident.
And that ring also helps make the small 12 mer.
And so you have what's called an auto catalytic set
where A makes B and B helps make A and vice versa.
And you then make this loop.
So it's a bit like these, they all work in synergy
to make this chain of events that grow.
And it doesn't take a very sophisticated model
to show that if you have these objects are competing
and then collaborating to help one another build,
they just grow out of the mess.
And although they seem improbable, they are improbable.
In fact, impossible in one step.
There's multiple steps.
This is when the blind people look at the blind watchmaker argument
and you talk about how could a watch spontaneously emerge.
Well, it doesn't.
It's a lineage of watches and cruder devices
that are bootstrapped onto one another.
Right.
So it's very improbable,
but once you get that little discovery, like with a wheel
and fire, it just explodes
because it's so successful, it explodes.
It explodes.
This is basically selection.
So this templating mechanism
that allows you to have a little blueprint for yourself,
how you go through different procedures
is to build copies of yourself.
So in chemistry somehow, it's possible to imagine
that that kind of thing is easy to spring up
in more complex organisms.
It feels like a different thing and much more complicated.
We're having multiple abstractions of the birds
and the bees conversation here,
but with complex organisms,
it feels like difficult to have reproduction.
That's going to get clipped out.
I'm going to make fun of that.
It's difficult to develop this idea of making copies of yourself
or no, because that seems like a magical idea for life
to, wow.
That feels like very necessary for what selection is,
for what evolution is,
but then if selection precedes all of this,
then maybe these are just like echoes
of the selecting mechanism at different scales.
Yeah, that's exactly it.
So selection is the default in the universe,
if you want to.
And what happens is that life,
the solution that life has got on Earth,
life on Earth, biology on Earth is unique to Earth.
We can talk about that.
And that was really hard fought for,
but that is a solution that works on Earth,
the ribosome, the fundamental machine
that is responsible for every cell on Earth,
wherever it is in the thick kingdom of life.
That is an incredibly complex object,
but it was evolved over time
and it wasn't involved in a vacuum.
And I think that once we understand that selection
can occur without the ribosome,
but what the ribosome does,
it's a phase transition in replication.
And I think that that and also technology
that is probably much easier to get to than we think.
Why do you put the ribosome as the central part
of living organisms on Earth?
It basically is a combination of two different polymer systems.
So RNA and peptides.
So the RNA world, if you like, gets transmitted
and builds proteins,
and the proteins are responsible for all the catalysis.
The majority of the catalysis goes on the cell.
No ribosome, no proteins, no decoding, no evolution.
So ribosome is looking at the action.
You don't put like the RNA itself as the critical thing.
Like information, you put action as the most important thing.
I think the actual molecules that we have in biology right now
are entirely contingent on the history of life on Earth.
There are so many possible solutions.
And this is where chemistry gets itself into...
Origin of life chemistry gets itself into a bit of a trap.
Yeah, let me interrupt you there.
You've tweeted, you're going to get...
I'm going to set your tweets like it's Shakespeare.
Okay.
It's surprising you haven't gotten canceled on Twitter yet.
Your brilliance once again saves you.
I'm just kidding.
You like to have a little bit of fun on Twitter.
You've tweeted that, quote,
origin of life research is a scam.
So if this is Shakespeare, can we analyze this word?
Why is the origin of life research a scam?
Aren't you kind of doing origin of life research?
Okay, it was tongue-in-cheek, but yeah, I think,
and I meant it as tongue-in-cheek.
I'm not doing the origin of life research.
I'm trying to make artificial life.
I also want to bound the likelihood of the origin of life on Earth,
but more importantly, to find origin of life elsewhere.
But let me directly address the tweet.
There are many, many good chemists out there doing origin of life research,
but I want to nudge them.
And I think they're brilliant.
There's no question the chemistry they are doing,
their motivation is great.
So what I meant by that tweet is saying
that maybe they're making assumptions about saying,
only I could make this particular type of molecule,
say this RNA molecule or this phosphodiester or this other molecule,
it's going to somehow unlock the origin of life.
And I think that origin of life has been looking at this for a very long time.
And whilst I think it's brilliant to work out how you can get to those molecules,
I think that chemistry and chemists doing origin of life could be nudged
into doing something even more profound.
And so the argument I'm making, it's a bit like right now,
let's say, I don't know, the first Tesla that makes its way to,
I don't know, into a new country in the world.
Let's say there's a country X that has never had a Tesla before
and they get the Tesla.
Russia.
And what they do is they take the Tesla apart and say,
what's the origin of cars in the universe?
And say, okay, how did this form and how did this form?
And they just randomly keep making until they make the door,
they make the wheel, they make the steering column and all this stuff.
And they say, oh, that's the root.
That's the way cars emerge on Earth.
But actually we know that there's a causal chain of cars going right back to Henry Ford
and the horse and carriage.
And before that, maybe, you know, people were using wheels.
And I think that obsession with the identities that we see in biology right now
are giving us a false sense of security about what we're looking for.
And I think the origin of life chemistry is in danger of not making the progress that it deserves
because the chemists are doing this.
The field is exploding right now.
There's amazing people out there, young and old, doing this.
And there's deservedly so more money going in.
You know, I used to complain, there's more money being spent searching for the Higgs boson
that we know exists than the origin of life.
You know, why is that?
We understand the origin of life.
We're going to actually work out what life is.
We're going to be at a bound, the likelihood of finding life elsewhere in the universe.
And most important for us, we are going to know or have a good idea of what the future of humanity looks like.
You know, we need to understand that although we're precious,
we're not the only life forms in the universe.
Well, that's my very strong impression.
I have no data for that.
It's just right now a belief.
And I want to turn that belief into a more than a belief by experimentation.
But coming back to the scam, the scam is if we just make this RNA,
we've got this, you know, this fluke event.
We know how that's simple.
Let's make this phosphodiester or let's make ATP or ATP.
We've got that part nailed.
Let's now make this other molecule, another molecule.
And how many molecules are going to be enough?
And then the reason I say this is when you go back to Craig Venter,
when he invented his life form, Cyndia, this micro, this minimal plasmid,
is a myoplasma, something I don't know the name of it,
but he made this wonderful cell and said, I've invented life.
Not quite.
He facsimile the genome from this entity and made it in the lab or the DNA,
but he didn't make the cell.
He had to take an existing cell that has a causal chain going all the way back to Luca.
And he showed when he took out the gene, the genes and put in his genes,
synthesized, the cell could boot up.
But it's remarkable that he could not make a cell from scratch.
And even now today, synthetic biologists cannot make a cell from scratch
because there's some contingent information embodied outside the genome in the cell.
And that is just incredible.
So there's lots of layers to the scam.
Well, let me then ask the question, how can we create life in a lab from scratch?
What have been the most promising attempts at creating life in a lab from scratch?
Has anyone actually been able to do it?
Do you think anyone will be able to do it in the near future if they haven't already?
Yeah, I think that nobody has made life in the lab from scratch.
Lots of people would argue that they have made progress.
Craig, I think the synthesis of a synthetic genome milestone in human achievement.
Brilliant.
Can we just walk back and say, what would you say from your perspective,
one of the world experts in exactly this area,
what does it mean to create life from scratch where if you sit back,
whether you do it or somebody else does it, it's like, damn, this is, we just created life.
Well, what I can tell you, what I would expect I would like to be able to do
is to go from sand to cells in my lab.
Can you explain what sand is?
Just inorganic stuff.
Like basically just so sand, it's just silicon oxide with some other ions in it,
maybe some inorganic carbon, some carbonates.
Just basically clearly dead stuff that you could just grind rocks into sand.
And it would be what, in a kind of vacuum so they could remove anything else
that could possibly be like a shadow of life that can assist in the chemical.
You could do that.
You could insist and say, look, I'm going to take, not just inorganic,
I want to cheat and have some organic, but I want inorganic organic,
and I'll explain the play on words in a moment.
So I would like to basically put into a world, say a completely, you know,
a synthetic world, if you like a closed world,
put some inorganic materials and just literally add some energy in some form,
be it lightning or heat, UV light, and run this thing in cycles over time
and let it solve the search problem.
So I see the origin of life as a search problem in chemical space.
And then I would wait, literally wait for a life form to crawl out of the test tube.
That's a joke I tell my group, literally wait for a very,
don't worry, it's going to be very feeble.
It's not going to take over the world.
You know, there's ways of ethically containing it.
Famous last words.
Indeed, indeed, indeed.
You know, this is being recorded, right?
It will not make you look good once it crawls out of the lab
and destroys all of human civilization.
But there is very good, there's a very good things you can do to prevent that.
For instance, if you put stuff in your world, which isn't earth abundant,
so let's say we make life based on molybdenum and it escapes,
it would die immediately because there's not enough molybdenum in the environment.
So we can put in, we can do it, we can do responsible life.
Or as I fantasize with my research group on our away day that would go in,
it's, you know, I think it's actually morally, if we don't find,
until humanity finds life in the universe, this is going on the tangent,
it's our moral obligation to make origin of life bombs,
identify dead planets and bomb them with our origin of life machines
and make them alive.
I think it is our moral obligation to do that.
Some people might argue with me about that,
but I think that we need more life in the universe.
And then we kind of forget we did it and then come back.
So where did you come from?
But coming back to what I'd expect.
Father, are you back?
I think this is once again a Rick and Morty episode.
Definitely all Rick and Morty all the way down.
So I imagine we have this pristine experiment and everything is, you know, sanitized.
And we put in inorganic materials and we have cycles,
whether they're night cycles, up, down, whatever.
And we look for evidence of replication and evolution over time.
And that's what the experiment should be.
Now, are there people doing this in the world right now?
There are a couple of, there's some really good groups doing this.
There's some really interesting scientists doing this around the world.
They're kind of perhaps too much associated with the scam.
And so they're using molecules that are already invented by biology.
So there's a bit of replication built in.
But I still think the work they're doing is amazing.
But I would like people to be a bit freer and say,
let's just basically shake a load of sand in a box and wait for life to come out.
Because that's what happened on Earth.
And so that we have to understand that.
Now, how would I know I've been successful?
Well, because I'm not obsessing with what molecules are in life now,
I would wager a vast quantity of money.
I'm not very rich, so just be a few dollars.
But for me, the solution space will be different.
So the genetic material will be not RNA.
The proteins will not be what we think.
The solutions will be just completely different.
And it might be very feeble because that's the other thing we should be able to show fairly robustly
that even if I did make or someone did make a new life form in the lab,
it would be so poor that it's not going to leap out.
The fear about making a lethal life form in a lab from scratch
is similar to us imagining that we're going to make the terminator at Boston Dynamics tomorrow.
And the problem is we don't communicate that properly.
I know you explain this very well.
There is not the AI catastrophe coming.
We're very far away from that.
That doesn't mean we should ignore it.
Same with the origin of life catastrophe.
It's not coming anytime soon.
We shouldn't ignore it, but we shouldn't let that fear stop us from doing those experiments.
But this is a much, much longer discussion because there's a lot of details there.
I would say there is potential for catastrophic events to happen in much dumber ways.
In the AI space, there's a lot of ways to create like social networks
that are creating a kind of accelerated set of events that we might not be able to control.
The social network, the virality in the digital space can create mass movements of ideas
that can then, if times are tough, create military conflict and all those kinds of things.
But that's not super intelligent AI.
That's an interesting at scale application of AI.
If you look at viruses, viruses are pretty dumb, but at scale, their application is pretty detrimental.
Origin of life, much like all of the kind of virology, the very contentious word of gain of function research and virology,
research on viruses, messing with them genetically, that can create a lot of problems if not done well.
So we have to be very cautious.
Whenever you're ultra cautious about stuff in AI or in virology and biology,
it borders on cynicism, I would say, where it's like everything we do is going to turn out to be destructive and terrible.
So I'm just going to sit here and do nothing.
Okay, that's a possible solution except for the fact that somebody's going to do it.
It's science and technology progresses, so we have to do it in an ethical way, in a good way,
considering in a transparent way, in an open way, considering all the possible positive trajectories
that could be taken and making sure as much as possible that we walk those trajectories.
So yeah, I don't think Terminator is coming, but a totally unexpected version of Terminator may be around the corner.
Yeah, it might be here already.
Yeah, so I agree with that.
And so going back to the origin of life discussion, I think that in synthetic biology right now,
we have to be very careful about how we edit genomes and edit synthetic biology to do things.
So that's where things might go wrong in the same way as Twitter turning ourselves into kind of strange scale effects.
I would love origin of life research or artificial life research to get to the point where we have those worries,
because that's why I think we're just so far away from that.
Right now, I think there are two really important angles.
There is the origin of life people, researchers who are faithfully working on this and trying to make those molecules,
the scam molecules I talk about.
And then there are people on the creationist side who are saying,
look, the fact you can't make these molecules and you can't make a cell means that evolution isn't true and all this other stuff.
Gotcha.
Yeah, and so, and I find that really frustrating because actually the origin of life researchers are all working in good faith, right?
Yes.
And so what I'm trying to do is give origin of life research a little bit more of an open context.
And one of the things I think is important, I really want to make a new life form in my lifetime.
I really want to prove that life is a general phenomena, a bit like gravity in the universe,
because I think that's going to be really important for humanity's global psychological state meaning going forward.
That's beautifully put.
So one, it will help us understand ourselves.
So that's useful for science.
But two, it gives us a kind of hope, if not an awe at all the huge amounts of alien civilizations that are out there.
If you can build life and understand just how easy it is to build life,
then that's just as good, if not much better than discovering life on another planet.
Yeah.
It's, I mean, it's cheaper.
It's much cheaper and much easier and probably much more conclusive because once you're able to create life,
like you said, it's a search problem that there's probably a lot of different ways to do it.
Once you find the first solution, you probably have all the right methodology for finding all kinds of other solutions.
Yeah.
And wouldn't it be great if we could find a solution?
I mean, it's probably a bit late for, I mean, I worry about climate change, but I'm not that worried about climate change.
And I think one day you could think about, could we engineer a new type of life form that could basically,
and I don't want to do this.
I don't think we should do this necessarily, but it's a good thought experiment that would perhaps take CO2 out of the atmosphere
or an intermediate life form.
So it's not quite alive.
It's almost like an add-on that we can, with a time dependent add-on,
you could give to say cyanobacteria in the ocean or to maybe to wheat.
And say, right, we're just going to fix a bit more CO2.
And we're going to work out how much we need to fix to basically save the climate.
And we're going to use evolutionary principles to basically get there.
What worries me is that biology has had a few billion years to find a solution for CO2 fixation.
It hasn't really done, it's not, the solution isn't brilliant for our needs,
but biology wasn't thinking about our needs.
Biology was thinking about biology's needs.
But I think if we can do, as you say, make life in the lab,
then suddenly we don't need to go to everywhere and conclusively prove it.
I think we make life in the lab.
We look at the extent of life in the solar system.
How far did Earth life get?
Probably all Martians, probably life got going on Mars, the chemistry on Mars, seeded Earth.
That might have been a legitimate way to kind of truncate the surface.
But in the outer solar system, we might have completely different life forms
on Enceladus, on Europa and Titan.
And that would be a cool thing because-
Okay, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute.
Did you just say that you think in terms of likelihood,
life started on Mars, like statistically speaking,
life started on Mars and seeded Earth?
It could be possible because life was like,
so Mars was habitable for the type of life that we have right now,
type of chemistry before Earth.
So it seems to me that Mars got searching doing chemistry.
It started way before.
Yeah, and so they had a few more replicators and some other stuff.
And if those replicators got ejected from Mars and landed on Earth,
and Earth would be like, I don't need to start again.
Thanks for that.
And then it just carried on.
So I'm not going, I think we will find evidence of life on Mars,
either life we put there by mistake, contamination,
or actually life, the earliest remnants of life.
And that would be really exciting.
It's a really good reason to go there.
But I think it's more unlikely because of the gravitational situation
in the solar system, if we find life in the outer solar system-
Titan and all that, that would be its own thing.
Exactly.
Wow, that would be so cool.
If we go to Mars and we find life that looks a hell of a lot similar to Earth life,
and then we'll go to Titan and all those weird moons with the ices and the volcanoes
and all that kind of stuff.
And then we find there something that looks, I don't know, way weirder.
Yeah.
Some other, some non-RNA type of situation.
But we might find almost life like in the pre-bodic chemical space.
And I think there are four types of exoplanets we can go look for, right?
Because when JWST goes up and touch wood, it goes up and everything's fine.
When we look at a star, statistically, most stars have planets around them.
What type of planet are they?
Are they going to be dead?
Are they going to be just a pre-bodic origin of life coming?
So, are they going to be technological?
So, we have intelligence on them.
And will they have died?
So, you know, had life on them, but not-
Those are the four states of the globe.
And suddenly, it's a bit like I want to classify planets the way we classify stars.
And I think that in terms of rather than having this, oh, we found methane as evidence of life.
We found oxygen as evidence of life.
We found whatever molecule marker and start to then frame things a little bit more.
As those four states, which by the way, you're just saying four,
but there could be before the dead, there could be other states that we humans can't even conceive of.
Just pre-bodic, almost alive, you know, got the possibility to come alive.
I think-
But there could be a post-technological.
Whatever we think of as technology, there could be a pre-conscious,
where we all melded into one super-intelligent consciousness,
or some weird thing that naturally happens over time.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I think that-
The metaverse.
Yeah.
We join into a virtual metaverse and start creating,
and it's kind of an interesting idea, almost arbitrary number of copies of each other
much more quickly to what can mess with different ideas in mind.
Like I can create a thousand copies of Lex, like every possible version of Lex,
and then just see like, and then I just have them like argue with each other
and like until like in the space of ideas and see who wins out.
How could that possibly go wrong?
Anyway, but there's a-
Especially in this digital space where you could start exploring with AI's mix,
then you could start engineering arbitrary intelligences.
You can start playing in the space of ideas, which might move us into a world
that looks very different than a biological world.
Our current world, the technology, is still very much tied to our biology.
We might move past that completely.
Oh, definitely.
We definitely will.
Definitely.
That could be another phase then.
Sure.
But I did say technological, so I think I agree with you.
Let's get this right.
Dead world, no prospect of alive.
Prebiotic world, life emerging, living, and technological.
The dead one, you probably won't be able to tell between the dead never been alive
and the dead one, maybe lots of artifacts and maybe there's five.
There's probably not more than five.
I think the technological one could have life on it still,
but it might just have exceeded.
Because one way that life might survive on Earth is if we can work out how to deal
with the real climate change that comes when the sun expands.
It might be a way to survive that.
But yeah, I think that we need to start thinking statistically
when it comes to looking for life in the universe.
Let me ask you then sort of statistically how many alien civilizations are out there
in those four phases that you're talking about.
When you look up to the stars and you're sipping on some wine
and talking to other people with British accents
about something intelligent and intellectual, I'm sure.
Do you think there's a lot of alien civilizations looking back at us?
I'm wondering the same.
My romantic view of the universe is really taking loans from my logical self.
So what I'm saying is I have no idea.
But having said that, there is no reason to suppose that life is as hard as we first thought it was.
And so if we just take Earth as a marker,
and if I think that life is a much more general phenomena than just our biology
than I think the universe is full of life.
And the reason for the Fermi paradox is not that they're not out there.
It's just that we can't interact with the other life forms because they're so different.
And I'm not saying that they're necessarily like hasn't depicted in a rival or other.
I'm just saying that perhaps there are very few universal facts in the universe
and maybe our technologies are quite divergent.
And so I think that it's very hard to know how we're going to interact with alien life.
You think there's a lot of kinds of life that's possible.
I guess that was the intuition.
You provided that the way biology itself,
but even this particular kind of biology that we have on Earth
is something that is just one sample of nearly infinite number of other possible
complex autonomous self-replicating type of things that could be possible.
And so we're almost unable to see the alternative versions of us.
I mean, we'll still be able to detect them.
We'll still be able to interact with them.
We'll still be able to, like, what exactly is lost in translation?
Why can't we see them?
Why can't we talk to them?
Because I too have a sense that you put it way more poetically.
But it seems both statistically and sort of romantically,
it feels like the universe should be teaming with life, like super intelligent life.
And I sit there and the Fermi Paradox is felt very distinctly by me
when I look up at the stars because it's the same way I feel
when I'm driving through New Jersey and listening to Bruce Springsteen
and feel quite sad.
It's like Lucy K talks about pulling you off to the side of the road
and just weeping a little bit.
I'm almost like wondering, like, hey, why aren't you talking to us?
You know, it feels lonely.
It feels lonely because it feels like they're out there.
I think that there are a number of answers to that.
I think the Fermi Paradox is perhaps based on the assumption
that if life did emerge in the universe, it would be similar to our life
and there's only one solution.
And I think that what we've got to start to do is go out and look for selection detection
rather than an evolution detection rather than life detection.
And I think that once we start to do that, we might start to see really interesting things.
And we haven't been doing this for very long.
We are living in an expanding universe and that makes the problem a little bit harder.
Everybody's always leaving.
Distance-wise.
I'm very optimistic that we will...
Well, I don't know.
There are two movies that came out within six months of one another.
Ad Astra and Cosmos.
Ad Astra, the very expensive blockbuster with Brad Pitt in it
and saying there is no life.
Life on Earth has more pressures than Cosmos, which is a UK production
which basically aliens came and visited Earth one day and they were discovered in the UK.
It's a fun film.
But I really loved those two films.
And at the same time, at the time those films are coming out, I was working on a paper,
a life detection paper, and it was so hard to publish this paper.
And it was almost as...
I got so depressed trying to get this science out there
that I felt the depression of the film in Ad Astra like life is...
There's no life elsewhere in the universe.
But I'm incredibly optimistic that I think we will find life in the universe,
firm evidence of life, and it will have to start on Earth,
making life on Earth and surprising us.
We have to surprise ourselves and make non-biological life on Earth.
And then people say, well, you made this life on Earth,
therefore you're part of the causal chain of that.
And that might be true.
But if I can show how I'm able to do it with very little cheating
or very little information inputs,
just creating like a model planet, some description,
and watching life emerge,
then I think that we will be even to persuade even the hardest critic
that it's possible.
Now with regards to the Fermi Paradox,
I think that we might crush that with the JWST.
It's basically, if I recall correctly,
the mirror is about 10 times the size of the Hubble,
that we're going to be able to do spectroscopy,
look at colors of exoplanets, I think,
not brilliantly, but we'll be able to start to classify them,
and we'll start to get a real fit feel for what's going on in the universe
on these exoplanets.
Because it's only in the last few decades, I think,
maybe even last decade that we even came to recognize
that exoplanets even are common.
And I think that that gives us a lot of optimism
that life is going to be out there.
But I think we have to start framing,
we have to start preparing the fact that biology is only one solution.
I can tell you with confidence that biology on Earth
does not exist anywhere else in the universe.
We are absolutely unique.
Well, okay, I love the confidence,
but where does that confidence come from?
Chemistry, how many options does chemistry really have?
Many, that's the point.
And the thing is, this is where the origin of life scam comes in,
is that people don't count the numbers.
So if biology, as you find on Earth, is common everywhere,
then there's something really weird going on
that's really written in the quantum mechanics.
There's some kind of, these bonds must form over these bonds
and this catalyst must form over this catalyst
when they're all quite equal.
Life is contingent.
The origin of life on Earth was contingent
upon the chemistry available at the origin of life on Earth.
So that means if we want to find other life-like,
other Earth-like worlds,
we look for the same kind of rocky world,
we might look in the same zone as Earth,
we might expect reasonably to find biological-like stuff going on.
That would be a reasonable hypothesis,
but it won't be the same, it can't be.
It's like saying, I don't believe in magic,
that's why I'm sure.
I just don't believe in magic, I believe in statistics
and I can do experiments.
And so I won't get the same,
exactly the same sequence of events,
I'll get something different.
And so there is TikTok elsewhere in the universe,
but it's not the same as our TikTok, right?
That's what I mean.
Which aspect of it is not the same?
Well, I just think,
so what is TikTok?
TikTok is a social media where people upload videos,
silly videos, so I guess there might be...
Well, there's humor, there's attention,
there's ability to process,
there's ability for intelligent organisms
to collaborate on ideas and find humor in ideas
and play with those ideas, make them viral, memes.
Humor seems to be kind of fundamental
to human experience.
And I think that that's a really interesting question
we can ask, is humor a fundamental thing in the universe?
I think maybe it will be, right?
In terms of you think about, in a game theoretic sense,
humor, the emergence of humor
serves a role in our game engine.
And so if selection is fundamental in the universe,
so is humor.
Well, I actually don't know exactly
what role humor serves.
Maybe it's from a chemical perspective.
It's like a catalyst for...
I guess it's of several purposes.
One is the catalyst for spreading ideas on the internet.
That's modern humor.
But humor is also a good way to deal
with the difficulty of life.
It's a kind of valve, release valve for suffering.
Throughout human history, life has been really hard.
And for the people that I've known in my life
who've lived through some really difficult things,
humor is part of how they deal with that.
It's usually dark humor.
But yeah, it's interesting.
I don't know exactly sort of what's the more
mathematically general way to formulate
what the hell is humor?
What humor does it serve?
But I still...
We're kind of joking here, but...
It's a counterintuitive idea to me
to think that life elsewhere in the universe
is very different than life on Earth.
And also, like,
each instantiation of life
is likely very different from each other.
Like, maybe there's a few clusters of similar like life,
but it's much more likely is what you're saying.
To me, it's a kind of novel thought.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
But you're saying that there's...
It's more common to be a weird outcast
in the full spectrum of life
than it is to be in some usual cluster.
So every instantiation of a kind of chemistry
that results in complexity,
that's autonomous and self-replicating,
however the hell you define life,
that is going to be very different every time.
I don't know.
Selection is a fundamental kind of directed force
in the universe.
Won't selection result in a few pockets
of interesting complexities?
Yeah, I...
If we ran Earth over again,
over and over and over,
you're saying it's going to come up
but there's not going to be elephants every time?
Yeah, I don't think so.
I think that there will be similarities.
And I think we don't know enough
about how selection is globally works.
But it might be that the elephant,
the emergence of elephants was wired
into the history of Earth in some way,
like the gravitational force,
how evolution was going,
Cambrian explosions, blah, blah, blah,
the emergence of mammals.
But I just don't know enough about the contingency,
the variability.
All I do know is you count the number of bits of information
to make an elephant
and think about the causal chain
that provides the lineage of elephants
going all the way back to Luca.
There's a huge scope for divergence.
Yeah, but just like you said,
with chemistry and selection,
the things that result in
self-replicating chemistry
and self-replicating organisms,
those are extremely unlikely,
as you're saying,
but once they're successful, they multiply.
So it might be a tiny subset
of all things that are possible
in the universe, chemically speaking,
it might be a very tiny subset
that's actually successful at creating elephants
or an elephant-like,
or a human-like creature.
Well, there's two different questions.
The first one, if we were to reset Earth
and to start again,
say we could go back to the beginning
and do the experiment,
or have a number of Earths,
how similar would biology be?
I would say that there would be
broad similarities,
but the emergence of mammals
is not a given unless we're going to throw an asteroid
at each planet each time
and try and faithfully reproduce what happened.
Then there's the other thing about
when you go to another Earth-like planet elsewhere,
maybe there's a different ratio,
there's particular elements,
maybe there's the bombardment
at the beginning of the planet
was quicker or longer than Earth.
I just don't have enough information there.
What I do know
is that the complexity
of the story of life on Earth
gives us lots of scope
for variation,
and I just don't think it's a reasonable
mathematical assumption
to think that life on Earth
happened again would be the same as what we have now.
Okay, but
you've also extended that to say that
as an explanation for the Fermi Paradox,
that that means we're not able
to interact with them.
Or that's an explanation
for why we haven't at scale
heard from aliens is
they're different than us.
We've only been looking for, say, 70, 80 years.
So I think that the reason
we have not found aliens yet
is that we haven't worked out what life is.
No, but the aliens have
worked that out, surely.
I mean,
statistically speaking,
there must be a large number of aliens
that are way ahead of us
on this whole life question.
Unless there's something about
this stage of
intellectual evolution
that often quickly results in nuclear war
and destroys itself.
There's something
in this process
that eventually, I don't know,
crystallizes the complexity
and it stops, either dies
or stops developing.
But most likely they already figured it out
and why aren't they contacting us?
Is it some
grad student somewhere
wants to study a new green planet?
Maybe they have.
I mean, I don't have
a coherent answer to your question
other than to say that
if there are other aliens out there
and they're far more advanced,
they might be in contact with each other
and they might also
we might be at a point where
what I'm saying quite critically is it takes
two to talk, right?
So the aliens might be there, but if we don't
have the ability to recognize them
and talk to them, then the aliens
aren't going to want to talk to us.
And I think that's a critical
point and probably
if that's
a filter, there needs to be an ability
for one to communicate with the other
and we need to know what life is
before we do that. So we haven't qualified
to even join their club to have a talk.
Well, I think they still want to
teach us how to talk, right?
But my worry is that
or I think
they would want to teach us how to talk like you do
when you meet it.
Like
when you even meet, I was going to say child
but that's a human species.
I mean like and
you want to
try to communicate
with them through whatever devices you can
given what an ant is like.
I just, I worry mostly about
that humans are just too close minded
or don't have the right tools.
I'm going to push back on this quite significantly.
I would say because we don't understand
what life is and because we don't
understand how life
immersed in the universe, we don't understand the physics
that gave rise to life yet
and that means our
fundamental description, I'm way out of my
pay grade even further out
but I'll say it anyway because I think it's fun.
You don't get paid much anyway.
So I would say
that we, because we don't understand
the universe yet, we do not understand
how the universe spat out life
and we don't know what life is
and I think that until we understand
that it is going to limit our ability to
even, we don't
qualify to talk to the aliens.
So I'm going to say that
they might be there but we just
I'm not going to say that I believe in
inter-dimensional aliens being present.
But I think you're just being self critical
like we don't qualify. I think
the fact that we don't qualify qualifies us.
We're interesting in our innocence.
No, I'm saying that
because we don't understand
causal chains and the way that
information is propagated in the universe
and we don't understand what replication is yet
and we don't understand
how life emerged,
and I think that we would not recognize
aliens
and if someone doesn't
recognize you
you wouldn't go and talk to it. You don't go and talk
to ants.
You don't go and talk to birds or maybe
some birds you do, right? Because you can.
There's just enough cognition. So I'm saying
because we don't have enough
cognitive abilities are not yet
where they need to be.
We probably haven't been communicating with them.
So you don't agree with the dating strategy
that it's hard to get?
Because us humans, that seems to attract us.
We're in a species that's fine
but I think we don't actually have abstraction.
No, actually I think
in this talk, in this conversation
you've helped me crystallize something that I think
has been troubling me for a long time
with the thermi paradox. I'm pretty sure
that a reasonable avenue
is to say that you would not
go and talk to
your cat about calculus,
right?
Sure, but I'm not talking about petting a cat.
The analogy is that the aliens
are not going to talk to us because
I'm using calculus
as an analogy for abstraction
because we lack the
layer, the fundamental layer
of understanding what life is
and what the universe is
in our reality.
It would be so counterproductive
interacting with intelligent alien species
that it would cause more angst
for human race.
They don't care.
They've got to be self-interested
so they more care about
is it interesting for them?
Surely
there's a way
to pet
the cat
in this analogy
because
even if we lack complete understanding
it must be a very frustrating experience
for other kinds of intelligence
to communicate with us.
There must be a way to interact with us.
Well...
Like perturb the system in interesting
ways to see what these creatures do.
We might actually find the answer.
I mean, again, out of my pay grade
in a simulation
of Earth.
Let's say a simulation where we allow
an intelligent AI to emerge
and that AI
we then give it
the objective is to be curious
interact with other intelligence in its
universe and then we might find
the
parameters required for that
AI to work well and I think you'll find
if the AI will not talk
to other AIs that don't share
the ability to abstract
the level of the AI because it's just a cat
and are you going to travel
20 light years to go and pet a cat?
So not because of the
inability to do so
but because of like boredom.
It's more interesting. It will start talking to
it will spend most
it will spend
a majority of its time talking to other
AI systems that can at least
somewhat understand it's much more fun.
It's a bit like do we know that plants are conscious?
Well, plants aren't conscious in the way we typically think
but we don't talk to them. They could be, right?
There's a lot of people on Earth who like gardening.
There's always going to be a weird...
They're not talking, they're just gardening.
Okay, well, you're not romantic enough to see gardening
as a way of communication between humans.
Okay, you've got me there.
There's ways there's always going to be
the people who are curious.
Jane Goodall who lives with the chimps, right?
There's always going to be curious
intelligent species that visit
the weird Earth planet
and try to interact.
I mean, it's a...
Yeah, I think it's a
super cool idea that you're expressing.
I just kind of have a sense maybe
it's a hope that there's always going to be
a desire to interact
even with those that don't
can't possibly understand the depth
of what you understand.
I'm with you. I want to be as positive
as you that the aliens do exist
and we will interact with them.
What I'm trying to do is to give you
a reasonable hypothesis
why we haven't yet
and also something to strive for
to be able to do that.
I mean, there is
the other view that the universe is just too big
and life is just too rare.
But I want to come up
with an alternative explanation
which I think is reasonable
and not been philosophically
and scientifically thought out, which is this
if you can't actually
communicate with the object
the thing
competently, you don't even know it's there
then there's no point yet.
See, I disagree with that, but I'm totally
aligned with your hopeful vision, which is like
we need to understand the origin of life
that will help us engineer life
will help us engineer intelligent life
to perhaps on the computer side
through simulation
and explore all the ways that life emerges
and that will allow us to
I think the fundamental reason we don't see
overwhelming amounts of life
is I actually believe
aliens
of course, these are all just kind of
open-minded beliefs
it's difficult to know for sure
about any of this but
I think there's a lot of alien civilizations
which are actively communicating with us
that we're too dumb
we don't have the right tools
to see it. That's what I'm saying.
No, but I
maybe I misinterpreted you, but
I interpreted you just say they kind of
tried a few times and they're like, oh god
No, no, no, what I'm saying is we
this goes two ways. Yeah, I agree with you
there could be information
out there but just put in such a way that we just
don't understand it yet.
So sorry if I didn't make that clear
I mean it's not just I don't think we
think we qualify as soon as we can decode
their signal
Right, so when you say quality
got it got it. So you mean we're just not smart
enough, the word quality will stop me off
so we're not smart enough to do it.
But we just need to get smarter
and there's a lot of people who believe
let me get your opinion on this
about UFO sightings
so
sightings of weird phenomena
that
you know what does UFO mean
it means it's
a flying object
and it's not identified
clearly
at the time of sighting, that's what UFO means
so it could be a physics phenomena
it could be ball lightning, it could be all kinds of
fascinating, I was always fascinated
with ball lightning as a
like the fact that there could be
physical phenomena in this world
that are observable by the human eye
of course all physical phenomena
generally are fascinating
that are
that really smart people
can't explain, I love that
because it's like wait a minute, especially if you can
replicate it, it's like wait a minute
how does this happen, that's like
the precursor to giant discoveries
in chemistry and biology and physics
and so on, but it sucks
when those events are super rare
right, like leg ball lightning
so
that's out there, and then
of course that phenomena could have other
interpretations that don't have to do
with the physics and chemistry and the biology of
earth, it could have to do
with more extra-terrestrial
explanations, that
in large part
thanks to Hollywood and movies and all those kinds of things
captivates the imaginations of
millions of people
but just because
it's science fiction that captivates
the imagination of people, doesn't mean that
some of those sightings
all it takes is one
one of those sightings
is actually a sign
that it's extra-terrestrial intelligence
that it's
object that's not of this
particular world, do you think
there's a chance that that's the case, what do you make
especially the pilot sightings, what do you make of those?
So I agree
there's a chance, there's always a chance, any good
scientist would have to
or observationist would have to
you know, I want to see if aliens
exist, come to earth
what I know about the universe
is I think it's unlikely
right now that there are aliens visiting us
but not impossible
I think the
releases, the dramatization
that's been happening politically
saying we're going to release all this information
this classified information
I was kind of disappointed because
it was just
very poor
material
and
right now
the ability to capture
high-resolution video, everybody
is carrying around with them an incredible
video device now and
we haven't
got more compelling
data and so that we've just
seeing
grainy pictures, a lot of here say
instrument
kind of malfunctions and whatnot
and so I think on balance
I think it's extremely unlikely but I think something
really interesting is happening
and also
during the pandemic right, we've all been locked down
we all want to have, our imaginations
are running
riot and I think that
I don't think that
the information out there is convinced to be there are
anything interesting on the UFO side
but what it has made me very interested
about is how humanity is opening
up its mind
to ponder aliens
and the mystery
of our universe and so I don't
want to dissuade people from having those
thoughts and say you're stupid and look at that it's clearly
incorrect, that's not right, that's not fair
what I would say is that
I lack sufficient data
replicated observations
to make me go oh I'm going to take this
seriously but I'm really interested
by the fact that there is this
this great deal of interest
and I think that it
drives me to maybe
want to make an artificial life
even more and to help NASA
and the Air Force
and whoever go and look for things even more
because I think humanity wants to know what's out there
there's this yearning isn't there
yeah but I
see I almost
depending on the day I sometimes agree with you
but with the
thing you just said but
one of the disappointing things
to me about the sightings
I still
hold the belief that
a non-zero
number of them
is an indication
of something very interesting
so I
don't side with the people who say
everything can be explained with like
sensor artifacts kind of thing
yeah I'd agree with you I didn't say that either
I would say I just don't have enough data
but the thing I want to push back on
is the statement that
everybody has a high definition camera
one of the disappointing things to me about
like the report that the government released but in general
just having worked with government
having worked with
people all over
is how incompetent we are
like if you look at the
response to the pandemic
how incompetent we are
in the face of great challenges
without great leadership
how incompetent we are
in the face of the great mysteries
before us without great leadership
and I just think
the fact that there's a lot of high definition cameras
is not enough
to capture
the full richness of weird
of the mysterious phenomenon out there
of which
extraterrestrial intelligence visiting earth could be one
I don't think we have
I don't think everybody having a
smartphone in their pocket
is enough
I think that allows for TikTok videos
I don't think it allows for
the capture of even interesting
relatively rare human events
that's not that common
it's rare to have been the right moment
in the right time to be able to capture the thing
I agree
let me rephrase what I think on this
I haven't seen enough information
I haven't really actively sought it out
I must admit
but I'm with you in that I love the idea
of anomaly detection in chemistry
in particular I want to make anomalies
sorry or not necessarily make anomalies
I want to
understand an anomaly
let me give you two from chemistry
which are really quite interesting
Phlegiston
going the way back
where people said this is thing called Phlegiston
and for ages
the alchemists got really
this kind of the fire is the thing
that's one
and we determined that Phlegiston wasn't
what we thought it is
let's go to physics the aether
the aether is a hard one because I think
actually the aether might exist
and I'll tell you what I think the aether is later
can you explain the aether
as the vacuums
the light travelling through the aether in the vacuum
there is some thing that we call the aether
that basically mediates the movement of light
and I think that
and then the other one is cold fusion
which is more
a few years ago
that people observed
when they did some electrochemistry
when they were splitting water into hydrogen
and oxygen
that you got more energy out than you put in
and people got excited and they thought
that this was a nuclear reaction
and in the end it was kind of
discredited because you didn't detect neutrons
and all that stuff
I'm pretty sure
I'm a chemist I'm telling you this on your podcast
but why not? I'm pretty sure there's interesting
electrochemical phenomena that's not completely bottomed
out yet that there is something there
however we lack the technology
and the experimental design
so all I'm saying in your response
about aliens is we lack the
experimental design to really capture these
anomalies and we are
in circling the
planet with many more detection systems
we've got satellites everywhere so there is
I do hope that we are going to discover
more anomalies and remember
that the solar system
isn't just static in space
it's moving through the universe
so there's just more and more chance
I'm not what with Avi Loeb
he's generating all sorts of kind of
a cult I would say
with this
but I'm not against him
I think there is a finite chance if there are aliens in the universe
that we're going to happen upon them
because we're moving through the universe
What's the nature of the following that Avi Loeb has?
He's doubling down more and more
and say there are aliens, interdimensional aliens
and everything else right? He's gone from
space junk accelerating out of to
interdimensional stuff in a very
short space of time
he's obviously bored
or he wants to tap into the psyche
and understand and
he's playfully kind of trying to interact with society
and his peers to say
stop saying
it's not possible
which I agree with we shouldn't do that
we shouldn't limit statistically
in the same way we should frame everything
as good scientists statistically
Good scientists
recently
the idea of good scientists
is
I take quite skeptically
I've been listening to a lot of scientists
tell me about what is good
what is good science
That makes me sad because you've been in an interview
and that's exactly right
and most of the people I talk to
are incredible human beings
but there's a humility that's required
science is not
science cannot be dogmatism
Sure, I agree
Authority
like
a PhD does not give you authority
a lifelong pursuit of a particular task
does not give you authority
you're just as lost and clues as everybody else
but you're more curious
and more stubborn
so that's a nice quality to have
but overall just
using the word science
and statistics
can often
as you know
kind of become a catalyst
for dismissing
new ideas out of the box ideas
wild ideas
all that kind of stuff
Yes and no
I like to
some people find me extremely annoying in science
because I'm basically
I'm quite rude and disruptive
not in a rude
some people say they're ugly or stupid
or anything like that
I just say
you're wrong
or why do you think this
gift I got given by society when I was very young
because I was in the
learning difficulties class at school
I thought I was stupid
and so I know I know I'm stupid
but I always wanted to be smart
I remember going to school
maybe today they're going to tell me
I'm not as stupid as I was yesterday
and it was always disappointed always
and so when I went into academia and everyone said
you're wrong I was like
join the queue
because it allowed me to walk through the
the wall so I think that people
always imagine science as a bit like
living in a Japanese house
and everyone sits in their room
and I annoy people because
I walk straight through the wall not because
why should I be a chemist and not a mathematician
why should I be a mathematician
not computer scientist because
if the problem requires us to walk
through those walls
but I like walking through the walls
but as long
then I have to put up
I have to do good science
I have to win the people in those rooms
across by good science
by taking their criticisms
and addressing them head on
and I think we must do that
and I think that I try and do that in my own way
and I kind of love walking
through the walls
and it gives me
it's difficult for me personally
it's quite painful
but it always leads to a deeper understanding
of the people I'm with
in particular you know the arguments I have
with all sorts of interesting minds
because I want to solve the
problem or I want to understand more about
why I exist
you know
that's it really
and I think we have to not dismiss science
on that basis I think we can
work with science
No science is beautiful but humans
with egos and all those kinds of things
can
sometimes misuse
good things
like social justice
like all ideas were all aspire to
misuse these beautiful ideas
to
manipulate people to
all those kinds of things
and there's assholes in every
space and walk of life
including science
and those are no good but yes
you're right the scientific method
has proven to be quite useful
that said
for difficult questions
for difficult
rare explanations
for rare phenomena
you have to walk cautiously
because
the scientific method when you
totally don't understand something
and it's rare and you can't replicate it
doesn't quite apply
yeah yeah yeah that's it I agree with you
the challenge is to
not dismiss the anomaly because you can't replicate it
I mean we can talk about this
this is something I realized when we were developing
assembly theory
people think
the track
they're on is so dogmatic
but there is this thing
that they see but they don't see
and it takes a bit of time and you just have to keep reframing it
and my approach
is to say well why can't this be right
why must we accept
that RNA is the only way into life
I mean who said
does RNA have a special
class of
information that's encoded in the universe
no of course it doesn't, right?
RNA is not a special molecule
in the space of all the other molecules
but it's so elegant and simple
and it works so well for the evolutionary process
that we kind of use that as an intuition
to explain that that must be the only way to have life
sure
but you mentioned assembly theory
well first let me pause, bathroom break, needed?
yeah let's take two minutes
we took a quick break
and offline
you mentioned to me
that you have a lab in your home
and then I said
that you're basically Rick from Rick and Morty
which is something I've been thinking
this whole conversation
and then you say
that there's a glowing pickle
that you used
something involving cold plasma
I believe, I don't know but can you explain
the glowing pickle situation?
and is there many
many versions of you in alternate dimensions
that you're aware of?
I tried to make an electrochemical
memory
at home
using a pickle
the only way I could get any
traction with it was actually by plugging it
into a very high voltage alternating current
and then putting in a couple of electrodes
but my kids weren't impressed
they're not impressed with anything I do
any experiments I do at home, I think it's quite funny
but you connected that pickle to some electrode
240 volts AC
and then had a couple of electrodes on it
so what happens is a pickle
this is a classic thing you do
I mean I shouldn't
pranks you do, you put a pickle into the mains
and just run away and leave it
and what happens is it starts to decompose
it heats up and then explodes
because the water turns to steam
and it just violently explodes
but I wondered if I could cause the iron
sodium potassium ions in the pickle to migrate
it had been in a jar
in a brine
that was not my
that was not my best experiment so I've been far better
experiments in my lab at home
at that time it was a failed experiment
but you never know
every experiment is a successful
experiment if you stick with it
long enough
I got kicked out of my own lab by my research team
many years ago and for good reason
my team is brilliant and I used to go and just break things
so what I do do at home
is I have a kind of electronics workshop
and
I prototype experiments there
then I try and
suggest to my team sometimes
maybe we can try this thing
and they would just say oh wow that's not going to work
because of this and I say aha
but actually I've tried and here's some code
and here's some hardware can we have a go
so I'm doing that less and less now
as I get even more busy
but that's quite fun because
they feel that we're in the experiment together
you do in fact
brilliantly
just like Rick from Rick and Morty
connects
chemistry
with computation
when we say chemistry we don't mean
the
simulation of chemistry
of modeling of chemistry
we mean chemistry in the physical space
as well as in the digital space
which is fascinating and we'll
talk about that but first
you mentioned assembly theory so we'll stick on
theory in these big
ideas
I would say revolutionary ideas
there's an intersection between
mathematics and philosophy
what is assembly theory
and generally speaking
how would we recognize life
if we saw it
so assembly theory is a theory
goes back a few years now
my struggle for maybe almost 10 years
when I was going to origin of life
conferences and artificial life conferences
where I thought that everybody
was dancing around
the problem of what life is
and what it does
but I'll tell you about what assembly theory is
because I think it's easier
so assembly theory literally says if you take an object
any given object
and you are able to break that object
into parts very gently so just
maybe let's say take a piece of
very intricate Chinese porcelain
and tap it just with the hammer or the nail
at some point and it will fragment
into many parts
and if that object is able to fragment
into many and you count those parts
the different parts so they're unsymmetrical
assembly
theory says the
larger the number of parts
unsymmetrical parts that object has
the more likely it is that
object has been created by an evolutionary
or information process
especially if that object
is not one-off you've got
an abundance of them
and that's really important
so because
what I'm literally saying about the abundance
if you have a one-off object and you break it into parts
and it has lots of
lots of parts you'd say well that
that could be
incredibly intricate and complex
but it could be just random
and I was troubled with this for years
because I saw in reality that assembly
theory works but when I talked to
very good computational
complexity computation lists
algorithmic complexity people
they said you haven't really done this
properly you haven't thought about it
this is the random problem
and so I kept
working this up because I invented assembly
theory in chemistry first of all
with molecules and so the
thought experiment was
how complex does a molecule
need to be when I find
it that it couldn't possibly have risen by chance
probabilistically
and if I found this molecule able to
detect enough quantities in the same object
like a machine like a mass spectrometer
so typically in a mass spectrometer you weigh
the molecules in electric field
you probably have to have on the order of 10,000 identical
molecules to get a signal
so 10,000 identical molecules
that are complex
what is the chance of them occurring
by chance
well we can do the math let's take a molecule like Strychnine
or
yeah so Strychnine is a good molecule actually
to take
or Viagra is a good molecule
I made jokes about Viagra because it's a complex molecule
and one of my friends said if we find
Viagra on Mars in detectable quantities
we know something is up
but anyway
it's a complex molecule
so what you do is you take this molecule
in the mass spectrometer and you hit it with some electrons
or in an electric field and it breaks apart
and if the
larger than the number of different parts
you know
when it starts to get refresh old
my idea was that that molecule could not be created by chance
probabilistically
so that was where assembly
theory was born in an experiment
in a mass spec experiment
and I was thinking about this because NASA
sending the mass spectrometers to Mars
to Titan it's going to send them to Europa
there's going to be a nuclear powered mass
spectrometer going to Titan
I mean this is the coolest experiment ever
they're not only sending a drone
that's going to fly around Titan
it's going to be powered by
a nuclear slug
a nuclear battery and it's going to have a mass spectrometer
on it
Is this already launched?
No it's Dragonfly and it's going to be launched in a few years
I think it got pushed a year because of the pandemic
so I think it's real
Dragonfly
Nuclear Dragonfly is going to fly to Titan
and
collect
data
about the composition
of the various chemicals on Titan
Yeah I'm trying to convince NASA
I don't know if I'll be able to convince the Dragonfly
team
that they should apply this approach
but they will get data and depending on how good
their mass spectrometer is
but I had this thought experiment anyway and I did this
thought experiment
and for me it seemed to work
I turned the thought experiment into an algorithm
in assembly theory and I basically
assembly theory if I take
the generic and let's just take the word
Abracadabra
if you have a book
with lots of words
and you find Abracadabra one-off
and it's a wrap book that's been written
in a random way
set of monkeys in a room
and you're on typewriters
and you find one-off Abracadabra no big deal
but if you find lots of reoccurrences
of Abracadabra
well that means something weird is going on
but let's think about the assembly number of Abracadabra
Abracadabra has
a number of letters in it
you can break it down so you just cut the letters up
but when you actually reassemble Abracadabra
the minimum number of weights
of organising those letters so you'd have an A
a B
and keep going up
there's just that you can
when you cut Abracadabra up into parts
you can put it together again in seven steps
so what does that mean?
that means if you basically don't
you're allowed to reuse things you make in a chain
at the beginning
that's the memory of the universe
the process that makes Abracadabra
and because that causal chain
you can then get to Abracadabra
quicker than the number of letters
if we're having to specify it only in seven
so if you take that to a molecule
and you cut the molecule up
into parts
and you can on the causal chain
and you basically start with the atoms
and then bonds
and then you randomly add on those parts
and keep going all the way up
I found that literally
assembly theory allows me to say how compressed
a molecule is
so when there's some information in there
and I realised assembly theory
isn't just
confined to molecular space
it can apply to anything but let me finish the molecular argument
so what I did is
I had this theory
with one of my students
we wrote an algorithm
we basically took 20 million molecules
from a database and we just calculated
their assembly number
and that's the index
basically if I take a molecule
and I cut it up into bonds
what is the minimum number of steps I need to take
to reform that molecule
from atoms
so reusability of previously formed things
is somehow a fundamental part of us
exactly, it's like a memory in the universe
I'm making lots of leaps here
it's kind of weird, there's a process that can form
the A and the B and the C
and because we've
formed A and B before, we can use A and B again
with no extra cost except one unit
so that's the kind of
the chain of events
and that's how you think about memory here when you say the universe
when you talk about the universe
or life is the universe
creating memory
exactly
so we went through chemical space
and we looked at the assembly numbers
and we were able to classify it
so okay, let's test it, let's go
so we were able to take a whole bunch of molecules
and assign an assembly index
to them
and it's just a
function of the number of bonds in the molecule
and how much symmetry
so literally, assembly theory is a measure
of how little symmetry a molecule has
so
the more asymmetry, the more information, the more weird it is
like a Jackson Pollock
of some description
so I then went
and did a load of experiments
I cut them up in the mass spec
and measured the number of peaks
without any knowledge of the molecule
and we found the assembly number
there was almost
not quite a one-to-one correlation
but almost because not all bonds are equal
they have different energies
I then did this using two other spectroscopic techniques
NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance
which uses radiofrequency to basically
jangle the molecules and get a signature out
and I also used infrared
and infrared and NMR almost gave us a one-to-one correlation
so what am I saying?
I'm saying by taking a molecule
and doing either
infrared or NMR or mass spec
I can work out
how many parts there are in that molecule
and then put it on a scale
and what we did
in the next part of the work
is we took molecules
randomly from the environment
from outer space from all around Earth
from the sea
from Antarctica
and from fossils and so on
and even NASA
because they didn't believe us, blinded some samples
and we found
that all these samples
that came from biology
produced molecules that had a
very high assembly number above a threshold
of about 15
so basically
all the stuff that came from my ebiotic origin
was low
there was no complexity there
so we suddenly realized that on Earth at least
we got off that natural phenomena
cannot produce molecules
that need more than 15 steps
to make them
so I realized that this is a way
to make a scale of life
a scale of technology as well
and literally you could just
go sniffing for molecules off Earth
on Titan, on Mars
and when you find a molecule
in the mass spectrometer that gives you more than 15 parts
you'll know
pretty much for sure
to be produced by evolution
and this allowed me to come up with a general definition
of life based on assembly theory
to say that if I find an object
that has a large number of parts
say an iPhone
or Boeing 747
or any complex object
and I can find it in abundance and cut it up
I can tell you
whether that has been produced
by an informational process or not
and that's what assembly theory kind of does
but it goes a bit further
I then realized that this isn't just about life
it's about causation
so actually
it tells you about where there's a causal structure
so now I can look at objects in the universe
say that again there's a cup and say right
I'm going to look at how many independent parts it has
so that's the assembly number
I'll then look at the abundance
of how many cups there are too on this table
maybe there's a few more you got snatched away
so assembly
is a function of
the complexity of the object
times the number of copy numbers of that object
or a function of the copy number
normalized so I realized there's a new quantity
in the universe
you have energy, entropy
and assembly
so assembly the way we should think about that
is how much
reusability there is
because reusability is like
can you play devil's advocate
to this or could this just be
a nice
tertiary
signal
for living organisms
like some kind of
distant signal that's
yeah this is a nice property
but it's not capturing something fundamental
or do you think reusability is something fundamental
to life in complex organisms
I think reusability is fundamental
in the universe
not just for life in complex organisms
it's about causation
so I think assembly tells you
if you find objects
cause you can do this with trajectories as well
you think about it
the fact there are objects
in the universe on earth
is weird
you think about it
we should just have a combinator explosion of stuff
the fact that not everything
exists
is really weird
now there
as I'm looking at
two mugs and two water bottles
and the things that exist
are kind of
are similar
and multiply
in copies
assembly allows you to do something
the statistical mechanics
people looking at entropy have got stuck
for a while
so I'm making it pretty bold
I'm writing a paper with Sarah Walker on this
and we're realizing
we don't want to get ahead of ourselves
because I think there's lots of ways
it's a really
interesting idea
it works for molecules
and it appears to work for any objects produced by causation
cause you can take a motor car
you can look at the assembly of the motor car
look at the assembly of the book
assembly theory tells you there's a way of
compressing and reusing
and so when people I talk to information theorists
they say oh this is just logical depth
I say it is
like logical depth
but it's experimentally measurable
complexity but it's
computable
and it's not infinitely computable
it gets NP hard very quickly
it's a very hard problem
but it's computable enough
to be able to tell the difference between the molecules
that's been formed by the random background
and by causation
and I think that
that's really interesting because
until now there's no way of measuring
complexity objectively
complexity has required
algorithmic comparisons
and programs
and human beings to label things
assembly is label free
well
not entirely we can talk about what that means in a minute
okay
my brain has been
broken a couple times here
I'm sorry I explained it really badly
no it was very well explained
it was just fascinating and
my brain
is broken into pieces and I'm trying to assemble it
so
NP hard
so when you have a molecule
you're trying to figure out
okay
if we were to reuse parts of this molecule
which parts can we
reuse
as an optimization problem
NP hard
to figure out the minimum amount
of reused components
that will create this molecule
and it becomes difficult
when you start to look at huge molecules
arbitrarily large
because I'm also mapping this
can I think about this
in complexity generally
looking at a cellular automata system
and saying can this be used
as a measure of complexity
for an arbitrarily complicated system
yeah
I think it can
and I think the question is
what's the benefit because there's plenty of
in computer science
and mathematics and physics people have been
really seriously studying
complexity for a long time
and I think there's a really interesting problems
of where we coarse grain
and we lose information
and all assembly theory does really assembly theory
just explains weak emergence
and so what assembly theory says
like going from the atoms
atoms interact
those first replicators that build one another
assembly
at the minimal level just tells you evidence
in replication and selection
and I think the more
selected something is the higher the assembly
and so
we're able to start to
know how to look for selection in the universe
if you go to the moon there's nothing a very high assembly
on the moon except the human artifacts
we've left there
so again let's go back to the sandbox
in assembly theory says
if all the sand grains could stick together
that's the infinite
combinatorial explosion in the universe
that should be the default
we don't have that
now let's assemble sand grains together
and do them in every possible way
so we have a series of
minimal operations
that can move the sand together
but all that doesn't exist either
because we have specific memory where we say
we're going to put three sand grains in a line
or four and make a cross or a triangle
or something unsymmetrical
and once we've made the triangle and the unsymmetrical thing
we remember that we can use it again
so what assembly theory allows you to do
is go to the actual object
that you find in space
and actually the way you get there
is by disassembling
assembly theory works by
disassembling objects you have
an understanding
the steps to create them
and it works for molecules beautifully
because you just break bonds
but like you said it's very difficult
it's a difficult problem to figure out
how to break them apart
in a molecular weight space
it's good enough so it's a complete theory
when we start to think about objects
we can start to assign
we can start to think about things at different levels
what do you assign as your atom
so in a molecule
the atom is really confusing
word atom I mean smallest breakable part
so in a molecule the atom is the bond
because you break bonds not atoms
so in a car
the atom might be
I don't know a small amount of iron
or the smallest
reusable part a rivet
a piece of plastic or something
so you've got to be really careful
in a micro process the atoms might be
transistors
and so
the amount of assembly
is a function
you have to look at the atom level
where are your parts
that's one of the things you get to choose
at what scale is the atom
what is the minimal thing
there's a huge amount of trade-offs
when you approach a system
and try to analyze like if you approach earth
you're an alien civilization
try to study earth what is the atom
for trying to measure the complexity
of life
are humans the atoms
I would say to start with you just use molecules
I can say for sure
if there are molecules of sufficient complexity
on earth then I know that life has made them
and you can go further and show technology
there are molecules that exist
on earth that are not possible even by biology
you need a technology
and you need a microprocessors to get there
so that's really cool
and there's a correlation between
that between
the coolness of that and
assembly number whatever the measure
what would you call the measure
assembly index
so there are three kind of fundamental
kind of labels we have
so there's the quantity of assembly
so if you have a box
let's just have a box of molecules
so I'm going to have my box
we count the number of identical molecules
and then we chop each molecule up
in the individual molecule class
and calculate assembly number
so basically you then
have a function that sums over
all the molecules for each assembly
and then you divide through
so you make it divide through by the number
of molecules
so that's the assembly index for the box
so that will tell you the amount of assembly
basically the assembly equation we come up with
is like basically the sum
of e to the power
of the assembly index for molecule i
times the number of copies of the molecule i
and then you normalize
so you sum them all up and then normalize
so some boxes are going to be more assembled
than others
yeah that's what they tell me
so if you were to look at me as a box
so say I'm a box
am I assembling my parts
in terms of like how do you know
so let's just
we'll talk about the molecules in you
so let's just take a pile of sand
the same weight as you
and I would
take you and just cut up all the molecules
I mean and
look at the number of copies in assembly number
so in sand let's say
there's probably going to be nothing more than assembly number
of two or three but there might be
trillions and trillions of sand grains
in your body there might be
the assembly number is going to be higher
but there might not be
quite as many copies because
the molecular weight is higher
so you do want to average it out
you do average it out
I'm not defined by the most impressive amount
no no you're an average in your volume
we're just working this out but what's really cool
is
you're going to have a really high assembly
the sand will have a very low assembly
your causal power is much higher
you get to make decisions
you're alive, you're aspiring
the assembly says something about causal power
in the universe
and that's not supposed to exist
because physicists don't accept that
causation exists at the bottom
so I understand at the chemical level
why the assembly is causation
why is it causation?
because it's capturing the memory
it's capturing memory
but there's not an action to it
so
I'm trying to see
how it leads to life
what is what life does
so I think we don't know
that's a good question
what is life versus what does life
do?
this is the definition of life
the only definition we need
is that life
is able to create objects
in abundance
that are
so complex, the semi-number is so high
they can't possibly form
in an environment where there's just random interactions
so
suddenly you can put life on a scale
and then life doesn't exist
actually
it's just how evolved you are
and
you as an object
because you have incredible causal power
you could go and
launch rockets
or build cars
or create drugs
you can do so many things
you can build stuff
build more artifacts
that show that you have had causal power
and that causal power
there's kind of a lineage
and I think that over time
I mean realizing that
physics
as a discipline
has a number of problems associated with it
with me as a chemist it's kind of interesting
that assembly theory and I'm really
you know I want to maintain
some credibility in the physics side
but I have to push them because
physics
is a really good discipline
physics is about reducing the belief system
but they're down to some things
in their belief system
which is kind of really makes me kind of grumpy
number one is requiring
order at the beginning of the universe magically
we don't need that
the second is the second law
we don't actually need that
this is blasphemous
in a minute I'll recover my career
in a second
the only good thing about being the religious chair
means I think there has to be an act of parliament to fire me
yeah
you can always go to least twitter
and protest
and I think the third thing is
so we've got the order at the beginning
second law
the second law and the fact that causation is
emergent
and that time is emergent
John Carroll just turned off this program
I think he believes that it's emergent
so causation is not
that's clearly incorrect
because we wouldn't exist otherwise
so physicists have kind of
got confused about time
time is a real thing
well I mean
so look
I'm very happy with the current description of the universe
as physics give me because I can do a lot of stuff
I can go to the moon with Newtonian physics
I think and I can understand
the orbit of Mercury
with relativity
and I can build transistors with quantum mechanics
and I can do all this stuff
so I'm not saying the physics is wrong
I'm just saying
if we say that time is fundamental
i.e. time is non-negotiable, there's a global clock
I don't need
to require that there's
order being magically made in the past
because that asymmetry is built
into the way the universe is
so time is fundamental
I mean you've been referring to this
kind of
an interesting formulation of that is memory
yeah
so time is hard to
like put a finger on
like what the hell are we talking about
it's just a direction but memory
is a construction
especially when you have like
think about these local pockets of complexity
these
non-zero assembly index
entities that's being constructed
and they remember
never forget molecules
but remember the thing is I invented assembly
theory
I'll tell you I invented it
the thing is I keep making fun of myself
from a search group
I've only ever had one idea
I keep exploring that idea over the 40 years or so
since I had that idea
well aren't you the idea that the universe had
so it's very kind of hierarchical
anyway go ahead I'm sorry
that's very poetic
well I think I came up with assembly theory
the following idea when I was a kid
I was obsessed about survival kits
what is the minimum stuff
I would need to basically
replicate my reality and I love computers
and I love technology
or what technology was going to come
so I imagined that I would have basically
this really big truck full of stuff
and I thought well can I delete some of that stuff
out can I have a blueprint
and then in the end I kept making this
making smaller I got to maybe half a truck
into a suitcase and I went
I came on screw it I want to carry my
entire technology in my pocket
how do I do it and I'm not like
at a launch into a Steve Jobs
and you know I play
I came up with a matchbox survival kit
in that matchbox survival kit
I would have the minimum stuff that would allow me to interact
the environment to build
my shelter to build a
fishing rod to build
a water purification system
and it's kind of like so what did I use in my box
to assemble in the environment
to assemble to assemble
to assemble and
I realized I could make a causal chain in my
survival kit so I guess that's probably
why I've been obsessed with assembly theory for so long
and I was just
pre
configured to find it somewhere
and when I saw it in molecules
I realized that
the causal structure that we say emerges
and the physics kind of
gets really stuck
because they're saying that time you can go backwards
in time I mean how do we
let physicists get away with the notion
that we can go back in time and meet ourselves
I mean
that's clearly
a very
hard thing
physicists would not let other
sciences get away with
that kind of heresy
so why are physicists allowed to get away with it
so first of all to push back
to play devil's advocate
they're fairly married to the idea of memory
you see
in this
again from Rick and Morty way
you have these deep dreams
of the universe
that is writing the story through its memories
through its chemical
compounds that are just building on top of each other
and they find useful components
that can reuse and then
the reused components
create systems that themselves are then
reused and in this way construct
things but
when you think of that as memory
it seems like
quite sad that you can
walk that back but at the same time
it feels like that memory
you can walk in both directions on that memory
in terms of time
you could walk in both directions but I don't think
that makes any sense because
the problem that I have
with time
being
reversible is that
I mean I'm just
I'm a dumb experimental chemist
so I love burning stuff
burning stuff and building stuff
but when I think of reversible phenomena
I imagine in my head I have to actually
manufacture some time
I have to borrow time from the universe
to do that
when anyone says let's imagine
we can go back in time or reversibility
you can't do that you can't step out of time
time is non-negotiable it's happening
but see you're assuming
time is fundamental which most of us
do when we go
day to day but it takes a leap
of wild imagination
to think that time is emergent
no time is not emergent
I mean this is an argument we can have
but I believe I can come up with an experiment
an experiment that proves
that time cannot possibly be emergent
an experiment that shows
how assembly theory
kind of is the
way that the universe produces selection
and that selection gives rise to life
and also
to say well hang on
we could allow ourselves to have a theory
that requires us to have these statements
to be possible
like we need to have
order in the past
or we can have used the past hypothesis
which is order in the past
but as well
okay
and we have to have an arrow of time
we have to require that entropy
increases and we have to say
and then we can say look the universe is completely closed
and there's no novelty
or that novelty is predetermined
what I'm saying is very very important
that time is fundamental
which means if you think about it
the universe becomes more and more novel
each step it generates
there's more states in the next step than it was before
so that means bigger search
so what I'm saying is that the universe
wasn't capable of consciousness at day one
actually
because it didn't have enough states
but today the universe
is complex so it's like how
alright alright hold on a second
now we've pissed off the pants like it's too
okay
no it's brilliant sorry
a part of me is just
joking I'm having fun with this thing but
because you're saying a lot of brilliant stuff
and I'm trying to slow it down before my brain
explodes so because I want to break
break apart some of the fascinating things you're saying
so novelty
novelty is increasing
in the universe because the number
of states is increasing what do you
mean by states so I think
the physicists almost got everything right I can't
I can't fault them at all
I just think there's a little bit of dog I'm just trying
to play devil's advocate I'm very happy to be entirely
wrong on this right you know I'm not
right on many things at all
but if I can make
less assumptions about the universe
with this then potentially
that's a more powerful way of looking at things
if you think of time as fundamental
yeah you can make less assumptions overall
exactly the time
fundamental I don't need to add on a magical second
law because the second law comes out of the fact
the universe is actually
there's more states available I mean we might
even be able to do weird things like dark energy
in the universe might actually just be time
right yeah but
then you have to still have to explain why
time is fundamental because
I can give you one explanation that's simpler than time
say God you know
like just because it's simple doesn't mean it's
but okay you still
have to explain God and you still have to explain time
like why is it fundamental
so let's just say existence is default
which means time is the default
so how did you go from the existence
to the time
well we exist right so let's just
just take be very where you have to talk
about what exists me alright let's go the way
back yeah yeah okay I think it's very poetic
and beautiful what you're weaving into this
I don't think this conversation is even
about the assembly
which is fascinating
and we'll keep mentioning it
assembly index and this idea
that I don't think is necessarily
connected to time
oh I think it is deeply connected
I can't explain it yet so you don't think
everything you've said about assembly
theory and assembly index
can still be correct
even if time is emergent so yeah
right now assembly theory appears to work
I appear to be able to measure
objects of high assembly in a mass
spectrum and look at their abundance and you know
all that's fine right it's a nice
if nothing else it's a nice way of looking
at how molecules can compress things
now am I
saying that a time has to be fundamental
not emergent for assembly theory to work no
I think I'm saying
that the universe
it appears that the universe has many
different ways of using time you could have
three different types of time you could just have time
that's the way I would think of it if you want
if you want to hold on to emergent time
I think that's fine let's do that for a second
hold on to emergent time
and the universe is just doing its thing
then assembly time only exists
when the universe starts to write memories through bonds
so let's just say there's rocks running around
you know there's when
the bond happens and selection starts
suddenly
there are the universe is remembering
cause in the past
and those structures will have effects in the
future so suddenly a new type of time
emerges at that point which has
a direction and I think
Sean Carroll at this point might even turn
the podcast back on and go okay I can
deal with that that's fine but I'm just
basically trying to condense the conversation and say
hey let's just have time fundamental
and see how that screws with people's minds
you're triggering people by saying fundamental
why not
let's say
I'm walking through the wall
why should I
grow up in a world where time
can't go back in time I don't meet myself
in the past
there are no aliens coming from the future
right
but that's not
hold on a second
that's like saying we're talking about biology
or like
evolutionary psychology and you're saying okay
let's just assume that clothing
is fundamental people wearing clothes
is fundamental
wait a minute
I think you're getting in a lot of trouble
if you assume time is fundamental
why give me one reason why I'm getting
into trouble time being fundamental
because you might not
understand the origins
of this memory that might be
deeper like that this memory
that could be a thing
that's explaining the construction of these
higher
complexities better
than just saying
it's a search
it's chemicals doing a search
for
reusable
reusable structures that they can
then use as bricks
to build the house
okay so I accept that
let's go back a second because it's a kind of
I wanted to drop the time bomb
at this part because I think we can
carry on discussing it for many
many many days
many months
but I'm happy to
accept that it might be wrong
what I would like to do is
imagine a universe where time is fundamental
and time is emergent
and ask let's just
then talk about causation
because physicists require that causation
so this is where I'm going to go
causation emerges
and it doesn't exist at the micro scale
well that clearly is wrong
because if causation has to emerge at the macro scale
life cannot emerge
so how does life emerge life requires
molecules to bump into each other
those replicators need to produce polymers
there needs to be cause and effect
at the molecular level
there needs to be a non-agirdic to an agirdic transition
at some point
and
those replicators
have consequence
material consequence in the universe
physicists just say oh you know what
I'm going to have a bunch of particles in the box
I'm going to think about it
in a Newtonian way and a quantum way
and I'll add on a narrow time
so I can label things
and causation will happen
magically later. Well how? Explain causation
and they can't
the only way I can reconcile causation
is having a fundamental time
because this allows me to have
a deterministic universe
that creates novelty
and there's so many things from unpack here
but let's go back to the point
you said does can assembly theory
work with emergent time? Sure it can
but it doesn't give me
a deep satisfaction about
how causation
an assembly gives rise
to these objects that move through time
and space and again what am I
saying to bring it back
I can say without fear
you know take this water bottle
and look at this water bottle and look at the features on it
this writing you've got a load of them
I know that
causal structures gave rise to this in fact
I'm not looking at just one water bottle here
I'm looking at every water bottle that's ever been conceived of
by humanity this here
is a special object
in fact Leibniz knew this
Leibniz
who was at the same time of Newton
he kind of got stuck I think Leibniz actually invented assembly
theory
the soul that you see in objects
wasn't the mystical soul it is assembly
it is a fact there's been a history of objects
related and without
the object in the past
this object wouldn't exist there is a lineage
and there is conserved
structures, causal structures
have given rise to those
fair enough
and you're saying it's just a
simpler view with time
is fundamental
and it shakes the physicist's cage a bit
right? but I think
that
I just enjoy the fact that
physicists are in cages
I would say that
Lee Smolin
I don't want to speak for Lee I'm talking to Leigh
about this I think Leigh also
is an agreement that time has to be fundamental
but I think he goes further
you know even in space
I don't think you can go back to the same place in space
I've been to Austin a few times now
this is my I think third time I've been
to Austin is Austin in the same place
no the solar system
is moving through space
I'm not going back in the same space
locally I am
every event in the universe
is unique
in space
and time
doesn't mean we can't go back though
I mean
let's just
rest this conversation which was
beautiful
with a quote from the Rolling Stones
that you can't always get what you want
you want time to be fundamental
but if you try
you get what you need which is assembly theory
okay let me ask you
about continue talking about complexity
and
to clarify
with this beautiful
theory of yours that you're developing
and I'm sure we'll continue developing
both in the lab and
in theory
yeah it's can't be said enough
just the ideas
you're playing with in your head are just
and we've been talking about are just beautiful
so if we talk about complexity
a little bit more generally
maybe
in an admiring romantic way
how does complexity emerge
from simple rules
the why, the how
okay the nice algorithm of assembly
is there
I would say that the problem I have right now
is I mean you're right we can about time as well
the problem is I have this hammer
called assembly and everything I see
is a nail so now let's
just apply it to all sorts of things
we take the Bernard instability
Bernard instability is you have oil
if you heat up oil
let's say on a frying pan
when you get convection you get honeycomb patterns
take the formation of snowflakes
right take the
take the emergence of a
of a tropical storm
or the storm on Jupiter
when people say let's talk about complexity
in general what they're saying is
let's take this collection of objects
that are correlated
in some way
and try and work out
how many moving parts are how this got
how this exists
so what people have been doing for a very long time
is taking complexity
and counting what they've lost
calculating the entropy
and the reason why I'm pushing very hard on assembly
is entropy tells you how much you've lost
it doesn't tell you the microstates are gone
but if you embrace
the bottom up of assembly
those states
you then
understand the causal chain that gives rise to
the emergence
so what I think assembly will help us do
is understand weak emergence
at the very least
and maybe allow us to
crack open complexity in a new way
and I've been fascinated
with complexity theory
for many years
as soon as I could
I learned of the Mandelbrot set
and I could just type it up
in my computer and run it
and just show it and see it
it was just
this kind of
this mathematical reality that existed in front of me
I just found
incredible but then I realized that actually
we were cheating
we're putting in the boundary conditions all the time
we're putting in information
and so when people talk to me
about the complexity
of things I say but relative what
how do you measure them
so my attempt, my small attempt
naive attempt
because there's many greater minds than mine
on the planet right now thinking about this properly
and you've had some of them on the podcast
just absolutely fantastic
but I'm wondering
if we might be able to reformat
the way we would explore
algorithmic complexity
using assembly
what's the minimum number of constraints
we need
in our system for this to unfold
so whether it's like
if you take some particles and put them in a box
at a certain box size
you get quasi-crystallinity
coming out right
but that quite that emergence
it's not magic it must come
from the boundary conditions you put in
so all I'm saying is a lot of the complexity
that we see
is a direct read of the
constraints we put in but we just don't understand
so as I said earlier to the poor origin of life
chemists you know
origin of life is a scam
I would say lots of complexity
calculation theory is a bit of a scam
because we put the constraints in
but we don't count them correctly
and I'm wondering if
oh you're thinking and starting to drop
assembly theory
assembly index is a way to count the constraints
yes that's it that's all it is
so assembly theory doesn't
lower any of the importance of complexity
theory but it allows us to go
across domains and start to compare things
compare the complexity
of a molecule of a microprocessor
of the text you're writing
of the music you may compose
you've tweeted
assembly theory explains why
Nietzsche understood we had
limited freedom rather than radical freedom
so we've applied assembly theory
to sell your automata in life and chemistry
what does Nietzsche have to do with assembly theory?
oh that gets me into free will
I know everything
so let me say that again
it explains why Nietzsche understood we had
limited freedom
rather than radical freedom
limited freedom I suppose
is referring to the fact that there's constraints
or
what is radical freedom
what is freedom
so Sartre was like believed in absolute freedom
and that he could do
whatever he wanted
in his imagination
and Nietzsche understood
that his freedom was somewhat more limited
and it kind of takes me back
to this computer game that I played when I was
10 so I think it's called Dragon's Lair
do you know Dragon's Lair?
I think I know Dragon's Lair
Dragon's Lair I knew I was being conned
Dragon's Lair when you play the game
you're lucky that you grew up in a basically
procedurally generated worlds
that was RPG a little bit
no is it turn based play?
it was a role playing game
but really good graphics and won the first
and when you actually flick the stick
it was like a graphical
adventure game with animation
and when I played this game
you could get through the game in 12 minutes
if you knew what you were doing without making mistakes
just play the disc, play the disc, play the disc
so it was just about timing
and actually it was a complete fraud
because all the animation
has been pre-recorded on the disc
it's like the Black Mirror
the first interactive where they had all the
several million
permutations of the movie
that you could select on Netflix
I've forgotten the name of it
so this was exactly that
in the laser disc, you basically go left, go right
fight the yoga, slay the Dragon
and when you flick the joystick
at the right time it just goes to the next animation
to play, it's not really generating it
and I played that game and I knew
I was being had
so to you
Dragon Lair is the first time you realize
that free will is an illusion
yeah
and why does assembly
theory give you hints about free will
whether it's an illusion or not
so not totally
I do think I have some will
and I think I am an agent
and I think I can interact and I can play around
with the model I have of the world
and the cost functions
which means I have a little bit of free will
but
as much as I want to do stuff in the universe
I don't think I could suddenly say
I mean actually this is ridiculous because now I say
I could try and do it, I would suddenly give up everything
and become a rapper tomorrow
maybe I could try that
but I don't have sufficient
agency to make that
necessarily happen, I'm on a trajectory
so when in Dragon Slayer I know that I
have some trajectories that I can play with
where
Sartre realized he had
no assembly, no memory, he could just leap across
and do everything
and Nietzsche said
I realize I don't have full freedom
but I have some freedom
and the assembly theory basically says that
it says if you have these constraints
in your past they limit what you are able
to do in the future but you can use them
to do amazing things
let's say I'm a poppy plant
and I'm creating some opiates
opiates are really interesting molecules
I mean they are obviously great for medicine
great problems in society
but let's imagine
we fast forward a billion years
what will the opiates
look like in a billion years
well we can guess because we can see
how those proteins will evolve
and we can see how the secondary metabolites
will change
but they can't go radical
they can't suddenly become
a molecule that you find in an OLED
in a display
they will be limited by the causal chain
that produced them
and that's what I'm getting at
we are
unpredictably predictable
or predictably unpredictable
predictably unpredictable
within a constraint on the trajectory we're on
so the predictably part
is the constraints of the trajectory
and the unpredictable part
is the part that you still haven't really clarified
the origin of
the little bit of freedom
so you're just arguing
you're basically saying that
radical freedom is impossible
you're really operating in a world of constraints
that are constrained by the memory
of the trajectory of the chemistry
that led to who you are
but
even just a tiny bit of freedom
even if everything
if everywhere
you are in cages
if you can move around
in that cage a little bit
you're free
and so the question is
in assembly theory
if we're thinking about free will
where does the little bit of freedom come from
what is the I
that can decide to be a rapper
what, why
what is that
that's a cute little trick
we've convinced each other of
so we can do fun tricks at parties
or is there something fundamental
that allows us to feel free
to be free
I think that that's the question
that I want to answer
and I think it's so profound
let me have a go at it
I would say that I don't take the stance
of Sam Harris because I think Sam Harris
when he said, the way he says it is almost
it's really interesting, I'd love to talk to him about it
Sam Harris almost thinks himself out of existence
right, because
do you know what I mean?
he has different
views on consciousness versus free will
I think he saves himself with consciousness
he thinks himself out of existence with
free will
I mean, there's no point, right?
he's a leaf floating on a river
yeah
I think that
he
I don't know, I'd love to ask him whether he really believes that
and then we could play some games
no, I then would say I'll get him to play
a game of cards with me
and I'll work out the conditions on which he says no
and then I'll get him to the conditions he says yes
and then I'll trap him in his logical inconsistency
with that argument
because at some point when he loses
enough money, or the prospect of losing enough money
there's a way of basically mapping out
a series of
what will is about
let's not call it free will, what will is about
is to have a series of
decisions equally weighted
in front of you
and those decisions aren't necessarily energy minimization
those decisions
are a function of the model you've
made in your mind, in your simulation
and the way you've interacted
in reality and also
other interactions
that you're having with other individuals
and happenstance
and I think
that there's a little bit of delay
in time, so I think
what you're able to do is
say well, I'm going to do the counterfactual
I've done all of them
and I'm going to go this way
and you probably don't know why
I think free will is actually
very complex interaction between your conscious
your unconscious
and your conscious brain
and I think the reason why we're arguing about it
is so interesting
some people
outsource their free will to their
unconscious brain
and some people try and
overthink the free will in the conscious brain
I would say that Sam Harris has realized
his conscious brain doesn't have free will
but his unconscious brain does
that's my guess, right?
and that he can't have access to the unconscious brain
and so he's just going to
through meditation come to acceptance
with that fact
which is maybe okay, but I do
think that I have
the ability to make decisions
and I like my decisions, in fact
there's an argument I have
with some people that
some days I feel I have no free will
and it's just an illusion
and it makes me more radical if you like
I get to explore more of the state
and I'm like I'm going to try and affect the world
now I'm really going to ask the question
that maybe I dare not ask
or dare not or do the thing I dare not do
and that allows me to kind of explore more
it's funny that
if you truly accept
that there's no free will
that is the kind of
radical freedom
it's funny
because
the little bit of the illusion
under that framework
that you have that you can make choices
if choice is just
an illusion of psychology
you can do whatever the hell you want
but we don't do we
but because you don't truly accept
that you think that there's
like you think there's a choice
which is why you don't
just do whatever the hell you want
like you feel like there's some responsibility
for making the wrong choice which is why you don't do it
but if you truly accept
that choice has already been made
then you can go
I don't know what is the most
radical thing
I mean but
I don't
I wonder what am I preventing myself
from doing that I would really want to do
probably like humor stuff
like
I would love to
if I could like save a game
do the thing
and then reload it later like do undo
it probably would be humor
just to do something like
super hilarious
that's super
embarrassing and then just go
I mean it's basically just fun
I would add more fun to the world
I mean I sometimes do that
I sometimes
I try and mess up my reality
in unusual ways by just doing things
because I'm bored but not bored
I'm not expressing this very well
I think that this is a really interesting problem
perhaps the hard sciences don't really understand
that they are responsible for
because the question about how life
emerged and how intelligence emerged
and consciousness and free will
they're all ultimately boiling down
to some of the same mechanics I think
my feeling is that they are
the same problem again and again and again
the transition from a
you know a boring world
or a world in which there is no selection
so I wonder if free will has something to do
with selection and models
that you're generating in the brain
and also your amount of memory
and working memory have available
to generate counterfactuals
the decision making process
is a kind of selection
that could be just
yet another manifestation
of the selection mechanism
that's pervasive throughout the universe
that's fascinating to think about
there's not some kind of fundamental
it's own thing or something like that
that is just yet another example of selection
yeah
and in the universe that's intrinsically open
you want to do that because you generate novelty
you mentioned something about
do cellular automata
exist outside the human mind
in our little offline conversation
why is that an interesting question
so cellular automata
complexity
what's the relationship between
complexity and the human mind
and trees falling in the forest
infrastructure
so the CA
so when John Von Neumann and Conway
and Feynman were doing CA
they were doing on paper
just drawing them on paper
how awesome is that
that they were doing cellular automata on paper
and then they were doing a computer
that takes forever to print out
anything and program
people are not with the tiktok kids
these days with the tiktok
don't understand how amazing it is
to just play with cellular automata
arbitrarily changing the rules
as you want to the initial conditions
and see the beautiful patterns
emerge, sing with fractals
you've just given me a brilliant idea
I wonder if there's a tiktok account
that's just dedicated to putting out CA rules
and if it isn't we should make one
100%
millions of views
millions, yes, no
it'll get dozens
so look
CA, I love CA's
yeah, no
we just have to make one
I actually a few years ago
I made some robots that talked to each other
chemical robots that played the game of hex
invented by John Nash
by doing chemistry
and they communicated by Twitter
which experiments they were doing
they had a look up table of experiments
and robot one said I'm doing experiment 10
the other robot said okay I'll do experiment one then
and they communicated
by Twitter and then publicly or DMs
can you maybe
quickly explain what the game of hex is
so it's basically a hexagonal board
and you try and basically
you color each element
on the board at each hexagon
and you try and get from one side to the other
and the other one tries to block you
so what are the robots
it's a chemical
so the two robots
were doing dichemistry so making RGB
red, green, blue, red, green, blue
and they could just choose from experiments
to do red, green, blue
initially I said to my group
we need to make two chemical robots that play chess
and my group were like
that's too hard, no, go away
but anyways we had the robot
by the way
people listening to this should probably know
that Lee Cronin
is an amazing group
of brilliant people
he's exceptionally well published
he's written a huge number of amazing
papers whenever
he calls himself
stupid and is a sign of
humility and I deeply respect that
and appreciate it so people listening
to this should know this is
a world-class scientist who doesn't take himself
seriously which I really appreciate
and love anywho
talking about serious science
we're back to
your group
your idea of chemical robots
playing chess
via
dyes
so you went to a simpler game of Hex
so what else?
the team that did it were brilliant
I think they still have PTSD
from doing it because I said this is a workshop
what I'd often do is I have
about 60 people on my team
and occasionally before lockdown I would say
I'm a bit bored we're going to have a workshop
on something who wants to come
and about 20 people turn up to my office
and I say we're going to do this mad thing
and then it would just self-organise
and some of them would say no I'm not doing this
and then you get left with
the happy dozen and what we did
is we built this robot and doing
dichemistry is really easy you can just take two molecules
react them together and change colour
and what I wanted to do is have a palette
of different molecules you can react
commentorily and get different colours
so you've got two robots and I went wouldn't it be cool
if the robots basically shared
the same list of reactions
to do and they said
then you could do a multi-core
chemistry
you could have two chemical reactions going on at once
and they could basically outsource the problem
but they're sharing the same tape
exactly so robot one would say
I'm going to do experiment one and the other robot
says I'll do experiment 100 and then they
could cross it off but I wanted to make it
that's brilliant by the way
that is genius
I wanted to make it groovier and I said
let's have them competing
so they're playing a game of Hex
and so when the robot does an experiment
and the more blue
the dye the more it gets
the higher chance it gets
to make the move it wants on the Hex board
so if it gets a red colour
it gets down weighted in the other robot
and so what the robots could do is they play
each player move
and because the fitness function or the
optimisation function was to make the colour blue
they started to invent
um
reactions we weren't on the list
and they did this by not cleaning
because we made cleaning optional
so when one robot realised if it didn't clean its pipe
so it could get blue more quickly
and the other robot realised that so it was like getting dirty
as well and they
I didn't understand the consequences
of superintelligence
that was the game
communicating through Twitter though
they were doing it through Twitter and Twitter bland them a couple of times
I said come on you've got a couple of robots doing chemistry
it's really cool to stop banning them
but in the end they had we had to take them off Twitter
and they just communicated via server
because it was just there were people saying
you can still find it cronin lab one
and cronin lab two on Twitter and it was like
make move wait you know
mix A and B wait 10 seconds
answer blue you know
I really find it
super compelling that
you would have a chemical entity
that's communicating with the world
that was one of the things I want to do in my origin of life reaction
is basically
have a
have a reactor
that's basically just randomly enumerating
through chemical space and have some kind of cycle
and then
read out what the molecules reading out using a mass spectrometer
and then convert that to text
and publish it on Twitter
and then wait until it says I'm alive
I reckon
that Twitter account will get a lot of followers
and I'm still trying to convince my group
that we should just make an origin of life Twitter account
where it's going
and it's like hello testing
I'm here
well I'll share it I like it
I particularly enjoy this idea
of a
non-human entity
communicating with the world via
human design social network
it's quite a beautiful idea
how we were talking about
CAs existing outside of human mind
so I really admire Stephen Wolfram
I think he's a genius
clearly a genius
and trapped in is actually like a problem
with being so smart if you get trapped in your own
you know mind right
and I try to actually
I try to convince Stephen that assembly theory wasn't nonsense
he was like now it's just nonsense
I was a little bit sad by that
so nonsense applied even if it applied to the simple construct
of a one-dimensional
cellular automata for example
yeah but I mean actually maybe I'm doing myself
a bit too down
it was just as a theory was coming through
and I didn't really know how to explain it
but we are going to use assembly theory
in CAs in cellular automata
but I wanted to
what I was really curious about is why
people are marvel
I mean you marvel at CAs and they're complexity
and I said well hang on that complexity is baked in
because if you play the game of life
in a CAs
you have to run it on a computer
you have to do a number of operations
put in the boundary conditions
so is it surprising that you get this structure out
is it manufactured by the boundary conditions
and it is interesting
because I think
cellular automata running them
is teaching me something about
what real numbers are and aren't
and I haven't quite got there yet
I was playing on the aeroplane coming over
I just realized I have no idea what real numbers are really
and I was like well I do actually have some notion
of what real numbers are
and I think
thinking about real numbers as functions
rather than numbers is more
appropriate and then if you then apply that
to CAs
then you're saying well actually
why am I seeing this complexity
in this rule
is it
you've got this deterministic system
and yet you get this
incredible structure coming out
well isn't that what you'd get
with any real number
as you apply it as a function
and you're trying to read it
out to an arbitrary position
and I wonder if CAs are just helping me
well my misunderstanding
is CAs might be helping me understand them
in terms of real numbers I don't know what you think
well the function
but
the devil's in the function
like which is the function
that's generating your real
number
it seems like
it's very important
the specific algorithm of that function
because some lead to something super trivial
some lead to something that's all chaotic
and some lead to things that are
just
walk that fine line of complexity
in that structure
I think we agree so let's take it back a second
so take the logistic map or something
logistic equation
where you have this equation
which is
I don't know what's going to happen at M plus 1
but once you've done M plus 1 you know
full time you can't predict it
for me CAs and logistic equation
feel similar
and I think what's incredibly
interesting and I share
your
kind of wonder at running a CAs
but also I'm saying
well what is it about the boundary conditions
and the way I'm running that calculation
so in my group with my team
we actually made a chemical CAs
we actually made a physical grid
I haven't been able to publish this paper
it's been trapped in purgatory for a long time
you wrote up a paper on how to do
a chemical formulation of the game of life
we made a chemical computer
and little cells
with the BZ reactions
each cell would pulse on and off
we have little stirra bars
and we have little gates
and we actually played Conway's game of life
and we got structures in that
we got structures in that game
in the chemistry that you wouldn't expect
from the actual CAs
so that's kind of cool
because they're interacting
outside of the cell smile
so what's happening is you're getting annoyed
so the thing is
you've got this BZ reaction
it gives on off, on off, on off
but there's also a wake
and those wakes constructively interfere
and in such a non-trivial way
that's
non-deterministic
and in the system
gives very rich dynamics
and I was wondering if I could physically
make a chemical computer
with this CA
that gives me something different
I can't get
in a silicon representation
of a CA where all the states are clean
because you don't have the noise
trailing into the next round
you just have the state
so the paper in particular
it's just a beautiful idea
to construct the cellular automa
and the famous one of Game of Life
but it's also interesting
it's a really interesting
scientific question of whether some kind
of random perturbations
or some source of randomness
can
have a
significant
constructive effect
on the complexity of the system
and indeed, I mean whether it's random
or just non-deterministic
to make in that non-determinism
at the beginning
I'm trying to think
about what is the encoding space
encoding space is pretty big
we have
49 starots
49 cells
49 chem bits
all connected to one another
like an analog computer
but being read out discreetly
as the BZ reaction
so just to say the BZ reaction is a chemical oscillator
two Russians discovered it
Beluzov-Zaposkinsky
I think Beluzov first proposed it
and everyone said you're crazy
it breaks the second law
and Zabosinsky said no, it doesn't break the second law
it's consuming a fuel
and it's like
there's a lot of
chemistry hidden in the Russian literature actually
because
Russians just wrote it in Russian
they didn't publish any English-speaking journals
it's heartbreaking actually
it's not there, it's not lost
I'm sure we will find a way of translating it
silver lining
slash greater sadness of all of this
is there's probably ideas
in English speaking
there's ideas in certain disciplines
that
if discovered by other disciplines
would crack open
some of the biggest mysteries in those disciplines
like computer science
for example
is trying to solve
problems like nobody else has ever tried
to solve problems
as if it's not already been all addressed
in cognitive science and psychology
mathematics and physics
and just whatever you want
economics even
but if you look into that literature
you might be able to discover some beautiful ideas
obviously Russian
is an interesting case of that
because there's a loss in translation
but you said there's a source of
fuel, a source of energy
yeah, so the BZ reaction
you have an acid in there called
melonic acid and what happens is
it's basically like a battery
that powers it and it loses CO2
so decuboxlates, it's just a chemical reaction
what that means we have to do is continuously
feed or we just keep the BZ
reaction going in a long
enough time so it's
like it's reversible in time
but only like
but it's fascinating
the team that did it
I'm really proud of their persistence
we made a chemical
computer
it can solve little problems, it can solve traveling
salesman problems actually
but like I say it's
but not any faster than the regular computer
is there something you could do?
maybe, I'm not sure
I think we can come up
with a way of solving problems
also really complex
hard ones
because it's an analog computer
and we can
it can energy minimize really quickly
it doesn't have to basically go through every element
in the matrix
flip it, it reads out
so we can actually do Monte Carlo
by just
shaking the box
it's literally a box shaker
you don't actually have to encode the shaking of the box
in a silicon memory and then just shuffle everything around
yeah and you can
it's natural so
it's an organic computer
so I was playing around with this
and I was kind of annoying some of my colleagues
wondering if we could get to chemical supremacy
like quantum supremacy
and I kind of calculated
how big the grid
has to be so we can actually start to solve problems
faster than a silicon computer
but I'm not willing to
to state how that is yet
because I'm probably wrong
it's not any top secret thing
I think I can make a chemical computer
that can solve optimization problems
faster than a silicon computer
that's fascinating
but then you're unsure how big that has to be
it might be a big box
hard to shake
it might be exactly a big box hard to shake
and basically a bit sloppy
did we answer the question
about do cellular time
exist outside the mind
we didn't but I would
posit that they don't
but I think minds can
well so the mind is fundamental
what's the why
well I mean sorry let's go the back
so as a physical phenomena
do CAs exist in physical reality
right I would say they probably
don't exist outside the human mind
but now we've constructed them they exist
in computer memories they exist in my lab
they exist on paper so
they emerge from the human mind
I'm just interested in
because Steven Wolfram likes CAs
a lot of people like CAs and likes to
think of them as minimal
computational elements
I'm just saying well do they exist
in reality or are they a representation
of a simple machine that's just very elegant
to implement
so there's a platonic question I guess
I mean it's um
there's initial conditions
there's a memory in the system
there's simple rules that
dictate the evolution of the system
so what exists
is the idea the rules the
yeah people are using CAs
as models for things in reality
to say hey look
you can do this thing in a CAs
and my
when I see this I'm say oh that's cool
but what does that tell me about reality
where's the CAs in space time
there's a mathematical object
so for people who don't know cellular automata
there's usually a grid
whether it's one dimensional, two dimensional
or three dimensional and it evolves
like you die or are born
if the neighbors
are alive or dead and
it turns out if you have
um
with certain kinds of initial conditions
and with certain kinds of very simple rules
you can create like
arbitrarily complex and beautiful systems
and to me
um you know
whether drugs are involved or not
I can sit back
for hours and enjoy the
the mystery of it
how such complexity can
emerge as it gives me
almost like you know people
talk about religious experiences
it gives me a sense
that you get to
have a glimpse
at the uh
origin of this whole thing
whatever is creating
this complexity
from such simplicity
is the very thing that
brought my mind to life
that's me the human
uh our
human civilization
and yes
those constructs are pretty
trivial they're
that's part of their magic is
even in this trivial
framework you could see
the emergence or especially
in this trivial framework you could see
the emergence of complexity from simplicity
I guess what Lee you're saying
is that
this is not
um
this is highly unlike
systems we see in the physical world
even though they probably carry some of the same
magic
mechanistically
I mean I'm saying that the
operating system that a CA has to
exist on is quite complex
and so I wonder
if you're getting the complexity out of the CA
from the boundary conditions the operating system
the underlying digital computer
oh wow so you those are some
strong words against CA's then
not again I mean I'm in love
with CA's as well I'm just saying
they aren't as trivial
as people think they are incredible
to get to that richness you
have to iterate billions of
times and you need
a display and you need
a math coprocessor and you
need a von Neumann machine
based on a Turing machine of
digital error correction and states
wow to think that
for the simplicity of a grid
you're basically saying a grid
is not simple yeah
it requires incredible
complexity to bring a grid to life
yeah
without them what is simple
that's all I wanted to say I agree with you
with a wonder of CA's I just think but remember
we take so much for granted
what the CA is resting on because von Neumann
and Feynman
weren't showing weren't seeing these
elaborate structures they could not get that far
yeah but that's the limitation of their mind
exactly the limitation of their pencil
but I think that's
the question is whether
the essential elements of
the cellular automata
is
is present
without all the complexities
required to build a computer
and my intuition the reason I
find it incredible is that
my intuition is yes it might look
different
there might not be a grid
like structure
but local interactions
operating under simple rules
and resulting in
multi-hierarchical
complex structures feels like
a thing that doesn't require a computer
I agree but coming back
to von Neumann and Feynman
and Wolfram
the non-trivial minds to create
those architectures and do it
to put on those state
transitions
and I think that's something that's really
incredibly interesting
that is understanding
how the human mind builds those
state transition machines
I could see how deeply in love
with the idea of memory you are
so it's like
how much of E equals MC
squared
is more than an equation
it has Albert Einstein
in it
you're saying like you can't just
say this is a
the equations of physics
are a really
good simple
capture of a physical
phenomena it is also
that equation has the
memory of the humans
absolutely
yeah
I don't, I don't know if you're implying this
I don't
that's a beautiful idea
but I don't know if I'm comfortable
with that sort of
diminishing the power of that equation
because it's built on the shoulders
it enhances it
that equation is the minimal compressed
representation of reality
we can use machine learning or
max-tech marks AI Feynman
to find lots of solutions for gravity
but isn't it wonderful that the laws that we do find
are the maximally compressed representations
but that representation
you can now give it as
I guess the universe has the memory of Einstein
with that representation
but then you can now give it as a gift for free
to other alien civilizations
now Einstein had to go through a lot of pain together
but it's low memory so I say that
physics and chemistry and biology are the same discipline
they're just physics
laws in physics there's no such thing as a law
in physics it's just low memory stuff
because you've got low memory stuff
things reoccur quickly
as you get building more memory
you get to chemistry so things become more contingent
when you get to biology
more contingent still and then technology
so the more memory you need
the more your laws are local
that's all I'm saying
the less memory the more the laws are universal
because they're not laws they are just low memory states
we have to talk about
a thing you've kind of mentioned already
a bunch of times
but doing computation
through chemistry
chemical based computation
I've seen you
refer to it as
in a sexy title of
Kemp
Utation
so what is computation
what is chemical based computation
okay so
Kemputation is a name
I gave to the process of
building a state machine
to make any molecule physically in the lab
and so as a chemist
chemists make molecules by hand
and
and they're quite hard
chemists have a lot of tacit knowledge
a lot of ambiguity
it's not possible to go uniform me to literature
and read a recipe to make a molecule
and then go and make it in the lab
every time
some recipes are better than others
but they all assume
some
knowledge
and it's not universal what that is
so it's carried from
from human to human
some of that implicit knowledge
and you're saying can we remove the human from the patient
can we like program
what by the way what is a state machine
so a state machine
is a
I suppose a
object either abstract or mechanical
where you can do
a unit operation
on it and flick it from one state to another
so a turnstile would be a good example
of a state machine
there's some kinds of states
and some kind of transitions between states
and it's
very formal in nature
in terms of like it's precise
you can mathematically precisely
describe a state machine
so I mean a very simple
Boolean gates
are a very good way of building
kind of logic based state machines
obviously a Turing machine
the concept of a Turing machine
where you have a tape and a reed head
and a series of rules
in a table and you would basically
look at what's on the tape
and if you're shifting the tape from left to right
and if you see a zero or one
you look in your lookup table and say
right I've seen a zero and a one
and then do
and then respond to that
so in the turnstile would be
is there a human being pushing
the turnstile in
direction clockwise
if yes I will open let them go
if it's anti-clockwise no
so yeah so a state machine has some labels
and a transition
diagram
you're looking to come up with
a chemical computer to form state machines
to create molecules
or
what's the chicken and the egg
so computation is not a chemical computer
because we talked a few moments about
actually doing computations with chemicals
what I'm now saying is I want to use state machines
to transform chemicals
and so build
chemicals programmatically
I mean I get in trouble saying this
I said to my group
I said look we should make the crack bot
in the crack robot
the robot that makes crack bot
oh crack bot
the robot that makes crack but maybe
we should scrub this from
or
so maybe you can educate me on
breaking bad with like
math right yeah so in breaking bad
you want to make
basically some kind of
mix of ex machina
and breaking bad
no I don't I don't record I don't
but you don't I said that's what I'm
going to do it once you release the papers
I shave my head
and I'm going to
live a life of crime anyway I'm sorry
no no so
let's go back to so indeed
it is about making drugs but importantly
making important drugs
all drugs
matter yeah but let's go back
so the basic thesis
is chemistry is very analog
there is no state machine
and I wandered into the
through the paper walls in the
Japanese house a few years ago and said
hey organic chemist why are you
doing this analog they said well
chemistry is really hard you can't
automate it it's impossible
I said but is it impossible
I said yeah and they said you know
I got the impression they were saying it's magic
and so when people tell me things are magic
it's like no
they can't be magic right so let's break this down
and so what I did is I went
to my group one day
about eight years ago and said
hey guys I've written this new programming language for you
and so everything is
clear and you know you have to
you're not allowed to just wander around the lab
willy-nilly you have to pick up things in order
go to the balance of the right time
and all this stuff and they looked at me as if I
was insane and basically kicked me out of the lab
and said no don't do that we're not doing that
and I said okay so I went back the next day
and said
I'm going to find some money so we can make
cool robots do chemical reactions and everyone
went that's cool and so
in that process
the first to try to convert the humans to
become robots and next
you could you agree you might as well just create the robots
yes but so in that
the formalization process yeah so what I did I said
look chemical to make a molecule
you need to do four things abstractly I want to
make a chemical Turing machine because
a Turing machine you think about this imagine a
Turing machine Turing machine is the ultimate
abstraction
of a computation because
it's been shown by Turing
and others that basically a universal
Turing machine should be able to do all
computations that you can imagine it's like
wow why don't I think of a Turing
machine for chemistry let's think of a magic robot
that can make any molecule
let's think about that for a second
okay great how do we then implement it
and I think it's right so what is the abstraction
so to make
any molecule you have to do a reaction
so you have to put reagents together do a reaction
in a flask typically
then you're after the reaction you have to stop
the reactions you do what's called a workup
so whatever call it down
add some liquid to it extract
so then after you do a workup you separate
so you then remove the molecules separate
them all out and then the final step is purification
so reaction
at workup separate purify
so this is basically like
exactly like a Turing
machine where you have your tape
you have your tape head you have some rules
then you run it so I thought cool
I went to all the chemists and said look
chemistry isn't that hard
reaction workup
separation purification do that in cycles
forever for any molecule all the chemistry
done
and they said chemistry is that hard
I said but just in principle
and I got a few very enlightened people
to say yeah okay in principle
but it ain't going to work
and this was in about 2013-2014
and I
I found myself going to an architecture
conference almost by accident it's like
why am I at this random conference on architecture
and that was because I published a paper on
inorganic architecture
and they said come to architecture conference
but the inorganic architecture was about nano architecture
it's not and I went okay
and then I found these guys at the conference 3D printing
ping pong balls and shapes
and this is 3D printing was cool and I was like
this is ridiculous why are you 3D printing ping pong balls
and I gave them a whole load of abuse
like I normally do when I first meet people
how to win friends and influence people
and then I was like oh my god you guys are geniuses
and so I got from
they were a bit confused because I was calling them idiots
and then calling them geniuses it's like
will you come to my lab and we're going to build a robot
to do chemistry with a 3D printer
and they said oh that's cool alright
so I had them come to the lab and we started to 3D
print test tubes so you imagine
you know 3D print a bottle and then
and then used the same
gantry to basically rather than
to squirt out plastic out of a nozzle
have a little syringe and chuck chemicals in
so we had the 3D printer
because simultaneously print the test tube
and then put chemicals into the test tube
and then
well it says really end to end
because they've got g-code to do it all
and I was like that's cool
so I got my group doing this and I developed it a bit
and I realized that we could
take those unit operations
and we built a whole bunch of pumps and valves
and I realized that I could basically
take the literature
and I made the first version of the computer
in 2016-17
I made some architectural decisions
so I designed the pumps and valves in my group
I did all the electronics in my group they were brilliant
I
cannot pay tribute to my group enough in doing this
they were just brilliant and there were some poor souls there
that said Lee
why are you making this design electronics
I'm like well because I don't understand it
they're like so you're making this design stuff
because you don't understand it's like yeah
it's like but can we not just buy some
I said well we can but then I don't understand
how to you know
what bus they're going to use and there's serial ports
and all this stuff I just wanted
and I made I came up with a decision
to design a bunch of pumps and valves
and use power of the ethernet
so I got one cable for power and data
plug them all in
plug them all into a router
and then I made the state machine
and there was a couple of cool things I did
all they did actually
we got the abstraction
so reaction
work up separation
purification
I made the decision to do it in batch
now it's in batch
all chemistry had been digitized
before apparently once it's been done
but everyone been doing it in flow
and flow is continuous
and there are infinities everywhere and you have to just
and I realized
that I could actually make a state machine where I basically
put stuff in
the reactor
turn it from one state to another state
stop it and just read it out
and I was kind of bitching
the engineer saying you have it easy
you don't have to clean out the electrons
electrons don't leave a big mess
they leave some EM waste
but in my state machine I built in cleaning
so it's like we do all operation
and then it cleans the backbone and then can do it again
so what we managed to do over a couple of years
is develop the hardware
develop the state machine
and we encoded three molecules
the first three we did nitole
sleeping drug refinimide anti-seizure and viagra
and I could make jokes
with the paper it's a hard problem blah blah blah
that's very good
and then in the next one
what we did said okay
my poor organic chemist said look Lee
we've worked with you this long
we've made a robot that looks like it's going to take
our jobs away
and not just take our jobs away
what we love in the lab
but now we have to become programmers
but we're not even good programmers we just have to spend ages
writing lines of code
that are boring and it's not as elegant
I went you're right
so then but I knew
because I had this abstraction
and I knew that there was language
I could suddenly develop a state machine
that would interpret the language which was lossy and ambiguous
and populate my abstraction
so I built a chemical programming language
that is actually going to be recursively innumerable
it's going to be a true and complete language
actually which is kind of cool
which means it's for me verifiable
so where we are now
is we can now read the literature
using a bit of natural language processing
it's not the best, many other groups have done better job
but we can use that language reading
to populate the state machine
and basically add, subtract
we've got about a number of primitives
that we
basically
program loops that we dovetail together
and we can make any molecule with it
okay so that's the kind of
program synthesis so you start
like literally you're talking about like a paper
like a scientific paper
that's being read
so natural language processing
extracting
some kind of details
about chemical reactions
and the chemical
molecules and compounds
involved
and then that's
in GPT
terms serves as a prompt
for the program synthesis
that's kind of trivial right now
there you have a bunch of different like for loops and so on
that creates a program
in this chemical language
that can then be interpreted
by the chemical computer
the computer
yeah, computer, that works
yeah
everything sounds better in your
British accent but I love it
so into the computer and that's able to then
basically be a 3D printer
for these molecules
yeah I wouldn't call it a 3D printer
it's a universal chemical reaction system
because 3D printing gives the wrong impression
but yeah and it purifies
and the nice thing is that that code
now that we call it the
KIDL code
is really interesting because
now, so
what is computation?
Computation is what
computing is to mathematics I think
Computation is the process
of taking chemical code
and some input reagents
making the molecule
reproducibly every time
without fail. What is computation?
It's the process of using a program
to take some input conditions
and give you an output
same every time
reliably
so the problem is
now maybe you can push back and correct me on this
so I know biology is messy
my question is how
messy is chemistry so the
if we use the analogy of a computer
it's easier to make
computation
in a computer very
precise that it's repeatable
it makes errors almost
never. If it does the
exact same way over and over and over and over
what about chemistry? Is there messiness
in the whole thing? Can that be
somehow leveraged? Can that be controlled?
Can that be removed? Do we want to remove it
from the system? Oh yes and no
right, is there messiness?
There is
messiness because chemistry is like
you're doing reactions
on billions of molecules
and they don't always work but you've got purification
there and so what we found
is at the beginning everyone said it can't work
it's going to be too messy, it will just
fail and I said but
you managed to get chemistry to work in the lab, are you magic?
Are you doing something? So I would say
now go back to the first
ever computer or the ENIAC
5 million soldered joints
400,000
that are exploding all the time. Was that?
Would you have gone, okay
that's messy.
Have we got the equivalent of the ENIAC
in my lab?
We've got 15 computers in the lab now
and are they unreliable?
Yeah they fall apart here and there
but are they getting better really quickly?
Yeah. Are they now able to
reliably make more? Are we at the point
in the lab where there are some molecules
we would rather make on the computer
than have a human being make? Yeah we've just
done, we've just made
an anti-influenza molecule
and some antivirals
six steps
on the computer that would take a human being
about one week
to make arbidol
of continuous labor
and all they do now is load up the reagents, press go button
and just go away and drink coffee. Wow
so this, I mean
and this is, you're saying this computer
is just the early days and so
like some of the criticism just have to do with the early
days and yes I would say
that something like this is
quite
impossible
so the fact that you're doing this
is incredible. Not impossible of course
but extremely difficult.
It did seem really difficult
and I do keep pinching myself when I go in the lab
and I was like is it working? Yeah
and it's not, you know, it does clog
it does stop. You've got to clean
this is great.
But it's getting more reliable
because I made some, we just made
design decisions and said we are not going to abandon
the abstraction. Think about it
if the von Neumann
implementation was abandoned
I mean think about what we do to
semiconductors to really constrain them
to what we do to silicon
in a fab lab
we take computation for granted
silicon is not in its natural state
we are doping the hell out of it.
It's incredible what they're able to accomplish
and achieve that reliability at the scale
they do. Like you said
that's after Moore's law what we have now
and
how it started
now we're here. We started at the bottom now we're here.
We only have 20 million molecules
say 20 million molecules in one database
maybe a few hundred million
in all the pharmaceutical companies
and those few hundred million molecules
are responsible for all the drugs
that we've had in humanity except
biologics for the last 50 years
now imagine what happens
when a drug goes out of print
goes out of prints because there's only
a finite number of manufacturing facilities in the world
that make these drugs.
This is a printing press
for chemistry.
And not only that we can protect the Kaidiel
so we can stop bad actors doing it
we can encrypt them
and we can give people life.
The Kaidiel is the name of the programming language
and the code we give the chemicals
so Kaidiel
as in
it's actually like an XML format
but I've now
taken it from script
to a fully
expressible programming language so we can do
dynamics and there's four loops in there
and conditional statements.
But the structure it started out as
like an XML
and now we also
the chemist doesn't need to program in Kaidiel
they can just go to the software and type in
add A to B reflux
and it just converts it to Kaidiel
and they have a linter to check it.
So how do you
you know not with ASCII
but because it's a Greek letter
how do you go with
how do you spell it just using the
English alphabet?
XDL or we use we put in Kaid.
And it was named by one of my students
and one of my postdocs many years ago
and I quite liked it.
It's important I think
when the team are contributing to such big ideas
because there are ideas as well
I try not to just rename
I didn't call it Cronin or anything that
because they keep saying you know
is it
the chemistry when they're putting stuff
in the computer one of my students said we are asking
now is it Cronin complete and I was like what does that mean
and said well can we make it on the damn
machine
and I was like oh is that a compliment
or a majority but they're like well
it might be both.
Yeah so you tweeted
quote why does chemistry
need a universal programming language
question mark
for all the reasons you can think of
reliability interoperability
collaboration
remove ambiguity
lower cost increase safety
open up discovery molecular customization
and publication
of executable chemical
code
which is fascinating by the way
just publish code
and
can you maybe
elaborate a little bit more about this
IDL what is the universal
language of chemistry look like
a Cronin complete
language.
It's a Turing complete language really
but so what it has it has a series
of operators in it
like add, heat,
stir
so there's a bunch of
just unit operations and all it is really
just
with chemical engineers when I talked about this
you've just rediscovered chemical
engineering and I said well
yeah I know
that's trivial
well yes it is trivial and that's why
it's good because not only
if we rediscover chemical engineering we've made
it implementable on the universal hardware
that doesn't cost very much money
and so the KIDL
has a series of statements like define the
reactor
the reagents
so they're all labels so you assign
them and what I
also implemented at the beginning is
because I give all the hardware
IP address you put it on a graph
and so what it does is like
the graph is equivalent to the
processor firmware
the processor code so when you take
your KIDL and you go to run it
on your computer you can run it on any
compatible hardware in any configuration
what does your graph look like as long as I
can solve the problem on the graph
with these unit operations you have the resources
available it compiles
aha
oh
we can carry on for years
but it is really it's compilation
and what it now does
is it says okay the problem
we have before is it was possible
to do robotics for
chemistry but the robots were really expensive
they were unique
they were vendor locked
so what we want to do is to make sure that every
chemist in the world can get access to
machinery like this at
virtually no cost because it makes it safer
it makes it more reliable
and then if you go to the literature
and you find a molecule that could potentially cure cancer
and let's say the molecule
that could potentially cure cancer takes you three years
to repeat
and maybe a student
finishes their PhD in the time and they never get it
back
so it's really hard to
to kind of get all the way to that molecule
and it limits the ability of humanity to build on it
if they just download the code
and can execute it
it turns I would say the electronic
laboratory notebook in chemistry
is a data symmetry
because no one will ever
reproduce it but now the data symmetry
is a Jupiter notebook and you can just
execute it and people can play with it
the access to it
the magnitude is increased
we'll talk about
so as with all technologies
I think there's way more exciting possibilities
but there are also terrifying possibilities
and we'll talk about all of them
but let me just kind of
linger on the machine learning side of this
so you're describing programming
but
it's a language I don't know if you've
heard about Open AI Codex which is
I'm playing with it
of course you are
you really are Rick
and Rick and Morty this is great
okay
except philosophically deep
I mean he is I guess kind of philosophically deep too
so for people who don't know
GPT, GPT-3
it's a language model
that can do natural language generation
so you can give it a prompt and it can
complete the rest of it
but it turns out that that kind of prompt
it's not just completes the rest of it
it's generating
like novel sounding
text and then you can apply that
to generation of other kinds of stuff
so these kinds of
transformer based language models
are really good
at forming
deep representations
of a particular space
like a medium
like language so you can then apply
the specific subset of language like
programming so you can have it
learn the representation
of the Python programming language
and use it to then generate
syntactically and semantically
correct
programs so you can start
to make progress on one of the hardest problems
in computer science which is
program synthesis how do you write
programs that accomplish different tasks
so what
OpenAI Codex does
is it to generate those
programs based on a
prompt of some kind usually
you can do a natural language prompt
so basically as you do when you program
you write some
comment which serves the basic
documentation of the inputs and
outputs and the function of the particular
set of coding and it's able to generate that
the point being is you can generate
programs
using machine learning using neural
networks
those programs operate
on the boring old
computer
can you generate programs that operate
this guy be a clever version of programs
for this but can you write programs
that operate on a
computer yep there's
actually software out there right now we can go and do it
really
it's a heuristic it's rule based
but we have
what we've done
inspired by Codex
actually is over the
summer I ran a little workshop
some of my groups got this inspired idea that
we should get a load of
students and ask them
to manually collect data to label
chemical procedures
into QIDL
and
we have a called synth reader
so there's a bunch of people doing this
right now but they're doing it
without abstraction
and because we have an abstraction
that's implementable in the hardware
we've developed
basically a chemical
log of Codex
we say sorry to interrupt
we say abstraction in the hardware
what do you mean so right now a lot of people doing
machine learning and reading chemistry
and just and saying oh
you've got all these operations ad shake whatever
he but they but because they
don't have a uniform
I mean it's a couple of groups doing it and competitors
actually they're good very good
but
they can't run that code
automatically they are
losing
meaning
and with and the really important
thing that you have to do is generate context
and so what we've learned
to do with our abstraction is make sure
we can pull the context out of the text
and so
can we take
a chemical procedure and read it and generate
our executable code yes
what's the hardest part about that whole
pipeline from the initial text interpreting
the initial text of a paper
extracting the meaningful
context and the meaningful chemical
information to then generating
the program to then
running that program in the hardware
what's the hardest part
about that pipeline as we look
towards a universal touring computer
so the hardest
the hardest thing with the
the pipeline is that
the software
the model gets confused
between some
meanings right so if
you know chemists are very good at inventing words
that aren't broken down so
I would the classic word
that you would use for boiling something is called reflux
so reflux is
you would have a solvent in the
round bottom flask at reflux it would be boiling
going up the reflux condenser and coming down
but that term
reflux to reflux could be
changed you know to people
often make up words
new words and the
and then the software can fall over
but what we've been able to do is a bit
like in python or any
programming language is identify
when things aren't matched so
you present the code and you say this isn't matched
you may want to think about this and then the user
goes and says oh I mean reflux and
just ticks a box and collects it so
what the codex or the
chemics does
in this case is it just
it suggests the
first go and then the chemist
goes in and corrects it and I really want the chemist
to correct it because
it's not safe
I believe for to allow
AI to just read literature
and generate code at this stage
because now you're having actual
by the way chemics nice
nice name
so you are
unlike
which is fascinating
we live in a fascinating moment
in history but yes you're
literally connecting
AI
to some physical
and like
it's building something in the physical realm
especially in the space of
chemistry
that operates
sort of
invisibly
I would say that's right
and it's really important to understand
those labeling schemes
and one of the things I was never
I was always worried about the beginning that
the abstraction was going to fall over
and the way we did it was just by
brute force to start with we just kept reading
the literature and saying is there anything new can we add a new rule in
and actually our QIDL language
expand exploded
there was so many extra
things we had to keep adding and then I realized
the primitives still were maintained
I could break them down again
so we get it's pretty good
I mean there are problems there are problems of
interpreting any big sentence and turning it into
an actionable code and the codex
is not without its problems you can
crash it quite easily right you can generate nonsense
but boy it's interesting
I would love to learn
to program now using codex
right just
hacking around right and I wonder if chemistry in the future
will learn to
do chemistry
by just hacking around with the system
writing in different things because the key thing
that we're doing with chemistry is that where
a lot of mathematical chemistry went wrong is people
and I think
Wolfram does this in Mathematica
he assumes
that chemistry is a reaction where atom A
or molecule A reacts with molecule B
to give molecule C that's not what chemistry is
chemistry is
take some molecule
take a liquid or a solid
mix it up and heat it
and then extract it
so the programming language is
actually with respect to the process
operations
and if you flick in process space
not in chemical graph space
you unlock everything
because there's only a finite number of processes
you need to do in chemistry
and that's reassuring
and so we're in the middle of it
it's really exciting
it's not the be all
and there is errors that can creep in
one day we might be able to do it
without human interaction you simulate it
and you'll know enough about the simulation
that will
the lab won't catch fire
but there are so many safety issues right now
that we've got to really be very careful
protecting the user, protecting
the environment, protecting misuse
there's lots to discuss
if you want to go down that route because it's very
interesting you don't want
novachocks being made
or explosives
being made or recreational drugs
being made but how do you stop
a molecular biologist making
a drug that's going to be important
for them looking at their particular
assay
on a bad actor trying to make
methamphetamine
I saw how you looked at me when you said bad actor
but that's exactly what I'm going to do
I'm trying to get the details of this so I can be first
don't worry we can protect you from yourself
okay
I'm not sure that's true
but that statement gives me hope
does this ultimately
excite you about the future
or does it terrify you
so let's
we mentioned that time is fundamental
it seems like
you're at the cutting edge
of progress that will have to happen
that will happen
that there's no stopping it
as we've been talking about
I see obviously a huge number of exciting possibilities
so
whenever you automate
these kinds of things
just the world opens up
it's like programming itself
and the computer, a regular computer
has
created innumerable applications
it made the world
better in so many dimensions
and it created of course a lot of negative things
that we for some reason like
to focus on using
that very technology to tweet about it
but
I think it made a much better world
but it created a lot of new dangers
so
maybe you can speak to
when you have
when you kind of
stand at the
end of the road for
building a really solid
reliable universal computer
what are the possibilities
that are positive
what are the possibilities that are negative
what is the chance of the negative
there's a really good question
so many positive things from drug discovery
from supply chain
stress
for basically enabling chemists to
build more productive in the lab
the computer is not going to replace the chemist
there's going to be a Moore's law of molecules
there's going to be so many more molecules we can design
so many more diseases we can cure
so chemists in the lab as researchers
that's better for science
so they can build a bunch of
like they could do science at a much more
accelerated pace so it's not just the development
of drugs it's actually like doing
the basic understanding of the science of drugs
and the personalization the cost of drugs right now
we're all living longer
we're all having more and more
we know more about our genomic development
we know about our predetermination
and we might be able to
one dream I've got is like imagine
you can work at your genome
a system tells you you're going to get cancer
in seven years time
you have your personal computer that cooks
up the right molecule just for you
to cure it right that's a really positive
idea the other thing is
is when drugs
so right now I think it is absolutely outrageous
that not all
of humanity has access to
medicine and I think
the computer might be able to change that
fundamentally because it will disrupt the way
things are manufactured so let's
stop thinking about manufacturing in different
factories let's say that computers
clinical grade computers
or drug grade computers will be
in facilities all around the world
and they can make
things on demand as a function
of the cost you know maybe people won't be able
to afford the latest and greatest patent
but maybe they'll be able to get the next
best thing and will basically
democratize and make
available drugs to everybody
that they need you know and you know
there's lots of really
interesting things there so I think that's
going to happen I think
that now let's take
the negative before
we do that let's imagine what happened
it would go back to a really tragic accident
a few years ago well not an accident
an act of murder by that pilot
on the I think it was Eurowings
or Swiss Wings but what he did is
the plane took off
he waited till his pilot went to the toilet
he was a copilot he locked the door
and then set the autopilot
the above the
out so he set the altimeter
or the descend height to zero
so the computer
just took the plane into the out
now
I mean that was such a tragedy
that obviously the guy was mentally ill
but it wasn't just a tragedy for him
it was for all the people on board
but what if and I was inspired by this
and I thinking what can I do to do
to anticipate
problems like this in the computer
had the software
or Boeing and Airbus will be thinking
oh maybe I can give the computer
a bit more situational awareness so whenever
someone tries to drop the height of the plane
and it knows it's above the out so just say
oh no computer says no we're not letting you do that
of course he would have
been able to find another way maybe fly it
until it runs out of fuel or something but you know
keep anticipating all the
large number of trajectories that can go
negative all those kinds of running into the Alps
and try to
at least make it easy
for the engineers to build
systems that are protecting us that
and let's just think
what in the computer world right now are
KIDLs let's just not think about what I'm doing
right now is it's completely open
everyone's going to know KIDLs and be playing with them
making them more easier and easier and easier
but what we're going to start to do
it makes sense to
encrypt
the KIDLs in such a way
let's say you work for a pharmaceutical company
and you have a license to make given molecule
well you get issued with a license
by the FDA or your local authority
and they'll say right your license to do it
here it is it's encrypted and the KIDL gets run
so you have a license for that instance
of use easy to do
computer science has already solved the problem
so the fact that we all trust online
banking right
the right now then we can secure it
I'm 100% sure we can secure the
computer and because of the
way we have a many you know it's like the same
mapping
problem that you to actually reverse
engineer a KIDL will be as hard as
reverse engineering the encryption key
you know brute force
it will be cheaper
to just actually buy
the regulated medicine and actually people
aren't going to want to then make
their own fake pharmaceuticals
because it'll be so cheap to do it
will drop the cost of access to drugs
now what will happen
recreational drugs people start saying well
I want access to recreational drugs
well it's going to be up to
it's going to accelerate that social
discussion that's happening in the US
and Canada and the UK everywhere right
cause cost goes down and access
access goes up
given cannabis THC to some people
got epilepsy isn't literally
forgive the term and no brainer
because these poor people go from seizures
like every day to maybe seizures just once
every few months
that's an interesting idea to try to minimize
the chance that it can get into
hands of individuals
like terrorists
or people that want to do harm
now with that kind
of thing you're putting a lot of power
in the hands of governments
in the hands of institutions and so then
emerge the kind of
natural criticism you might have of governments
that can sometimes use these
for ill use them as
weapons of war not weapon
not tools of
betterment so
and sometimes
not just war against other nations
but war against its own people
as it has been done throughout history
well I'm thinking
so there's another way of doing it a decentralized
peer-to-peer version
where and what you have to do
I'm not saying you should adopt a blockchain
but there is a way of maybe taking KyDLs
and put them in blockchain here's an idea
let's just say the way we do it in my lab right now
is we go to the literature
we take a recipe to make a molecule
though that's a KyDL
and diligently make it in the robot
and validate it
so we that I would call mining
proof of work, proof of synthesis
right?
proof of synthesis
yeah yeah but this is cool because
suddenly when you do it when you actually synthesize it
you can get the analytical data but there's also a fingerprint
in there of the impurities that get carried across
because you can never make one something
100% pure that fingerprint
will allow you to secure your KyDL
that's what you do is encrypt those two things
so suddenly you can have people out there mining
and what you could do perhaps
is do the type of thing
we need to basically
look at the way that contact tracing
should have been done in COVID
where people are given the information
so you have just been in contact with someone
COVID you choose
I'm not telling you to stay at home you choose
right? so now if we could imagine
a similar thing like you know
you have got access to these chemicals
they will have these effects you choose
and publicize it
or maybe it's out somewhere I don't know
I'm not a policy maker on this
and what my job here is to
not just make the technology possible
but to have as open as a discussion
as possible with people to say hey
can we stop childhood mortality
with this technology and do those
benefits outweigh
the one off where people might use it
for terrorism or people might use it
for recreational drugs
Chemify which is the name of the entity
that will make this happen
I think we have some social responsibilities
as an entity to make sure that we're not
enabling people to manufacture
personal drugs weapons at will
and what we have to do is have a discussion
with society with the people that invest
in this with people that are going to pay
for this to say do you want to live longer
and do you want to be healthier
and are you willing to accept some of the risks
and I think that's a discussion to have
so by the way when you say personal drugs
do you mean the illegal ones
or do you have a concern of
just putting the manufacture
of any kind of
legal drugs in the hands
of regular people
because they might like dose
matters they might take way too much
I mean I would say to be honest
the chances of computers being
well should always never
so the fact I can now say this
means it's totally going to come true right
I'm going to do it
I cannot imagine that computers will be
in people's houses anytime soon
but they might be at the local pharmacy
got it right and they
if you've got a drug manufacturing facility
in every town then you just
go and they give you a prescription and they do it in such
a way they format it so that you don't have
to take ten pills every day
you get one manufactured
for you that has all the materials you need
and the right distribution got it
but you mentioned recreation drugs
and the reason I mentioned
because I know people are going to speak
up on this if the drug is legal
there's to me no reason
why you can't manufacture
I mean for recreation
what do you have against
fun Lee?
I have
I'm a chemistry professor in a university
who's an entrepreneur as well
I just think I need to be as responsible
as I can in the discussion
sure
so let me be the one that says
like there's nothing
to have said recreational drugs
and like terrorism in the same
sentence I think
let's make sure we draw a line
that there's real
dangers to the world of
terrorists of biowarfare
and then there's a little bit of weed
so I have
I mean I think it's up to the
society to
tell his governments what it wants
what's acceptable right and if it
become let's say that THC's
become
heavily acceptable
and that you can modify them
so let's say it's like blood type
there's a particular type of THC
that you tolerate better than I do
then why not
have a machine that makes the one you like
and then why not
it's the perfect brownie
and I think that that's fine
but I'm
we're so far away from that
I can barely get the thing to work in the lab
reliability and all this other stuff
but what I think is going to happen in the short term
it's going to turbo charge
molecular discovery
reliability and that will change the world
that's super exciting
you have a draft of a paper titled
autonomous intelligent exploration
discovery and optimization of nanomaterials
so we are
talking about automating engineering
of nanomaterials
how hard is this problem
and as we continue down this thread
of the positives
and the worrisome
what are the things we should be excited about
and what are the things we should be
terrified about and how do we minimize
the chance of
the terrifying consequences
so in this robot
the robot does all the heavy lifting
so the robot basically
is an embodied AI
I really like AI
in a domain specific way
one that I should say at this point
there was an attempt in the 60s
Joshua Leddenberg
and some really important people
that did this that made an AI
to try and guess if organic molecules
and a mass spectrometer were alien or not
yes
and they failed because they didn't have assembly theory
I see
wait what does assembly theory give you
about alien versus human life
well no it just tells you about unknown
the degree of unknowns you can finger print stuff
they weren't looking at
trying to basically just look at the corpus
of complex organic molecules
so when I was a bit down
about assembly theory because I couldn't
convince referees and couldn't convince
computational
people interested in computational complexity
I was really quite
depressed about it and I mean I've been working
with Sarah Walker's team
and I think
she also invented in assembly theory
in some way we can talk about it later
when I found the AI
not working for
the Dendral project
I suddenly realized I wasn't
totally insane
coming back to this nano robot
so what it does is basically
like a computer but now what it does
is it squirts a liquid
with gold in it in a test tube
and it adds
some
reducing agents so there's electrons to make the gold
turn into a nanoparticle
now when gold becomes a nanoparticle
there's a characteristic color, a plasmon
so it's a bit like if you look at the sheen
on the gold wedding ring or gold bar or something
those are the ways of conducting electrons
basically reflect light
what we did is we randomly
squirt the gold particle
and the reducing agent in and we measure the UV
we measure the color
and so what we do is we've got
the robot has a mind
so it has a mind where
in a simulation
it randomly generates nanoparticles
a plasmon, the color that comes out
randomly generates imagines in its head
it then, well the others, that's the imaginary
side of the robot and the physical side of the robot
it squirts in the chemicals
and looks at the color
and it uses a genetic algorithm
and it'll map a leap actually on it
and it goes around in cycles
and refines
the color to the objective
now we use two different points
we have an exploration
and an optimization
the exploration just says
just do random stuff
and see how many different things you can get
and when you get different things
try and optimize and make the peak sharper, sharper, sharper
and what it does
after a number of cycles
is it physically takes a sample
of the optimized nanomaterial
resets all the round bottom flasks
cleans them and puts the seed
physical seed back in
and what this robot is able to do
is search a space
for physical reactions
in just a thousand experiments in three days
and it makes
five generations of nanoparticles
which get nicer and nicer in terms of shape
and color and definition
and then at the end it outputs a kaideo code
that could then be
Wow, it's doing the search
for programs
in the physical space
so it's doing a kind of reinforcement learning
in the physical space
with the exploration and the optimization
that will work on any computer
or any qualified hardware
so now that's it, now that's a general piece of code
that can replicate
somewhat, maybe perfectly
what it created
that's amazing, that's incredible
but the nanoparticles themselves are done
the robot has all the thinking
so we don't try and imply any self-replication
or try and get the particles
to make themselves, although it would be cool to try
so well, there you go
those are famous last words
for human civilization
would be cool to try
so is it possible to create molecules
to start approaching
this question
that we started this conversation
which is the origin of life
to start to create molecules
that have life-like
qualities
so have the replication
start to create complex organisms
so we have done this with the oxides
I talked about earlier
the oxides and the rings and the bulls
and the problem is
what they do
they autocatalytically
enhance one another, so they would
I guess you would call itself replication
but because there's limited
function
and mutation
they're pretty dumb, so they don't do very much
so
I think the prospect
of us being able to engineer
a nano
a nanomaterial life form in the short term
like I said earlier
my aim is to do this, of course
on one hand I'm saying it's impossible
and on the other hand I'm saying I'm doing it
so wish is it Lee
I think we can do it, but only in the robot
so the causal chain that's going to allow it
is in the robot
these particles, if they do start to self-replicate
the system is going to be so fragile
that I don't think anything
dangerous will come out
it doesn't mean we shouldn't treat them
so
I don't want to scare people like gain of function
we're going to produce stuff that comes out
our number one kill switch is that
we always try to
search a space of
objects that
don't exist in the environment
so even if something got out it just
would die immediately, it's like making
a silicon life form or something
which is the opposite of
oftentimes gain of function research
just focused on how do you get
a dangerous thing
to be closer to something that works with humans
have it jump to humans
so that's the one good
mode to operate on
is always try to operate
on
chemical entities that are very different
than the kind of chemical environment
that humans operate in
and also, I mean I'll say something dramatic
which may not be
may not be true
so I should be careful
if let's say we did discover
a new living system
and it was made out of a shadow
biosphere
and we just released it in the environment, who cares
it's going to use different stuff
it'll just live
just live, yeah
I found one of my biggest fantasies
is actually is like a planet
there's basically half in the sun
it doesn't rotate, right
and you have two different origins
of life on that planet
and they don't share the same chemistry
and then the only way
time they recognize each other is when they become intelligent
they go, well what's that moving
I wonder
that's fascinating
so one fascinating thing to do
is exactly what you were saying
which is a life bomb
which is like
try to focus on
atmospheres or
chemical conditions of other planets
and try within
this kind of
exploration, optimization system
try to discover
life forms
that can work in those conditions
and then you send those life forms
over there and see what kind of stuff
they build up, like you can do like a large scale
it's kind of a safe
physical environment
to do large scale experiments
it's another planet
I'm going to say something quite contentious
Elon wants to go to Mars
but I would counter then say
is Elon just obsessed with getting
humanity off Earth
or what about just technology
so if we do technology
so Elon, I don't need to take a computer to Mars
because he needs to manufacture drugs on demand
because zero cost payload
and all that stuff is just code
or what we do is we actually say
hang on, it's quite hard for humans to survive on Mars
why don't we write a series
of origin life algorithms
where we embed our culture in it
it's a very ridley spot, Provenceus
which is a terrible film
by the way, but anyway
and dump it on Mars
and just terraform Mars
and what we do is we evolve life on Mars
that is suited to life on Mars
rather than brute forcing
human life on Mars
so one of the questions is
what is human culture, what are the things
you encode, some of it is knowledge
some of it is information
but the thing that Elon talks about
and the thing I think about
I think you think about as well
is some of the more unique aspects
of human
of what makes us human
which is
our particular kind of consciousness
so he talks about the flame
of human consciousness
that's one of the questions
can we
instill
consciousness into other beings
because that's a sad thought
that whatever
this thing inside
our minds that hopes and dreams
and fears and loves
can all die
Yeah, but I think you already know
the answer to that question
I have a robot lawnmower at home
my kids call it CC
called Cutter, it's a
Robomo and the way
it works, it has an electric field around the perimeter
and it just tell it
the area and it goes out
and goes from its base station
goes to the perimeter
detects perimeter and chooses a random angle
rotates around and goes on
but my kids call it
Cool Cutter, it's a she
I don't know why it's a she, they were like
quite young, they called it
I don't want to be sexist there, it could be a he but
they liked
they gendered the lawnmower
they gendered the lawnmower, why not
but I was thinking this lawnmower
if you apply integrated information
theory to lawnmower, lawnmower is conscious
now
integrated information theory
is that people say
it's a flawed way of measuring consciousness but I don't think it is
I think assembly theory actually measures
consciousness in the same way
consciousness is something that
is generated over a population of
objects of humans
consciousness didn't suddenly spring in
our consciousness is evolved together
the fact we're here and the robots we leave behind
they all have some of that
so we won't lose it all
sure consciousness requires
that we have many models being generated
it's not just one domain specific AI
I think the way it creates consciousness
I'm going to say unashainably the best way
to make a consciousness
is in a chemical system
because you just have access to many more states
and the problem right now we're making silicon consciousness
is you just don't have enough
states
so there are more possible states
there are more possible configurations possible in your brain
than there are atoms in the universe
and you can switch between them
you can't do that on a core I-10
it's got 10 billion, 12 billion, 14 billion transistors
but you can't
you can't reconfigure them as dynamically
well you've shared this intuition
a few times already that
the larger number of states
somehow correlates to greater
possibility of life
but
it's also possible the constraints
are essential here
I mean but coming back to the
you worry that something's lost I agree
but I think
that
we will get to an AGI
but I wonder if it's
it can't be separate from human
it can't be separate from human consciousness
because the causal chain that produced it came from humans
so the people
what I kind of try and suggest
heavily to people worry about
the existential threat of AI
saying
I mean you put it much more elegantly earlier
like we should worry about
dark algorithms written by human beings
on Twitter driving us insane
right?
and doing acting in odd ways
yeah I think intelligence
this is what I have been in eloquent
in trying to describe it
partially because
I try not to think
too deeply through this stuff
because then you become a philosopher
I still aspire to actually
do this stuff
but my sense is super intelligence
leads to
deep integration
into human society
so like intelligence is strongly correlated
like
intelligence
the way we conceive of intelligence
materializes as a
thing that becomes
a fun entity
to have at a party
with humans
it's a mix of wit, intelligence, humor
like intelligence like knowledge
ability to do reasoning
and so on but also
humor, emotional intelligence
ability to love
to dream
to share those dreams
to play the game
of human civilization
to push and pull the whole dance
of it, the whole dance of life
and I think that kind of
super intelligent being
is not the thing that
worries me, I think that ultimately
will enrich life
it's again the dumb algorithms
the dumb algorithms that scale
in the hands of people that are too
don't study history
that don't study human psychology and human nature
just applying too broadly
for selfish
near term interests
that's the biggest danger
I think it's not a new danger right
I now know
how I should use Twitter
and how I shouldn't use Twitter
I like to provoke people into thinking
I don't want to provoke people into
outrage, it's not fun, it's not a good thing
for humans to do right
and I think that when you get people into outrage
they take sides
and taking sides is really bad but I think
that we're all beginning to see this
and I think that actually I'm very optimistic
about how things will evolve
because you know
I wonder how much
humanity has Twitter and social media
taking out humanity because how many now
I mean so the good thing
about Twitter is it gives power
so it gives voice to minorities
right and that's good
in some degree
but I wonder how much
voice does it give to
all sorts of other
problems that don't need
this emerge
by the way when you say minorities I think
or at least
to agree with you what I would say
minorities broadly defined
in these small groups
of people that
it magnifies
the concerns of the small
versus the big
that is good to some degree
but I think
I mean I have to be careful because I think
I have a very
I mean I think that the world isn't that broken
I think the world is pretty cool place
I think academia is really great
I think
climate change presents a really
interesting problem for humanity
that we will solve
I like how you said it's a pretty cool problem
for civilization it's a big one
there's a bunch of really
really big problems that
if solved can
significantly improve the quality of life
that ultimately is what we're trying to do
improve like how awesome life
is for the maximum number of people
and I think that
about the consciousness
I don't think the universe is doomed to
heat death right it's one of the
optimists that's why I want to kind of nudge you
into thinking that time is fundamental
because if time is fundamental then suddenly
you don't have to give it back
the universe just constructs stuff
and what we see around us in our construction
I know everyone's worried about how fragile civilization is
and I mean look at the fundamentals
we're good until
the sun expands right
we've got quite a lot of resource
on earth we're trying to be quite cooperative
humans are nice to each other
when they
are not under enormous stress
we're coming back to the consciousness thing
are we going to send
human beings to Mars or conscious robots
to Mars or are we going to send some
hybrid
and I don't know the answer to that question
right now I guess you know Elon's going to have
a pretty good go at getting there I'm not sure
whether
I have my doubts but I'm
not qualified
I'm sure people have their doubts that
computation works but I've
got it working
and most of the
cool technologies we have today
and take for granted
like the airplane
aforementioned airplane were things that
people doubted
majority of people doubted
before they came to life
and they come to life and speaking of hybrid
AI and humans
it's fascinating to think about all the different
ways that hybridization
that merger can happen
I mean we have currently have the smart
phone so there's already a hybrid but there's
all kinds of ways that hybrid
happens how we and other technology
play together like a computer
how that changes
the fabric of human civilization
is like wide open who knows
who knows if you
remove
if you remove cancer
if you remove major diseases
from
humanity
there's going to be a bunch of consequences
we're not anticipating
many of them positive
but many of them negative
many of them, most of them at least I hope
are weird and wonderful
and fun in ways that are
totally unexpected and we
sitting on a porch with a bottle of
Jack Daniels in a rock we'll say
kids these days don't appreciate
how hard we had it back in the day
I gotta ask you
speaking of nudging
you and Yosha Bach
nudge each other on Twitter
quite a bit in wonderful
intellectual debates
and of course for people who don't know Yosha Bach
he's a brilliant guy he's been on the podcast
a couple times
you tweeted
he tweeted
Yosha Bach everyone should follow him as well
should definitely follow Mr. Lee Cronin
Dr. Lee Cronin
he tweeted dinner with
Lee Cronin we discussed
that while we can translate every working
model of existence into a touring
machine the structure
of the universe might be given by wakes
of nonexistence in a pattern generated
by all possible
automata which exist by
default
and then he followed on saying
face to face is the best
so the dinner was
face to face what is Yosha talking about
in wakes
quote wakes of nonexistence
in a pattern
generated by all possible
automata which exist
by default
so automata
exist by default apparently
and then there's wakes of nonexistence
what the hell is nonexistence
in the universe that's
that's
and also in another conversation
you tweeted
it's state machines all the way
down which presumably
is the origin story of this discussion
and then Yosha said
again
nudging
nudging slash trolling
Yosha said you've seen the light
welcome friend
many foundational physicists effectively
believe in some form of hypercomputation
Lee is coming
around to this idea
and then you said
I think there are notable differences
first I think the universe does not have
to be a computer second
I want to understand how the universe
emerges constructors that build computers
and third is that there is
something below church
touring
okay
what the heck is this dinner
conversation about
maybe put another way
maybe zooming out a little bit
interesting agreements and disagreements between
you and Yosha Bach
that can elucidate
some of the other topics we've been talking about
yeah so Yosha is an
incredible mind and he has
he's so well read
and
uses language really elegantly
it bamboozles me at times so
I'm
so often I'm using I'm describing concepts
in a way that
I built from the ground up
and so we misunderstand each other a lot
and he's floating in the clouds
something like not quite
but I think so this concept of a
Turing machine so a Turing machine
Turing machines I would argue
and I think this is not
the Turing machine the universe
is not a Turing machine
biology is not even a Turing machine
and because Turing machines don't evolve
there is this problem
that people see Turing machines everywhere
but isn't it interesting the universe gave rise to
biology that gave rise to intelligence
that gave rise to Alan Turing
who invented the abstraction of the Turing machine
and allowed us to digitize
and
so I've been looking for the mystery
at the origin of life the origin of intelligence
and the origin of this and I
when I discussed with Yasha I think
Yosha he was saying well
the universe of course the universe is a Turing machine
of course there's a hyper computer there
and I think we got kind of
trapped in our words and terms
because of course it's possible
for a Turing machine or computers to exist
in the universe we have them
but what I'm trying to understand
is where did the transition of continuous
to discrete occur
and this is because of my
my general foolishness of understanding
the continuous
but I guess what I'm
trying to say is
there were constructors before there were
abstractors because
how did the universe abstract
itself into existence
and it goes back to earlier saying
could the universe of intelligence have come first
what's a constructor what's an abstractor
so the abstractor is the ability
of say of Alan Turing
and Goodall and
and Church
to think about
the mathematical universe
and to label things
and then from those labels to come up with a
set of axioms with those labels
and to basically understand
the universe mathematically and say
okay I can label things
but where did the labeler come from
where is the prime labeler
even if the universe
is not
a Turing computer
does that negate the possibility
that a Turing computer can simulate the universe
like just because
abstraction was formed at a later time
does that mean
that abstraction this is to our
cellular automata conversation
you were taking away some of the magic from the cellular automata
because very intelligent
biological systems came up with that cellular automata
well this is where the existence
is the default right is it does
the fact that we exist and we can
come up with a Turing machine does that mean the universe
has to be a Turing machine as well
but
can it be a Turing machine though that's a
there has to be in a canopy
can it be sure
I don't know
I don't understand if it has to be
or not can it be
but can the universe have
Turing machines in it sure
they do exist now
I'm wondering though
maybe this is
really hairy
is I think the universe maybe in the past
did not have the computational
power that it has now
this is almost like
law of physics
so the computational
power is not
you can get some free lunch
the fact that we now we sit here
in this period in time and we can imagine
all these robots and all these machines and we built them
and so we can easily
imagine going back in time that the universe was capable
of having them but I don't think it can
so the universe may have been a lot
dumber computationally
and I think that's why I don't want to
go back to the time discussion but I think it has some
relationship with it
the universe is basically smarter now than it used to be
and it's going to continue getting smart
smarter over time
because of novelty, generation
and the ability to create objects within objects
within objects
there's a perhaps this ground in physics
there's intuition of conservation
that stuff is conserved
like you're not you've always had
all everything
you're just rearranging books
on the bookshelf
through time
you're saying like new books are being written
which laws you want to break
the origin of the big bang
you had to break the second law
because we got order for free
what I'm telling you now is that the energy
isn't conserved in the universe
oh it's the second law, okay I got you
but not in a mad way
okay so
computation
potentially is not conserved
which is a fascinating idea
intelligence
is not conserved
complexity is not conserved
I suppose that's deeply
connected to
time being fundamental
the natural consequence of that
is if time is fundamental
and the universe is inflating
in time
if you like
then there are one or two conservation laws
that we need to have a look at
and I wonder
if that means the total energy of the universe
is actually increasing over time
and this may be completely ludicrous
but
we do have all this dark energy
we have some anomalies let's say
dark matter and dark energy
if we don't add them in
galaxy it's so dark matter I think
doesn't hold
you need to hold the galaxies together
and there's some other observational issues
dark energy just be time
so figuring out
what dark energy is might give us
some deep clues
about this
not just time but the consequences
of time
so it could be that
I'm not saying this perpetual motions allows
in this free lunch but I'm saying
if the universe is intrinsically
asymmetric
and it appears to be
and it's generating novelty
and it appears to
couldn't that just be mechanistically
how reality works
and therefore
I don't really like this idea
that the
so I want to live in a deterministic universe
that is undetermined
right?
the only way I can do that is if time is fundamental
because otherwise
all the rest of us is just sleight of hand
because the physicists will say
yes everything is deterministic
Newton, Newtonian mechanics
is deterministic, quantum mechanics
is deterministic, let's take the Everedian view
and then basically
we can just draw out this massive
universe branching but it closes again
we can get it all back and don't worry
your feeling of free will is effective
but what the physicists are actually saying
is the entire future is mapped out
and that is clearly
problematical
and clearly
because that's not so clear
it's just
problematic
because
that maybe is just the way it is
it's problematic to you
the creature along the timeline
I want to reduce the number of beliefs I need to understand the universe
so if time is fundamental
I don't need
to have magic order at the beginning
and I don't need a second law
but you do need the magical belief
that time is fundamental
I need the observation
that I'm seeing to be just
how it is all the way down
but the earth also looks flat
if you agree
with your observation
so we can't necessarily trust our observation
I know the earth isn't flat
because I can send the satellite into space
but now you're using the tools
the science and the technology
but I'm saying I'm going to do experiments
that start to show
I think that it's worth
so if you can't
so if I cannot do an experiment
or a thought experiment
that will test this assumption
then the assumption is without merit really
in the end
so that's a beautiful idea
you hold yourself to
that's
given that you think deeply
in a philosophical way
you think about some of these really important
issues and you have theoretical frameworks
like assembly theory
it's really nice
that you're always grounded
with experiment
that's so refreshing
that's so beautifully refreshing
now that
we're holding you to the grounded
in experiment
to the harsh truth of reality
let me ask the big ridiculous question
what is the meaning of this whole thing
what's the meaning of life
why?
time is fundamental
we're moving forward
and along this
long timeline
come along a bunch of descendants of apes
that
have come up with cellular automata
and computers and now computers
why?
I have so many different answers to this question
it depends on what day
I would say
given the way of the conversation we had today
I'd say the meaning
well we make our own meaning
I think the universe wants to
explore
every possible configuration that this allows
is to explore
and this goes back to the kind of question
that you're asking about Yasha
and the existence and non-existence of things
so if the universe is a Turing machine
it's churning through a load of states
and you think about
combinatorial theory before assembly theory
so everything is possible
what Yasha and I were saying is
well not everything is
we don't see the combinatorial explosion
we see something else
and what we see is
evidence of memory
so there clearly seems to be some
interference between
the combinatorial explosion of things
and what the universe allows
and it's like this kind of
constructive destructive interference
so maybe the universe
is not just about
it is
assembling objects in space and time
and those objects are
able to search more
space and time and the universe is just
infinitely creative and I guess
I'm searching for why the universe
is infinitely creative, is it infinitely creative
and maybe the meaning is just simply to
make as many objects create
as many things as possible
and I see a future of the universe that doesn't result
in the heat there for the universe
the universe is going to extract
every ounce of creativity
it can out of it because that's what we see
and if you think that
almost like intelligence is not
conserved that maybe creativity
isn't either, maybe like
it's an infinite well
so like creativity is ultimately tied to novelty
coming up with
cool new configurations of things
and maybe that just can continue indefinitely
and
this human species that was created
along the way is probably just
one method
like that's able to ask
the universe about itself is just one
way to explore creativity
maybe there's other meta levels on top of that
like obviously
as a collective intelligence will create
organisms maybe there'll be
organisms that
ask themselves questions
about themselves
in a
deeper, bigger picture way that we humans do
first to ask questions about the humans
and then construct some kind of
hybrid systems that
ask themselves about the collective
just like some weird stacking
that we can't even imagine yet
and that stacking I mean I have discussed this stacking a lot
with Sarah Walker
who's a professor of physics
and astrobiology at ASU
and we argue about
you know
how creative the universe is going to be and is it
as deterministic as all that because I think she
she's more of a free will thinker
and I'm of a less free
will thinker but I think we're beginning to converge
and understanding that
because there's simply a missing understanding
right now we don't
understand how the universe
we don't know what rules the universe has
to allow the universe to contemplate itself
so asking the meaning of it
before we even know what those rules are
is premature but my guess is
it's not meaningless and it isn't just about
and there are three levels
of meanings obviously the universe wants us to do stuff
we're interacting with each other so we create
meaning in our own society and our own interactions
with humanity
but I do think there is something else going on
but because
reality is so weird
we're just scratching
at that and I think that we have to
make the experiments better
and we have to perhaps
join across not just
for the computation lists and what I tried
to do with Yasha is meet him halfway
say what happens if I become a computation list
what do I gain a lot it turns out
because I can make Turing machines in the universe
because on the one hand I'm making computers
which are state machines inspired by Turing
on the other hand I'm saying they can't exist
well clearly that's
I can't have my cake and eat it so there's something
weird going on there so then
did the universe have to make a continuous
to discreet transition or is the universe just discreet
it's probably just discreet
so if it's just discreet then there are
I will then give Yasha
his Turing like property
in the universe but maybe there's something else below it
which is the constructor
the construct the Turing machine
that then constructs you know
is a bit like the
you generate a computing system
that then is able to build an abstraction
that then recognizes
it can make a generalizable abstraction
because human beings with mathematics
have been able to go on
and build physical computers
if that makes any sense
and I think that's the meaning
as far as we can
Turing will be further elucidated with further experiments
Well you mentioned Sarah
I think you and Sarah Walker
are just these fascinating
human beings
I'm really fortunate
to have the opportunity
to be in your presence to study your work
to follow along with your work
I'm a big fan
like I told you offline
I hope we get a chance to talk again
with the two of us but also with Sarah
that's a fascinating dynamic
for people who haven't heard
I suppose on Clubhouse is where I heard
you guys talk but you have an incredible dynamic
and I also can't
wait to hear you and Yasha talk
so I think if there's
some point in this
predetermined or yet to be determined
future
where the three of us
you and Sarah
or the four of us with Yasha
meet and talk would be a beautiful future
and I look forward
to most futures but I look forward
to that one in particular
Lee, thank you so much for spending your valuable time
with me today
Thanks Lex, it's been a pleasure
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Lee Cronin
To support this podcast
please check out our sponsors in the description
and now
let me leave you with some words from the mad scientist
Rick Sanchez of Rick and Morty fame
to live
is to risk it all
otherwise
you're just an inner chunk
of randomly assembled molecules
drifting wherever
the universe blows you
Thank you for listening
and hope to see you next time
