Every star in the sky probably has planets and life is
probably emerging on these planets.
But I think the commentarial space associated with these
planets is so different.
Our causal cones are never going to overlap or not easily.
And this is the thing that makes me sad about alien life.
Why it's why we have to create alien life in the lab as
quickly as possible.
Because I don't know if we are going to be able to be able to
build architectures that will intersect with alien
intelligence architectures.
Intersect, you don't mean in time or space.
Time and the ability to communicate.
The ability to communicate.
Yeah.
My biggest fear in a way is that life is everywhere, but we
become infinitely more lonely because of our scaffolding in
that commentarial space.
The following is a conversation with Lee Cronin, his third
time in this podcast.
He is a chemist from University of Glasgow, who is one of the
most fascinating, brilliant, and fun to talk to scientists of
ever had the pleasure of getting to know.
This is a Lex Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's Lee Cronin.
So your big assembly theory paper was published in Nature.
Congratulations.
Thanks.
It created, I think it's fair to say a lot of controversy,
but also a lot of interesting discussion.
So maybe I can try to summarize assembly theory and you tell
me if I'm wrong.
Sorry for it.
So assembly theory says that if we look at any object in the
universe, any object that we can quantify how complex it is by
trying to find the number of steps it took to create it.
And also we can determine if it was built by a process akin to
evolution by looking at how many copies of the object there are.
Yeah, that's spot on.
Yeah, spot on spot on.
I was not expecting that.
Okay, so let's go through definitions.
So there's a central equation I'd love to talk about, but
definition wise, what is an object?
Yeah, an object.
So from, so if I'm going to try to be as meticulous as possible,
objects need to be finite and they need to be decomposable
into subunits.
All human made artifacts are objects.
Is a planet an object?
Probably yes in the, if you scale out.
So an object is finite and countable and decomposable, I suppose
mathematically.
But yeah, I still, I still wake up some days and go to think to
myself, what is an object?
Because it's, it's, it's a non-trivial question.
Persists over time.
I'm quoting from the paper here.
An object that's finite is distinguishable.
I'm sure that's a weird adjective, distinguishable.
We've had so many people help offering to rewrite the paper after it came
out, you wouldn't believe it's so funny.
Persists over time and is breakable such that the set of constraints to
construct it from elementary building blocks is quantifiable.
The history is in the objects.
It's kind of cool, right?
So, okay.
So what defines the object is its history or memory, whichever is the
sexier word.
I'm happy with both depending on the day.
Okay.
So the set of steps it took to create the object.
So there's a sense in which every object in the universe has a history.
So the set of steps it took to create the object, so there's a sense in
which every object in the universe has a history.
Yeah.
And that is part of the thing that is used to describe its complexity.
How complicated it is.
Okay.
What is an assembly index?
So the assembly index, if you're to take the object apart and be super
lazy about it or minimal, say, well, it's like, you know, it's like you've got
a really short-term memory.
So what you do is you lay all the parts on the path and you find the minimum
number of steps you take on the path to add the parts together to reproduce the
object and that minimum number is the assembly index.
It's a minimum bound.
And it was always my intuition, the minimum bound in assembly theory was
really important and I only worked out why a few weeks ago, which was kind of
funny because I was just like, no, this is sacrosanct.
I don't know why it will come to me one day.
And then when I was pushed by a bunch of mathematicians, we came up with the
correct physical explanation, which I can get to, but it's the minimum.
And it's really important.
It's the minimum.
And the reason I knew the minimum was right is because we could measure it.
So almost before this paper came out, we've, we'd publish papers, explain how
you can measure the assembly index of molecules.
Okay.
So that's not so trivial to figure out.
So when you look at an object, we can say a molecule, we can say object more
generally to figure out the minimum number of steps it takes to create that
object.
That doesn't seem like a trivial thing to do.
So with molecules, it is, it's not trivial, but it is possible because what you
can do, and because I'm, I'm a chemist, so I'm kind of like, I see the lens
of the world through just chemistry.
Um, um, I break the molecule apart and break bonds.
And if you break up, if you take a molecule and you break it all apart, you
have a bunch of atoms and then you can say, okay, I'm going to then form,
take the atoms and form bonds and go up the chain of events to make the molecule.
And that's what made me realize, take a toy example, literally toy example,
take a Lego object, which is broken up of Lego blocks.
So you could do exactly the same thing.
In this case, the Lego blocks are naturally the smallest, they're the atoms in
the actual composite Lego architecture.
But then if you maybe take, you know, um, a couple of blocks and put them
together in a certain way, maybe they'll have a, they're offset in some way.
That offset is on the memory.
You can use that offset again with only a penalty of one, and you can then make
a square triangle and keep going.
And you remember those motifs on the chain.
So you can then leap from the, the start with all the Lego blocks or atoms,
just laid out in front of you and say, right, I'll take you, you, you connect
and do the least amount of work.
So it's really like the smallest steps you can take on the graph to make the object.
And so for molecules, it came relatively intuitively.
And then we started to apply it to language.
We've even started to apply it to mathematical theorems.
I'm so well out of my depth, but it looks like you can take minimum
set of axioms and then start to build up kind of, uh, mathematical
architectures in the same way.
And then the shortest path to get there is something interesting
that I don't yet understand.
So what, what, what's the computational complexity of figuring out the shortest
path in, um, with molecules, with language, with mathematical theorems.
It seems that once you have the fully constructed Lego castle or whatever your
favorite Lego world is, figuring out how to get there from the building,
basic building blocks, isn't like a, is that an empty heart problem?
It's a hard problem.
It's a hard problem, but actually if you look at it, so the,
best way to look at it for, let's take a molecule.
So if the molecule has, um, 13 bonds, first of all, take 13 copies of the
molecule and just cut all the bonds.
So take cut 12 bonds and then you just put them in order.
And then that's how it works.
So, and you keep looking for symmetry or, or copies.
So you can then shorten it as you go down.
And that becomes commentarily quite hard.
Um, for some natural product molecules, um, it's, it comes very hard.
It's not impossible, but we're looking at the bounds on that at the moment.
But as the object gets bigger, it becomes really hard.
And, but that, that's the bad news, but the good news is there are shortcuts.
And we might even be able to physically measure the complexity without
computationally calculating it, which is kind of insane.
Well, how would you do that?
Well, in the case of molecule, um, so if you shine light on a molecule,
let's take it infrared.
The, the molecule has each of the bonds absorbs the infrared differently.
And that's what we call the fingerprint region.
And so it's a bit like, uh, um, and because it's quantized as well, you
have all these discrete kind of absorbences.
And my intuition after we realized we could cut molecules up in mass spec,
that was the first go at this.
We did it with using infrared and the infrared gave us an even better
correlation assembly index.
And we used another technique as well.
In addition to infrared called NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance, which tells
you about the number of different magnetic environments in a molecule.
And that also worked out.
So we have three techniques, which each of them independently gives us the
same or tending towards the same assembly index for a molecule that we can
calculate mathematically.
Okay.
So these are all methods of mass spectrometry mass spec.
You scan a molecule.
It gives you data in the form of a mass spectrum.
And you're saying that, uh, the data correlates to the assembly index.
Yeah.
How generalizable is that shortcut?
First of all, to chemistry.
And second of all, beyond that, cause that seems like a nice hack.
And you're extremely knowledgeable about various aspects of chemistry.
So you can say, okay, it kind of correlates, but, you know, the whole idea behind
assembly theory paper, and perhaps why it's so controversial is that it
reaches bigger, it reaches for the bigger general theory of objects in the
universe.
Yeah, I'd say so.
I'd agree.
So I've started assembly theory of emoticons with my lab, believe it or not.
So we take emojis, pixelate them and work out the assembly index of emoji and
then work out how many emojis you can make on the path of emoji.
So there's the uber emoji from which all other emojis emerge.
And then you can, so you can then take a photograph and by looking at the
shortest path on, by reproducing the pixels to make the image you want, you
can measure that.
So then you start to be able to take spatial data.
Now there's some problems there.
What is then the definition of the object?
How many pixels?
Um, how do you break it down?
And so we're just learning all this right now.
So how do you compute these, how would you begin to compute the assembly
index of a graphical, like a set of pixels on a 2G plane that form a thing?
So you would, first of all, determine the resolution.
So then what, what is your X, Y and what the number on the X and Y plane?
And then look at the surface area and then you take all your emojis and make
sure they're all looked at the same resolution.
Yes.
And then we were basically then, um, do the exactly the same thing we would do
for cutting the bonds.
You'd cut bits out of the emoji on and look at the, the, you'd have a bag of
pixels.
So, um, and you would then add those pixels together to make the overall emoji.
Well, but like, first of all, not every pixels, I mean, this is at the core sort
of machine learning and computer vision, not every pixel is that important.
And then there's like macro features, there's a micro features and all that
kind of stuff.
Exactly.
Like, uh, you know, the eyes appear in a lot of them.
The smile appears in a lot of them.
So in the same way in chemistry, we assume the bond is fundamental.
What we do, and they're here with, we assume the resolution at the scale that
wish we do it is fundamental and we're just working that out.
And that you're right, that will change, right?
Because as you take your lens out a bit, you, it will change dramatically, but it,
but it's just a new way of looking at not just compression, what we do right now
in computer science and data, one big kind of, um, uh, um, kind of misunderstanding
as assembly theory is telling you about how compressed the object is.
That's not right.
It's a how much information is required on a chain of events.
Cause the nice thing is if you, when you do compression in computer science,
we're wandering a bit here, but it's kind of worth wandering.
I think in you, you, um, assume you have instantaneous access to all the
information in the memory, the assembly theory, you say, no, you don't get
access to that memory until you've done the work.
And then you don't access that memory.
You can have access, but not to the next one.
And this is how in assembly theory, we talk about the four universes, the assembly
universe, the assembly possible and the assembly contingent.
And then the assembly observed and they're all, all scales in this combinatorial
universe.
Yeah.
Can you explain each one of them?
Yep.
So the assembly universe is like anything goes.
Just, it's just combinatorial kind of explosion in everything.
That's the biggest one.
That's the biggest one's massive.
Assembly universe, assembly possible, assembly contingent, assembly observed.
And, uh, on the y-axis is assembly steps in time.
Yeah.
And, you know, in the x-axis, as, as the thing expands through time, more and
more unique objects appear.
So, yeah.
So assembly universe, everything goes.
Yep.
Um, assembly possible laws of physics come in, in this case, in chemistry bonds in
assembly, so that means those are actually constraints, I guess.
Yes.
And they're the only constraints.
They're the constraints of the base.
So the way to look at it, you've got all your atoms, they're quantized.
You can just bung them together.
So then you can become a kind of, so in the way in computer science, because
suppose the assembly universe is just like no laws of physics, things can fly
through mountains beyond the speed of light in, in the assembly possible, you
have to apply the laws of physics, but you can get access to all the motifs
instantaneously with no effort.
So that means you could make anything.
Then the assembly contingent says, no, you can't have access to the highly
assembled object in the future until you've done the work in the past on the
causal chain.
And that's really the really interesting shift where you go from assembly, um,
possible to assembly contingent.
That is really the key thing in assembly theory that says, you cannot just
have instantaneous access to all those memories.
You have to have done the work somehow.
The universe has to have somehow built a, um, a system that allows you to select
that path, um, rather than other paths.
And then the final thing the assembly observed is basically are saying, oh,
these are the things we actually see.
We can go backwards now and understand that they have been created by this,
this causal process.
Wait a minute.
So when you say the universe has to construct the system that does the work,
is that like the environment that, that, that allows for like selection?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So that's the thing that does the selection.
You could think about in terms of a von Neumann constructor versus selection
of ribosome, uh, Tesla, plant assembling Teslas, you know, the, the
difference between the assembly universe in Tesla land and the, the Tesla factory
is everyone says, no, Teslas are just easy.
They just spring out, you know, how I make them all the Tesla factory.
You have to put things in sequence and out comes a Tesla.
So you're talking about the factory?
Yes.
This is, this is really nice.
Super important point is that when I talk about the universe having a memory or
there's some magic, it's not that it's that tells you that there must be a
process encoded somewhere in physical reality, be it a cell, a Tesla factory or
something else that is making that object.
I'm not saying there's some kind of woo woo memory in the universe, you know,
morphic resonance or something.
I'm saying that there is an actual causal process that is being directed,
constrained in some way.
Um, so it's not kind of, uh, just making everything.
Yeah, but Lee, what's the factory that made the factory?
So what, what is the, so first of all, you assume the laws of physics is, uh, just
sprung to the existence at the beginning.
Those are constraints, but what, what makes the factory the environment that does
the selection?
This is the question or, well, it's the first interesting question that I want
to answer out of four.
I think the factory emerges in the environment, the interplay between the
environment and the objects that are being built.
And, and here, let me, I'll have a go explain to you the shortest path.
So why is the shortest path important?
Imagine you've got, um, I'm going to have to go chemistry for a moment and then
abstract it.
Um, so imagine you've got, uh, an envir, a given environment that, um, that you
have a budget of atoms, you're just flinging together and the, the objective
of those atoms that being flung together and say molecule A, um, have to make
that they haven't, they decompose.
So molecules decompose over time.
So the molecules, um, in this environment, in this magic environment have to not
die, but they do die.
There's a, there's a, they have a half life.
So the only way the molecules can get through that environment out the other
side, let's pretend the environment is a box and go in and out without dying.
And there's a, there's just an infinite supply of atoms coming or a well, a
large supply.
The, the molecule gets built, but the molecule that is able to template itself
being built, um, and survives in the environment will, will basically rain
supreme.
Now, let's say that that molecule takes 10 steps now, and it, and it's using
finite set of atoms, right?
Or now let's say another molecule, smart ass molecule will call it comes in and
can survive in that environment and can copy itself, but it only needs five steps.
The molecule that only needs five steps, cause it's continued, both molecules
have been destroyed, but they're creating themselves faster.
They can be destroyed.
You can see that the shortest path reigns supreme.
So the shortest path tells us something super interesting about the minimal amount
of, uh, information required to propagate that motif in time and space.
Um, and it's just like a kind of, it seems to be like some kind of conservation law.
So one of the intuitions you have is the propagation of motifs in time will be
done by the things that can construct themselves in the shortest path.
So like, you can assume that most of the objects in the universe are built in
the shortest, in the most efficient way.
The, the, yeah.
So big loop I just took there.
Yeah, no, yeah, yes and no, because there are other things.
So in the limit, yes, because you want to tell the difference between things that
have required a factory to build them and just random processes.
Um, but you can find instances where the shortest path isn't taken for an
individual object, an individual function.
Um, and people go, ah, that means the shortest path isn't right.
And then I say, well, I don't know.
I think it's right still because, so of course, because there are other driving
forces, it's not just one molecule.
Now, when you start to, now you start to consider two objects.
You have a joint assembly space and it's not, now it's a compromise between not
just making A and B in the shortest path.
You want to make A and B in the shortest path, which might mean that A is slightly
longer, you have compromise.
So when you see slightly more nesting in the construction, when you take a given
object that can look longer, but that's because the overall function is the
object is still trying to be efficient.
Yeah.
And this is still very hand wavy, um, and maybe have no legs to stand on, but we
think we're getting somewhere with that.
And there's probably some parallelization.
Yeah.
Right.
So this is all, this is not sequential.
The building is, I guess, when you're talking about complex objects, you, you
don't have to work sequentially.
You can work in parallel.
You can get your friends together and they can.
Yeah.
These, and the, the, the thing we're working on right now is how to understand
these parallel processes.
Now there's an, a new thing we've introduced called assembly depth and
ascend assembly depth can be lower than the assembly index for a molecule when
they're cooperating together because exactly this parallel processing is going on.
And my team have been working this out in the last few weeks because we're
looking at what compromises does nature need to make when it's making molecules
in a cell?
And I, I wonder if, you know, I, I'm maybe like, well, I'm always
leaping out of my competence, but in economics, I'm just wondering if you
could apply this in economic processes.
Seems like capitalism is very good at finding shortest path, you know, every
time, but there are ludicrous things that happen because actually the cost
function has been minimized.
And so I keep seeing parallels everywhere where they're complex nested systems.
Where if you give it enough time and you introduce a bit of heterogeneity, the
system readjusts and finds a new shortest path, but the shortest path isn't
fixed on just one molecule.
Now it's in the actual existence of the object over time.
And that object could be a city.
It could be a cell.
It could be a factory, but I think we're going way beyond molecules and my
competence and probably should go back to molecules, but hey.
All right.
Before we get too far, let's talk about the assembly equation.
Okay.
How should we do this?
Let me just even read that part of the paper.
We define assembly as the total amount of selection necessary to produce an
ensemble of observed objects, quantified using equation one.
The equation basically has a on one side, which is the assembly of the ensemble.
And then a sum from one to n, where n is the total number of
unique objects.
And then there is a few variables in there that include the assembly index,
the copy number, which we'll talk about.
That's an interesting, I don't remember you talking about that.
That's an interesting addition.
And I think a powerful one has to do with what that you can create pretty
complex objects randomly.
And in order to know that they're not random, that there's a factory involved.
You need to see a bunch of them.
Yeah, that's, that's the intuition there.
It's an interesting intuition.
And then some normalization.
What else is it in?
In minus one, just to make sure that I'm more than one object.
One object could be a one-off and random.
Yep.
And then you have more than one identical object.
That's interesting.
When there's, when there's two of a thing.
Two of the thing is super important, especially if the index, assembly index is high.
So we could say several questions here.
One, let's talk about selection.
What is this term selection?
What is this term evolution that we're referring to?
Which, which aspect of Darwinian evolution are we referring to?
That's interesting here.
So, yeah.
So this is probably what, you know, the paper, we should talk about the paper
the second the paper did.
What it did is it kind of annoyed, um, we didn't know it.
I mean, it got intention and obviously angry people, the angry people were annoyed.
There's angry people in the world.
That's good.
So what happened is the evolutionary biologists got angry.
We were not expecting that because we thought evolutionary biologists would be cool.
I knew that some, not many computational complexity people will get angry because
I'd kind of been poking them and maybe I deserved it.
But I was trying to poke them in a productive way.
And then the physicists kind of got grumpy because the initial conditions tell everything.
The prebiotic chemists got slightly grumpy because there's not enough chemistry in there.
Then finally, when the creationist said it wasn't creationist enough, I was like,
I've done my job.
Well, you see in the physics, they say, because you're basically saying that physics is not
enough to tell the story of how biology emerges.
I think so.
And then they said a few physics is the beginning and the end of the story.
Yeah.
So what happened is the reason why people put the phone down on the call of the paper,
I mean, if you, if you view the reading of the paper like a phone call, they got to the abstract.
Yep.
And in the abstract, it's for sentences, pretty.
The first two sentences caused everybody.
Scientists have grappled with reconciling biological evolution with the immutable laws
of the universe defined by physics.
True.
Right.
There's nothing wrong with that statement.
Totally true.
Yeah.
These laws underpin life's origin, evolution and the development of human culture and
technology, yet they do not predict the emergence of these phenomena.
Wow.
First off, we should say the title of the paper.
This is paper was accepted and published in nature.
The title is assembly theory explains and quantifies selection and evolution.
Very humble title.
And the, the, the entirety of the paper, I think, presents interesting ideas, but reaches high.
I am not, I would do it all again.
This paper was actually on the preprint server for over a year.
You regret nothing.
Yeah, I, I, I think, yeah, I don't regret anything.
You and Frank Sinatra did it your way.
What I love about being a scientist is kind of sometimes I'm, cause I'm a bit dim.
I'm like, and I don't understand what people are telling me.
I want to get to the point.
This paper says, Hey, laws of physics are really cool.
The universe is great, but they don't really, it's not intuitive that you just run the
standard model and get life out.
I think most physicists might go, yeah, there's this, you know, it's not just
we can't just go back and say, that's what happened.
Cause physics can't explain the origin of life yet.
There's a, doesn't mean it won't or can't.
Okay.
Just to be clear, sorry, intelligent designers.
We are going to get there.
Second point, we say that evolution works, but we don't know how evolution got going.
So biological evolution and biological selection.
So for me, this seems like a simple continuum.
So when I mentioned selection and evolution in the title, I think, and in the abstract,
we should have maybe prefaced that and said, non biological selection and non
biological evolution.
Sure.
And then that might have made it even more crystal clear, but I didn't think that
biology, evolutionary biology should be so bold to claim ownership of selection and
evolution.
And secondly, a lot of evolutionary biologists seem to dismiss the origin of
life questions to say it's obvious.
And, and that causes a real problem scientifically.
Cause when two different, when the physicists are like, we own the universe,
the universe is good, we explain all of it, look at us.
And even biologists say we can explain biology and the poor chemistry in the, in the,
in the middle going, but hang on.
And this paper kind of says, Hey, there is an interesting disconnect between
physics and biology.
And that's at the point at which memories get made in chemistry through bonds.
And Hey, let's look at this closeness if we can quantify it.
So yeah, I mean, I never expected the paper to, to, to kind of get that much
interest and still, I mean, it's only been published just over a month ago now.
So just to link on the selection, what is the broader sense of what selection means?
Yeah, that's a really good for selection, selection.
So I think for selection, you need, so this is where for me, the concept of an
object is something that can persist in time and not die, but basically can be broken up.
So if, so if I was going to kind of bolster the definition of objects.
So, so if, and if something can form and persist for a long period of time under an
existing environment that could destroy other, and I'm going to use anthropomorphic
terms, I apologize, weaker objects or less robust, then the environment could have
selected that.
So good chemistry examples, if you took some carbon and you made a chain of carbon
atoms, whereas if you took some, I don't know, some carbon nitrogen and oxygen and
made change from those, you start to get different reactions and rearrangements.
So a chain of carbon atoms might be more resistant to falling apart under acidic or
basic conditions versus another set of molecules.
So it survives in that environment.
So the acid pond, the molecule, the molecule, the resistant molecule can get through.
And, and then, then that molecule goes into another environment.
So that environment now maybe being an acid pond is a basic pond, or maybe it's an
oxidizing pond.
And so if you've got carbon, and it goes an oxidizing pond, maybe the carbon starts
to oxidize and break apart.
So you go through all these kind of obstacle courses, if you like, given by reality.
So selection is the ability happens when an object survives in an environment for some
time, but, and this is the thing that's super subtle, the object has to be continually
being destroyed and made by process.
So it's not just about the process, the object now is about the process and time that
makes it, because a rock could just stand on the mountain side for four billion years
and nothing happened to it.
And that's not necessarily really advanced selection.
So for selection to get really interesting, you need to have a turnover in time.
You need to be continually creating objects, producing them, what we call discovery time.
So there's a discovery time for an object.
When that object is discovered, if it's a molecule that can then act on itself, or the
chain of events that caused itself to bolster its formation, then you go from discovery
time to production time, and suddenly you have more of it in the universe.
So it could be a self replicating molecule.
And the interaction of the molecule in the environment in the warm little pond or in the
sea or wherever in the bubble could then start to build a proto factory, the environment.
So really, to answer your question, what the factory is, the factory is the environment,
but it's not very autonomous.
It's not very redundant.
There's lots of things that could go wrong.
So once you get high enough up the hierarchy of networks of interactions, something needs
to happen that needs to be compressed into a smaller volume and made resistant robust.
Because in biology, selection and evolution is robust.
That you have error correction built in, you have really, you know, there's good ways of
basically making sure propagation goes on.
So really, the difference between inorganic, abiotic selection, evolution, and evolution and
stuff in biology is robustness, the ability to kind of propagate over the ability to survive in
lots of different environments.
Whereas our poor little inorganic soul molecule, whatever, just dies in lots of different
environments.
So there's something super special that happens from the inorganic environment molecule in
the environment kills it to where you've got evolution and cells can survive everywhere.
How special is that?
How do you know those kinds of evolution factors on everywhere in the universe?
I, I don't, and I'm excited because I think selection isn't special at all.
I think what is special is the history of the environments on earth that gave rise to the
first cell that now has, you know, has taken all those environments and is now more autonomous.
And I would like to think that, you know, this paper could be very wrong.
But I don't think it's very wrong.
It means certainly wrong, but it's less wrong than some other ideas, I hope, right?
And if this allows us to go and look for selection in the universe, because we now have an
equation where we can say, we can look for selection going on and say, oh, that's interesting.
We seem to have a process that's giving us high copy number objects that also are highly
complex, but that doesn't look like life as we know it.
And we use that and say, oh, there's a hydrophermal vent.
Oh, there's a process going on.
There's molecular networks because the assembly equation is not only meant to identify at the
higher end advanced selection, what you get, I would call in biology, super advanced selection.
And even, I mean, you could use the assembly equation to look for technology.
And God forbid we could talk about consciousness and abstraction, but let's keep it primitive,
molecules and biology.
So I think the real power of the assembly equation is to, is to say how much selection is
going on in this space.
And there's, there's a really simple thought experiment I could do is you, you know, have
a little petri dish and on that petri dish, you put some simple food.
So the assembly index of all the sugars and everything is quite low.
So then, and you put a single cell of E coli cell.
And then you say, I'm going to, I'm going to measure the assembly in this amount of assembly
in the box.
So it's quite low, but the rate of change of assembly, DADT will go voomsigmoidal as it
eats all the food.
And the number of coli cells will, will replicate because they take all the food, they
copy themselves, the assembly index of all the molecules goes up, up, up and up until
the food is exhausted in the box.
So now the, now the coli's stop, I mean, dying is probably a strong word.
They stop respiring because all the food is gone.
But suddenly the amount of assembly in the box has gone up gigantically because of that
one E coli factory has just eaten through, milled lots of other E coli factories, run
out of food and stopped.
And so that, looking at that, so in the initial box, although the amount of assembly was
really small, it was able to replicate and use all the food and go up.
And that's what we're trying to do in the lab actually is kind of make those kind of
experiments and see if we can spot the emergence of molecular networks that are
producing complexity as we feed in raw materials and we feed a challenge, an
environment, you know, we try and kill the molecules.
And then, and really that's the main kind of idea for the entire paper.
Yeah.
And see if you can measure the changes in the assembly index throughout the whole
system.
Yeah.
Okay.
What, what about if I show up to a new planet, we'll go to Mars or some other planet
from a different solar system.
And how do we use assembly index there to discover alien life?
Um, in very simply, actually, if we, let's say we'll go to Mars with a mass
spectrometer with a sufficiently high resolution.
So what you have to be able to do.
So good thing about mass spec, um, is that you can, um, select the molecule from the
mass and then if it's high enough resolution, you can be more and more sure
that you're just seeing, um, identical copies.
You can count them and then you fragment them and you count the number of fragments
and look at the molecular weight and the higher the molecular weight and the higher
the number of fragments or higher the assembly index.
So if you go to Mars and you take a mass spec or high enough resolution and you can
find molecules and I'll give a guide on earth.
If you could find molecules say greater than 350 molecular weight with more than
15 fragments, you have found artifacts that can only be produced, at least on earth.
By life.
Now you would say, oh, well, maybe the geological process.
I would argue very vehemently that that is not the case.
But we can say, look, if you don't like the cut off on earth, go up higher, 30, 100.
Right.
Because there's going to be a point where you'll find a molecule with so many
different parts, the chances of you getting a molecule that has a hundred different parts,
um, and finding a million identical copies.
You know, that's, that's just impossible.
That could never happen in an infinite set of universes.
Can you just look at this copy number thing, a million different copies?
What do you mean by copies and why is the number of copies important?
Yeah, that was so interesting.
And I always understood the copy number is really important, but I never explained it
properly for ages.
Um, and I kept having this, it goes back to this, if I give you a, um, I don't know,
a really complicated molecule, and I say it's complicated, you could say, hey,
that's really complicated, but is it just really random?
And so, so I realized that ultimate randomness and ultimate complexity are
indistinguishable until you can, um, you can see a structure in the randomness.
So you can see copies.
So copies implies structure.
Yeah.
The factory.
I mean, there's a deep profound thing in there.
Cause like, if you just have a random, random process, you're going to get a lot
of complex, beautiful, sophisticated things.
What makes them complex in the way we think life is complex or, um, yeah.
Something like a, a factory that's operating under a selection processes.
There should be copies.
Is there like some looseness about copies?
Like what does it mean for two objects to be equal?
It's, it's all to do with the, the telescope or the microscope you're using.
And so at the maximum resolution.
So in the nice thing about the nice thing about chemists is they have this concept
of the molecule and they're all familiar with the molecule and molecules.
You can hold, uh, you know, on your hand and lots of them identical copies.
And molecules actually a super important thing in chemistry to say, look, you
can have a mole of a molecules and have a gadro's number of molecules and they're
identical.
What does that mean?
That means that the molecular composition, the bonding and so on, the configuration
is all is indistinguishable.
You can hold them together.
You can overlay them.
So the way I do it is if I say, here's a bag, um, of 10 identical molecules,
let's prove they're identical.
You pick one out of the, out of the bag and you basically observe it using some
technique and then you put it, you take it away and then you take another one out.
If you observe it using technique, you can see no differences.
They're identical.
It's really interesting to get right because if you take, say two molecules,
molecules can be in different vibrational and rotational states.
They're moving all the time.
So with this respect, identical molecules have identical bonding.
In this case, we don't even, um, talk about chirality because we don't have a
chirality detector.
So two, I met identical molecules in one conception assembly theory, basically,
um, considers both hands as being the same.
Um, but of, but of course they're not, they're different.
As soon as you have a chiral distinguisher, detect, detect the left and the
right hand, they become different.
And so it's to do with the detection system that you have and the resolution.
So I wonder if there's an art and science to the, which detection system is used
when you show up to a new planet?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So like you're talking about chemistry a lot today.
We have kind of standardized detection systems, right?
Of how to compare molecules.
So, you know, when you start to talk about emojis and language and, uh,
mathematical theorems and, uh, I don't know, more sophisticated things at a
different scale, at a smaller scale, the molecules at a larger scale, the
molecules, like what detection, like if, if we look at the difference between
you and me, Lex and Lee, are we the same?
Are we different?
Sure.
I mean, of course we're different close up, but if you zoom out a little bit,
we'll morphologically look the same.
Yeah.
Not, not, you know, high in characteristics, hair length, stuff like that.
Well, we're also like the species and yeah, yeah, yeah.
And, and also there's a sense why we're both from earth.
Yeah.
I agree.
I mean, this is the power of assembly theory in that regard that you, if, if you,
so if everything, so the way to look at it, if you have a box of objects, if
they're all, if they're all indistinguishable, um, then using your technique,
you then, you, what you then do is you then look at the assembly index.
Now, if the assembly index of them is really low, right?
And they're all, they're all indistinguishable.
Then you've, then it's telling you that you have to go to another resolution.
So that would be, you know, it's kind of a sighing scale.
It's kind of nice.
So you got it.
So those two kind of are attention with each other.
Yeah.
The, the number of copies on the assembly index.
Yeah.
That's really, really interesting.
So, okay.
So you show up to on your planet, you'll be doing what?
I would do mass spec.
I would bring a sample of what, like, first of all, like how big of a scoop do
you take?
Did you just take a scoop?
Like what, like, uh, so we're looking for primitive life.
I would, I would look, yeah.
So if we're just going to Mars or Titan or Enceladus or somewhere, so a
number of ways of doing it.
So you could take a large scoop or you'd go for the atmosphere and detect stuff.
So, and you could make a life, um, a life meter, right?
So, um, one of, uh, uh, Sarah's colleagues at ASU, Paul Davis keeps
calling it a life meter, a life meter, which is quite a nice idea because you
think about it, if you've got, um, a living system that's producing these,
uh, highly complex molecules and they drift away and they're in a highly,
um, kind of, um, demanding environment, they could be burnt, right?
So they could just be falling apart.
So you want to sniff a little bit of complexity and say warmer, warmer, warmer.
Oh, we've found life.
We've found the alien.
We've found, we've found the alien Elon Musk smoking a joint in the bottom
of the cave on Mars or Elon himself, whatever, right?
You say, okay, found it.
So what you can do is the mass spectrometer, um, you could just look for
things in the gas phase or you go on the surface, drill down because you want
to find molecules that are, you've, you've either got to find the source living
system because the problem with just looking for complexity is it gets burned away.
So in a harsh environment on, on, on, say, on the mass surface of Mars, there's
a very low probability that you're going to find really complex molecules
because of all the radiation and so on.
If you drill down a little bit, you could drill down a bit into, into a soil
that's billions of years old.
Then I would put in some solvent, water, alcohol or something, or take a scoop,
put it in, put it, make it volatile, put it into the mass spectrometer and
just try and detect high complexity, high abundant molecules.
And if you get them, hey presto, you can have evidence of life.
Wouldn't that then be great if you could say, okay, we've found evidence of life.
Now we want to keep, keep the life meter, keep searching for more and more
complexity until you actually find living cells.
You can get those new living cells and then, and then you could bring them back
to earth or you could try and sequence them.
You could see that they have different DNA and proteins.
Go along the gradient of the life meter.
How would you build a life meter?
Let's say we're together starting a new company and launching a life meter.
Mass spectrometer would be the first way of doing it.
Just take it.
No, no, no, but that's, that's, uh, that's one of the major components of it.
But I'm talking about like, if it's a device, we've got a, and branding logo,
we're going to talk about that later.
But what's the input?
What's the, like, how do you get to the, um, a metered output?
So I would, I would take a life.
So my, my life meter, our life meter, there you go.
Thank you.
Yeah.
You're welcome.
Would have both infrared and mass spec.
So it would have two ports so we could shine the light.
Um, and so what it would do is you would have a vacuum chamber and you would have
an electrostatic analyzer and you'd have a monochromator to producing infrared.
Um, you'd add the some, so you'd take a scoop of the sample, put it in the life
meter, it would then add a solvent or heat up the sample.
So some volatiles come off.
The volatiles would then be put into the, into the mass spectrometer, into
electrostatic trap and you'd weigh the molecules and fragment them.
Alternatively, you'd shine infrared light on them.
You count the number of bands, but you'd have to, in that case, do some separation
because you want to separate.
And so in mass spec, it's really nice and convenient because you can separate electrostatically,
but, um, you need to have that.
Can you do it in real time?
Yeah, pretty much it, pretty much.
Yeah.
So let's go all the way back.
So this, okay, we're really going to get this, the Lexa's life meat, Lex and
Lee's life meat.
Lex and Lee.
It's a good, it's a good, uh, good ring to it.
All right.
So, um, you have a, you have a vacuum chamber.
You have a little nose.
The nose would have, um, uh, some, uh, uh, a, a packing material.
So you would take your, your sample, add it onto the nose, add a solvent or a gas.
It would then be sucked up the nose and that would be separated using chrome,
what we call chromatography.
And then as each band comes off the nose, we would then do mass spec and infrared.
And in the, in the, in the case of the infrared count the number of bands in the
case of the mass spec count the number of fragments and weigh it.
And then the further up in molecular weight range for the mass spec and the
number of bands you go up and up and up from the, you know, dead, interesting,
interesting over the threshold.
Oh my gosh, earth life.
And then right up to the batshit crazy.
This is definitely, um, you know, alien intelligence that's made this life.
Right.
You could almost go all the way there, same as the infrared.
And it's pretty simple.
The thing that is really problematical is that for many years, decades, what
people have done, and I can't blame them, is they've rather, they've been
obsessing about small biomarkers on, that we find on earth, amino acids, like
single amino acids or evidence of small molecules and these things.
And looking for those run, looking for complexity.
They were the beautiful thing about this is you can look for, um, complexity
without earth chemistry bias or earth biology bias.
So assembly theory is just a way of saying, Hey, complexity in abundance
is evidence of selection.
That's how our universal life meter will work.
Complexity in abundance is evidence of selection.
Okay.
So let's apply our life meter to earth.
So what, you know, if we were just to apply assembly index measurements to
earth, what, what, what, what kind of stuff are going to be get, uh, are going
to get, what's impressive about some of the complexity on earth?
So we did this a few years ago in the, um, when I was trying to convince NASA
and colleagues that this technique could work.
And honestly, it's so funny because everyone's like, no, I ain't going to
work.
And it was just like, because the chemists were saying, of course, there
are complicated molecules out there you can detect that just form randomly.
I was like, really, really?
That's like, that was like, you know, as a bit like, uh, um, I don't know,
someone saying, of course, Darwin textbook was just written randomly by
some monkeys and a typewriter.
It was just for me, it was like, really?
And, uh, and, and I've pushed a lot on the chemists now.
And I think most of them are on board, but not totally.
I really, it really had some big arguments, but the copy number caught
there cause I think I confused the chemists by saying one off.
And then when I made clear about the copy number, I think that made it a little
bit easier.
Just to clarify, chemists might say that, of course, out there, outside of
earth, there's complex molecules.
Yes.
Okay.
And then you're saying, wait a minute.
That's like saying, of course, there's aliens out there.
Like you.
Yeah.
Exactly that.
Okay.
Exactly.
But you're, you say, you clarify that that's actually a very interesting
question and we should be looking for complex molecules of which the
copy number is two or greater.
Yeah, exactly.
So on earth, so coming back to earth, what we did is we took a whole bunch
of samples, we, and we were running pre-bodic chemistry experiments in the lab.
Um, we took various inorganic minerals and extracted them, look at the volatile
because there's a special way of treating minerals and polymers and assembly
theory where what, in this, in our life machine, we're looking at molecules.
We don't care about polymers because they don't, they're not volatile.
You can't hold them.
We're not, how, how can you make, if you can't discern that they're identical,
then it's very difficult for you to, to, to work out if there's undergone
selection or they're just a random mess, same with some minerals, but we can
come back to that.
So basically what you do, we got a whole lot of samples inorganic ones.
We got a load of, we got Scotch whisky and also got, took a odd bag, which is
one of my favorite whiskeys, which is Ray Petey.
And another whisky is like, um, so the way that on, uh, on, um, in Scotland, in
Isla, which is a little island, the, the, the, the, the Scotch, the Scotch, the
whisky is led to mature in barrels.
And, um, the, the, it said that the peat, you know, the, the, the, the complex
molecules in the peat might find their way through into the whisky.
And that's what gives it this intense brown color and really complex flavor.
It's literally molecular complexity that does that.
And so, you know, Volcker is the complete opposite.
It's just pure, right?
So the better the whisky, the higher the assembly index, the higher the
assembly index, the better the whisky.
That's what I mean.
I really love deep Petey Scottish whiskeys near my house.
There is a, a glow, one of the, the lowland distilleries called Glen
Goyne, it's still beautiful whisky, but not as complex.
So for fun, I cook, took some Glen Goyne, uh, whiskey in our bag and put them
into the mass spec and measure the assembly index.
I also got Ecoli.
So the way we do it, take the Ecoli, break the cell apart, take it all apart.
Um, and also got some beer and, and people were ridiculing us saying, Oh, beer
is evidence of complexity.
One of the, one of the computational, uh, complexity people was just throwing.
Yeah.
We kind of, kind of is very vigorous in his disagreement of assembly theory was
just saying, you know, you don't know what you're doing.
Even beer is more complicated than human.
We didn't realize is that it's not beer per se is taking the east extract, taking
the extract, breaking the cells, extracting the molecules and just looking
at the profile of the molecules, see if there's anything over the threshold.
And we also put in a really complex molecule tax soul.
So we took all of these, but also NASA gave us, I think five samples and they
wouldn't tell us what they are.
They said, no, we don't believe you can get this to work.
And they really, you know, they gave us some super complex samples and they gave
us two fossils, one that was a million years old and one was at 10,000 years old.
Um, see, but something from Antarctica, seabed, they gave us a
mercheson meter, right?
And a few others put them through the system.
So I, we, we took all the samples, treat them all identically, put them into mass spec,
fragmented them, counted and in this case, implicit in the measurement was we, um,
you, in mass spec, you only detect, um, peaks when you've got more than say, let's
say 10,000 identical molecules.
So the copy numbers already baked in, there wasn't quantified, which is
super important there.
This is in the first paper, because I guess it's abundant, of course.
Um, and when you then took it all out, we found that the biological samples, um, gave
you, um, molecules that had an assembly index greater than 15 and all the abarctic
samples were less than 15.
And then we took the NASA samples and we looked at the ones that were more than
15 less than 15 and we gave them back to NASA and they're like, oh gosh, yep, dead
living, dead living, you got it.
And, um, and that's what we found on earth.
Um, that's a success.
Yeah.
Oh yeah.
Resounding success.
Um, can you, can you, uh, just go back to the beer and the E. coli.
So what, what's the assembly index on those?
So what you were able to do is like the assembly index, um, of we found high
assembly index molecules originating, originating from the beer sample and the
E. coli sample.
So I mean, there, there were, I didn't know which one was higher.
We wouldn't really do any detail there because now we are doing that because one
of the things we've done, um, it's a secret, but I can tell you.
No, nobody's listening.
Well, is that we've just mapped the tree of life using assembly theory because
everyone said, oh, that you can't do it from biology.
And what we were able to do is so you, I think there's three ways, well, two
ways of doing tree of life traffic, uh, well, three ways actually.
Yeah.
What's the tree of life?
So the tree of life is basically, um, tracing back the history of life on earth,
all the different species going back, what, who evolved from what, and it all
goes all the way back to the first kind of life forms and they branch off.
And like you have plant kingdom, the animal kingdom, the fungi system, the
kingdom, you know, and different, and different branches all the way up.
Um, and the way this was classically done, and I'm no evolutionary biologist,
evolutionary biologists are very, tell me every day, at least 10 times, uh, I
want to be one though.
I kind of like biology.
It's kind of cool.
But yeah, it's very cool.
Um, but basically what, uh, what Darwin and Mendeleev and all these people do is
just they draw pictures, right?
And they, they tax her.
They just con, they were able to draw pictures and, and say, and say, oh, these
look like common classes.
Yeah.
Then they're artists, really.
They're just, you know, but they're, but they're, they were able to find out a
lot, right?
And looking at verbrates and verbrates, camera and explosion, all this stuff.
And then, um, then came the genomic revolution and suddenly everyone
used gene sequencing and Craig Ventus, a good example, I think he's gone
around the world in his yacht, just picking up samples, looking for new species
where he's just found new species of life just from sequencing.
It's amazing.
So you have taxonomy, you have sequencing, and then you can also do a little
bit of kind of molecular, um, uh, kind of archeology.
Like, you know, measure the samples and, and kind of form some inference.
What we did, um, is we were able to fingerprint who took a load of random
samples from all of biology and we use mass spectrometry.
And what we did now is not just look for individual molecules, but we looked
for coexisting molecules where they had to look at their joint assembly space.
And where we, where we were able to cut them apart and an undergo recursion in
mass spec and infer some relationships and we're able to recapitulate the tree
of life using mass spectroscopy, no sequencing and no drawing.
All right.
Can you, uh, try to say that again, but a little more detail.
So recreating, what does it take to recreate the tree of life?
What does the reverse engineering process look like here?
So what you do is you take an unknown sample, you pung it into the mass spec.
You get a, cause this comes from what you're asking, like, what do you see
in E. coli?
And so in E. coli, you don't just see, it's not, it's not, it's not that the
most sophisticated, um, cells on, on earth make the most sophisticated molecules.
It is the coexistence of lots of complex molecules above a threshold.
And so what we realized is you could fingerprint different life forms.
So fungi make really complicated molecules.
Why?
Cause they can't move.
They have to make everything on site.
Um, whereas, you know, some animals are like lazy.
They can just go eat the fungi.
They don't need to make very much.
And I, um, and so what you do is you look at the, so you take, I don't know,
the fingerprint, maybe the top number of high molecular weight molecules
you find in the sample, you fragment them to get their assembly indices.
And then what you can do is you can infer common origins of molecules.
You can do a kind of molecular, um, um, when the reverse engineering
of the assembly space, you can infer common roots and look at what's
called the joint assembly space.
Um, but what, let's translate that into the experiment.
Take a sample, bung it in the mass spec, take the top, say 10 molecules,
fragment them, and then, and that gives you one fingerprint.
Then you do it for another sample, you get another fingerprint.
Now the question is you say, Hey, are these samples the same or different?
And that's what we've been able to do.
And, um, by basically looking at the assembly space, these molecules create
without any knowledge of assembly theory, you are unable to do it.
With a knowledge of assembly theory, you can reconstruct the tree.
Uh, how does, how does knowing if they're the same or different
give you the tree?
Let's go to two leaves on different branches on the tree.
Right.
What you can do by counting the number of differences, you can
estimate how far away their origin was.
And that's all we do.
And it just works.
But when we realized you could even use assembly theory to
recapitulate the tree of life with no gene sequencing, we were like,
huh.
So this, this is looking at samples that exist today in the world.
What about like things that are no longer existing?
The tree contains information about the past.
I would, some of it is gone.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
I would love to get old fossil samples and apply assembly theory mass spec
and see if we can find new forms of life.
That have, that are no longer amenable to gene sequencing because
the DNA is all gone.
There's DNA, DNA and RNA is quite unstable, but some of them are complex
molecules might be there and might give you a hint, something new.
Or wouldn't it be great if you, if you find a sample that's worth
really persevering and doing, um, you know, doing, uh, the proper
extraction to wreak, to, you know, PCR and so on.
And then sequence it and then put it together.
So one of the thing dies, you can still get some information about its complexity.
Yeah.
And we can, and it appears that you can, um, do some dating.
Now there are really good techniques as radiocarbon dating.
There is, um, longer dating, going, looking at radioactive minerals and so on.
And you can also in bone, you can look at the, what happens in after
something dies is the, you get what's called racemization, where the,
the, the chirality in the polymers basically changes and you just get,
you get decomposition and the rate of the deviation from the pure, um, uh,
enantiomer to the mixture, you can have a hot, you gives you a time,
time scale on it, a half life.
So you can date when it died.
I want to use assembly theory to see if I can date, use it and date death and
things and, and trace the tree of life and also decomposition of molecules.
Do you think it's possible?
Oh yeah.
Then without a doubt, it may not be better than what, cause like the,
I was just at a conference where there's some brilliant people looking at isotope
enrichment and, and looking at how life enriches isotopes and they're really
sophisticated stuff that they're doing.
But I think there's some fun to be had there because it gives you another
dimension of dating.
How old is this molecule?
Um, in terms of an, or more importantly, how long ago was this molecule produced
by life, the more complex the molecule, the more prospect for decomposition,
oxidation, reorganization, loss of chirality and all that jazz.
But what life also does is it enriches as you get older, the amount of carbon
13 and you goes up because of the, because of the way the metabolite,
because of the way the, the bonding is in, in carbon 13.
So it has a slightly different strength bond strength than you is called a
kinetic isotope effect.
So you can literally date how old you are, you know, uh, or when you stop
metabolizing, so you could date someone's debt, how old they are.
I think I'm making this up.
This might be right, but I think it's roughly right.
The amount of carbon 13 you have in you, you couldn't kind of estimate how,
how old you are.
How old living humans are.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like you could say, oh, this person is 10 years old and this person 30 years
old because they've been metabolizing more carbon and they've accumulated it.
That's the basic idea.
It's probably completely wrong time scale.
Signatures of chemistry are fascinating.
So you've been saying a lot of chemistry examples for assembly theory.
What, if we zoom out and look at a bigger scale of an object, you know,
like really complex objects like humans or living organisms that are made up of,
you know, millions or billions of other organisms.
How do you try to apply assembly theory to that?
At the moment, um, we're with, we should be able to do this to morphology in cells.
So we're looking at cell surfaces and really I'm trying to extend further.
It's just that, you know, we work so hard to get this paper out and people to start
discussing the ideas and I was, but, but it's kind of funny because I think the
pep, the, the penny is falling on this.
So, yeah.
So was that even, what, what, what does it mean for a penny to be?
I mean, no, the, the, the pennies dropped, right?
Cause a lot of people were like, it's rubbish.
It's rubbish.
You've insulted me.
It's wrong.
And I'm, and then, you know, I mean, the paper got published on the 4th of October.
It had 2.3 million engagements on Twitter, right?
And it's been downloaded over a few hundred thousand times and someone actually
said to me, wrote to me and said, this is an example of really bad writing and
what not to do.
And I was like, if all of my papers got read this much, cause that's the
objective of, I have a publishing and people want people to read it.
I want to write that badly again.
Yeah.
I don't know what's the deep inside here about the negativity in the space.
I think it's probably the immune system of the scientific community, making
sure that there's no bullshit that gets published.
That's, and then it can overfire, it can do a lot of damage.
It can shut down conversations in a way that's not productive.
We go back, I mean, I'll answer your question about the hierarchy and assembly,
but let's go back to the reception.
People saying that paper was badly written.
I mean, of course we could improve it.
We could always improve the clarity.
Let's go there before we go to the hierarchy.
You know, it has been criticized quite a bit, the paper.
What has been some criticism that you found most powerful, like that you can
understand and can you explain it?
The, yes, the most exciting criticism came from the evolutionary biologist
telling me that they thought that origin of life was a solved problem.
And I was like, whoa, we're really on to something because it's clearly not.
And then when you poke them on that, they just said, no, you don't understand
evolution.
And I said, no, no, I don't think you understand that evolution had to occur
before biology and we need, there's a gap.
That was really, for me, that misunderstanding and that did cause an
immune response, which was really interesting.
Um, the second thing was the fact that physicists, well, the physicists were
actually really polite, right?
Really nice about it, but they just said, huh, we're not really sure about the
initial conditions thing, but this is a really big debate that we should certainly
get into because, you know, the, the, the, the emergence of life was not encoded
in the initial conditions of the universe.
Um, and it can't, and I think assembly theory shows why it can't be.
I'll say, I'll say that if you can say that again, the origin of the emergence
of life was not and cannot, in principle, be encoded in the initial conditions of
the universe.
Just to clarify what we mean by life is like what high assembly index objects.
Yeah.
And this goes back to your favorite subject.
What's that?
Time.
Right.
So why, so why, what does time have to do with it?
We, I mean, probably we can come back to it later, but I, I think it might be if
we have time, but, um, I think that I've, I think I now understand how to explain
how, um, you know, lots of people got angry with the assembly paper, but also
the ramifications of this is how time is fundamental in the universe and, and
this notion of combinatorial spaces.
And there are so many layers on this, but, um, you have to become an
into it, I think you have to become an, uh, intuitionist, mathematician, and you
have to abandon platonic mathematics and also platonic mathematics is left physics
astray, but there's a lot back there.
So we can go to the.
Atonic mathematics.
Okay.
Hey, there's, there's a, it's okay.
The evolutionary biologists criticize because the origin of life is understood.
And not, it doesn't require an explanation that involves physics.
Yeah.
That's their statement.
Well, I mean, it was, I said, they said lots of confusing statements.
Basically, I realized the evolutionary biology community that were vocal and
some of them were really rude, really spiteful and needlessly so, right?
Because look, you know, um, it, I, I didn't, people misunderstand publication
as well.
Some of the people who said, how dare this be published in nature?
This is, you know, how, what a terrible journal.
And, and I, and it really, and I watch that people look, this is a brand new idea
that's not only potentially going to change the way we look at, um, biology,
it's going to change the way we look at the universe.
And everyone's like saying, how dare you, how dare you be so grandiose?
I'm like, no, no, no, this is not hype.
We're not, we're not like saying we've invented some, um, I don't know.
We've discovered an alien in a closet somewhere just for hype.
We've genuinely mean this to genuinely have the impact or ask the question.
And the way people jumped on that was a really bad precedent for young people
who want to actually do something new because this makes a bold claim.
And the chances are that it's not correct.
But what I wanted to do is a couple of things.
As I want to make a bold claim that was precise and testable and correctable.
Not a woolly, another woolly information in biology argument,
information, Turing machine, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, a concrete
series of statements that can be falsified and explored and either
the theory could be destroyed or built upon.
Well, what about the criticism of you're just putting a bunch of sexy names
on something that's already obvious?
Um, yeah, that's really good.
So, so, um, the assembly index of a molecule is not obvious.
No one had measured it before.
And no one has thought to con quantify selection, um, complexity
and copy number before in such a primitive, um, quantifiable way.
I think the nice thing about this paper, this paper is, is a tribute to all,
well, not to all the people that understand that the biology does
something very interesting.
Some people call it neg entropy.
Some people call it, think about, you know, organizational principles,
that lots of people were not shocked by the paper because they'd done it before.
A lot of the, a lot of the arguments we got, some people said, oh, it's rubbish.
Oh, by the way, I had this idea 20 years before.
I was like, which one is it your, the rubbish part or the really revolutionary part?
So this kind of plucked two strings at once.
It plucked the, there is something interesting.
The biology is ours.
We can see around this, but we haven't quantified yet.
And what this is, the first stab at quantifying that.
So the, the, the, the fact that people said, um, this is obvious, but it's also, um,
so, so if it's obvious, why have you not done it?
Sure.
But, uh, there's, there's a few things to say there.
One is, you know, this is, um, in part of a lot of philosophical framework because,
you know, it's not like you can apply this generally to any object in the universe.
It's very chemistry focused.
Yeah.
Well, I think you will be able to, we just haven't got there robustly.
So we can say, how can we, let's go up a level.
So if we go up from level, we go up, let's go up from molecules to cells.
Cause you jump to people and I jumped from motocons and both are good.
And well, and they will be assembled.
They're thick with cells.
Yeah.
Can we go from, if we go from, so if we go from, um, molecules to assemblies and
let's take a cellular assembly, a nice thing about a cell is you can tell the
difference between a U-carryot and a pro-carryot, right?
The organelles are specialized differently.
We then look at the cell surface and the cell surface has different
glycosylation patterns and these cells will stick together.
Now let's go up a level with multicellular creatures.
You have cellular differentiation.
Now, if you think about how embryos develop, you go all the
way back, those cells undergo differentiation in a causal way that's
biomechanically a feedback between the genetics and biomechanics.
I think we can use assembly theory to apply to tissue types.
We can even apply it to different cell disease types.
So that's what we're doing next, but we're trying to walk, you know, the thing
is I'm trying to leap ahead.
I want to leap ahead to go, whoa, we'll apply it to culture, but clearly you
can apply it to memes and culture.
And we've also applied assembly theory to CAs.
And not as you think.
Cellar automata, by the way.
Yeah, to cellular automata, not just as you think, different C.A.
rules were invented by different people at different times.
And one of my co-workers, very talented to chat, basically was like, oh, I can
realize that different people had different ideas with different rules and
they copied each other and made slightly different bit, different cellular
automata rules and they and public and looked at them online.
And so he was able to refer an assembly index and copy number of rule,
whatever, doing this thing, but I digress.
But it does show you can apply it at a higher scale.
So what do we need to do to apply assembly theory to things?
We need to agree there's a common set of building blocks.
So in a cell, well, in a, in a multi-cellular creature, you need to look back in time.
So there is the initial cell, which the creature is fertilized and then starts
to grow, and then there is cell differentiation and you have to then
make that causal chain both on those.
So that requires development of the organism in time.
Or if you look at the cell surfaces and the cell types, they've got different
features on the cell, what, the walls and inside the cell.
So we're building up.
But obviously I want a leap to things like emoticons, language, mathematical theorems.
But that's a very large number of steps to get from a molecule to the human brain.
Yeah.
And I think they are related, but in hierarchies of emergence, right?
So you shouldn't compare them.
I mean, the assembly index of a human brain, what does that even mean?
Well, maybe we can look at the morphology of the human brain.
Say all human brains have these number of features in common.
If they have those numbers and then let's look at a brain in a whale or a dolphin
or a chimpanzee or a bird and say, okay, let's look at the assembly indices,
number of features in these.
And now the copy number is just the number of how many birds are there,
how many chimpanzees are there, how many humans are there.
Then you have to discover for that the features that you would be looking for.
Yeah.
And that means you need to have some idea of the anatomy.
Is there an automated way to discover features?
I guess so.
I mean, and I think this is a good way to apply machine learning and image recognition
just to basically characterize things.
So apply compression to it to see what emerges and then use the thing,
the features used as part of the compression as the measurement of,
as the thing that is searched for when you're measuring assembly index and copy.
And the compression has to be, remember the assembly universe,
which is you have to go from assembly possible to assembly contingent.
And that jump from assembly possible or possible brains or possible features all the time.
But we know that on the tree of life and also on the lineage of life,
going back to Luca, the human brain just didn't spring into existence.
Yesterday, it is a long lineage of brains going all the way back.
And so if we could do assembly theory to understand the development,
not just an evolutionary history, but in biological development as you grow,
we are going to learn something more.
What would be amazing is if you can use assembly theory,
this framework to show the increase in the assembly index associated with,
I don't know, cultures or pieces of text like language or images and so on.
And illustrate without knowing the data ahead of time,
just kind of like you did with NASA,
that you were able to demonstrate that it applies in those other contexts.
I mean, and that probably wouldn't at first,
you have to evolve the theory somehow, you have to change it, you have to expand it.
But like that, I guess this is as a paper at first step and saying,
okay, can we create a general framework for measuring complexity?
Of objects, for measuring life, the complexity of living organisms.
That's what this is reaching for.
That is the first step and also to say, look, we have a way of quantifying
selection and evolution in a fairly, not mundane, but a fairly mechanical way.
Because before now, it wasn't very, the ground truth for it was very subjective.
Whereas here, we're talking about clean observables.
And there's going to be layers on that.
I mean, we've collaborated right now, we already think we can do assembly theory on language.
And not only that, wouldn't it be great if we can,
so the, if we can figure out how under pressure, language is going to evolve and be more efficient.
Because you're going to want to transmit things.
And again, it's not just about compression.
It is about understanding how you can make the most of the architecture you've already built.
And I think this is something beautiful that evolution does.
We're reusing those architectures.
We can't just abandon our evolutionary history.
And if you don't want to abandon your evolutionary history,
and you know that evolution has been happening, then assembly theory works.
And I think that's a key comment I want to make, is that assembly theory is great
for understanding where evolution has been used.
The next jump is when we go to technology.
Because of course, if you take the M3 processor, I want to buy it,
I haven't bought one yet, I can't justify it, but I want it at some point.
The M3 processor arguably is, there's quite a lot of features, a quite large number.
The M2 came before it, then the M1 all the way back.
You can apply assembly theory to microprocessor architecture.
It doesn't take a huge leap to see that.
I'm a Linux guy, by the way.
So your examples go way over my head.
Yeah, well, whatever.
Is that, is that like a, is that a fruit company or something?
Sorry, I don't even know.
Yeah, there's a lot of interesting stuff to ask about language.
Like you could look at, how would that work?
You could look at GPT-1, GPT-2, GPT-3, 3, 5, 4, and try to analyze the kind of language it produces.
I mean, that's almost trying to look at assembly index of intelligent systems.
Yeah, I mean, I think the thing about large language models,
and this is a whole hobby horse I have at the moment, is that obviously they're all about
the evidence of evolution in the large language model comes from
all the people that produced all the language.
And that's really interesting, and all the corrections in the mechanical Turk.
Right?
Sure.
And, and so...
That's the part of the history, part of the memory of the system.
Exactly.
So you, can you, so, so it would be really interesting to basically use an assembly-based
approach to making language in a hierarchy, right?
I think as, my guess is that you could, we might be able to build a new type of large
language model that uses assembly theory that it has more understanding of the past and how
things were created, where basically, what the thing with LLMs is they're like everything,
everywhere, all at once, splat, and make the user happy.
So there's not much intelligence in the model.
The model is how the human interacts with the model, but wouldn't it be great if we could
understand how to embed more intelligence in them, in the system?
What do you mean by intelligence there?
Like, you seem to associate intelligence with history.
Yeah, well, I think selection produces intelligence.
You're almost implying that selection is intelligence.
No.
Yeah, kind of.
I would go out and limit and say that, but I think it's a little bit more.
Human beings have the ability to abstract and they can break beyond selection.
And this is what, like Darwinian selection, because a human being doesn't have to basically
do trial and error, like, they can think about it and say, oh, that's a bad idea.
I won't do that.
And then technologies and so on.
So we escaped Darwinian evolution and now we're onto some other kind of evolution.
I guess higher, higher level.
And then assembly theory will measure that as well, right?
Because it's all a lineage.
Okay, another piece of criticism or by way of question is how's assembly theory or maybe
assembly index different from Kamal Gaurav complexity?
So for people who don't know, Kamal Gaurav complexity of an object is the length of a
shortest computer program that produces the object as output.
Yeah, I seem to, there seems to be a disconnect between the computational process.
So yeah, so Kamal Gaurav measure requires a Turing machine, requires a computer.
And that's one thing.
And the other thing is assembly theory is supposed to trace the process by which
life evolution emerged.
There's a main thing there.
There are lots of other layers.
So Kamal Gaurav complexity, you can approximate Kamal Gaurav complexity,
but it's not really telling you very much about the actual,
it's really telling you about like your data set, compression of your data set.
And so that doesn't really help you identify the turtle in this case as the computer.
And so what assembly theory does is, I'm going to say,
trigger warning for anyone listening who loves complexity theory,
I think that we're going to show that AIT is a very important subset of assembly theory.
Because here's what happens, that I think that assembly theory allows us to build,
understand when with selections occurring, selection produces factories and things,
factories and the end produce computers, and you can get an algorithmic information theory
comes out of that.
The frustration I've had with looking at life through this kind of information theory is it
doesn't take into account causation.
So the main difference between assembly theory and all these complexity measures is there's no
causal chain.
And I think that's the main.
It's the causal chain at the core of assembly theory.
Exactly.
And if you've got all your data in a computer memory,
all the data is the same, you can access it in the same way, you don't care,
you just compress it and you'll either look at the program runtime or the shortest program.
And that, for me, is absolutely not capturing what it is, what its selection does.
But assembly theory looks at objects.
It doesn't have information about the object history.
It's going to try to infer that history by looking for the shortest history.
The object doesn't have a Wikipedia page that goes with it.
Oh, I would say it does in a way and it is fascinating to look at.
So you've just got the object and you have no other information about the object.
What assembly theory allows you to do with just with the object is to,
and the word infer is correct, I would agree with you infer.
So you're like, say, well, that's not the history, but something really interesting comes from this.
The shortest path is inferred from the object.
That is the worst case scenario if you have no machine to make it.
So that tells you about the depth of that object in time.
And so what assembly theory allows you to do is without considering any other circumstances
to say from this object, how deep is this object in time?
If we just treat the object as itself without any other constraints.
And that's super powerful because the shortest path then says, allows you to say,
oh, this object wasn't just created randomly, there was a process.
And so assembly theory is not meant to one up AIT or to ignore the factory.
It's just to say, hey, there was a factory.
How big was that factory and how deep in time is it?
But it's still computationally very difficult to compute that history for complex objects.
It is, it becomes harder.
But one of the things that's super nice is that it constrains your initial conditions, right?
It constrains where you're going to be.
So if you take, say, imagine, so one of the things we're doing right now is applying
assembly theory to drug discovery.
Now, what everyone's doing right now is taking all the proteins and looking at the proteins
and looking at molecules, docker proteins.
Why not instead take the, look at the molecules
that are involved in interacting with the receptors over time, rather thinking about
and use the molecules evolve over time as a proxy for how the proteins evolved over time.
And then use that to constrain your drug discovery process.
You flip the problem 180 and focus on the molecule evolution rather than the protein.
And so you can guess in the future what might happen.
So that, so that, so you rather than having to consider all possible molecules,
you know where to focus.
And that's the same thing.
If you're looking at in assembly spaces for like object where you don't know the entire history,
but you know that, you know, in the history of this object,
it's not going to have some other motif there that it doesn't apply.
It doesn't appear in the past.
But just even for the drug discovery point you made,
isn't, don't you have to simulate all of chemistry for to figure out how to come up with constraints?
No.
The molecules and the.
No, I mean, I don't, I don't know enough about protein.
Well, this is another thing that I think causes,
because this paper goes across so many boundaries.
So chemists have looked at this and said,
this is not a, this is not a reaction.
This is not correct reaction.
I was like, no, it's a graph.
Sure, there's, there's assembly index and shortest path examples here on chemistry.
Yeah.
And so, and what you do is you look at the minimal constraints on that graph.
Of course it has some mapping to the synthesis,
but actually you don't have to know all of chemistry.
You just have to understand, you can build up the constraint space rather nicely.
But this is just at the beginning, right?
There are so many directions this could go in and I said it,
it could all be wrong, but hopefully it's less wrong.
What about the little criticism I saw of you?
By way of question,
do you consider the different probabilities of each reaction in the chain?
So like that there could be different,
when you look at a chain of events that led up to the creation of an object,
doesn't it matter that some parts in the chain are less likely than others?
No.
It doesn't matter.
No, no.
Well, let's go back.
So no, not less likely, but react so, so no.
Let's go back to what we're looking at.
So the assembly index is the minimal path
that could have created that object probabilistically.
So imagine you have all your atoms in a plasma,
you've got enough energy, you've got enough, there's collisions.
What is the quickest way you could zip out that molecule with no reaction constraints?
How do you define quickest there then?
It's just basically a walk on a random graph.
So we make an assumption that basically the time scale for forming the bonds.
So no, I don't want to say that because then it's going to have people getting obsessing
about this point and your criticism is a really good one.
What we're trying to say is like, this puts a lower bound on something.
Of course, some reactions are less possible than others,
but actually I don't think chemical reactions exist.
Oh boy, what does that mean?
Why don't chemical reactions exist?
I'm writing a paper right now that I keep being told I have to finish
and it's called The Origin of Chemical Reactions.
And it merely says that reactivity exists as controlled by the laws of quantum mechanics.
And reactions, chemists put names on reactions like, so you could have like,
I don't know, the Vitic reaction, which is by Vitic.
You could have the Suzuki reaction, which is by Suzuki.
Now, what are these reactions?
So these reactions are constrained by the following.
They're constrained by the fact they're on planet Earth, 1g, 298 Kelvin, 1 bar.
So these are constraints.
They're also constrained by the chemical composition of Earth, oxygen,
availability, all this stuff.
And that then allows us to focus in our chemistry.
So when a chemist does a reaction, that's a really nice,
compressed shorthand for constraint application.
Glass flask, pure reagent, temperature pressure,
boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, control, control, control, control, control.
So of course, we have bond energies.
So the bond energies are kind of intrinsic in a vacuum, if you say that.
So the bond energy, you have to have a bond.
And so for assembly theory to work, you have to have a bond,
which means that bond has to give the molecule a certain half life.
So you're probably going to find later on that some bonds are weaker,
and that you are going to miss in mass spectrum.
When you look at the assembly of some molecules,
you're going to miss count the assembly of the molecule,
because it falls apart too quickly, because the bonds just form.
But you can solve that with looking at infrared.
So when people think about the probability, they're kind of misunderstanding.
Assembly theory says nothing about the chemistry,
because chemistry is chemistry, and their constraints are put in by biology.
There was no chemist in the origin of life, unless you believe in the chemist in the sky,
and it's like Santa Claus, they had a lot of work to do.
But chemical reactions do not exist in the constraints
that allow chemical transformations to occur, do exist.
Okay, so there's no chemical reactions, it's all constraint application,
which enables the emergence of, what's the different word for chemical reaction?
Transformation.
Transformation.
Yeah, like a function.
It's a function.
But no, but I love chemical reactions in the shorthand,
and so the chemists don't all go mad.
I mean, of course chemical reactions exist on earth.
It's a shorthand.
It's a shorthand for these constraints.
For it right.
So assuming all these constraints that we've been using for so long,
we just assume that that's always the case in natural language conversation.
Exactly, the grammar of chemistry, of course, emerges in reactions,
and we can use them reliably.
But I do not think the vitic reaction is accessible on Venus.
Right, and this is useful to remember, to frame it as constraint application is useful
for when you zoom out to the bigger picture of the universe,
and looking at the chemistry of the universe, and then starting to apply assembly theory.
That's interesting.
That's really interesting.
But we've also pissed off the chemists now.
Oh, they're pretty happy, but well, most of them.
Everybody, everybody deep down is happy, I think.
They're just sometimes feisty.
That's how they show, that's how they have fun.
Everyone is grumpy on some days when you challenge.
The problem with this paper is you, what is like,
it's almost like I went to a part, it's like you,
I used to do this occasionally when I was young is go to a meeting
and just find a way to offend everyone at the meeting simultaneously.
Even the factions that don't like each other,
they're all unified in their hatred of you just offending them.
This paper, it feels like the person that went to the party
and offended everyone simultaneously.
So stop fighting with themselves and just focus on this paper.
Maybe just a little insider, interesting information.
What were the editors of Nature, what the reviews and so on,
how difficult was that process?
Because this is a pretty big paper.
So when we originally sent the paper, we sent the paper
and the editor said, this was quite a long process.
So we sent the paper and the editor gave us some feedback
and said, I don't think it's that interesting.
It's not, or it's hard, it's a hard concept.
And we asked, and the editor gave us some feedback
and Sarah and I took a year to rewrite the paper.
Was the nature of the feedback very specific on this part,
this part, or was it like, what are you guys smoking?
What kind of coffee do you take?
Yeah, it was kind of the latter, what are you smoking?
Okay.
But polite and there's promise.
Yeah, well, the thing is the editor was really critical,
but in a really professional way.
And I mean, for me, this was the way science should happen.
So when it came back, we had too many equations in the paper.
If you look at the preprint, they're just equations everywhere,
like the 23 equations.
And when I said to Abhishek, who was the first author,
we've got to remove all the equations.
But my assembly equations saying Abhishek was like,
you know, no, we can't.
I said, well, look, if we want to explain this to people,
there's a real challenge.
And so Sarah and I went through the,
I think it was actually 160 versions of the paper,
but we basically, we got to version 40 or something.
We said, right, zero, let's start again.
So we wrote the whole paper again.
We knew the entire...
Amazing.
And we just went bit by bit by bit and said,
what is it we want to say?
And then we send the paper in.
And to ask, we expected it to be rejected
and not even go to review.
And then the, we got notification back, it had gone to review.
We were like, oh my God, it's so going to get rejected.
How's it going to get rejected?
Because the first assembly paper that on the mass spec,
we sent to nature, went through six rounds of review
and rejected, right?
And there's by a chemist who just said,
I don't believe you, you must be committing fraud.
A long story, probably a boring story.
But in this case, it went out to review,
the comments came back and the comments were incredibly...
No, there were very deep comments from all the reviewers.
There were, but the nice thing was,
the reviewers were kind of very critical,
but not dismissive.
They were like, oh really?
Explain this, explain this, explain this, explain this.
Are you sure it's not Comma Golarov?
Are you sure it's not this?
And we went through, I think, three rounds of review,
pretty quick, and the editor went, yeah, it's in.
But maybe you could just comment on the whole process.
You've published some pretty huge papers
on all kinds of topics within chemistry and beyond.
Some of them have some little spice in them,
a little spice of crazy.
Like Tom Wei says, I like my Tom with a little drop of poison.
It's not a mundane paper.
What's it like psychologically to go through all this process
to keep getting rejected, to get reviews from people
that don't get the paper or all that kind of stuff,
just from a question of a scientist.
Like what is that like?
It's, I think it's, I mean, this paper for me kind of,
because this wasn't the first time we tried
to publish assembly theory at the highest level.
The Nature Communications paper, on the mass spec,
on the idea, went through, went to Nature and got rejected,
went through six rounds of review and got rejected.
And it's, and I just was so confused
when the chemist said, this can't be possible.
I do not believe you can measure complexity using mass spec.
And also, by the way, molecules,
complex molecules can randomly form.
And we're like, but look at the data.
The data says, and they said, no, no, we don't believe you.
And we went and I just wouldn't give up.
The edit and the edit in the end was just like,
the different editors actually, right?
What's behind that never giving up?
It's like, when you're sitting there, 10 o'clock in the evening,
there's a melancholy feeling that comes over you.
And you're like, okay, this is rejection number five.
Or it's not rejection, but maybe it feels like a rejection
because the comments are, you totally don't get it.
Like what gives you strength to keep going there?
No, I don't know.
I don't normally get emotional about papers, but...
It's not about giving up because we want to get it published
because we want the glory or anything.
It's just like, why don't you understand?
And so what I would just try to be as rational as possible
and say, yeah, you didn't like it.
Tell me why.
And then, sorry, silly.
Never get emotional about papers normally,
but I think what we just compressed like five years of angst from this.
So it's been rough?
It's not just rough, it's like, it happened,
I came up with the assembly equation remote from Sarah in Arizona
and the people at SFI.
I felt like I was a mad person, the guy in depicted in a beautiful mind
who was just like, not the actual genius part,
but just the gibberish gibberish gibberish.
Because I kept writing expanded and I have no mathematical ability at all.
And I was expanding, I was making these mathematical expansions
where I kept seeing the same motif again.
I was like, I think this is a copy number.
The same string as carrying again and again.
Again, I couldn't do the math.
And then I realized the copy number fell out of the equation
and everything collapsed down.
I was like, oh, that works kind of.
So we submitted the paper and then when it was
almost accepted, right? The mass spec one. And it was Astrobiologist at Gray, you know, a mass spectroscopist at Gray, and the chemist went
nonsense, like biggest pilot nonsense ever fraud, you know. And I was like, but why fraud? And they just said, just because. And I was like,
well, and so, so, and I could not convince the editor in this case, the edit was just so pissed off, because they see it as like a kind of,
you know, you're wasting my time. And I would not give up. I wrote, I went and did dissected, you know, all the parts. And I think
although I mean, I got upset about it, you know, it was kind of embarrassing, actually. But, but I guess
beautiful. Um, but it was just trying to understand why they didn't like it. So they were part of me was like really
devastated. And a part of me was super excited. So I'm like, huh, they can't tell me why I'm wrong. And this kind of goes back
to, you know, when I was at school, I was in a kind of learning difficulties class, and I kept going to the teacher and say,
you know, you know, how what do I do today to prove I'm smart? And they were like, nothing, you can't I was like, give me a job,
you know, give me something to do, give me a job to do something to do as we and I kind of felt like that a bit when I was
arguing with the, and not arguing, there's no ad hominem, I wasn't telling the editor, they were idiots or anything like
this, or the, the reviewers, I kept it strictly like factual. And all I did is I just kept knocking it down bit by
bit by bit by bit by bit. It was ultimately rejected and it got published elsewhere. And then the actual
experimental data. So this is kind of in this paper, the experimental justification was already published. So when we did
this one, and we went through the versions and, and then we sent it in. And in the end, it just got accepted. We were
like, Well, that's kind of cool, right? This is kind of like, you know, some days, you have, you know, the, the students,
sorry, the, the, the first author was like, I can't believe it got accepted like, no, my, but it's great. It's like, it's good.
And then when the paper was published, I was not expecting the backlash, I was expecting computational, what, no, actually,
I was just expecting one person who'd been trolling me for a while about it, just to carry on trolling. But I didn't
expect the backlash. And then I wrote, I wrote to the editor and apologized. And the editor was like, Well, you're
apologizing for it was a great paper. Of course, it's going to get backlash, you said some controversial stuff. But it's
awesome.
And so
it's, I think it's a beautiful story of perseverance. And the backlash is just a negative word for discourse, which I think is
beautiful. I think you, as I said, to, you know, when it got accepted, and people were saying, we're kind of like
hacking on it. I was like, papers are not gold medals. The reason I wanted to publish that paper in nature is
because it says, Hey, there's something before biological evolution. You have to have that if you're not a
creationist, by the way, this is an approach. First time someone has put a concrete mechanism or sorry, a concrete
quantification. And what comes next, you're pushing on is a mechanism. And that's what we need to get to is order
catalytic sets, self replicating molecules, some other features that come in. And the fact that this paper has been so
discussed, for me, is a dream come true. Like, you, it doesn't get better than that. If you can't accept a few people
hating it. And the nice thing is the thing that really makes me happy is that no one has attacked the actual physical
content. Like, you can measure the assembly index, you can measure selection now. So either that's right, or it's well,
either that's helpful or unhelpful. If it's unhelpful, this paper will sink down and no one will use it again. If it's
helpful, it'll help people build scaffold on it, and we'll start to converge for a new paradigm. So I think that
that's the thing that I wanted to see, you know, my colleagues, authors, collaborators, and people were like, you've
just published this paper, you're a chemist, why have you done this? Like, who are you to be doing evolutionary
theory? Like, well, I don't know. I mean, sorry, did I need to
close anyone to do anything? Well, I'm glad you did. Let me just before coming back to origin of life and these
kinds of questions. You mentioned learning difficulties. I didn't know about this. So what was it like?
I wasn't very good at school, right?
This is when you were very young?
Yeah, yeah, well, but in primary school, I, my handwriting was really poor. And apparently I couldn't read. And, and I, and
my mathematics was very poor. So they just said this is a problem, they identified it. My parents kind of at the time were
confused because I was busy taking things apart, buying electronic junk from a shop, trying to build computers and
things. And then once I got out of when I was I think about the major transition in my stupidity, like, you know,
everyone thought I wasn't that stupid. Well, basically, everyone thought I was faking, I like stuff and I was faking
wanting to be it. So I always want to be a scientist. So five, six, seven years, I'll be a scientist, take things
apart. And everyone's like, Yeah, this guy wants to be a scientist, but he's an idiot. And so, and so, so everyone was
really confused, I think, at first, that I wasn't smarter than I, you know, was claiming to be. And then I just
basically didn't do well in any of the tests. I went down and down and down and down. And then, and I was kind of
like, huh, this is really embarrassing. I really like maths. And everyone says I can't do it. I really like kind of,
you know, physics and chemistry and all that in science. And people say, you know, you can't, you can't read and
write. And so I found myself in a learning difficulties class at the end of primary school and the beginning of
secondary school in UK secondary school is like 1112 years old. And I remember being put in the in the remedial
class. And the remedial class was basically full of, well, two types of three types of people, there were people
that had quite violent, right? You know, and there were people who couldn't speak English. And there were people that
really had learning difficulties. So
the one thing I can objectively remember was, I mean, I could read. I like reading, I read a lot. But something in me,
I was, I'm a bit of a rebel. I refused to read while I was told to read. And I found it difficult to read individual
words in the way they're told. But anyway, I got caught one day teaching someone else to read. And they said, okay,
there, we don't understand this. I, I know I always know what to be a scientist, but didn't really know what that
meant. And I realized you had to go to university. And I thought I can just go to university to take curious
people like, no, no, no, you need to have these, you have to be able to enter these exams to get this grade point
average. And the fact is the exams you've been entered into, you're not you, you're just going to get C, D or E, you
can't even get A, B or C, right? These are the UK GCSEs. I was like, oh, shit. And I said, can you just put me into the
the higher exams? I said, no, no, you're going to fail. There's no chance. So my, my father kind of intervened and said,
you know, just let him go in the exams. And they said, he's definitely going to fail. It's a waste of time,
waste of money. And he said, well, what have we paid? So they said, well, okay, so you didn't actually have to pay to
pay if I failed. So I took the exams and passed them, fortunately, I didn't get the top grades, but I, you know, I got
into A levels. But then that also kind of limited what I could do at A levels, I wasn't allowed to do A level
maths.
What do you mean you weren't allowed to?
Because I had such a bad math grade from my GCSE, I only had a C. But I, they wouldn't let me go into the ABC for
maths, because of some kind of coursework requirement back then. So the top grade I could have got was a C, so C
deal E, so I got a C. And then let me do kind of AS level maths, which is this half intermediate, but get to go
university. But in the archer like chemistry, I had a good chemistry teacher. So in the end, I got to university to
do chemistry.
So through that kind of process, I think, for kids in that situation, it's, it's easy to start believing that you're
not, well, how do I put it, that you're stupid, and basically give up that you're just not good at math, you're not
good at school. So this is by way of advice for people, for interesting people, for interesting young kids right
now, experiencing the same thing. Where was the place? What was the source of you not giving up there?
I have no idea. Other than I, I was really, I really like not understanding stuff. For me, when I not
understand something, I didn't understand, I feel like I don't understand anything. But, but now, but back
then, I was so, I remember when I was like, I don't know, I, I tried to, I tried to build a laser when I was
like eight. And I thought, how hard could it be? Like, and I basically, I was going to build a co, I was going
to build a co2 laser. I was like, right, I think I need some partially coated mirrors, and need some carbon
dioxide. And I need a high, high, high, high voltage. So I kind of, and I was like, I didn't have a, and I was so
stupid, right? I was kind of so embarrassed. I, to make enough co2, I actually set a fire and try to filter the flame.
Oh, nice.
To trap enough co2, and I was like, completely, completely failed. And I bent, burnt half the garage down. So my
parents were not very happy about that. But so that was one thing I was like, I really like first principle
thinking. And so, you know, so I'm, I remember being super curious, and being determined to find answers. And so the kind
of when people do a give advice about this, why ask for advice about this, I don't really have that much advice
other than don't give up. And one of the things I try to do as a, as a chemistry professor in my group is I, I
don't, I hire people that I think that, you know, I'm kind of home, I if they're persistent enough, who am I to deny
them the chance because, you know, people gave me a chance and I was able to do stuff.
Do you believe in yourself, essentially?
I'm, I like, so I love being around smart people. And I love confusing smart people. And when I'm confusing smart
people, and you know, not by stealing their wallets and hiding it somewhere, but if I can confuse smart people, that
is the one piece of hope that I might be doing something interesting.
Oh, that's quite brilliant. Like as a gradient to optimize, hang out with smart people and confuse them. And the more
confusing it is, the more there's something there.
And as long as they're not telling you just a complete idiot, and, and they give you different reasons. Yeah. And I
mean, I'm, you know, if everyone is like with assembly theory, and people said, Oh, it's wrong. And I was like, why? And
they're like, and no one could give me a consistent reason. They said, Oh, because it's been done before, or it's just
comagola off, or it's just that and the other. So I think the, the thing that I like to do is and in academia, it's
hard, right? Because people are critical. But I mean, you know, the criticism, I mean, although I got kind of upset
about it earlier, which is kind of silly, but not silly, because obviously, it's hard work being on your own or with a
team, spatially separated, like during lockdown, and, and try to keep everyone on board and, and, and be, you know,
have some faith that I always wanted to have a new idea. And so, you know, I like a new idea. And I want to, I don't
want to nurture it as long as possible. And if someone can give me actionable criticism, that's why I think I was
trying to say earlier, when I was kind of like stuck for words, give me actionable criticism. You know, it's wrong. Okay,
why is it wrong? So it doesn't, your equation is incorrect for this, or your method is wrong. And then so if, and so what I
try and do is get enough criticism from people to then triangulate and go back. And I've been very fortunate in my
life, that I've got great colleagues, great collaborators, funders, mentors and people that will take the time to say,
you're wrong because, and then what I have to do is integrate the wrongness and go, Oh, cool. Maybe I can fix that. And I
think criticism is really good. People have a go at me because I'm really critical. And like, but I'm not criticizing,
you know, you as a person, I'm just criticizing the idea and trying to make it better and say, Well, what about this?
And, you know, and sometimes I'm kind of, you know, my filters are kind of, you know, truncated in some ways. I'm just
like, That's wrong. That's wrong. That's wrong. What do this? And people are like, Oh, my God, you just told me you
destroyed my life's work. I'm like, relax. No, I'm just like, let's make it better. And I think that we don't do
that enough because we're, we're, you know, we, we're, we're, we're either personally critical, which isn't helpful, or we
don't give any criticism at all because we're too scared.
Yeah, yeah, the, I've seen you be pretty aggressively critical. But it's, every time I've seen it's the idea, not the
person.
I'm sure I make mistakes on that. I mean, I, you know, I argue, I argue lots with, with lots. I mean, I argue lots
with Sarah. And she's like, kind of shocked. I've argued with Yasha in the past. And he's like, you just make Yasha
barking. You're like, you're just making that up. I'm like, no, no, not quite. But kind of. Yeah.
You know, I've had a big argument with Sarah about time. She's like, No, time, time doesn't exist. I'm like, No,
time does exist. And now, and as, as she realized, the, her conception of assembly theory, and my conception
assembly theory was the same thing, necessitated us to abandon the fact that time is eternal, to actually
really fundamentally question how the universe produces combinatorial novelty.
So, also, time is fundamental for some of the theory.
I'm just trying to figure out where you and Sarah converge.
So I think assembly theory is fine in this time right now. But I think it helps us understand that
something interesting is going on. So there's, and I'm really inspired by a guy called Nick Gizin. I'm
gonna butcher his argument, but I love his argument a lot. So I hope he forgives me if he hears about it.
But basically, if you want free will, time has to be fundamental.
And we can go, and if you want time to be fundamental, you have to give up on platonic mathematics, and you
have to use intuitions, mathematics, by the, by the way, and again, I'm going to butcher this. But
basically, Hilbert said that, you know, infinite numbers are allowed. And I think it was Brower said
no, you can't all numbers are finite. So they're kind of like, so let's go back a step because it was like
people gonna say, assembly theory seems to explain that combinatorial large combinatorial space allows you
to produce things like life and technology. And that large combinatorial space is so big, it's not even
accessible to a Sean Carroll, David Deutsch multiverse, that physicists saying that, that all of, all of the
universe already exists in time is probably provably, that's a strong word, not correct, that we are going
to know that the universe as it stands the present, the way the present builds a future so big, the universe
can't ever contain the future. And this is a really interesting thing, I think Max Techmark has this
mathematical universe, we says, you know, the universe is kind of like a block universe. And I apologize to Max, if
I'm getting it wrong, but people think you can just move, you have the stat, you have the initial
conditions, and you can run the universe, right to the end and go backwards and forwards in that universe, that is
not correct.
Let me load that in the universe is not big enough to contain the future.
Yeah. That's why that's it.
That's another, that's a beautiful way of saying that time is fundamental.
Yes. And the you can have, and that's what this is why the law of the excluded middle, something is true or
false only works in the past.
Is it going to snow in New York next week, or in Austin, you might in Austin say probably not in New York, you might say
yeah, if you go forward to next week and say did it snow in New York last week true or false, you can answer that
question. The fact that the law of the excluded middle cannot apply to the future explains why time is fundamental.
Well, I mean, that that's a good example, intuitive example, but it's possible that we might be able to predict, you
know, whether it's going to snow if we had the perfect information.
I think we're saying it not impossible, impossible.
So here's why I'll make a really quick argument.
And this argument isn't mine.
It's Nick's and a few other people.
Can you explain his view on fundamental on time being fundamental?
Yeah, so I'll give my view, which kind of resonates with his.
But basically, it's very simple, actually, he would say that free will, your ability to design and do an experiment is exercising free
will. So he used that thought process, I never really thought about it that way, and that you actively make decisions.
I do think that I used to think that free will was a kind of kind of consequence of just selection.
But I'm kind of understanding that human free will is something really interesting.
And he very much inspired me.
But I think that what Sarah Walker said that inspired me as well, that these will converge is that I think that the universe in the
universe is very big, huge, but actually the place that is largest in the universe right now, the largest place in the
universe is Earth.
Yeah, I've seen you say that.
And boy, does that, that's a, that's an interesting process.
What do you mean by that?
Earth is the biggest place in the universe.
Because we have this combinatorial scaffolding going all the way back from Luca.
So you've, you've got cells that can self replicate.
And then you go all the way to terraforming the earth.
You've got all these architectures, the amount of selection that's going on biological selection, just to be clear, biological
evolution.
And then you have multicellularity, then animals and abstraction and when abstraction, there was another kick, because you can
then build architectures and computers and cultures and language.
And these things are the biggest things exist in the universe, because we can just build architectures that couldn't naturally
arise anywhere.
And the further that distance goes in time.
And this kind of is just, it's gigantic.
And from a complexity perspective.
Yeah.
Okay, wait a minute.
But I mean, I know you're being poetic, but how do you know there's not other earth?
Like, uh, like, how do you know you're, you're basically saying earth is really special.
It's awesome stuff.
As far as we look out, there's nothing like it going on.
But how do you know there's not nearly infinite number of places where cool stuff like this is going on?
I agree.
And I would say, I'll say again, that earth is the most gigantic thing.
We know in the universe, commentarily, we know, we know now, now, I guess this is just purely a guess.
I have no data, but other than hope, well, maybe not hope.
Maybe no, I have some data, um, that every star in the sky probably has planets and life is probably emerging on these
planets, but the amount of contingency that is associated with life is that I think the
commentarial space associated with these planets is so different.
We are never going to, our causal cones are never going to overlap or not easily.
And this is the thing that makes me sad about alien life, why it's why we have to create alien life in the lab as quickly as possible.
Because I don't know if we are going to be able to be able to build, um, architectures that will intersect with alien intelligence and architectures.
Intersect, you don't mean in time or space.
Time and the ability to communicate.
The ability to communicate.
Yeah.
My biggest fear in a way is that life is everywhere, but we become infinitely more lonely because of our scaffolding in that
commentarial space, because it's so big.
And so you're saying the, the constraints created by the environment that led to the factory of Darwinian evolution are just like
this little tiny cone in a nearly infinite commentarial space.
Exactly.
There's other cones like it and, and what, yeah, why can't we communicate with other, like just because we can't create it, doesn't mean we
can't appreciate the creation, right?
Like that, sorry, detect the creation.
I, I truly don't know, but I, it's an excuse for me to ask for people to give me money to make a planet simulator.
Yeah, right.
If I can make with a different, different kind of like another shameless, like, give me money.
I need this was all a long plug for a planet simulator.
It's like, you know, hey, I will be the first in line to do my, my, my, my rick, my rick garage has run out of room.
You know, yeah.
No, um, this is a planet simulator.
You mean like a different kind of planet with different sets of environments and pressures.
Exactly.
If we could basically recreate the selection before biology, as we know it, that gives rise to a different biology, we should be
able to put the constraints on where to look in the universe.
So here's a thing.
Here's my, here's my dream.
My dream is that by creating life in the lab, based upon constraints, we understand.
Like there's the go for Venus type life or Earth type life or something.
Again, do Earth 2.0 screw it.
Let's do Earth 2.0.
And Earth 2.0 has a different genetic alphabet.
Fine.
That's fine.
Different protein alphabet.
Fine.
Have cells and evolution and all that stuff.
We will then be able to say, okay, life is a more general phenomenon.
Selection is more general than what we think is the chemical constraints on life.
And we can point to Jane's Web and other telescopes and other planets that we are in that zone.
We are most likely to conventorily overlap with.
Right.
So, because, you know, we basically, so they're a chemistry.
You're looking for some overlap.
And then we can then basically shine light on them literally and white look at light coming back and
apply advanced assembly theory to general theory of language that we will get and say, ha, we, in that
signal, it looks random, but there's a copy number.
Oh, this random set of things that shouldn't be, that looks like a, a true random number
generator has structure as a, not, not common goal or off AIT type structure, but evolutionary
structure given by assembly theory.
And we start to, but I would say that because I'm a shameless assembly theorist.
Yeah, it just feels like the, the cone that might be misused in the word cone here, but the width
of the cone is growing faster, is growing really fast to where eventually all the cones overlap.
I, even in a very, very, very large combinatorial space, it just, but then again, if you're
saying the universe is also growing very quickly in terms of possibilities.
That's, I hope that as we build, as we build abstractions, the main, I mean, one, one idea is that as
we go to intelligence, intelligence allows us to look at the regularities around us in the
universe, and that gives us some common grounding to, to discuss with aliens.
And, and you might be right that, that, that we will overlap there, even though we have
completed different chemistry, literally complete different chemistry, that we will be at a
pass information from one another, but it's not a given.
And, you know, I have to kind of try and divorce hope and emotion, you know, away from what I
end up, I can logically justify.
But it's just hard to intuit a world, a universe where there's nearly infinite complexity
objects, and they somehow can't detect each other.
But the universe is expanding.
But the nice thing is that I would say, I would look, you see, I think Carl Sagan did the wrong
thing, well, not the wrong thing.
He flicked the Voyager program and pale blue dot said, look how big the universe is.
I would have done it the other way around and said, look at the Voyager program that came
from the planet Earth, that came from Luca, look at how big Earth is.
They produced that.
It produced that.
Yeah.
And that I think is like, completely amazing.
And then that should allow people on Earth to think about, well, probably we should try and get
causal chains off Earth onto Mars, onto the moon, wherever.
Well, it's human life or Martian life that we create, it doesn't matter.
But, but I think this combinatorial space tells us something very important about the
universe.
And that I realized in the assembly theory that the universe is too big to contain itself.
And I think this is, and now I'm coming back and I want to, I want to kind of change your
mind about time, because I'm guessing that your time is just coordinate.
Yeah.
So I'm going to, I'm going to change on.
I'm guessing you're one of those.
I'm going to change one of those.
I'm going to change your mind in real time, or at least attempt.
Oh, in real time.
There you go.
I already got the tattoo, so this is going to be embarrassing if you change my mind.
But you can just add, you can just add an arrow of time onto it, right?
Yeah, true.
Or erase it a bit.
So, and the argument that I think that is really most interesting is like, people say
the initial conditions specify the future of the universe.
Okay, fine.
Let's say that's the case for a moment.
Now let's go back to Newtonian mechanics.
Now, the uncertainty between principle and Newtonian mechanics is this.
If I give you the coordinates of your, of an object moving in space and the coordinates
of another object, and they collide in space, and you know those initial conditions,
you should know exactly what's going to happen.
However, you cannot specify these coordinates to infinite precision.
Now everyone said, you know, oh, this is kind of like, you know, the chaos theory argument.
No, no, it's deeper than that.
Here's a problem with numbers.
This is how, this is where Hilbert and Brower fell out.
To have the coordinates of this object to give an object a colliding, you have to have
them to infinite precision.
That's what Hilbert says.
It says no problem, infinite precision is fine.
Let's just take that for granted.
But when the object is finite, and it can't store its own coordinates, what do you do?
So in principle, if a finite object cannot be specified to infinite precision, in
principle, the initial conditions don't apply.
Well, how do you know it can't store its, well, how do you store an infinitely long
number in a finite size?
Well.
We're using infinity very loosely here.
No, no, we're using infinite precision.
I mean, not loosely, but very precisely, so you think infinite precision is required.
Well, let's, let's take the object.
Let's say the object is a golf ball.
Golf balls, a few centimeters in diameter.
We can work out how many atoms are on the golf ball.
And let's say we can store numbers down to atomic dislocations.
So we can work out how many atoms are on the golf ball and we can store the coordinates
in that golf ball down to that number.
But beyond that, we can't.
Let's make the golf ball smaller.
And, and this is where I think that we think that we get randomness in quantum mechanics.
And some people say you can't get random as quantum mechanics deterministic.
But this is where, this is where we realize that classical mechanics and quantum mechanics
suffer from the same uncertainty principle.
And that is the inability to specify the, the initial conditions to a precise enough
degree to give you determinism.
The universe is intrinsically too big.
And that's why time exists.
It's non deterministic.
Looking back into the past, you can look at the, you can use logical, um, arguments
because you can say, was it true or false?
You really know, but this is the fact we are unable to predict the future with the
precision is not evidence of lack of knowledge.
It's evidence, evidence, the universe is generating new things.
Okay.
So to you, first of all, quantum mechanics, you can just say statistically what's
going to happen when two golf balls hit each other.
Statistically, but that, but, but sure, I can say statistically what's going to happen.
But then when they do happen and they, and you keep nesting it together, you can't, I
mean, it goes almost back to look at, look at, look at, um, let's think about entropy
in the universe.
So how do you, what, how do we, how do we understand, um, entropy change?
Well, we could do the, look at, or process, we can use the agirdic hypothesis.
Um, we can also have, um, um, um, we can also have the, uh, counterfactuals where we
have all the different states and we can even put that in the multiverse.
Right.
But both those are kind of, they, they're, they're, they're non-physical.
Uh, the multiverse kind of collapses back to the same problem about the precision.
So all the, the, what you, if you accept you don't have to have true and false going
forward into the future, um, the real numbers are real.
They're just, they're just, they're, they're, they're observables.
We're trying to see exactly where time being fundamental sneaks in, in this
difference between the golf ball can't contain its own position perfectly
precisely, if how that leads to time needing to be fundamental.
Let me, I have a quick, do you believe, do you believe, or do you accept you have free will?
Yeah.
I think at this moment in time, I believe that I have free will.
So then you are, then you have to believe that time is fundamental.
I understand that's the statement you've made.
Well, no, that we can logically follows because if you don't have free will,
so like if you're in a, if you're in a universe that has no time, the universe is
deterministic.
If it's deterministic, then you have no free will.
I think the space of how much we don't know is so vast.
That saying the universe is deterministic and from that jumping, there's no free will.
It's just too difficult to believe.
No, I logically follows.
No, no, I don't disagree.
It's not, I'm not saying any, I mean, it's deep and it's important.
All I'm, all I'm saying, and it's the difference of, it's actually different to what I've said
before is that if you don't require Platonistic mathematics and accepts that
that non-determinism is how the universe looks and that gives us our creativity and the way
the universe is getting novelty, it's kind of really deeply important in assembly theory
because assembly theory starts to actually give you a mechanism why you go from boring time,
which is basically initial conditions specify everything, to a mismatch in creative time.
And I hope we'll do experiments.
I think it's really important to, I would love to do an experiment that proved that time is
fundamental and the universe is generating novelty.
I don't know all the features of that experiment yet, but by, you know, having these conversations
openly and getting people to think about the problems in a new way, better people, more
intelligent people with good mathematical backgrounds can say, oh, hey, I've got an idea.
I would love to do an experiment that shows that the universe, I mean,
universe is too big for itself going forward in time. And I really, you know, this is why I
really hate the idea of the Boltzmann brain. The Boltzmann brain makes me super kind of like,
you know, everyone's having a free lunch. It's like saying, it's like, let's break the
laws of physics. So a Boltzmann brain is this idea that in a long enough universe,
a brain will just emerge in the universe as conscious without, and that neglects the cause
or chain of evolution that require to produce that brain. And this is where the computational
argument really falls down because the computation is to say, I can calculate probability of a
Boltzmann brain and I can, and they'll give you a probability, but I can calculate probability
of a Boltzmann brain, zero. Just because the space of possibility is so large?
Yeah, it's like when we start falling ourselves with numbers that we can't actually measure
and we can't ever conceive of, I think it doesn't give us a good explanation. And I've become,
I want to explain why life is in the universe. I think life is actually novelty minor.
I mean, life basically minds novelty almost from the future and makes it actualizes in the present.
Okay, life is a novelty minor
from the future that is actualized in the present.
Yeah, I think so.
Novelty minor. First of all, novelty. What's the origin of novelty when you go from boring
time to creative time? Where's that? Is it as simple as randomness like you're referring to?
I'm really struggling with randomness because I had a really good argument
with Yasha Bark about randomness. Nisa said randomness doesn't give you free will. That's
insane because you just be random. And I think he's right at that level. But I don't think he is
right on another level. And it's not about randomness. It's about constrained, I'm making this up
as I go along, so making this up, constrained opportunity. So what I mean is like, so you have
to have, so the novelty, what is novelty? This is why I think it's a funny thing.
You ever want to discuss AI? Why I think everyone's kind of gone AI mad is that they're misunderstanding
novelty. But let's think about novelty. What is novelty? So I think novelty is a genuinely new
configuration that is not predicted by the past and that you discover in the present.
And that is truly different. Now, everyone says that some people say that novelty doesn't exist.
It's always with precedent. I want to do experiments that show that that is not the case.
And it goes back to a question you asked me a few moments ago, which is, where is the factory?
Because I think the same mechanism that gives us a factory gives us novelty. And I think that
is why I'm so deeply hung up on time. I mean, of course I'm wrong, but how wrong? And I think that
life opens up that combinatorial space in a way that our current laws of physics,
or as contrived, in a deterministic initial condition universe, even with the get out of
the multiverse, David Deutsch style, which I love by the way, but I don't think it's correct.
But it's really beautiful.
Multiverse.
David Deutsch's conception of the multiverse is kind of like given.
But I think that the problem with wave particle duality and quantum mechanics is not
about the multiverse. It's about understanding how determined the past is. Well, I don't think
just think that actually this is a discussion I was having with Sarah about that, right?
When she was like, oh, I think we've been debating this for a long time now
about how do we reconcile novelty, determinism, indeterminism.
It's okay. Just to clarify, you both, you and Sarah, think the universe is not deterministic?
I won't speak for Sarah, but I roughly can. I think that the universe,
I think the universe is deterministic looking back in the past, but undetermined going forward
in the future. So I'm kind of having my cake and eat it here. This is because I fundamentally
don't understand randomness, right? As Yasha told me or other people told me. But if I adopt a new
view now, which the new view is the universe is just non-deterministic, but I'd like to refine that
and say the universe appears deterministic going back in the past, but it's undetermined going
forward in the future. So how can we have a universe that has deterministic looking rules
that's non-determined going in the future? Is this breakdown in precision in the initial
conditions? And we have to just stop using initial conditions and start looking at
trajectories and how the combinatorial space behaves in expanding the universe in time and
space. And assembly theory helps us quantify the transition to biology. Biology appears to be
a novelty mining because it's making crazy stuff. That we are unique to Earth, right?
There are objects on Earth that are unique to Earth that will not be found anywhere else
because you can do the combinatorial math. What was that statement you made about life
is novelty mining from the future? What's the little element of time that you're introducing?
So what I'm kind of meaning is because the future is bigger than the present. In a deterministic
universe, how do you go from the... How do the states go from one to another? I mean,
there's a mismatch, right? So that must mean that you have a little bit of indeterminism,
whether that's randomness or something else. I don't understand. I want to do experiments
to formulate a theory to refine that as we go forward. That might help us explain that.
And I think that's why I'm so determined to try and crack the non-life-to-life transition,
looking at networks and molecules, and that might help us think about it, the mechanism.
But certainly, the future is bigger than the past in my conception of the universe and some
conception of the universe. By the way, that's not obvious, right? That's what was just kind of
the future being bigger than the past. Well, that's one statement and the statement that the
universe is not big enough to contain the future is another statement. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That one is a big one. That one's a really big one. I think so. But I think it's entirely...
Because look, we have the second law. And right now, I mean, we don't need the second law if the
future is bigger than the past. It follows naturally. Right. So why are we retrofitting
all these sticking plasters onto our reality to hold onto a timeless universe?
Yeah, but that's because it's kind of difficult to imagine the universe that can't contain the
future. But isn't that really exciting? It's very exciting, but it's hard. I mean, we're humans on
Earth and we have a very kind of four-dimensional conception of the world of 3D plus time. It's
just hard to intuit a world where what does it even mean? A universe that can't contain the future.
Yeah, it's kind of crazy, but obvious. I mean, I suppose it sounds obvious, yeah, if it's true.
But the nice thing is you can... So the reason why assembly theory turned me on to that was that
let's just start in the present and look at all the complex molecules and go backwards in time
and understand how evolutionary processes gave rise to them. It's not at all obvious. The taxol,
which is one of the most complex natural products produced by biology, was going to be invented
by biology. It's an accident. Taxol is unique to Earth. There's no taxol elsewhere in the universe
and taxol was not decided by the initial conditions. It was decided by this kind of
this interplay between the... So the past simply is embedded in the present. It gives some features,
but why the past doesn't map to the future one to one is because the universe is too big to
contain itself. That gives space for creativity, novelty, and some things which are unpredictable.
Well, okay, so given that you're disrespecting the power of the initial conditions, let me ask you
about... So how do you explain that cellular thermometer are able to produce such incredible
complexity given just basic rules and basic initial conditions? I think that this falls into the
Brower-Hilbert trap. So how do you get a cellular thermometer producing a complexity? You have a
computer, you generate a display, and you map the change of that in time. There are some CAs
repeat functions. It's fascinating to me that for pi, there is a formula where you can go to the
millionth decimal place of pi and read out the number without having to go there. But there are
some numbers where you can't do that. You have to just crank through. Whether it's Wolframian
computational irreducibility or some other thing, that doesn't matter. But these CAs,
that complexity, is that just complexity or a number that is basically you're mining that
number in time? Is that just a display screen for that number, that function?
Can you say the same thing about the complexity on Earth then?
No, because the complexity on Earth has a copy number and an assembly index associated with
that. That CAs is just a number running. You don't think it has a copy number? Wait a minute.
Well, it does where we're looking at humans producing different rules, but then it's
nested on selection. So those CAs are produced by selection. I mean, the CAs are such a fascinating
pseudo complexity generator. What I would love to do is understand, quantify the degree of surprise
in the CA and run it long enough. But what that, I guess that means is we have to instantiate,
we have to have a number of experiments where we're generating different rules and running them
time spare steps. But oh, got it. CAs are mining novelty in the future by iteration, right? And
you're like, oh, that's great. That's great. You didn't predict it. Some rules you can predict
what's going to happen. Other rules you can't. So for me, if anything, CAs are evidence that the
universe is too big to contain itself, because otherwise you'd know what the rules are going
to do forever more. Right. I guess you were saying that the physicist saying that all you need is
the initial conditions and the rules of physics is somehow missing the bigger picture. And if you
look at CAs, all you need is the initial condition and the rules and then run the thing.
You need three things. You need the initial conditions, you need the rules, and you need
time iteration to mine it out. Without the coordinate, you can't get it out.
Sure. And that's that, that is fundamental. And you can't predict it from the initial conditions.
If you could, then it'd be fine. And that time is a resource.
A foundation of, this is the history, the memory of each of the things that created,
it has to have that memory of all the things that led up to it.
I think it's, yeah, you have to have the resource. Because time is a fundamental
resource. And yeah, I'm becoming, I think I had a major epiphany about randomness,
but I keep doing that every two days, and then it goes away again, it's random.
You're a time fundamentalist.
You should be as well. If you believe in free will, the only conclusion is there is
time is fundamental, otherwise you cannot have free will, it logically follows.
Well, the foundation of my belief in free will is just observation driven.
But that's, I think if you use logic, it's like, logically it seems like the universe is deterministic.
Looking backwards in time, and that's correct. The universe is.
And then everything else is a kind of leap. It requires a leap.
I mean, I think that it's kind of, I think machine learning is going to provide a big,
a chunk of that, right? Because it helps us explain this. So the way I'd say, if you take...
That's interesting. Why?
Well, let's just, my favorite one is because I'm, the AI doomers are driving me mad.
And in fact, that we don't have any intelligence yet. I call AI autonomous informatics just to
make people grumpy. You're saying we're quite far away from AGI.
I think that we have no conception of intelligence. And I think that we don't
understand how the human brain does what it does. I think that we are, neuroscience is making great
advances, but I think that we have no idea about AGI. So I am a technological, I guess,
optimist. I believe we should do everything. The whole regulation of AI is nonsensical.
I mean, why would you regulate Excel other than the fact that Clippy should come back and I love
Excel 97? Because we can play, you know, we can do the flight simulator.
I'm sorry, in Excel?
Yeah. Have you not played the flight simulator?
In Excel 97?
Yeah.
What does that look like?
It's like wireframe, very, very basic. But basically, I think it's x0, y0, shift,
and it opens up and you can play the flight simulator.
Oh, wow. Wait, wait, is it using Excel?
Excel, Excel 97.
Okay.
I resurrected it the other day and saw Clippy again for the first time in a long time.
Well, Clippy is definitely coming back. But you're saying we don't have a great understanding
of what is intelligence? What is the intelligence?
I am very frustrated.
I'm underpinning the human mind.
I'm very frustrated by the way that we're AI dooming right now.
And people are bestowing some kind of magic.
Now, let's go back a bit. So you said about AGI. Are we far away from AGI?
Yes, I do not think we're going to get to AGI anytime soon. I've seen no evidence of it.
And the AI doom scenario is nonsensical and extreme.
And the reason why I think it's nonsensical, but it's not nonsensical,
and I don't think there isn't things we should do and be very worried about, right?
I mean, there are things we need to worry about right now, what AI are doing,
whether it's fake data, fake users, right? I want authentic people, authentic data.
I don't want everything to be faked. And I think it's a really big problem.
And I absolutely want to go on the record to say, I really worry about that.
What I'm not worried about is that some fictitious entity is going to turn us all to paperclips
or detonate nuclear bombs. I don't know. Maybe I don't know anything you can't think of.
Why is this? I'll take a very simple series of logical arguments.
And the AI doomers have not had the correct epistemology.
They do not understand what knowledge is. And until we understand what knowledge is,
they're not going to get anywhere because they're applying things falsely.
So let me give you a very simple argument. People talk about the probability,
P doom AI. We can work out the probability of an asteroid hitting the planet.
Why? Because it's happened before. We know the mechanism. We know that there's a gravity well
or that space time is bent and stuff falls in. We don't know the probability of AGI because
we have no mechanism. So let me give you another one, which is like, I'm really worried about AGI.
What's AGI? AGI is anti-gravity. One day we could wake up and anti-gravity is discovered.
We're all going to die. The atmosphere is going to float away. We're going to float away.
We're all doomed. What is the probability of AGI? We don't know because there's no mechanism for AGI.
Do we worry about it? No. And I don't understand the current
reason for certain people in certain areas to be generating this nonsense.
I think they're not doing it maliciously. I think we're observing the emergence of new
religions, how religions come because religions are about kind of some controls. You've got the
optimist saying, AI is going to cure us all and AI is going to kill us all. What's the reality?
Well, we don't have AI. We have really powerful machine learning tools,
and they will allow us to do interesting things. And we need to be careful about how we
use those tools in terms of manipulating human beings and faking stuff, right?
Right. Well, let me try to sort of steal man the AI doomers argument. Actually, I don't know.
Are AI doomers in the Yadkowski camp saying it's definitely going to kill us because there's
a spectrum. 95% I think is the limit. And 95% plus. No, not plus. I don't know. I was seeing on
Twitter today various things, but I think Yadkowski is at 95%. But to belong to the AI doomer club,
is there a threshold? I don't know what the membership means. Maybe. And what are the fees?
Well, I think Scott Aronson, I was quite surprised. I saw this online, so it could be wrong. Sorry
if it's wrong, says 2%. But the thing is, if someone said there's a 2% chance
you're going to die going into the lift, would you go into the lift?
In the elevator for the American English speaking audience. Well, no, not for the elevator.
So I would say anyone higher than 2%. I mean, I think there's a 0% chance of AI doom. Zero.
Just to push back on the argument where the end of zero on the AI. We can see on earth that there
increasing levels of intelligence of organisms. We can see what humans with extra intelligence
were able to do to the other species. So that is a lot of samples of data, what a delta in
intelligence gives you. When you have an increase in intelligence, how you're able to dominate
species on earth. And so the idea there is that if you have a being that's 10x smarter than humans,
we're not going to be able to predict what that's going to do. With that being is going to be able
to do, especially if it has the power to hurt humans, which you can imagine a lot of trajectories
in which the more benefit AI systems give, the more control would give to those AI systems
over our power grid, over our nuclear weapons or weapons of any sort. And then it's hard to
know what an ultra-intelligent system would be able to do in that case. You don't find that convincing.
I think I would fail that argument 100%. Here's a number of reasons to fail it on.
First of all, we don't know where the intention comes from. The problem is that people think
they keep watching all the Huxters online with a prompt engineering and all this stuff.
When I talk to a typical AI computer scientist, they keep talking about the AI as having some
kind of decision-making ability. That is a category error. The decision-making ability
comes from human beings. We have no understanding of how humans make decisions. We've just been
discussing free will for the last half an hour, right? We don't even know what that is. So the
intention, I totally agree with you. People who intend to do bad things can do bad things and
we should not let that risk go. That's totally here and now. I do not want that to happen,
and I'm happy to be regulated to make sure that systems I generate, whether they're like
computer systems or I'm working on a new project called Chem Machina.
Nice. Well done.
Yeah, which is basically a...
For people who don't understand the point, the X Machina is a great
film about, I guess, AGI embodied and chemistry version of that.
And I only know one way to embody intelligence, that's in chemistry and human brains.
Category error number one is they have agency. Category error number two is saying that assuming
that anything we make is going to be more intelligent. Now, you didn't say super intelligent.
I'll put the words into our mouths here, super intelligent. I think that there is no
reason to expect that we are going to make systems that are more intelligent,
more capable. When people play chess computers, they don't expect to win now, right? The chess
computer is very good at chess. That doesn't mean it's super intelligent. So I think that
super intelligence, I mean, I think even Nick Bostrom is pulling back on this now because he
invented this. So I see this a lot. When did it see first happen? Eric Drexler, nanotechnology,
atomically precise machines. He came up with a world where we had these atom cogs everywhere,
they were going to make self replicating nanobots. Not possible. Why? Because there's no
resources to build these self replicating nanobots. You can't get the precision. It doesn't work.
It was a major category error in taking engineering principles down to the molecular level. The only
functioning molecular technology we know, sorry, the only functioning nanomolecular technology
we know produced by evolution. There. So now let's go forward to AGI. What is AGI? We don't know.
It's super. It can do this or humans can't think. I would argue the only AGIs that exist in the
universe are produced by evolution. And sure, we may be able to make our working memory better. We
might be able to do more things. The human brain is the most compact computing unit in the universe.
It uses 20 watts. It uses a really limited volume. It's not like a chat GPT cluster, which has to
have thousands of watts of model that's generated and has to be corrected by human beings. You are
autonomous and embodied intelligence. So I think that there are so many levels that we're missing
out. We've just kind of went, oh, we've discovered fire. Oh, gosh, the planet's just going to burn
one day randomly. I mean, I just don't understand that leap. There are bigger problems we need to
worry about. So what is the motivation? Why are these people, let's assume they have their earnest,
have this conviction? Well, I think it's just, it's kind of, they're making leaps that they're
trapped in a virtual reality. There isn't reality. Well, I mean, I can continue this set of arguments
here, but also it is true that ideologies that fear monger are dangerous. Because you can then
use it to control, to regulate in a way that halts progress, to control people,
to cancel people, all that kind of stuff. So you have to be careful because reason ultimately
wins, right? But there is a lot of concerns with superintelligence systems, with very capable
systems. When you, I think when I, when you hear the word superintelligence, you're hearing like
it's smarter than humans in every way that humans are smart. But the
paperclip manufacturing system doesn't need to be smart in every way. It just needs to be smart in
a set of specific ways. And the more capable the AI systems become, the more you could see
us giving them control over, like I said, our power grid, a lot of aspects of human life. And
then that means they will be able to do more and more damage when there's unintended consequences
that come to life. I think that that's right. The unintended consequences we have to think about.
And I'm, that I fully, I fully agree with. But let's go back a bit. Sentient, I mean, I'm going
on far away from my comfort zone and all this stuff, but hey, let's talk about it because
I give myself a qualification. Yeah, we're both qualified incentives, I think.
As much as anyone else.
I think the paperclip scenario is just such a poor one, because let's think about how that would
happen. And also, let's think about, we are being so unrealistic about how much of the earth's
surface we have commandeered. You know, for papermit clip manufacturing to really happen,
I mean, do the math. It's like, it's not going to happen. There's not enough energy,
there's not enough resource, where they're all going to come from. I think that what happens in
evolution is really, why is, why is a killer virus not killed out all of, not killed all life on
earth? What happens is, sure, super killer viruses that kill the ribosome have emerged.
But you know what happens? They nuke a small space because they can't propagate, they all die.
So there's this interplay between evolution and propagation, right, and death. And so.
In evolution. You don't think it's possible to engineer, for example, sorry to interrupt, but
a perfect virus that's deadly enough? No, nonsensical. I think that just wouldn't, again,
it wouldn't work. So it's too deadly. It would just kill the radius and not replicate it.
Yeah. I mean, you don't think it's possible to get a... I mean, if you were super, I mean,
if you were... Not kill all of life on earth, but kill all humans. There's not many of us.
There's only like 8 billion. There's so much more ants. I mean, I don't... So many more ants.
And they're pretty smart. I think we... The nice thing about what we're where we are,
I would love for the AI crowd to take a leaf out of the book of the bio warfare, chemical warfare
crowd. I mean, not love, because actually people have been killed with chemical weapons in the
first and second world war, and people and bio weapons have been made. And, you know, we can
argue about COVID-19 and all this stuff. Let's not go there just now. But I think there is a
consensus that some certain things are bad, and we shouldn't do them, right? And sure,
it would be possible for a bad actor to engineer something bad, but the damage would be,
we would see it coming, and we would be able to do something about it.
Now, I guess what I'm trying to say is, when people talk about doom, and they just... When
you ask them for the mechanism, they just say, you know, they just make something up. I mean,
in this case, I'm with Yanlacoon. I think you could put out a very good point about trying to
regulate jet engines before we've even invented them. And I think that's what I'm saying. I'm not
saying we should... I just don't understand why these guys are going around making... Literally
making stuff up about us all dying, when basically we need to actually really focus on. Now, let's
say there's some actors that are earnest. Let's say Yurikowski is being earnest, right? And he
really cares. But he loves it. It goes, and then you're all going to die. It's like, you know,
why don't we try and do the same thing and say, you could do this, and then you're all going to be
happy forever after? Yeah. Well, I think there's several things to say there. One, I think there
is a role in society for people that say we're all going to die, because I think it filters through
as a message, as a viral message that gives us the proper amount of concern. Okay. All right.
Meaning not the... It's not 95%, but when you say 95% and it filters through society, you'll give an
average of like a 0.03%, an average. So it's nice to have people that are like, we're all going to
die, then we'll have a proper concern. Like, for example, I do believe we're not properly concerned
about the threat of nuclear weapons currently. It just seems like people have forgotten that
that's a thing. And there's a war in Ukraine with the nuclear power involved. There's nuclear
power throughout the world, and it just feels like we're on the brink of a potential world war
to a percentage that I don't think people are properly calibrating in their head. We're all
thinking it's a Twitter battle as opposed to like actual threat. So it's nice to have that kind of
level of concern. But to me, like when I hear AI tumors, what I'm imagining is with unintended
consequences, a potential situation where let's say 5% of the world suffers deeply because of a
mistake made of unintended consequences. I don't imagine the entirety of human civilization dying,
but there could be a lot of suffering if this is done. I understand that. And I kind of, I guess,
I mean, I'm involved in the whole hype cycle. Like why, what I would like us to, I don't want us to,
so what's happening right now is there seems to be, so let me just say, having some people
saying AI doom is a worry. Fine, let's give them that. But what seems to be happening is there
seems to be people who don't think AI is doing, they're trying to use that to control regulation
and to push people to regulate where, which stops humans generating knowledge. And I am an
advocate for generating as much knowledge as possible. When it comes to nuclear weapons,
I grew up in the 70s and 80s where the nuclear doom, a lot of adults really had existential
threat, almost as bad as now with AI doom, they were really worried, right? There was some great,
well, not great, there was some horrific documentaries. I think there's one called
Fred's that was generated in the UK, which was like, it was terrible, it was like so scary.
And I think that the correct thing to do is obviously get rid of nuclear weapons, but let's
think about unintended consequences. We've got rid of, this conference is such a non-secretary,
we've got rid of all the sulfur particles in the atmosphere, right, all the, all the soot.
And what's happened in the last couple of years is global warming has accelerated because we've
cleaned up the atmosphere too much. Sure. I mean, the same thing if you get rid of nuclear weapons.
Exactly, that's my point. So what we could do is if we actually started to put the AI in charge,
which is I really like an AI to be in charge of all world politics. And this sounds ridiculous
for a second, hang on. But if we could all agree on the... Yeah, I just woke up. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That statement. But I really don't like politicians who are basically just looking at local sampling.
But if you could say globally, look, here's some game theory here. What is the minimum
number of nuclear weapons we need to distribute around the world to everybody
to basically reduce war to zero? I mean, just the start experiment of the United States and China
and Russia and major nuclear powers get together and say, all right, we're going to distribute
nuclear weapons to everybody. Every single nation on earth. Oh, boy. I mean, that has a
probably greater than 50% chance of eliminating major military conflict. Yeah. Yeah, but it's not
100%. But I don't think anyone will use them because I think... And look, what you've got to try and do
is like to qualify for these nuclear weapons. This is a great idea. The game fair is to do
this, right? I think the question is this, I really by your question, we have too many nukes.
From just from a feeling point of view that we've got too many of them. So let's reduce the number
but not get rid of them because we'll have too much conventional warfare. So then what is the
minimum number of nuclear weapons we can distribute around to remove what humans hurting each other
is something we should stop doing. It's in, it's not out with our conceptual capability. But right
now, what about nations, certain nations are being exploited for their natural resources in the
future, because for a short term gain, because we don't want to generate knowledge. And so if
everybody had an equal doomsday switch, I predict the quality of life of average human will go up
faster. I am an optimist and I believe that humanity is going to get better and better and
better, that we're going to eliminate more problems. But I think, yeah, let's...
But the probability of a bad actor of one of the nations setting off a nuclear weapon,
I mean, you have to integrate that into the...
But we just give you the nukes like population, right? We give, what we do is we...
But anyway, let's just go there. So if a small nation with a couple of nukes uses one because
they're a bit bored or annoyed, the likelihood that they are going to be pummeled out of
existence immediately is 100%. And yet they've only nuked one other city. I know this is crazy
and I apologize for... Well, no, no, I think it's just to be clear, we're just having a thought
experiment that's interesting. But there's terrorist organizations that would take that,
would take that trade. And we have to ask ourselves a question of how many...
Which percentage of humans would be suicide bombers, essentially, where they would sacrifice
their own life to... Because they hate another group of people. And I believe it's a very small
fraction, but is it large enough to... If you give out nuclear weapons?
I can predict a future where we take all nuclear material and we burn it for energy, right?
Because we're getting there. And the other thing you could do is say, look, there's a gap.
So if we get all the countries to sign up to the virtual nuclear agreement where we all exist,
we have a simulation where we can nuke each other in the simulation and the economic
consequences are catastrophic. Sure. In the simulation. I love it. It's not going to kill all
humans, it's just going to have economic consequences. Yeah, yeah. I don't know, I just made it up.
It seems like... No, it's interesting. I mean, but it's interesting whether that would have as much
power on human psychology as actual physical nuclear exposure. I think so.
It's possible, but people don't take economic consequences as seriously, I think, as
actual nuclear weapons. I think they do in Argentina, and they do in Somalia,
and they do in a lot of these places where... No, I think this is a great idea. I'm a strong
advocate now for... So what have we come up with? Burning all the nuclear material to have energy.
And before we do that, because mad is good, mutually assured destruction is very powerful,
let's take it into the metaverse and then get people to kind of subscribe to that,
and if they actually nuke each other, even for fun in the metaverse, there are dire consequences.
Yeah, yeah. So it's like a video game. We all have to join this metaverse video game.
Yeah. I can't believe it. And then there's dire economic consequences. I don't know how...
And it's all run by AI, as you mentioned, so the AI doomers are really terrified at this point.
No, they're happy they have a job for another 20 years, right?
If you're angry. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm a believer in equal employment.
You've mentioned that, what do you call it? Chem-Machina?
Yeah. Yeah. So you've mentioned that a chemical brain is something you're interested in creating,
and that's the way you get conscious AI soon. Can you explain what a chemical brain is?
I want to understand the mechanism of intelligence that's gone through evolution,
right? Because the way that intelligence was produced by evolution appears to be the following.
Origin of life, multicellularity, locomotion, senses, once you can start to see things coming
towards you, and you can remember the past and interrogate the present and imagine the future,
you can do something amazing, right? And I think only in recent years did humans become
Turing-Complete, right? Yeah. We'll go... And so that Turing-Completeness kind of gave us another
kick up. But our ability to process that information is produced in a wet brain,
and I think that we are not getting... We do not have the correct hardware architectures
to have the domain flexibility and the ability to integrate information. I think intelligence
also comes at a massive compromise of data. Right now, we're obsessing about getting more and more
data, more and more processing, more and more tricks to get dopamine hits. So when we look back
on this, going, oh, yeah, that was really cool. Because when I chat GPT, it made me feel really
happy. I got a hit from it, but actually it just exposed how little intelligence I use in every
moment, because I'm easily fooled. So what I would like to do is to say, well, hey, hang on,
what is it about the brain? So the brain has this incredible connectivity, and it has the ability
to... As I said earlier about my nephew, I just went from Bill to Billy, and he went,
all right, Leroy. How did he make that leap? He was able to basically, without any training,
I extended his name, he doesn't like, he wants to be called Bill. He went back and said,
you like to be called Lee, I'm going to call you Leroy. So human beings have a brilliant ability,
or intelligent beings appear to have a brilliant ability to integrate across all domains all at
once, and to synthesize something which allows us to generate knowledge, and becoming Turing complete
on our own. Although AIs are built in Turing complete things, their thinking is not Turing
complete, in that they are not able to build universal explanations. And that lack of universal
explanation means that they're just inductivists. Inductivism doesn't get you anywhere. It's just
basically a party trick. It's like, I like the, I think it's in the fabric of reality from David
Deutsch, where basically, the farmer is feeding the chicken every day, and the chicken's getting
fat and happy, and the chicken's like, I'm really happy. Every time the farmer comes in and feeds
me, and then one day the farmer comes in, and instead of feeding the chicken just rings its neck.
You know, and that's kind of, and had the chicken had an alternative understanding of why the farmer
was feeding it. It's interesting though, because we don't know what's special about the human mind.
It's able to come up with these kind of generalities, this universal theories of things,
and come up with novelty. I can imagine, because you gave an example, you know, about William and
Leroy. I feel like an example like that will be able to see in future versions of large language
models, will be really, really, really impressed by the humor, the insights, all of it, because it's
fundamentally trained on all the incredible humor and insights that's available out there on the
internet, right? So we'll be impressed. I think we'll be impressed. Oh, I'm impressed. Right.
I'm impressed. Increasingly so. But we're mining the past. Yes. And what the human brain appears
to be able to do is mine the future. Yes. So novelty, it is interesting whether these large
language models will ever be able to come up with something truly novel. I can show on the back of
a piece of paper why that's impossible. And it's like the problem is that, and again, there's a
domain experts kind of bullshitting each other. The term generative. Yes. Right.
Average person, oh, it's no, no, no. If look, if I take the numbers between zero and 1000,
and I train a model to pick out the prime numbers by giving them all the prime numbers between zero
and 1000, he doesn't know what prime number is. Occasionally, if I can cheat a bit, we'll start
to guess that it never will produce anything out with the data set because you mine the past.
The thing that I'm getting to is I think that actually, current machine learning technologies
might actually help reveal why time is fundamental. It's like kind of insane, because they tell you
about what's happened in the past, but they can never help you understand what's happening in the
future without training examples. Sure, if that thing happens again, it's like,
so I think, so let's think about what large knowledge models are doing. We have all the
internet as we know it, language, but also they're doing something else. We're having human beings
correcting it all the time. Those models are being corrected. Steered. Corrected.
Modified, tweaked. Well, yeah, but I mean, cheating. Well, you could say that training
on human data in the first place is cheating. Well, human is in the loop. Sorry to interrupt.
Yes, so human is definitely in the loop, but it's not just human is in the loop. A very large
collection of humans is in the loop. Look, I totally... And that could be... I mean, to me,
it's not intuitive that you said prime numbers, that the system can't generate an algorithm,
right? That the algorithm that can generate prime numbers or the algorithm that can tell you
if a number is prime and so on. And generate algorithms that generate algorithms that generate
algorithms that start to look a lot like human reasoning. I don't think... I think, again,
we can show that on a piece of paper. That's sure. I think there has... So this is the failure in
epistemiology. Like, I'm glad I even can say that word, letting you know what it means.
It's like you said it multiple times. I know. It's like three times now. Without failure.
Quit while you're ahead. Just don't say it again because you did really well.
Thanks. So what is reasoning? So coming back to the chemical brain, if I could basically...
If I could show that in a... Because I mean, I'm never going to make an intelligence in
cam machiner because we don't have brain cells. They don't have glial cells. They don't have neurons.
But if I can make... If I can take a gel and engineer the gel to be a hybrid hardware
for reprogramming, which I think I know how to do, I will be at a process a lot more information
and train models billions of times cheaper and use cross-domain knowledge. And there's
certain techniques I think we can do, but they're still missing though the abilities of human beings
have had to become true and complete. And so I guess the question to give back at you is like,
how do you tell the difference between trial and error and the generation of new knowledge?
I think the way you can do it is this, is that you come up with a theory and explanations.
Inspiration comes from out there. And then you then test that and then you see that's going
towards the truth. And human beings are very good at doing that in the transition between
philosophy, mathematics, physics and natural sciences where... And I think that we can see that.
Where I get confused is why people misappropriate the term artificial intelligence to say,
hey, there's something else going on here because I think you and I both agree machine learning is
really good. So anything get better, we're going to get happier with the outcome. But why would you
ever think the model is thinking or reasoning? Reasoning requires intention. And the intention,
if the model isn't reasoning, the intentions come from the prompter. And the intention has come from
the person who programmed it to do it. But don't you think you can prompt it to have intention?
Basically start with the initial conditions and get it going. Where the currently large
language models, Chad GPT, only talks to you when you talk to it. There's no reason why you can't
just start talking. But those initial conditions came from someone starting it. And that calls
all chain in there. So that intention comes from the outside. I think that there is something in
that causal chain of intention that's super important. I don't disagree. We're going to get
to AGI. It's a matter of when and what hardware. I think we're not going to do it in this hardware.
And I think we're unnecessarily fetishizing really cool outputs and dopamine hits because
obviously that's what people want to sell us. Well, but there could be, AGI is a loaded term,
but there could be incredibly super impressive intelligence systems on the way to AGI. So
these large language models, I mean, if it appears conscious, if it appears super intelligent,
poor we just say it's not. I agree. But I, the super intelligence I want, I want to be able to
have a discussion with it about coming up with fundamental new ideas that generate knowledge.
And if the super intelligence we generate can mine novelty from the future that I didn't see in
its training set in the past, I would agree. There's something really interesting is coming on.
I'll say that again, if the intelligence system be a human being, a chat bar, something else,
is able to produce something truly novel that we could not predict even having full audit trail
from the past, then I would be sold. Well, so we should be clear that it can currently produce,
it can currently produce things that are in a shallow sense novel that are not in the training
set. But you're saying truly novel. I think they are in the training set. I think everything it
produces comes from a training set. There might be, there's a difference between novelty and
interpolation. We do not understand where these leaps come from yet. That is what intelligence is,
I would argue, those leaps. And some people say, no, it's actually just what will happen if you
just do cross domain training and all that stuff. And that may be true. And I may be completely wrong.
But right now, the human mind is able to mine novelty in a way that artificial intelligence
systems cannot. And this is why we still have a job and we're still doing stuff. And I use chat
gpt for a few weeks, well, this is cool. And then it took me too much, I had to, well, what happened
is it took me too much time to correct it, then it got really good. And now they've done something
to it. It's not actually that good. Yeah, right. I don't know what's going on.
Some censorship. Yeah. So I mean, that's interesting, but it will push us humans to
characterize novelty better. Like characterize the novel, like what is novel? What is truly novel?
What's the difference between novelty and interpolation?
I think that this, this is the thing that makes me most excited about these technologies,
is they're going to help me demonstrate to you that time is fundamental and unit future is
bigger than the present, which is why we are human beings are quite good at generating
novelty because we have to expand our data set and to cope with unexpected things in our environment.
Our environment throws them all at us. Again, we have to survive in that environment.
And I mean, I never say never, I would be very interested in how we can get
cross-domain training cheaply in chemical systems because I'm a chemist and the
brain the only thing I know of is human brain, but maybe that's just me being boring, predictable
and not novel. Yeah, you mentioned GPT for electron density. So a GPT like system for
generating molecules that combine to host automatically. I mean, that's, that's interesting.
That's really interesting. Applying this same kind of transformer mechanism.
Yeah. I mean, this is one of, it goes, my team, I try and do things that are non obvious, but
non obvious in certain areas. And one of the things I was always asking about in chemistry,
people like to represent molecules as graphs. And it's quite difficult. It's really hard.
And when you're doing AI and chemistry, you really want to basically have good representations,
you can generate new molecules are interesting. And I was thinking, well, molecules aren't really
graphs and they're not continuously differentiable. Could I do something that was continuously
differentiable? I was like, well, molecules are actually made up of electron density.
So then I got thinking, say, well, okay, could there be a way where we could just basically
take a, take a database of readily solved electron densities for millions of molecules.
So we took the electron density for millions of molecules and just train the model
to put to learn what electron density is. And so what we built was a system that you literally
could give it a, let's say you could take a protein that has a particular active site or,
you know, a cup with a certain hole in it, you pour a noise into it. And with a GPT,
you turn the noise into electron density. And then in this case, it hallucinates like
all of them do. But the hallucinations are good, because it means I don't have to train on such
a large num, such a huge data set, because these data sets are very expensive. Because how do you
produce it? So, so go back a step. So you've got all these molecules in this data set. But what
you've literally done is a quantum mechanical calculation, we produce electron densities
for each molecule. So you say, oh, this representation of this molecule has these electron densities
associated with it. So you know what the representation is, and you train the neural
network to know what electron density is. So then you give it an unknown pocket, you pour in noise,
and you say, right, produce me electron density, it produces electron density that doesn't look
ridiculous. And what we did in this case is we produce electron density that maximizes the
electrostatic potentials to the stickiness, but minimizes what we call the steric hindrance.
So the overlaps is repulsive. So, you know, make the perfect fit. And then we then use the kind of
kind of like a chat GPT type thing to turn that little on density into what's called a smile.
A smile string is a way of representing a molecule and letters. And then we can then
to just generate them just generate some. And then the other thing is then we bung that into
the computer and then just makes it. Yeah, the computer being the thing that you're right.
Yeah, the robot that we've got that can basically just do chemistry.
So kind of we've kind of got this end to end drug discovery machine where you can say, oh,
you want to bind to this active site? Here you go. I mean, it's a bit leaky and things kind of break,
but it's a proof of principle. Well, were the hallucinations what are those still
accurate? Well, the hallucinations are really great in this case, because in the case of a large
language model, the hallucinations just like just make everything up to when it doesn't
just make everything up, but it gives you an output that you're plausibly comfortable with,
but it thinks you're doing probabilistically. The problem on these electron density models is
it's very expensive to solve a Schrodinger equation going up to many heavy atoms and
large molecules. And so we wondered if we trained the
the system on up to nine heavy atoms, whether it would go beyond nine.
And it did. It started to generate molecules of 12. No problem. They look pretty good. And I was
like, well, this hallucination I will take for free. Thank you very much. Because it just basically,
this is a case where interpolation extrapolation worked relatively well.
And we were able to generate the really good molecules. And then what we were able to do here
is, and this is a really good point, what I was trying to say earlier, that
we were able to generate new molecules from the known data set that would bind
to the host. So a new guest would bind. Were these truly novel? Not really, because they
were constrained by the host. Were they new to us? Yes. So I do understand. I can concede that
machine learning systems, artificial intelligence systems can generate new entities. But how novel
are they? It remains to be seen. Yeah. And how novel the things that humans generate is also
difficult to quantify. They seem novel. That's what a lot of people say. Like, you know,
so the way to really get to genuine novelty and assembly theory shows you the way
is to have different causal chains overlap. And this really really resonates with the
time is fundamental argument. And if you're bringing together a couple of objects with
different initial conditions coming together, when they interact, the more different their
histories, the more novelty they generate in time going forward. And so it could be that
genuine novelty is basically about mix, mix it up a little. And the human brain is able to mix
it up a little and all that stimulus comes from the environment. But all I think I'm saying
is the universe is deterministic going back in time, non deterministic going forward in time,
because the future is to the universe is too big in the future to contain in the present.
Therefore, these collisions of known things generate unknown things that then become part
of your data set and don't appear weird. That's how we give ourselves comfort. The past looks
consistent with this initial conditional hypothesis, but actually we're generating
more and more novelty. And that's how it works. Simple. So it's hard to quantify novelty looking
backwards. I mean, the present and the future are the novelty generators.
But I like this whole idea of mining novelty. I think it is going to reveal why the limitations
of current AI is a bit like a printing press, right? Everyone thought that when the printing
press came that writing books is going to be terrible, that you had evil spirits and all
this, they were just books. And the same with AI. But I think they're just the scale you can
achieve in terms of impact with AI systems is pretty nerve wracking. But that's what the
big companies want you to think. But not like in terms of destroy all humans,
but you can have major consequences in the way social media has had major consequences,
both positive and negative. And so you have to kind of think about it and worry about it.
But yeah, people that fear monger, you know,
My pet theory for this, you want to know, is I think that a lot of, and maybe I'm being,
and I think I really do respect a lot of the people out there who are trying to have discourse
about the positive future. So open AI guys, meta guys and all this. And
what I wonder if they're trying to cover up for the fact that social media has had a pretty
disastrous effect at some level. And they're just trying to say, Oh, yeah, we should do this.
Because I'm covering up for the fact that we have got some problems with, you know,
teenagers and Instagram and Snapchat and, you know, all this stuff. And maybe they're just
overreacting now. Yeah, it's like, Oh, yeah, sorry, we made the bubonic played and gave it to you
all and you're all dying. And oh, yeah, but look at this over here is even worse.
Yeah, there's a little bit of that. But there's also not enough celebration of the positive
impact that all these technologies have had. We tend to focus on the negative and tend to forget
that in part because it's hard to measure like it's very hard to measure the positive impact
social media had on the world. Yeah, I agree. But if what I worry about right now is like,
I'm really, I do care about the ethics of what we're doing. And one of the reasons why I'm so
open about the things we're trying to do in the lab, make life, look at intelligence, all this is
so people say, what are the consequences of this? And you say, what are the consequences of not doing
it? And I think that what worries me right now in the present is lack of authenticated users
and authenticated data and human users. Yeah, human.
I still think that there will be AI agents that appear to be conscious, but they would have to
be also authenticated and labeled as such. There's too much, there's too much value in that,
you know, like friendships with the AI systems, there's too much meaningful human experiences
to have with the AI systems that I just... But that's like a tool, right? It's a bit like a
meditation tool, right? Some people have a meditation tool, it makes them feel better.
But I'm not sure you can ascribe sentience and legal rights to a chatbot that makes you feel
less lonely. Sentience, yes, I think legal rights, no. I think it's the same, you can have a really
deep meaning for a relationship with a dog. With a dog sentient? Yes. The chatbot's not,
right now, using the technology we use, it's not going to be sentient.
Ah, this is going to be a fun, continued conversation on Twitter that I look forward to.
Since you've had also, from another place, some debates that were inspired by the assembly theory
paper, let me ask you about God. Is there any room for notions of God in assembly theory?
Of God. Yeah, I don't know what God is. I mean, so God exists in our mind created by selection.
So the human beings have created the concept of God in the same way that human beings have
created the concept of superintelligence. Sure, but does it mean, does it not...
It still could mean that that's a projection from the real world. We're just assigning words
and concepts to a thing that is fundamental to the real world, that there is something out there
that is a creative force underlying the universe. I think the universe, there is a creative force
in the universe, but I don't think it's sentient. I mean, I think the... So, I do not understand
the universe. So who am I to say that God doesn't exist? I am an atheist, but I'm not an angry
atheist, right? I have lots of... There's some people I know that are angry atheists and say,
say that religious people are stupid. I don't think that's the case. I have faith in some things,
because I don't... I mean, when I was a kid, I was like, I need to know what the charge of
electron is. I was like, I can't measure the charge of an electron. I just gave up and had faith.
Resistors worked. So when it comes to... I want to know why the universe is growing in the future
and what humanity is going to become. And I've seen that the acquisition of knowledge
via the generation of novelty to produce technology has uniformly made humans' lives better.
I would love to continue that tradition. And...
You said that there's that creative force. Do you think, just to think on that point,
do you think there's a creative force? Is there like a thing, like a driver that's
creating stuff? Yeah, I think that... So I think that...
And where? Can you describe it like math and math?
Well, I think selection. I think selection.
Selection is the force. Selection is the force in the universe. It creates novelty.
Is selection somehow fundamental? Like what? Yeah, I think persistence of objects that could
decay into nothing through operations that maintain that structure. I mean, think about it.
If it's amazing that things exist at all, that we're just not a big combinatorial mess.
Yes. So the fact... And exist... I think that exists persistent time.
Yeah. I mean, let's think maybe the universe is actually, in the present, the things...
Everything that can exist in the present does exist.
Well, that would mean it's deterministic, right?
No, I think the universe started super small. The past was deterministic.
There wasn't much going on. And it was able to mine, mine, mine, mine, mine.
And so the process is somehow generating... The universe is basically...
I'm trying to put this into words. Did you just say there's no free will, though?
No, I didn't say that.
As if... I mean, that can't exist.
I said there is free will. I think... I'm saying that free will occurs at the
boundary between the past and the future.
Yeah, I got you. But everything that can exist does exist.
So everything that's possible to exist at this... So no, I'm really pulling...
There's a lot of loaded words there.
There's a time element loaded into that state.
I think that the universe is able to do what it can in the present, right?
Yeah.
And then I think in the future, there are other things that could be possible.
We can imagine lots of things, but they don't all happen.
Sure. That's where you sneak in free will right there.
Yeah. So I guess what I'm saying is what exists is a convolution of the past
with the present and the free will going into the future.
But we can still imagine stuff, right? We can imagine stuff that will never happen.
And it's amazing force because you're imagining...
This is the most important thing that we don't understand is our imaginations
can actually change the future in a tangible way,
which is what fit the initial conditions and physics cannot predict.
Like your imagination has a causal consequence in the future.
Isn't that weird too?
Yeah.
How do you...
It breaks the laws of physics as we know them right now.
Yeah. So you think the imagination has a causal effect on the future.
Yeah.
But it does exist in there in the head.
And there must be a lot of power in whatever's going on.
There could be a lot of power whatever's going on in there.
If we then go back to the initial conditions,
and that is simply not possible, that can happen.
But if we go into a universe where we accept that there is a finite ability to represent
numbers and you have rounding... We're not rounding errors.
You have some... What happens, your ability to make decisions,
imagine and do stuff, is that that interface between the certain and the uncertain,
it's not as Yasha was saying to me, randomness goes and you just randomly do random stuff.
It is that you are set free a little on your trajectory.
Free will is about being able to explore on this narrow trajectory
that allows you to build... You have a choice about what you build,
or that choice is you interacting with a future in the present.
What do you use most beautiful about this whole thing?
The universe.
The fact it seems to be very undecided, very open.
The fact that every time I think I'm getting towards an answer to a question,
there are so many more questions that make the chase.
Do you hate that it's going to be over at some point?
Well, for me, so I think if you think about it, is it over for Newton now?
Newton has had causal consequences in the future, we discuss him all the time.
His idea has been not the person.
The person just had a lot of causal power when he was alive, but oh my God,
one of the things I want to do is leave as many Easter eggs in the future when I'm gone,
to go, oh, that's cool.
Would you be very upset if somebody made a good large language model
that's fine-tuned to Leigh Connor?
It would be quite boring because I mean, I mean, I'm a...
Non novelty generation.
I would, I mean, if it's a faithful representation of what I've done in my life,
that's great. That's an interesting artifact.
But I think the most interesting thing about knowing each others,
we don't know what we're going to do next.
Sure, sure.
I mean, within some constraints, I've got, you know, you might,
I can predict some things about you, you can predict some things about me,
but we can't predict everything.
And it's because we can't predict everything is why we're exciting to come back
and discuss and see it.
So yeah, I'm kind of happy that it'll be interesting that some things that I've done
can be captured, but I'm pretty sure that my
angle on mining novelty for the future will not be captured.
Yeah, yeah.
So that's what life is. It's just some novelty generation and then you're done.
Each one of us just generate a little bit or have the capacity to at least.
I think life is a selection produces life and life affects the universe.
Universes with life in them are materially and physically
fundamentally different than universes without life.
And that's super interesting. And I have no beginnings of understanding.
I think maybe this is like in a thousand years, there'll be a new discipline in humans.
Yeah, of course, this is how it all works, right?
And in retrospect, it will all be obvious, I think.
I think assembly theory is obvious. That's why a lot of people got angry, right?
They were like, oh my God, this is such nonsense.
You know, and like, oh, you know, actually it's not quite, but the writing's really bad.
Well, I can't wait to see where it evolves.
Lee, and I'm glad I get to exist in this universe with you.
You're a fascinating human. This is always a pleasure.
I hope to talk to you many more times.
And I'm a huge fan of just watching you create stuff in this world.
And thank you for talking today.
It's a pleasure to always, thanks for having me on.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Lee Cronin.
To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now let me leave you with some words from Carl Sagan,
who can judge your progress by the courage of our questions
and the depth of our answers, our willingness to embrace what is true
rather than what feels good.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
