The following is a conversation with Sam Harris, his second time in the podcast.
As I said two years ago, when I first met and spoke with Sam, he's one of the most influential
pioneering thinkers of our time. As the host of the Making Sense podcast, creator of the Waking
Up app, and the author of many seminal books on human nature and the human mind, including
End of Faith, The More Landscape, Lying, Free Will, and Waking Up.
In this conversation, besides our mutual fascination with AGI and Free Will,
we do also go deep into controversial, challenging topics of Donald Trump,
Hunter Biden, January 6th, Vaccines, Lab Leak, Kanye West, and several key figures
at the Center of Public Discourse, including Joe Rogan and Elon Musk, both of whom have been
friends of Sam and have become friends of mine. Somehow, an amazing life trajectory
that I do not deserve in any way and, in fact, believe is probably a figment of my imagination.
And, if it's alright, please allow me to say a few words about this personal aspect
of the conversation of discussing Joe, Elon, and others. What's been weighing heavy on my heart
since the beginning of the pandemic, now three years ago, is that many people I look to for
wisdom and public discourse stop talking to each other as often, with respect,
humility, and love, when the world needed those kinds of conversations the most.
My hope is that they start talking again. They start being friends again.
They start noticing the humanity that connects them that is much deeper than the
disagreements that divide them. So, let me take this moment to say, with humility and honesty,
why I look up to and am inspired by Joe, Elon, and Sam. I think Joe Rogan is important to the
world, as a voice of compassion and curiosity, and open-mindedness to ideas both radical and
mainstream, sometimes with humor, sometimes with brutal honesty, always pushing for more kindness
in the world. I think Elon Musk is important to the world, as an engineer, leader, entrepreneur,
and human being who takes on the hardest problems that face humanity and refuses to accept
the constraints of conventional thinking that made the solutions to these problems seem impossible.
I think Sam Harris is important to the world, as a fearless voice who fights for the pursuit
of truth against growing forces of echo chambers and audience capture, taking unpopular perspectives
and defending them with rigor and resilience. I both celebrate and criticize all three privately,
and they criticize me, usually more effectively, from which I always learn a lot and always appreciate.
Most importantly, there is respect and love for each other as human beings, the very thing that
I think the world needs most now, in a time of division and chaos. I will continue to try to mend
divisions, to try to understand, not to ride, to turn the other cheek if needed, to return hate
with love. Sometimes people criticize me for being naive, cheesy, simplistic, all of that.
I know, I agree, but I really am speaking from the heart, and I'm trying. This world is too
fucking beautiful not to try, in whatever way I know how. I love you all. This is the Lex
Podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. Now, dear friends,
here's Sam Harris. What is more effective at making a net positive impact on the world?
Empathy or reason? It depends on what you mean by empathy. There are at least two kinds of empathy.
There's the cognitive form, which is, I would argue, even a species of reason. It's just
understanding another person's point of view. You understand why they're suffering, or why
they're happy, or you have a theory of mind about another human being that is accurate,
and so you can navigate in relationship to them more effectively. Then there's another
layer entirely, not incompatible with that, but just distinct, which is what people often mean
by empathy, which is more emotional contagion. You feel depressed, and I begin to feel depressed
along with you because it's contagious. We're so close, and I'm so concerned about you,
and your problems become my problems, and it bleeds through. Now, I think both of those
capacities are very important, but the emotional contagion piece, and this is not really my thesis,
this is something I have more or less learned from Paul Bloom, the psychologist who wrote a
book on this topic titled Against Empathy. The emotional social contagion piece is
a bad guide, rather often for ethical behavior and ethical intuitions.
I'll give you the clear example of this, which is we find stories with a single identifiable
protagonist who we can effortlessly empathize with far more compelling than data. If I tell you,
this is the classic case of the little girl who falls down a well, right? This is somebody's
daughter, you see the parents distraught on television, you hear her cries from the bottom of
the well, the whole country stops. There was an example of this 20, 25 years ago, I think,
where it was just wall-to-wall on CNN. This is just the perfect use of CNN. It was 72 hours,
whatever it was, of continuous coverage of just extracting this girl from a well.
We effortlessly pay attention to that. We care about it. We will donate money
toward it. I mean, it's just, it marshals 100% of our compassion and altruistic impulse,
whereas if you hear that there's a genocide raging in some country you've never been to
and never attended to go to, and the numbers don't make a dent, and we find the story
boring. We'll change the channel in the face of a genocide. It doesn't matter.
And it literally, perversely, it could be 500,000 little girls have fallen down wells
in that country, and we still don't care. Many of us have come to believe that this is a bug
rather than a feature of our moral psychology. And so empathy plays an unhelpful role there.
So ultimately, I think when we're making big decisions about what we should do and how to
mitigate human suffering and what's worth valuing and how we should protect those values,
I think reason is the better tool. But it's not that I would want to dispense with
any part of empathy either. Well, there's a lot of danger to go on there. But briefly,
to mention, you've recently talked about effective altruism on your podcast. I think
you mentioned some interesting statement. I'm going to horribly misquote you, but
that you'd rather live in a world, it doesn't really make sense, but you'd rather live in a
world where you care about maybe your daughter and son more than 100 people that live across the
world, something like this. Where the calculus is not always perfect, but somehow it makes sense to
live in a world where it's irrational in this way. And yet empathetic in the way you've been
discussing. Right. I'm not sure what the right answer is there, or even whether there is one
right answer. There could be multiple peaks on this part of the moral landscape. But
the opposition is between an ethic that's articulated by someone like the Dalai Lama,
right? Or really any exponent of classic Buddhism would say that the ultimate enlightened ethic
is true dispassion with respect to friends and strangers. The mind of the Buddha would be
truly dispassionate. You would love and care about all people equally. And by that light,
it seems some kind of ethical failing or at least a failure to fully actualize compassion
in the limit or enlightened wisdom in the limit to care more or even much more about your kids
than the kids of other people and to prioritize your energy in that way. So you spend all this
time trying to figure out how to keep your kids healthy and happy, and you'll attend to their
minutest concerns and however superficial. And again, there's a genocide raging in
Sudan or wherever, and it takes up less than 1% of your bandwidth. I'm not sure it would be a
better world if everyone was running the Dalai Lama program there. I think some prioritization of
one's nearest and dearest ethically might be optimal because we'll all be doing that,
and we'll all be doing that in a circumstance where we have certain norms and laws and other
structures that force us to be dispassionate where that matters. So when my daughter gets sick,
and I have to take her to a hospital, I really want her to get attention, and I'm worried about
her more than I'm worried about everyone else in the lobby. But the truth is, I actually don't want
a totally corrupt hospital. I don't want a hospital that treats my daughter better than anyone else
in the lobby because she's my daughter, and I've bribed the guy at the door or the guy as a fan
of my podcast or whatever the thing is, you don't want starkly corrupt, unfair situations.
And when you get pressed down the hierarchy of Maslow's needs individually and societally,
a bunch of those variables change, and they change for the worse, understandably. But yeah,
when everyone's corrupt and you're in a state of collective emergency,
you've got a lifeboat problem, you're scrambling to get into the lifeboat,
yeah, then fairness and norms and the other vestiges of civilization begin to get stripped off.
We can't reason from those emergencies to normal life. I mean, in normal life,
we want justice, we want fairness, we're all better off for it even when the spotlight of our
concern is focused on the people we know, the people who are friends, the people who are family,
people we have good reason to care about. We still by default want a system that protects the
interests of strangers too. And we know that generally speaking, just in game theoretic terms,
we're all going to tend to be better off in a fair system than a corrupt one.
One of the failure modes of empathy is our susceptibility to anecdotal data. Just a good
story will get us to not think clearly. But what about empathy in the context of just discussing
ideas with other people? And then there's a large number of people like in this country,
you know, red and blue, half the population believes certain things on immigration or on
the response to the pandemic or any kind of controversial issue. Even if the election was
fairly executed, having an empathy for their worldview, trying to understand where they're
coming from, not just in the explicit statement of their idea, but the entirety of like the roots
from which their ideas stems, that kind of empathy, while you're discussing ideas, what is
in your pursuit of truth, having empathy for the perspective of a large number of other people
versus raw mathematical reason? I think it's important, but I just, it only takes you so
far, right? It doesn't get you to truth, right? Truth is not decided by democratic principles.
And certain people believe things for understandable reasons, but those reasons are
nonetheless bad reasons, right? They don't scale, they don't generalize. They're not reasons anyone
should adopt for themselves or respect epistemologically. And yet their circumstance is
understandable and it's something you can care about, right? And so, yeah, let me just take,
I think there's many examples of this that you might be thinking of, but
and the one that comes to mind is I've been super critical of Trump, obviously, and
I've been super critical of certain people for endorsing him or not criticizing him when he
really made it painfully obvious who he was, if there had been any doubt initially. There was no
doubt when we have a sitting president who's not agreeing to a peaceful transfer of power,
right? So I'm critical of all of that and yet the fact that many millions of Americans didn't see
what was wrong with Trump or bought into the, didn't see through his con, right? I mean,
they bought into the idea that he was a brilliant businessman who might just be able to change
things because he's so unconventional and so, his heart is in the right place. He's really a
man of the people even though he's a gold-plated everything in his life. They bought the myth
somehow of largely because they had seen him on television for almost a decade and a half,
pretending to be this genius businessman who could get things done.
It's understandable to me that many very frustrated people who have not had their hopes and dreams
actualized, who have been the victims of globalism and many other current trends,
it's understandable that they would be confused and not see the liability of electing
a grossly incompetent, morbidly narcissistic person into the presidency.
So which is to say that I don't blame, there are many, many millions of people who I don't
necessarily blame for the Trump phenomenon, but I can nonetheless bemoan the phenomenon
as indicative of a very bad state of affairs in our society. So there's two levels to it.
One is I think you have to call a spade a spade when you're talking about how things actually
work and what things are likely to happen or not, but then you can recognize that people
are very different life experiences and I think empathy and probably the better word for what I
would hope to embody there is compassion. To really wish people well and to really wish strangers
well effortlessly, wish them well. To realize that there is no opposition between, at bottom,
there's no real opposition between selfishness and selflessness because why selfishness really
takes into account other people's happiness? Do you want to live in a society where you have
everything but most other people have nothing or do you want to live in a society where you're
surrounded by happy, creative, self-actualized people who are having their hopes and dreams
realized? I think it's obvious that the second society is much better, however much you can
guard your good luck. But what about having empathy for certain principles that people
believe? For example, the pushback, the other perspective on this because you said bought
the myth of Trump as the great businessman. There could be a lot of people that are supporters of
Trump who could say that Sam Harris bought the myth that we have this government of the people,
by the people, that actually represents the people as opposed to a bunch of elites who are running a
giant bureaucracy that is corrupt, that is feeding themselves and they're actually not
representing the people and then here's this chaos agent, Trump, who speaks off the top of his head.
He's flawed in all this number of ways. He's a more comedian than he is a presidential type of
figure and he's actually creating the kind of chaos that's going to shake up this bureaucracy,
shake up the elites that are so uncomfortable because they don't want the world to know about
the game they got running on everybody else. That's the kind of perspective that they would take
and say, yeah, there's these flaws that Trump has but this is necessary.
I agree with the first part. I haven't bought the myth that it's a truly representative democracy
in the way that we might idealize. On some level, I mean, this is a different conversation,
but on some level, I'm not even sure how much I think it should be. I'm not sure
where we want in the end everyone's opinion given equal weight about just what we should
do about anything. I include myself in that. I mean, there are many topics around which
I don't deserve to have a strong opinion because I don't know what I'm talking about
or what I would be talking about if I had a strong opinion. I think we'll probably get to that,
to some of those topics because I've declined to have certain conversations on my podcast just
because I think I'm the wrong person to have that conversation. I think it's important to see
those bright lines in one's life and in the moment politically and ethically.
I think we've aside the viability of democracy. I'm under no illusions that all of our institutions
are worth preserving precisely as they have been up until the moment. This great orange
wrecking ball came swinging through our lives, but it was a very bad bet to elect someone who is
grossly incompetent and worse than incompetent, genuinely malevolent in his selfishness.
This is something we know based on literally decades of him being in the public eye. He's
not a public servant in any normal sense of that term. He couldn't possibly give an honest
or sane answer to the question you asked me about empathy and reason and what should guide us.
I genuinely think he is missing some necessary moral and psychological tools. I can feel
compassion for him as a human being because I think having those things is incredibly important
and genuinely loving other people is incredibly important. Knowing what all that's about is
that's really the good stuff in life. I think he's missing a lot of that, but I think we
don't want to promote people to the highest positions of power in our society who are
far outliers in pathological terms. We want them to be far outliers in the best case,
in wisdom and compassion and some of the topics you've brought up. We want someone to be deeply
informed. We want someone to be unusually curious, unusually alert to how they may be wrong or
getting things wrong consequentially. He's none of those things. Insofar as we're going to get
normal mediocrities in that role, which I think is often the best we could expect,
let's get normal mediocrities in that role, not once in a generation narcissists and
frauds. I mean, it's like, let me just take honesty as a single variable. I think you want,
yes, it's possible that most politicians lie at least some of the time. I don't think that's a
good thing. I think people should be generally honest even to a fault. Yes, there are certain
circumstances where lying I think is necessary. It's kind of on a continuum of self-defense and
violence. If the Nazis come to your door and ask you if you've got Anne Frank in the attic,
I think it's okay to lie to them. Arguably, there's never been a person that anyone could name
in human history who's lied with that kind of velocity. I mean, it was just a blizzard of lies,
great and small, pointless and effective. It says something
fairly alarming about our society that a person of that character got promoted. Yes,
I have compassion and concern for half of the society who didn't see it that way,
and that's going to sound elitist and smug or something for anyone who's on that side
listening to me. But it's genuine. I understand that I'm one of the luckiest people in the world,
and I barely have the bandwidth to pay attention to half the things I should pay attention to in
order to have an opinion about half the things we're going to talk about. So how much less
bandwidth is somebody who's working two jobs or a single mom who's raising multiple kids,
even a single kid? It's just unimaginable to me that people have the bandwidth to
really track this stuff. And so then they jump on social media and they get inundated by misinformation
and they see what their favorite influencer just said, and now they're worried about vaccines.
It's just we're living in an environment where the information space has become so corrupted,
and we've built machines to further corrupt it. We've built a business model for the internet
that further corrupts it. So it's chaos in informational terms, and I don't fault people for
being confused and impatient at their wit's end. And yes, Trump was an enormous fuck you
to the establishment, and that was understandable for many reasons.
To me, Sam Harris, the great Sam Harris is somebody I've looked up to for a long time
as a beacon of voice of reason. And there's this meme on the internet, and I would love you to
steal me in the case for it and against that Trump broke Sam Harris's brain. That there's
something is disproportionately to the actual impact that Trump had on our society. He had
an impact on the ability of balanced, calm, rational minds to see the world clearly,
to think clearly. You being one of the beacons of that. Is there a degree to which he broke your
brain, otherwise known as Trump derangement syndrome, medical condition?
Yeah, I think Trump derangement syndrome is a very clever meme because it just
throws the problem back on the person who's criticizing Trump. But in truth, the true
Trump derangement syndrome was not to have seen how dangerous and divisive it would be to promote
someone like Trump to that position of power. And in the final moment, not to see how untenable it
was to still support someone sitting president who was not committing to a peaceful transfer of
power. If that wasn't a bright line for you, you have been deranged by something because that was
one minute to midnight for our democracy as far as I'm concerned. And I think
it really was but for the integrity of a few people that we didn't suffer some real constitutional
crisis and real emergency after January 6th. I mean, if Mike Pence had caved in and decided to
not certify the election, right? Literally, you can count on two hands the number of people who
held things together at that moment. And so it wasn't for want of trying on Trump's part that we
didn't succumb to some real, truly uncharted catastrophe with our democracy. So the fact
that that didn't happen is not a sign that those of us who were worried that it was so close to
happening were exaggerating the problem. I mean, it's like, you almost got run over by a car,
but you didn't. And so the fact that you're adrenalized and you're thinking, well, boy,
that was dangerous. I probably shouldn't wander in the middle of the street with my eyes closed.
You weren't wrong to feel that you really had a problem, right? And came very close to something
truly terrible. So I think that's where we were. And I think we shouldn't do that again. So the
fact that he's still, he's coming back around as potentially a viable candidate, I'm not spending
much time thinking about it, frankly, because I'm waiting for the moment where it requires some
thought. I mean, it took up, I don't know how many podcasts I devoted to the topic.
It wasn't that many in the end against the number of podcasts I devoted to other topics,
but there are people who look at Trump and just find him funny, entertaining, not especially
threatening. It's just good fun to see somebody who's just not taking anything seriously and
it's just putting a stick in the wheel of business as usual again and again and again and again.
And they don't really see anything much at stake, right? It doesn't really matter if we don't
support NATO. It doesn't really matter if he says he trusts Putin more than our intelligence
services. It doesn't matter if he's on the one hand saying that he loves
the leader of North Korea and on the other, it threatens to bomb them back to the Stone Age
right on Twitter. It all can be taken in the spirit of reality television. This is the part
of the movie that's just fun to watch, right? And I understand that. I can even inhabit that
space for a few minutes at a time, but there's a deeper concern that we're in the process of
entertaining ourselves to death, right? That we're just not taking things seriously. And this is a
problem I've had with several other people we might name who just appear to me to be goofing
around at scale and they lack a kind of moral seriousness. I mean, they're touching big problems
where lives hang in the balance, but they're just fucking around. And I think there are really
important problems that we have to get our heads straight around. And it's not to say that
institutions don't become corrupt. I think they do. And I'm quite worried that both about the
loss of trust in our institutions and the fact that trust has eroded for good reason,
right? That they have become less trustworthy. They've become infected by
political ideologies that are not truth tracking. I mean, I worry about all of that,
but I just think we need institutions. We need to rebuild them. We need experts
who are real experts. We need to value expertise over amateurish speculation and conspiracy
thinking and bullshit. The kind of amateur speculation we're doing on this very podcast.
I'm usually alert to the moments where I'm just guessing or where I actually feel like I'm talking
from within my wheelhouse. And I try to telegraph that a fair amount with people.
So yeah, but it's different. I mean, you can invite someone onto your podcast
who's an expert about something that you're not an expert about. And then you
in the process of getting more informed yourself, your audience is getting more informed. So you're
asking smart questions. And you might be pushing back at the margins, but you know that when push
comes to shove on that topic, you really don't have a basis to have a strong opinion. And
if you were going to form a strong opinion that was this counter to the expert you have in front
of you, it's going to be by deference to some other expert who you've brought in or who you've
heard about or whose work you've read or whatever. But there's a paradox to how we value authority
in science that most people don't understand. And I think we should at some point unravel
that because it's the basis for a lot of public confusion. And frankly, it's the basis for a lot
of criticism I've received on these topics where people think that I'm against free speech or I'm
an establishment shill or it's like I just think I'm a credentialist. I just think people with
PhDs from Ivy League universities should run everything. It's not true, but there's a lot
to cut through to get to daylight there because people are very confused about how
we value authority in the service of rationality generally. You've talked about it, but it's just
interesting the intensity of feeling you have. You've had this famous phrase about Hunter Biden
and children in the basement. Can you just revisit this case? So let me give another
perspective on the situation of January 6th and Trump in general. It's possible that January 6th
and things of that nature revealed that our democracy is actually pretty fragile.
And then Trump is not a malevolent and ultra competent malevolent figure, but it's simply
a jokester. And he just by creating the chaos revealed that it's all pretty fragile because
you're a student in history and there's a lot of people like Vladimir Lenin, Hitler, who are
exceptionally competent at controlling power, at being executives and taking that power,
controlling the generals, controlling all the figures involved, and certainly not tweeting,
but working in the shadows behind the scenes to gain power. And they did so extremely competently,
and that is how they were able to gain power. The pushback with Trump, he was doing none of that.
He was creating what he's very good at, creating drama, sometimes for humor's sake,
sometimes for drama's sake, and simply revealed that our democracy is fragile.
And so he's not this once in a generation horrible figure.
Once in a generation narcissist. I don't think he's a truly scary sinister Putin-like
or much less Hitler-like figure, not at all. I mean, he's not ideological. He doesn't care
about anything beyond himself. So it's not... No, no, he's much less scary than any really scary
totalitarian. He's more brave in your world than 1984.
This is what Eric Weinstein never stops badgering me about, but he's still wrong, Eric.
My analogy for Trump was that he's an evil Chauncey Gardner. I don't know if you remember
the book or the film Being There with Peter Sellers. But Peter Sellers is this Gardner who
really doesn't know anything, but he gets recognized as this wise man and he gets promoted to immense
power in Washington because he's speaking in a semblance of wisdom. He's got these very simple
aphorisms or it would seem to be aphorisms. All he cares about is gardening. He's just talking
about his garden all the time, but he'll say something. But in the spring, the new shoots
will bloom and people read into that some kind of genius insight politically. And so he gets
promoted and says that's the joke of the film. For me, Trump has always been someone like an
evil Chauncey Gardner. It's not to say he's totally... Yes, he has a certain kind of genius.
He's got a genius for creating a spectacle around himself. He's got a genius for getting the eye of
the media always coming back to him. But it's a kind of self-promotion that only works if you
actually are truly shameless and don't care about having a reputation for anything that I or you
would want to have a reputation for. It's like the pure pornography of attention. And he just
wants more of it. I think the truly depressing and genuinely scary thing was that we have a
country that at least half of the country, given how broken our society is in many ways,
we have a country that didn't see anything wrong with that, bringing someone who obviously
doesn't know what he should know to be president and who's obviously not a good person, who obviously
doesn't care about people, can't even pretend to care about people really in a credible way.
If there's a silver lining to this, it's along the lines you just sketched. It shows us how
vulnerable our system is to a truly brilliant and sinister figure. I think we really dodged a bullet.
Yes, someone far more competent and conniving and ideological could have exploited our system
in a way that Trump didn't. So if we plug those holes eventually,
that would be a good thing and he would have done a good thing for our society.
One of the things we realized, and I think nobody knew, I certainly didn't know it and I
didn't hear anyone talk about it, is how much our system relies on norms rather than laws.
Yeah, civility almost.
Yeah, it's quite possible that he never did anything illegal, truly illegal. I think he
probably did a few illegal things, but illegal such that he really should be thrown in jail for it.
At least that remains to be seen. So all of the chaos, all of the
diminishment of our stature in the world, all of the opportunity costs of spending years focused on
nonsense, all of that was just norm violations. That was just all a matter of not saying the
thing you should say, but that doesn't mean they're insignificant. It's not illegal for a
sitting president to say, no, I'm not going to commit to a peaceful transfer of power. We'll
wait and see whether I win. If I win, the election was valid. If I lose, it was fraudulent, right?
But aren't those humorous perturbations to our system of civility such that we know
where the limits are and now we start to think that and have these kinds of discussions?
That wasn't a humorous perturbation because he did everything he could, granted he wasn't very
competent, but he did everything he could to try to steal the election. The irony is he claimed to
have an election stolen from him all the while doing everything he could to steal it, declaring
it fraudulent in advance, trying to get the votes to not be counted as the evening wore on,
knowing that they were going to be disproportionately Democrat votes because of the
position he took on mail-in ballots. I mean, all of it was fairly calculated,
the whole circus of the clown car that crashed into four seasons landscaping, right? And you got
Rudy Giuliani with his hair dye and you got Sidney Powell and all these grossly incompetent people
lying as freely as they could breathe about election fraud, right? And all of these things
were getting thrown out by largely Republican election officials and Republican judges.
It wasn't for want of trying that he didn't maintain his power in this country. He really tried
to steal the presidency. He just was not competent and the people around him weren't competent.
So that's a good thing and it's worth not letting that happen again.
But he wasn't competent so he didn't do everything he could.
Well, no, he did everything he could. He didn't do everything that could have been done by someone
more competent. Right. But the tools you have as a president, you could do a lot of things,
you can declare emergencies, especially during COVID, you could postpone the election,
you can create military conflict, that any kind of reason to postpone the election,
there's a lot of... Well, he tried to do things and he would have to have done those things through
other people and they're people who refuse to do those things. They're people who said they would
quit. They would quit publicly. Again, there are multiple books written about
the last hours of this presidency and the details are shocking in what he tried to do
and tried to get others to do and it's awful. I mean, it's just awful that we were that close
to a true unraveling of our political process. I mean, it's the only time in our lifetime that
anything like this has happened and it's deeply embarrassing on the world stage. It's just like
we looked like a banana republic there for a while and we're the lone superpower.
It's not good. The people who thought, well, we just need to shake things up and this is a
great way to shake things up and having people storm our capital and smear shit on the walls,
that's just more shaking things up. It's all just for the lulls.
There's a nihilism and cynicism to all of that, which again, in certain people, it's understandable.
Frankly, it's not understandable if you've got a billion dollars and you have a compound in Menlo
Park or wherever. There are people who are cheerleading this stuff, who shouldn't be cheerleading
this stuff and who know that they can get on their Gulf Stream and fly to their compound in New
Zealand if everything goes to shit. There's a cynicism to all of that that I think we should
be deeply critical of. What I'm trying to understand is not and analyze,
is not the behavior of this particular human being, but the effect it had in part on the division
between people. To me, the degree, the meme of Sam Harris's brain being broken by Trump represents
you're like the person I would look to to bridge the division.
Well, I don't think there is something profitably to be said to someone who's truly
captivated by the personality cult of Trumpism. There's no conversation I'm going to have with
Candace Owens, say, about Trump that's going to converge on something reasonable.
You don't think so?
No. I haven't tried with Candace, but I've tried with many people who
are in that particular orbit. I've had conversations with people who
won't admit that there's anything wrong with Trump, anything.
I'd like to push for the empathy versus reason, because when you operate in the space of reason,
yes, but I think there's a lot of power in you showing, in you, Sam Harris, showing that you're
willing to see the good qualities of Trump, publicly showing that. I think that's the way
to and over. But he has so few of them. He has fewer good qualities than virtually anyone I can
name. I'll grant you that he's funny. He's a good entertainer.
Does others look at just policies and actual impacts he had?
I've admitted that. No, no. So I've admitted that many of his policies I agree with,
many, many of his policies. So probably more often than not, at least on balance,
I agreed with his policy that we should take China seriously as an adversary.
Again, there's a lot of fine print to a lot of this, because the way he talks about these things
and many of his motives that are obvious are things that I don't support. But I'm going to take
immigration. I think it's obvious that we should have control of our borders. I don't see the argument
for not having control of our borders. We should let in who we want to let in, and we should keep
out who we want to keep out, and we should have a sane immigration policy. So I didn't necessarily
think it was a priority to build the wall, but I never criticized the impulse to build the wall,
because if tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of people are coming across that border,
and we are not in a position to know who's coming, that seems untenable to me. And I can recognize
that many people in our society are on balance the victims of immigration. And there is, in many
cases, a zero-sum contest between the interests of actual citizens and the interests of immigrants.
So I think we should have control of our borders. We should have a sane and compassionate immigration
policy. We should let in refugees. So Trump on refugees was terrible. But I
would say 80% of the policy concerns people celebrated in him are concerns that I either share
entirely or certainly sympathize with. So that's not the issue. The issue is...
A threat to democracy in some way.
The issue is largely what you said it was. It's not so much the person, it's the effect on
everything he touches. He has this superpower of deranging and destabilizing
almost everything he touches and compromising the integrity of almost anyone who comes into his
orbit. I mean, if you looked at these people who served as chief of staff or in various
cabinet positions, people who had real reputations for probity and level-headedness,
whether you share their politics or not, I mean, these were real people. Some of them were goofballs.
Many people who just got totally trashed by proximity to him and then trashed by him when
they finally parted company with him, yeah, I mean, it's just people bent over backwards to
accommodate his norm violations and it was bad for them and it was bad for our system.
None of that discounts the fact that we have a system that really needs proper house cleaning.
Yes, there are bad incentives and entrenched interests and I'm not a fan of the concept of
the deep state because it has been so propagandized, but yes, there's something like that that is
not flexible enough to respond intelligently to the needs of the moment.
Right, so there's a lot of rethinking of government and of institutions in general that I think
we should do, but we need smart, well-informed, well-intentioned people to do that job.
The well-intentioned part is hugely important. Just give me someone who is not the most selfish
person anyone has ever heard about in their lifetime. What we got with Trump was literally
the one most selfish person I think anyone could name. Again, there's so much known about this,
man. That's the thing. It predates his presidency. We knew this guy 30 years ago
and this is what, to come back to those inflammatory comments about Hunter Biden's
laptop, the reason why I can say with confidence that I don't care what was on his laptop is that
that includes any evidence of corruption on the part of his father. Now, there's been precious
little of that that's actually emerged, so it's like there is no, as far as I can tell,
there's not a big story associated with that laptop as much as people bang on about a few emails,
but even if there were just obvious corruption, Joe Biden was at this meeting and he took this
amount of money from this shady guy for bad reasons. Given how visible the lives of these
two men have been, given how much we know about Joe Biden and how much we know about Donald Trump
and how they have lived in public for almost as long as I've been alive, both of them, the scale
of corruption can't possibly balance out between the two of them. If you show me that Joe Biden
has this secret life where he's driving a Bugatti and he's living like Andrew Tate and he's doing
all these things I didn't know about, okay, then I'm going to start getting a sense that,
all right, maybe this guy is way more corrupt than I realized. Maybe there is some deal in
Ukraine or with China that is just like this guy is not who he seems, he's not the public
servant he's been pretending to be, he's been on the take for decades and decades and he's just,
he's as dirty as can be, he's all mobbed up and it's a nightmare and he can't be trusted, right?
That's possible if you show me that his life is not at all what it seems, but on the assumption
that I, having looked at this guy for literally decades, right, and knowing that every journalist
has looked at him for decades, just how many affairs is he having, just how much, you know,
how many drugs is he doing, how many houses does he have, what is, what are the obvious
conflicts of interest, you know, you hold that against what we know about Trump, right? And
I mean, the litany of indiscretions you can put on Trump's side that testify to his personal
corruption, to testify to the fact that he has no ethical compass, there's simply no comparison,
right? So that's why I don't care about what's on the laptop. Now, if you tell me Trump is no
longer running for president in 2024 and we can put Trumpism behind us, and now you're saying,
listen, there's a lot of stuff on that laptop that makes Joe Biden look like a total asshole.
Okay, I'm all ears, right? I mean, it was a force, in 2020, it was a forced choice between
a sitting president who wouldn't commit to a peaceful transfer of power and a guy who's obviously
too old to be president, who has a crack addicted son who lost his laptop. And I just knew that
I was going to take Biden in spite of whatever litany of horrors was going to come tumbling out
of that laptop. And that might involve sort of, so the actual quote is, Hunter Biden literally
could have had the corpses of children in the basement. There's a dark humor to it, right?
Which is, I think you speak to, I would not have cared. There's nothing, it's Hunter Biden,
it's not Joe Biden. Whatever the scope of Joe Biden's corruption is, it is infinitesimally
compared to the corruption. We know Trump was involved in, it's like a firefly to the sun,
is what you're speaking to. But let me make the case that you're really focused on the surface
stuff, that it's possible to have corruption that masquerades in the thing we mentioned,
which is civility. You can spend hundreds of billions of dollars or trillions towards the war
in the Middle East, for example, something that you've changed your mind on in terms of
the negative impact that it has on the world. And that, the military industrial complex,
everybody's very nice, everybody's very civil, just very upfront. Here's how we're spending the
money. Yeah, sometimes somehow disappears in different places, but that's the way war is
complicated. And it's everyone is very polite. There's no Coke and strippers or whatever is on
the laptop. It's very nice and polite. And then meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of civilians
die, hate, just an incredible amount of hate is created because people lose their family members,
all that kind of stuff. But there's no strippers and Coke on a laptop.
Yeah, but it's not just superficial. It is when someone only wants wealth and power and fame,
that is their objective function, right? They're like a robot that is calibrated just to those
variables, right? And they don't care about the risks we run on any other front. They don't care
about environmental risk, pandemic risk, nuclear proliferation risk, none of it, right? They're
just tracking fame and money and whatever can personally redown to their self-interest along
those lines. And they're not informed about the other risks we're running, really. I mean,
in Trump, you had a president who was repeatedly asking his generals, why couldn't we use our
nuclear weapons? Why can't we have more of them? Why do I have fewer nuclear weapons than JFK?
As though that were a sign of anything other than progress, right?
And this is the guy who's got the button, right? I mean, somebody's following him around with a
bag waiting to take his order to launch, right? It's just a risk we should never
run. One thing Trump has going for him, I think, is that he doesn't drink or do drugs, right? Although
there's people alleged that he does speed, but let's take him at his word. He's not deranging
himself with pharmaceuticals, at least, but apart from Diet Coke. There's nothing wrong.
Just for the record, when you push back on that, there's nothing wrong with Diet Coke.
Yeah, I assume a very large amount. I occasionally have some myself.
There's no medical, there's no scientific evidence that I observed the negatives of,
all those studies about aspartame and all of that. No, I don't know.
I hope you're right. I mean, everything you said about the military industrial complex is true,
right? And we've been worrying about that on both sides of the aisle for a very long time. I mean,
that phrase came from Eisenhower. I mean, so much of what ails us is a story of bad incentives,
right? And bad incentives are so powerful that they corrupt even good people, right?
How much more do they corrupt bad people? At minimum, you want reasonably good people,
at least non-pathological people in the system trying to navigate against the grain of bad
incentives. And better still, all of us can get together and try to diagnose those incentives
and change them, right? And we will really succeed when we have a system of incentives where
the good incentives are so strong that even bad people are effortlessly behaving as though they're
good people because they're so successfully incentivized to behave that way, right? So
it's almost the inversion of our current situation. So yes, and you say I changed my mind about the
war, not quite. I mean, I was never a supporter of the war in Iraq. I was always worried that it
was a distraction from the war in Afghanistan. I was a supporter of the war in Afghanistan,
and I will admit in hindsight, that looks like at best a highly ambiguous and painful exercise,
more likely a fool's errand, right? It's like that did not turn out well. It wasn't for want
of trying. I have not done a deep dive on all of the failures there, and maybe all of these
failures are failures in principle. Maybe that's not the kind of thing that can be done well by
anybody, whatever our intentions. But yeah, the move to Iraq always seemed questionable to me,
and when we knew the immediate problem at that moment, Al Qaeda
was in Afghanistan and then bouncing to Pakistan. Anyway, so yes, but my sense of the possibility
of nation building, my sense of insofar as the neocon spirit of responsibility and idealism,
America was the kind of nation that should be functioning in this way as the world's cop,
and we have to get in there and untangle some of these knots by force rather often because
if we don't do it over there, we're going to have to do it over here kind of thing.
Yeah, some of that has definitely changed for me in my thinking. There are obviously cultural
reasons why it failed in Afghanistan, and if you can't change the culture,
you're not going to force a change at gunpoint in the culture. It certainly seems that that's
not going to happen, and it took us over 20 years apparently to realize that.
That's one of the things you realize with the wars. There's not going to be a strong
signal that things are not working. If you just keep pouring money into a thing, a military effort.
There are signs of it working too. You have all the stories of girls now going to school.
The girls are getting battery acid thrown in their faces by religious maniacs,
and then we come in there and we stop that, and now girls are getting educated, and that's all
good, and our intentions are good there. We're on the right side of history there. Girls should
be going to school. Malala Yosefzai should have the Nobel Prize, and she shouldn't have been shot
in the face by the Taliban, right? We know what the right answers are there. The question is,
what do you do when there are enough in this particular case religious maniacs who are willing
to die and let their children die in defense of crazy ideas and moral norms that belong in the
seventh century? It's a problem we couldn't solve, and we couldn't solve it even though we spent
trillions of dollars to solve it. This reminded me of the thing that you and Jack Dorsey
jokingly had for a while, the discussion about banning Donald Trump from Twitter.
But does any of it bother you now that Twitter files came out? It has to do with the Hunter
Biden laptop story. Does it bother you that there could be a collection of people that
make decisions about who to ban or not, and that could be susceptible to bias and to ideological
influence? Well, I think it always will be, or in the absence of perfect AI, it always will be.
And this becomes relevant with AI as well, because there's some censorship on AI happening,
and it's an interesting question there as well. I don't think Twitter is as important as people
think it is. And I used to think it was more important when I was on it, and now that I'm
off of it, I think it's just an unambiguously good thing in my experience to leach your Twitter
account. Even the good parts of Twitter that I miss were bad in the aggregate, in the degree to
it was fragmenting my attention, the degree to which my life was getting doled out to me in
periods between those moments where I checked Twitter and had my attention diverted.
I was not a crazy Twitter addict. I was probably a pretty normal user. I was not
someone who was tweeting multiple times a day or even every day. I think I probably averaged
something like one tweet a day, I think I averaged. But in reality, it would be like four tweets
one day, and then I wouldn't tweet for the better part of a week. But I was looking
a lot because it was my newsfeed. I was just following 200 very smart people, and I just
wanted to see what they were paying attention to, and they would recommend articles, and I would
read those articles. And then when I would read an article, then I would thought I should signal
boost, I would tweet. And so all of that seemed good, and that's all separable from all of the
odious bullshit that came back at me in response to this largely in response to this Hunter Biden
thing. But even the good stuff has a downside, and it comes at just this point of your phone is
this perpetual stimulus of which is intrinsically fragmenting of time and attention. And now my
phone is much less of a presence in my life. And it's not that I don't check Slack or check email.
I use it to work, but my sense of just what the world is and my sense of my place in the world,
the sense of where I exist as a person has changed a lot by deleting my Twitter account.
And the things that I think, I mean, we all know this phenomenon. We say if someone,
you know, that person's too online, right? What does it mean to be too online? And where do you
draw that boundary? How do you know what constitutes being too online? Well,
in some sense, I think being on social media at all is to be too online. Given the kinds of
information, it signal boosts, and given the impulse it kindles in each of us to reach out to
our audience in specific moments and in specific ways. There are lots of moments now where I
have an opinion about something, but there's nothing for me to do with that opinion. There's
no Twitter. There are lots of things that I would have tweeted in the last months
that are not the kind of thing I'm going to do a podcast about. I'm not going to roll out 10
minutes on that topic on my podcast. I'm not going to take the time to really think about it,
but had I been on Twitter, I would have reacted to this thing in the news or this thing that
somebody did, right? What do you do with that thought now? I just let go of it.
Like chocolate ice cream is the most delicious thing ever. Yeah, it's usually not that sort of
thing, but it's just, but then you look at the kinds of problems people create for themselves.
You look at the life deranging and reputation destroying things that people do, and I look at
the analogous things that have happened to me. The things that have really bent my life around
professionally over the past decade, so much of it is Twitter. Honestly, in my case,
almost 100% of it was Twitter. The controversies I would get into, the things I would think I would
have to respond to in a podcast, like I would release a podcast on a certain topic, I would see
some blowback on Twitter. It would give me the sense that there was some signal that I really
had to respond to. Now that I'm off Twitter, I recognize that most of that was just totally
specious, right? It was not something I had to respond to, but yet I would then do a cycle of
podcasts responding to that thing that like taking my foot out of my mouth or taking someone else's
foot out of my mouth, and it became this self-perpetuating cycle, which if you're having fun,
great. If it's generative of useful information and engagement professionally and psychologically,
great. There was some of that on Twitter. There were people who I've connected with
because one of us DMed the other on Twitter, and it was hard to see how that was going to
happen otherwise, but it was largely just a machine for manufacturing unnecessary controversy.
Do you think it's possible to avoid the drug of that? Now that you've achieved this Zen state,
is it possible for somebody like you to use it in a way that doesn't pull you into the
whirlpool? Anytime there's a tax, I mean, that's how I tried to use it.
Yeah, but it's not the way I wanted to use it. It's not the way it promises itself as a-
You wanted to have debate.
I wanted to actually communicate with people. I wanted to hear from the person because,
again, it's like being in Afghanistan. There are the potted cases where it's obviously good.
In Afghanistan, the girl who's getting an education, that's why we're here. That's obviously good.
I have those moments on Twitter where I'm hearing from a smart person who's detected an error I made
in my podcast or in a book, or they've just got some great idea about something that I should
spend time on, and I would never have heard from this person in any other format, and now
I'm actually in dialogue with them, and it's fantastic. That's the promise of it, to actually
talk to people. I kept getting lured back into that. No, the same or sanity-preserving way of
using it is just as a marketing channel. You just put your stuff out there and you don't look at
what's coming back at you. I'm on other social media platforms that I don't even touch. I mean,
my team put stuff on Facebook and on Instagram. I never even see what's on there.
So you don't think it's possible to see something and not let it affect your mind?
No, that's definitely possible, but the question is, and I did that for vast stretches of time.
Right? But then the promise of the platform is dialogue and feedback.
If I know, for whatever reason, I'm going to see 99-to-1 awful feedback, bad faith feedback,
malicious feedback. Some of it's probably even bots, and I'm not even aware of who's a person,
who's a bot. But I'm just going to stare into this funhouse mirror of acrimony and dishonesty.
The reason why I got off is not because I couldn't recalibrate and find equanimity again with all
the nastiness that was coming back at me, and not that I couldn't ignore it for vast stretches of
time. But I could see that I kept coming back to it, hoping that it would be something that I could
use, a real tool for communication. And I was noticing that it was insidiously changing
the way I felt about people, both people I know and people I don't know. People are
mutual friends of ours who are behaving in certain ways on Twitter, which just seemed insane to me.
And then that became a signal I felt like I had to take into account somehow. You're seeing
people at their worst, if you're both friends and strangers. And I felt that as much as I
could try to recalibrate for it, I felt that I was losing touch with what was real information,
because people are performing, people are faking, people are not themselves, or you're seeing
people at their worst. And so I felt like, all right, was being advertised to me
here on a not just a daily basis, an hourly basis, or an increment sometimes of multiple
times an hour. I mean, I probably checked Twitter at minimum 10 times a day, and maybe I was checking
it 100 times a day on some days, where things were really active and I was really engaged with
something. What was being delivered into my brain there was subtly false information about how
dishonest and just generally unethical, totally normal people are capable of being. It is a
funhouse mirror. I was seeing the most grotesque versions of people who I know. People who I know
I could sit down at dinner with, and they would never behave this way. And yet they were coming
at me on Twitter, it was essentially turning ordinary people into sociopaths. People are just
their analogies that many of us have made. It's like one analogy is road rage. People behave in
the confines of a car in ways that they never would if they didn't have this metal box around them
moving at speed. And all of that becomes quite hilarious and obviously dysfunctional when they
actually have to stop at the light next to the person they just flipped off. And they didn't
understand that the person coming out of that car next to them with cauliflower ear is someone who
they never would have rolled their eyes at in public because they would have taken one look
at this person and realized this is the last person you want to fight with. That's one of the
heartbreaking things is to see people who I know, who I admire, who I know are friends,
be everything from snarky to downright, mean, derisive towards each other. It doesn't make
any sense. This is the only place where I've seen people I really admire who have had a calm head
most things like really be shitty to other people. It's probably the only place I've seen that.
I choose to maybe believe that that's not really them. There's something about the system.
If you go paintballing, if you, Jordan Peterson, you're going to shoot your friends.
Yeah, you're going to shoot your friends, but you kind of accept that that's kind of what you're
doing in this little game that you're playing. But it's sometimes hard to remind yourself of that.
And I think I was guilty of that, definitely. I don't think I ever did anything that I
really feel bad about, but yeah, it was always pushing me to the edge of snideness somehow.
It's just not healthy. The reason why I deleted my Twitter account in the end was that
it was obviously making me a worse person. Is there some way to be on there where he's not
making you a worse person? I'm sure there is, but it's given the nature of the platform and given
what was coming back at me on it, the way to do that is just to basically use it as a one-way
channel of communication, just marketing. It's like, here's what I'm paying attention to.
Look at it if you want to, and you just push it out, and then you don't look at what's coming
back at you. I put out a call for questions on Twitter, and then actually quite surprising,
there's a lot of good... I mean, they're like, even if they're critical, they're like being
thoughtful, which is nice. I used it that way too, and that was what kept me hooked.
But then there's also TouchBalls69 wrote a question. I can't imagine. This is part of it.
One way to solve this is we've got to get rid of anonymity for this.
Let me ask the question. Ask Sam why he sucks was the question.
One reason why I sucked was Twitter, and I've since solved that problem. TouchBalls69 should
be happy that I suck a little bit less now that I'm off Twitter and don't have to hear from TouchBalls
69 on the regular. The fact that you have to see that, it probably can have a negative effect,
just even a moderation, just to see that there is... For me, the negative effect is
slightly losing faith in the underlying kindness of humanity. Yeah, that was for me.
You can also just reason your way out of it saying that this is anonymity, and this is fun,
and it's just the shit show of Twitter, it's okay, but it does mentally affect you a little bit.
I don't read too much into that kind of comment. That's just trolling, and I understand the fun
the person is having on the other side of that. Do you though?
Well, I do. I mean, I don't behave that way, but I do, and for all I know, that person could be
16 years old. It could be also an alt account for Elon. I don't know.
No, I'm pretty sure Elon would just tweet that under his own name at this point.
You love each other. Okay, so speaking of which, now that Elon has taken over Twitter,
is there something that he could do to make this platform better?
This Twitter and just social media in general, but because of the aggressive nature of his
innovation that he's pushing, is there any way to make Twitter a pleasant place for Sam Harris?
Maybe. I don't know. I think I'm agnostic as to whether or not he or anyone could make a social
media platform that really was healthy. So you were just observing yourself week by week,
seeing the effect that's on your mind, and on how much you're actually learning and growing as a
person, and it was negative? Yeah, I'd also seen the negativity in other people's lives. I mean,
it's obviously, I mean, he's not going to admit it, but I think it's obviously negative for Elon,
right? I mean, it's just not, that was one of the things that, when I was looking into the
Funhaus mirror, I was also seeing the Funhaus mirror on his side of Twitter, and it was just
even more exaggerated. It's like, when I was asking myself, why is he spending his time this way,
I then reflected on why was I spending my time this way to a lesser degree,
right? And at lesser scale, and at lesser risk, frankly, right? And so,
and it was just so, it's not just Twitter, I mean, this is in part an internet phenomenon.
It's like the whole Hunter Biden mess that you explored. That was based, I mean,
it was on somebody's podcast, but that was based on a clip taken from that podcast,
which was highly misleading as to the general shape of my remarks on that podcast. Even,
I had to then do my own podcast untangling all of that and admitting that even in the full context,
I was not speaking especially well and didn't say exactly what I thought in a way that would
have been recognizable to anyone, even someone with not functioning by a spirit of charity,
but the clip was quite distinct from the podcast itself. The reality is that we're
living in an environment now where people are so lazy and their attention is so fragmented
that they only have time for clips, 99% of people will see a clip and will assume
there's no relevant context I need to understand what happened in that clip, right? And obviously,
the people who make those clips know that, right? And they're doing it quite maliciously. And in
this case, the person who made that clip and subsequent clips of other podcasts was quite
maliciously trying to engineer some reputational emulation for me and being signal-boosted by
Elon and other prominent people who can't take the time to watch anything other than a clip,
even when it's their friend or someone who's ostensibly their friend in that clip, right?
So, it's a total failure, an understandable failure of ethics that everyone is so short on time
and they're so fucking lazy and that we now have these contexts in which we react so quickly to
things, right? Twitter is inviting an instantaneous reaction to this clip that it's just too tempting
to just say something and not know what you're even commenting on. And most of the people who
saw that clip don't understand what I actually think about any of these issues. And the irony is,
people are going to find clips from this conversation that are just as misleading and
they're going to export those and then people are going to be dunking on those clips. And,
you know, we're all living and dying by clips now and it's dysfunctional.
See, I think it's possible to create a platform. I think we will keep living on clips. But, you
know, when I saw that clip of you talking about children and so on, just knowing that you have
a sense of humor, we just went to a dark place in terms of humor. So, like, I didn't even bother and
then I knew that the way clips work is that people will use it for virality's sake. But the giving,
giving a person benefit of the doubt, that's not even the right term. It's not like I was,
it's really like interpreting it in the context of the past.
The truth is, the truth is you even need, like, I even give
Trump the benefit of the doubt when I see a clip of Trump. Because there are famous clips of Trump
that are very misleading as to what he was saying in context. And I've been honest about that. Like,
the whole, you know, there were good people on both sides scandal around the, his remarks after
Charlottesville, that the clip that got exported and got promoted by everyone, you know, left of
center from Biden on down, you know, the New York Times, CNN, there's nobody that I'm aware of
who has honestly, you know, apologized for what they did with that clip. He did not say what he
seemed to be saying in that clip about the Nazis at Charlottesville, right? And I've always been
very clear about that. So it's just, you know, even people who I think should be marginalized and
people who should be defenestrated because they really are terrible people who are doing dangerous
things and for bad reasons, I think we should be honest about what they actually meant in context,
right? And this goes to anyone else we might talk about, you know, who's more,
where the case is much more confusing. But yeah, so everyone's, it's just so, and then I'm sure
we're going to get to AI. But, you know, the prospect of being able to manufacture clips
with AI and deep fakes, and that where it's going to be hard for most people most of the time to
even figure out that whether they're in the presence of something real, you know, forget about
being divorced from context, there was no context. I mean, that is a misinformation apocalypse that
is, we are right on the cusp of and, you know, it's terrifying. Or it could be just a new world
like where Alice going to Wonderland or humor is the only thing we have and it will save us.
Maybe in the end, Trump's approach to social media was the right one after all. Nothing is
true and everything's absurd. But we can't live that way. People function on the basis of what
they assume is true, right? They think, you know- People have functioned.
Well, to do anything. It's like, I mean, you have to know what you think is going to happen
or you have to at least give a probabilistic waiting over the future. Otherwise, you're
going to be incapacitated by- People want certain things and they have to have a
rational plan to get those desires gratified. And they don't want to die. They don't want
their kids to die. You tell them that there's a comet hurtling toward earth and they should get
outside and look up, right? They're going to do it. And if it turns out it's misinformation,
it's going to matter because it comes down to like, what medicines do you give your children,
right? We're going to be manufacturing fake journal articles. I mean, this is- I'm sure
someone's using chat GPT for this reader as we speak. And if it's not credible, if it's not
persuasive now to most people, I mean, honestly, I'll be amazed if it's a year before we can
actually create journal articles that would take a PhD to debunk that are completely fake.
And there are people who are celebrating this kind of coming cataclysm. But it's just,
there are the people who don't have anything to lose who are celebrating it or just are so confused
that they just don't even know what's at stake. And then there are the people who have met the
few people who we could count on a few hands who have managed to insulate themselves or at least
imagine they've insulated themselves from the downside here enough that they're not implicated
in the great unraveling we are witnessing or could witness.
The shaking up of what is true. So actually, that returns us to experts. Do you think experts can
save us? Is there such thing as expertise and experts in something? How do you know if you've
did? I think it's important to acknowledge up front that there's something paradoxical about
how we relate to authority, especially within science. And I don't think that paradox is going
away. And it's just, it doesn't have to be confusing. And it's not truly a paradox,
it's just like there are different moments in time. So it is true to say that
within science or within rationality generally, I mean, just whenever you're making it, having a
fact-based discussion about anything, it is true to say that the truth or falsity of a statement
does not even slightly depend on the credentials of the person making the statement. So
it doesn't matter if you're a Nobel laureate, you can be wrong. The last sentence you spoke could
be total bullshit, right? And it's also possible for someone who's deeply uninformed to be right
about something or to be right for the wrong reasons, right? Or someone just gets lucky or
they're middling cases where you have like a backyard astronomer who's got no credentials,
but he just loves astronomy and he's got a telescope and he spends a lot of time looking at
the night sky and he discovers a comet that no one else has seen, not even the professional
expert astronomers. I mean, I gotta think that happens less and less now, but some version
of that keeps happening and it may always keep happening in every area of expertise, right?
So it's true that truth is orthogonal to the reputational concerns we have
among apes who are talking about the truth. But it is also true that most of the time
real experts are much more reliable than frauds or people who are not experts, right?
And expertise really is a thing, right? And when you're flying an airplane in a storm,
you don't want just randos come into the cockpit saying, listen, I've got a new idea about how
we should tweak these controls, right? You want someone who's a trained pilot and that training
gave them something, right? It gave them a set of competences and intuitions and
they know what all those dials and switches do, right? And I don't, right? I shouldn't be
flying that plane. So when things really matter, you know, and putting this at 30,000 feet in a
storm sharpens this up, we want real experts to be in charge, right? And we are at 30,000 feet
a lot of the time on a lot of issues, right? And whether they're public health issues,
whether it's issue, whether it's a geopolitical emergency like Ukraine,
climate change, I mean, just pick your topic. There are real problems and the clock is rather
often ticking and their solutions are non-obvious, right? And so expertise is a thing and deferring
to experts much of the time makes a lot of sense. At minimum, it prevents spectacular errors of
incompetence and just foolhardiness. But even in the case of somewhere where you're talking about
someone, I mean, people like ourselves who are like, we're well educated, we're not the worst
possible candidates for, you know, the Dunning-Kruger effect. When we're going into a new area
where we're not experts, we're fairly alert to the possibility that we don't, you know,
it's not as simple as things seem at first and we don't, you know, we don't know how our
tools translate to this new area. We can be fairly circumspect. But we're also, because we're well
educated, we can work and we're pretty quick studies, we can learn a lot of things pretty fast
and we can begin to play a language game that sounds fairly expert, right? And
in that case, the invitation to do your own research, right, is when times are good,
I view as an invitation to waste your time pointlessly, right? When times are good. Now,
the truth is, times are not all that good, right? And we have the ongoing public display of failures
of expertise. We have experts who are obviously corrupted by bad incentives. We've got experts who,
you know, perversely won't admit they were wrong when they, in fact, you know, are demonstrated
to be wrong. We've got institutions that have been captured by political ideology that's not
truth tracking and this whole woke encroachment into really every place, you know, whether it's
universities or science journals or government or, I mean, it's just like that is, that has been
genuinely deranging. So there's a lot going on that where experts and the very concept of expertise
has seemed to discredit itself. But the reality is that there is a massive difference. When anything
matters, when there's anything to know about anything, there is a massive difference most of
the time between someone who has really done the work to understand that domain and someone who
hasn't. And if I get sick or someone close to me gets sick, you know, I have a PhD in neuroscience,
right? So I can read a medical journal article and understand a lot of it, right? And I, you know,
so I'm just fairly conversant with, you know, medical terminology. And I understand its methods
and I'm alert to the difference because I've, you know, because in neuroscience, I've spent hours
and hours in journal clubs, you know, diagnosing, you know, analyzing the difference between good
and bad studies, I'm alert to the difference between good and bad studies in medical journals,
right? And I understand that bad studies can get published and, you know, et cetera. And
experiments can be poorly designed. I'm alert to all of those things. But when I get sick or
when someone close to me gets sick, I don't pretend to be a doctor, right? I've got no clinical
experience. I don't go down the rabbit hole on Google for days at a stretch, trying to become
a doctor, much less a specialist in the domain of problem that has been visited upon me or my
family, right? So if someone close to me gets cancer, I don't pretend to be an oncologist.
I don't go out and start reading, you know, in journals of oncology and try to really get
up to speed as an oncologist because it's not, it's, one is a bad and potentially and very
likely misleading use of my time, right? And it's, if I decide, if I had a lot of runway,
if I decide, okay, it's really important for me to know everything I can. At this point, I want to,
I know someone's going to get cancer. I may not go back to school and become an oncologist,
but what I want to do is I want to know everything I can know about cancer, right? So I'm going to
take the next four years and spend most of my time on cancer. Okay, I could do that, right? I
still think that's a waste of my time. I still think at the end of, even at the end of those four
years, I'm not going to be the best person to form intuitions about what to do in the face of
the next cancer that I have to confront. I'm still going to want a better oncologist than
I've become to tell me what he or she would do if they were in my shoes or in the shoes of,
you know, my family member. I'm going to, you know, what I'm not advocating, I'm not advocating a
blind trust and authority. Like, if you get cancer and you're talking to one oncologist and
they're recommending some course of treatment, by all means get a second opinion, get a third
opinion, right? But it matters that those opinions are coming from real experts and not from,
you know, Robert Kennedy Jr., you know, who's telling you that, you know, you got it because
you got a vaccine, right? It's just, we're swimming in a sea of misinformation where
you've got people who are moving the opinions of millions of others who should not have an opinion
on these topics. There is no scenario in which you should be getting your opinion about vaccine
safety or climate change or the war in Ukraine or anything else that we might want to talk about
from Candace Owens, right? It's just like, she's not a relevant expert on any of those topics
and what's more, she doesn't seem to care, right? And she's living in a culture that has
amplified that not carrying into a business model, an effective business model, right? So it's just,
and there's something very Trumpian about all that. The problem is the culture,
it's not these specific individuals. So the paradox here is that expertise is a real thing
and we defer to it a lot as a labor-saving device and just based on the reality that
it's very hard to be a polymath, right? And specialization is a thing, right? And so the
people who specialize in a very narrow topic, they know more about that topic than the next
guy, no matter how smart that guy or gal is and that those differences matter. But it's also true
that when you're talking about facts, sometimes the best experts are wrong. The scientific
consensus is wrong. You get a sea change in the thinking of a whole field because one person
who's an outlier for whatever reason decides, okay, I'm going to prove this point and they
prove it, right? So somebody like the doctor who believed that stomach ulcers were not due to stress
but were due to H. pylori infections, right? So he just drank a vial of H. pylori bacteria and
proved and quickly got an ulcer and convinced the field that at minimum H. pylori was involved
in that process. Okay, so yes, everyone was wrong. That doesn't disprove the reality of expertise.
It doesn't disprove the utility of relying on experts most of the time, especially in an emergency,
especially when the clock is ticking, especially when you're in this particular cockpit and you
only have one chance to land this plane, right? You want the real pilot at the controls.
But there's just a few things to say. Go. So one, you mentioned this example with cancer and doing
your own research. There are several things that are different about our particular time in history.
One, doing your own research has become more and more effective because you can read, the internet
made information a lot more accessible. So you can read a lot of different meta-analyses.
You can read blog posts that describe to you exactly the flaws in the different papers they
make up the meta-analyses. And you can read a lot of those blog posts that are conflicting with
each other and you can take that information in. And in a short amount of time, you can start to make
good faith interpretations. For example, I don't want to overstate things, but if you suffer from
depression, for example, then you could go to an expert and a doctor that prescribes you some
medication. But you could also challenge some of those ideas and seeing what are the different
medications, what are the different side effects, what are the different solutions to depression,
all that kind of stuff. And I think depression is just a really difficult problem that's very
I don't want to again state incorrect things, but I think there's a lot of variability
of what depression really means. So being introspective about the type of depression you have
and the different possible solutions you have, just doing your own research as a first step
before approaching a doctor or as you have multiple opinions could be very beneficial in that case.
Now, that's depression. That's something that's been studied for a very long time. With a new
pandemic that's affecting everybody. With the airplane equated to like 9-11 or something,
a new emergency just happened and everybody, every expert in the world is publishing on it
and talking about it. So doing your own research there could be exceptionally effective in asking
questions. And then there's a difference between experts, virologists, and it's actually a good
question who is exactly the expert in a pandemic. But there's the actual experts doing the research
and publishing stuff. And then there's the communicators of that expertise. And the question is
if the communicators are flawed to a degree where doing your own research is actually the more
effective way to figure out policies and solutions. Because you're not competing with experts,
you're competing with the communicators of expertise. That could be WHO, CDC in the case
of the pandemic, or politicians, or political type of science figures like Anthony Fauci.
There's a question there of the effectiveness of doing your own research in that context.
And the competing forces there, incentives that you've mentioned,
is you can become quite popular by being contrarian. By saying everybody's lying to you,
all the authorities are lying to you, all the institutions are lying to you. So those are the
waters you're swimming in. But I think doing your own research in that kind of context could be
quite effective. Let me be clear. I'm not saying you shouldn't do any research. I'm not saying
that you shouldn't be informed about an issue. I'm not saying you shouldn't read articles on
whatever the topic is. And yes, if I got cancer or someone close to me got cancer, I probably would
read more about cancer than I've read thus far about cancer. And I've read some. So I'm not
making a virtue of ignorance and a blind obedience to authority. And again, I recognize that
authorities can discredit themselves or they can be wrong. They can be wrong even when there's
no discredit. There's a lot we don't understand about the nature of the world.
But still this vast gulf between truly informed opinion and bullshit exists,
it always exists. And conspiracy thinking is rather often, most of the time, the species of
bullshit, but it's not always wrong. There are real conspiracies and there really are
just awful corruptions of born of bad incentives within our scientific processes,
within institutions. And again, we've mentioned a lot of these things in passing, but what
woke political ideology did to scientific communication during the pandemic was awful,
and it was really corrosive of public trust, especially on the right.
For understandable reasons, it was just, it was crazy, some of the things that were being said
and still is. And these cases are all different. You take depression, we just don't know enough
about depression for anyone to be that confident about anything. And there are many different
modalities in which to interact with it as a problem. So there's pharmaceuticals,
have whatever promise they have, but there's certainly reason to be concerned that they
don't work well for everybody. And that's obvious they don't work well for everybody,
but they do work for some people. But again, depression is a multifactorial problem,
and there are different levels at which to influence it. And there are things like meditation,
there are things like you just life changes. And one of the first things about depression is that
when you're depressed, all of the things that would be good for you to do are precisely the
things you don't want to do. You don't have any energy to socialize, you don't want to get things
done, you don't want to exercise. And all of those things, if you got those up and running,
they do make you feel better in the aggregate. But the reality is that there are clinical level
depressions that are so bad that we just don't have good tools for them. And it's not enough to
tell you, there's no life change, someone's going to embrace that it's going to be an
obvious remedy for that. I mean, pandemics are obviously a complicated problem, but I would
consider it much simpler than depression in terms of what's on the menu to be chosen among
the various choices. Just less multifactorial. The logic by which you would make those choices.
We have a virus, we have a new virus, it's some version of bad, it's human transmissible,
we're still catching up to every aspect of it. We don't know how it spreads.
We don't know how effective masks are. Well, at a certain point, we knew it was respiratory,
but whether it's spread by fomites, all that, we were confused about a lot of things.
We're still confused. It's been a moving target this whole time, and it's been changing this
whole time. And our responses to it have been, we ramped up the vaccines as quickly as we could,
but too quick for some, not quick enough for others. We could have done human challenge trials
and got them out more quickly with better data. And I think that's something we should
probably look at in the future, because to my eye, that would make ethical sense to do challenge
trials. And so much of my concern about COVID, I mean, many people are confused about my
concern about COVID. My concern about COVID has for much of the time not been narrowly focused on
COVID itself, how dangerous I perceive COVID to be as a illness. It has been for the longest time
even more a concern about our ability to respond to a truly scary pathogen next time.
Outside those initial months, give me the first six months to be quite worried about
COVID and the unraveling of society. And the supply of toilet paper.
You want to secure a steady supply of toilet paper. But beyond that initial period,
when we had a sense of what we were dealing with, and we had every hope that the vaccines are
actually going to work, and we knew we were getting those vaccines in short order, right?
Beyond that, and we knew just how dangerous the illness was and how dangerous it wasn't.
For years now, I've just been worrying about this as a failed dress rehearsal
for something much worse, right? I think what we proved to ourselves at this moment in history is
that we have built informational tools that we do not know how to use, and we have made
ourselves, we've basically enrolled all of human society into a psychological experiment
that is deranging us and making it virtually impossible to solve
coordination problems that we absolutely have to solve next time when things are worse.
Do you understand who's at fault for the way this unraveled? The way we didn't seem to have
the distrust in institutions and the institution of science that grew seemingly exponentially,
or got revealed through this process. Who is at fault here? What's to fix?
So much blame to go around, but so much of it is not a matter of bad people conspiring to do
bad things. It's a matter of incompetence and misaligned incentives and just ordinary plain
vanilla dysfunction. But my problem was that people like you, people like Brett Weinstein,
people like that I look to for reasonable, difficult conversations on difficult topics,
have a little bit lost their mind, became emotional and dogmatic in style of conversation,
perhaps not in the depth of actual ideas. But I tweet something of that nature and not about
you, but just it feels like the pandemic made people really more emotional than before. And
then Kimball Musk responded, I think something I think you probably would agree with, maybe not.
I think it was the combo of Trump and the pandemic. Trump triggered the far left to be
way more active than they could have been without him. And then the pandemic handed
big government, Nanny State left these a huge platform on a silver platter. I want to punch,
and here we are. I would agree with some of that. I'm not sure how much to read into the Nanny
State concept. But yet basically got people on the far left really activated and then gave control
to, I don't know if you say Nanny State, but just control to government that when executed poorly
has created a complete distrust in government. My fear is that there was going to be that complete
distrust anyway given the nature of the information space, given the level of conspiracy thinking,
given the gaming of these tools by an anti-vax cult. I mean, there really is an anti-vax cult
that just ramped up its energy during this moment. But it's a small one.
It's not to say that everything, every concern about vaccines is a species of,
it was born of misinformation or born of this cult, but there is a cult that is just,
and the core of Trumpism is a cult. I mean, QAnon is a cult. And so there's a lot of lying
and there's a lot of confusion. It's almost impossible to exaggerate how confused some
people are and how fully their lives are organized around that confusion. I mean,
there are people who think that the world's being run by pedophile cannibals and that Tom Hanks and
Oprah Winfrey and Michelle Obama are among those cannibals. I mean, they're adjacent to the pure
crazy, there's the semi-crazy and adjacent to the semi-crazy, there's the grifting opportunist
asshole. And the layers of bad faith are hard to fully diagnose, but the problem is
all of this is getting signal boosted by an outrage machine that is preferentially
spreading misinformation. It has a business model that is guaranteeing that is preferentially
sharing misinformation.
Can I actually just on a small tangent, how do you defend yourself against the claim that you're
a pedophile cannibal? It's difficult.
Here's the case I would make, because I don't think you can use reason. I think you have to use
empathy, you have to understand. But like part of it, I mean, I find it very difficult to believe
that anyone believes these things. I mean, I think that there's, and I'm sure there's some number of
people who are just pretending to believe these things, because it's just, again, this is sort
of like the 4-chanification of everything. It's just pepe the frog. None of this is what it seems.
They're not signaling an alliance with white supremacy or neo-Nazism, but they're not doing
it. They just don't fucking care. It's just cynicism overflowing its banks. It's just fun to
wind up the normies. Look at all the normies who don't understand that a green frog is just
a green frog, even when it isn't just a green frog. It's just gumming up everyone's cognitive
bandwidth with bullshit. I get that that's fun if you're a teenager and you just want to vandalize
our new sphere, but at a certain point, we have to recognize that real questions of human welfare
are in play. There's wars getting fought or not fought, and there's a pandemic raging,
and there's medicine to take or not take. But to come back to this issue of COVID,
I don't think I got so out of balance around COVID. I think people are quite confused about
what I was concerned about. Yes, there was a period where I was crazy because anyone who was
taking it seriously was crazy because they had no idea what was going on. Yes, I was wiping down
packages with alcohol wipes because people thought it was transmissible by touch. When we
realized that was no longer the case, I stopped doing that. Again, it was a moving target, and
a lot of things we did in hindsight around masking and school closures looked fairly
dysfunctional. But I think the criticism that people would say about you're talking about COVID,
and maybe you can correct me, but you were against skepticism of the safety and efficacy of the
vaccine. People who get nervous about the vaccine but don't fall into the usual anti-vax camp,
which I think there was a significant enough number. They're getting nervous. Especially
after the war in Afghanistan and Iraq, I too was nervous about anything where a lot of money could
be made. You just see how the people who are greedy, they come to the surface all of a sudden,
and a lot of them that run institutions, they're actually really good human beings. I know a lot
of them, but it's hard to know how those two combine together when there's hundreds of billions,
trillions of dollars to be made. I guess the sense was that you weren't open enough to the
skepticism. I understand that people have that sense. I'll tell you how I thought about it and
think about it. One, again, it was a moving target. There was a point in the timeline where
it was totally rational to expect that the vaccines were both working, both they were
reasonably safe and that COVID was reasonably dangerous. The trade-off for basically everyone
was it was rational to get vaccinated given the level of testing and how many people had
been vaccinated before you, given what we were seeing with COVID, that that was a forced choice.
You're eventually going to get COVID and the question is, do you want to be vaccinated when
you do? There was a period where that forced choice, it was just obviously reasonable to
get vaccinated, especially because there was every reason to expect that while it wasn't a
perfectly sterilizing vaccine, it was going to knock down transmission a lot and that matters.
It wasn't just a personal choice. You were actually being a good citizen when you decided to run
whatever risk you were going to run to get vaccinated because there are people in our
society who actually can't get vaccinated. I know people who can't take any vaccines,
they're so allergic to it. They in their own person seem to justify all of the fears of the
anti-vax cult. They're the kind of person who Robert Kennedy Jr. can point to and say,
vaccines will fucking kill you because of the experience. I know people who have kids
who fit that description. We should all feel a civic responsibility to be vaccinated against
egregiously awful and transmissible diseases for which we have relatively safe vaccines
to keep those sorts of people safe. There was a period of time when it was thought that the
vaccine could stop transmission. Yes. Again, all of this has begun to shift.
I don't think it has shifted as much as Brett Weinstein thinks it's shifted, but
yes, there are safety concerns around the mRNA vaccines, especially for young men.
As far as I know, that's the purview of actual heightened concern.
Also, there's now a lot of natural immunity out there. Basically,
everyone who was going to get vaccinated has gotten vaccinated. The virus has evolved to the
point in this context where it seems less dangerous. Again, I'm going more on the seemings
than on research that I've done at this point, but I'm certainly less worried about getting
COVID. I've had it once. I've been vaccinated. You ask me now, how do I feel about getting
the next booster? I don't know that I'm going to get the next booster. I was somebody who was
waiting in line at four in the morning, hoping to get some overflow vaccine when it was first
available. At that point, given what I thought I knew, based on the best sources I could consult,
and based on anecdotes that were too vivid to ignore, both data and personal experience,
it was totally rational for me to want to get that vaccine as soon as I could. Now,
I think it's totally rational for me to do a different kind of cost-benefit analysis and wonder,
listen, do I really need to get a booster? How many of these boosters am I going to get
for the rest of my life? Really? How safe is the mRNA vaccine for a man of my age? Do I need
to be worried about myocarditis? All of that is completely rational to talk about now. My concern
is that at every point along the way, I was the wrong person, and Brett Weinstein was the wrong
person, and there's many other people I could add to this list, to have strong opinions about any of
this stuff. I just disagree with that. I think, yes, in theory, I agree 100%, but I feel like experts
failed at communicating. Not at doing... They did. And I just feel like you and Brett Weinstein
actually have the tools with the internet, given the engine you have in your brain of thinking for
months at a time, deeply about the problems that face our world, that you actually have the tools
to do pretty good thinking here. The problem I have with experts... But there would be deference
to experts and pseudo-experts behind all of that? Well, the papers. You would stand on the shoulders
of giants, but you can surf those shoulders better than the giants themselves. Yeah, but I knew we
were going to disagree about that. I saw his podcast where he brought on these experts who had... Many
of them had the right credentials, but for a variety of reasons, they didn't pass the smell test for
me. One larger problem, and this goes back to the problem of how we rely on authority in science,
is that you can always find a PhD or an MD to champion any crackpot idea. It is amazing,
but you could find PhDs and MDs who would sit up there in front of Congress and say that they thought
smoking was not addictive, or that it was not harmful to... There was no direct link between
smoking and lung cancer. You could always find those people. Some of the people Brett found
were people who had obvious tells to my point of view, and I saw them on some of the same people
who were on Rogan's podcast. It's hard because if a person does have the right credentials,
and they're not saying something floridly mistaken, and we're talking about something where
they're genuine unknowns, like how much do we know about the safety of these vaccines?
At that point, not a whole hell of a lot. We have no long-term data on mRNA vaccines,
but to confidently say that millions of people are going to die because of these vaccines,
and to confidently say that ivermectin is a panacea, ivermectin is the thing that prevents
COVID, there was no good reason to say either of those things at that moment. Given that that's
where Brett was, I felt like there was nothing to debate. We're both the wrong people that would
be getting into the weeds on this. We're both going to defer to our chosen experts. His experts
look like crackpots to me, or at least the ones who are most vociferous on those edgiest points.
And your experts seem like, what is the term, mask hysteria? I forgot the term.
Well, no, but it's like with climate science. It's received as a canard in half of our society
now, but the claim that 97% of climate scientists agree that human-caused climate
changes a thing. Do you go with the 97% most of the time, or do you go with the 3% most of the time?
It's obvious you go with the 97% most of the time for anything that matters. It's not to say that
the 3% are always wrong. Again, things get overturned. And yes, as you say, I've spent
much more time worrying about this on my podcast than I've spent worrying about COVID.
Our institutions have lost trust for good reason, and it's an open question whether
we can actually get things done with this level of transparency and pseudo-transparency
given our information ecosystems. Can we fight a war, really fight a war that we may have to
fight, like the next Nazis? Can we fight that war when everyone with an iPhone is showing just
how awful it is that little girls get blown up when we drop our bombs? Could we as a society
do what we might have to do to actually get necessary things done when we're living in this
panopticon of just everyone's a journalist, everyone's a scientist, everyone's an expert,
everyone's got direct contact with the facts or some or semblance of the facts. I don't know.
I think yes. And I think voices like yours are exceptionally important. And I think there's
certain signals you send in your ability to steal me on the other side in your empathy,
essentially. So that's the fight. That's the mechanism by which you resist
the dogmatism of this binary thinking. And then if you become a trusted person that's able to
consider the other side, then people will listen to you as the aggregators, the communicator of
expertise. Because the virologists haven't been able to be good communicators. I still to this day
don't really know what am I supposed to think about the safety and efficacy of the vaccines
today? As it stands today, what are we supposed to think? What are we supposed to think about
testing? What are we supposed to think about the effectiveness of masks or lockdowns? Where's the
great communicator on this topic that consider all the other conspiracy theories, all the other
all the communication that's out there and actually aggregating it together and be able to
say this is actually what's most likely the truth. And also some of that has to do with
humility, epistemic humility, knowing that you can't really know for sure,
just like with depression, you can't really know for sure. I'm not seeing those communications
being effectively done, even still today. Well, the jury is still out on some of it. And again,
it's a moving target. And some of it, it's complicated, some of it's a self-fulfilling
dynamic where like, so like lockdowns, in theory, lockdowns, a lockdown would work
if we could only do it, but we can't really do it. And there's a lot of people who won't do it,
because they're convinced that it's, this is the totalitarian boot, you know, on finally on the
neck of the good people who are always having their interests, you know,
traduced by the elites, right? So like this is, if you have enough people who think the lockdown
for any reason in the face of any conceivable illness, right, is just code for the new world
order coming to fuck you over and take your guns, right? Okay, you have a society that is now immune
to reason, right? Because there are absolutely certain pathogens that we should lock down for
next time, right? And it was completely rational in the beginning of this thing
to lock down given, to attempt to lock down, we never really locked down, to attempt some
semblance of a lockdown just to quote, bend the curve, to spare our healthcare system,
given what we were seeing happening in Italy, right? Like that moment was, it was not hard to
navigate, at least in my view, it was obvious at the time, in retrospect, my views on that
haven't changed, except for the fact that I recognize maybe it's, it's just impossible,
given the nature of people's response to that kind of demand, right? We live in a society that's
just not going to lock down. Unless the pandemic is much more deadly. Right, so that's a point I
made, which was maliciously clipped out from some other podcast where someone's trying to
make it look like I want to see children die. Like there's a pity more children didn't die
from COVID, right? This is actually the same person who, and that's the other thing that got
so poisoned here. It's like that person, this psychopath or effective psychopath who's creating
these clips of me on podcasts, the second clip of me seeming to say that I wish more children died
during COVID, but it was, it was so, I was so, it was so clear in context what I was saying that
even the clip betrayed the context, so it didn't actually work. This psycho, and again, I don't
know whether he actually is a psychopath, but he's behaving like one because of the incentives of
Twitter. This is somebody who Brett Signal Boosted as a very reliable source of information,
right? He kept retweeting this guy at me, against me, right? And this guy, at one glance,
I knew how unreliable this guy was, right? But I think I, I'm not at all sad. One thing I think
I did wrong, one thing that I do regret, one thing I have not sorted out for myself is
how to navigate the professional and personal pressure that gets
applied at this moment where you have a friend or an acquaintance or someone you know
who's behaving badly in public or behaving badly, behaving in a way that you think
is bad in public. And they have a public platform where they're influencing a lot of people,
and you have your own public platform where you're constantly getting asked to comment
on what this friend or acquaintance or colleague is doing.
I haven't known what I think is ethically right about the choices that seem forced on us at
moments like this. So like, I've criticized you in public about your interview with Kanye.
Now, in the case, in that case, I reached out to you in private first and told you exactly
what I thought. And then when I was going to get asked in public or when I was touching that
topic on my podcast, I more or less said the same thing that I said to you in private. Now,
that was how I navigated that moment. I did the same thing with Elon, at least on at the beginning.
You know, this, we have, we have maintained good vibes, which is, which is not what I want to
say about Elon. But I don't think, I just agree with you, because good vibes in the moment,
there's a deep core of good vibes that persists through time between you and Elon. And I would
argue probably between some of the other folks you mentioned. I think with Brett, I failed to
reach out in private to the degree that I should have. And we never really had, we had tried to
set up a conversation in private that never happened. But there was some communication, but
it would have been much better for me to have made more of an effort in private
than I did before it spilled out into public. And I would say that's true with other people as well.
What kind of interaction in private do you think you should have with Brett? Because my case
would be beforehand and now still. The case I would like in this part of the criticism
you sent my way, maybe it's useful to go to that direction. Actually, let's go to that direction
because I think I disagree with your criticism as you stated publicly.
The thing you criticized me for is actually the right thing to do with Brett.
Okay, you said Lex could have spoken with Kanye in such a way as to have produced a useful
document. He didn't do that because he has a fairly naive philosophy about the power of love.
Let's see if you can maintain that philosophy in the presence of this criticism.
No, it's beautiful. He seemed to think that if he just got through the minefield
to the end of the conversation where the two of them still were feeling good about one another
and they can hug it out, that would be by definition a success. So let me make the
case for this power of love philosophy. And first of all, I love you, Sam. You're still
an inspiration and somebody I deeply admire. Okay. Back at you. To me, in the case of Kanye,
it's not only that you get through the conversation and have hugs, it's that the display that you're
willing to do that has power. So even if it doesn't end in hugging, the actual, the turning
the other cheek, the act of turning the other cheek itself communicates both to Kanye later
and to the rest of the world, that we should have empathy and compassion towards each other.
There is power to that. Maybe that is naive, but I believe in the power of that. So it's not that
I'm trying to convince Kanye that some of his ideas are wrong, but I'm trying to illustrate that
just the act of listening and truly trying to understand the human being, that opens people's
minds to actually questioning their own beliefs more. It takes them out of the dogmatism, de-escalates
the kind of dogmatism that I've been seeing. So in that sense, I would say the power of love
is the philosophy you might apply to Brett, because the right conversation you have in private
is not about, hey, listen, you're, you know, the experts you're talking to, they seem credentialed,
but they're not actually as credentials as they illustrating, they're not grounding their findings
in actual meta-analyses and papers and so on, like making a strong case, like what are you doing?
This is going to get a lot of people in trouble, but instead just saying, like being a friend
in the dumbest of ways, being like respectful, sending love their way, and just having a
conversation outside of all of this, like basically showing that like
removing the emotional attachment to this debate, even though you are very emotionally attached,
because in the case of COVID specifically, there is a very large number of lies at stake,
but removing all of that and remembering that you have a friendship.
Yeah, well, so I think these are highly non-analogous cases, right? So your conversation
with Kanye misfired from my point of view for a very different reason. It was, it was,
it has to do with Kanye. I mean, so Kanye, I don't know, I've never met Kanye,
so obviously I don't know him, but I think he's either obviously in the midst of a mental health
crisis, or he's a colossal asshole, or both. I mean, actually those aren't mutually exclusive.
So one of three possibilities, he's either mentally ill, he's an asshole, or he's mentally ill
and an asshole. I think all three of those possibilities are possible for the both of
us as well at the moment. No, I would argue none of those are likely for either of us, but
possible. Not to say we don't have our moments, but so the reason not to talk to Kanye, so you,
I think you should have had the conversation you had with him in private. That's great,
and I've got no criticism of what you said had it been in private. In public, I just thought
you're not doing him a favor. If he's mentally ill, right, he's in the middle of a
manic episode, or I'm not a clinician, but I've heard it said of him that he is bipolar,
you're not doing him a favor sticking a mic in front of him and letting him
go off on the Jews or anything else, right? We know what he thought about the Jews,
we know that there's not much illumination that's going to come from him on that topic,
and if it is a symptom of his mental illness that he thinks these things, well then,
you're not doing him a favor making that even more public. If he's just an asshole,
and he's just an anti-Semite, an ordinary garden variety anti-Semite, well then
there's also not much to say unless you're really going to dig in and kick the shit out of him in
public, and I'm saying you can do that with love. That's the other thing here is that
I don't agree that compassion and love always have this patient embracing acquiescent face,
they don't always feel good to the recipient. There is a sort of wisdom that you can
wield compassionately in moments like that where someone's full of shit and you just make it
absolutely clear to them and to your audience that they're full of shit, and there's no hatred
being communicated. In fact, you could just like, listen, I'm going to do everyone a favor right now
and just take your foot out of your mouth, and the truth is I just wouldn't have
erred the conversation. I just don't think it was a document that had to get out there, right?
I get that many people, this is not a signal you're likely to get from your audience, right?
I get that many people in your audience thought, oh my god, that's awesome, you're talking to Kanye
and you're doing it in Lex style where it's just love, and you're not treating him like a pariah,
and you're holding this tension between, he's this creative genius who is work we love,
and yet he's having this moment that's so painful, and what a tightrope walk. I get that maybe 90%
of your audience saw it that way, they're still wrong, and I still think that was non-balance,
not a good thing to put out into the world. You don't think it opens up the mind and heart of
people that listen to that? If it's opening it up in the wrong direction where just
gaol force nonsense is coming in, right? I think we should have an open mind and an open heart,
but there's some clear things here that we have to keep in view. One is the mental illness
component is its own thing. I don't pretend to understand what's going on with him, but in so
far as that's the reason he's saying what he's saying, do not put this guy on camera and let
him see it. Sorry, on that point real quick, I had a bunch of conversations with him offline,
and I didn't get a sense of mental illness. That's why I chose to sit down, and I didn't get it.
I mean, mental illness is such a... But when it shows up in a gimp put on Alex Jones' podcast,
either that's more genius performance in his world or he's unraveling further.
I wouldn't put that under mental illness. I think there's another conversation to be had about
how we treat artists because they're weirdos. Taking words from Ocania as if he's a Christopher
Hitchens or something like that, very eloquent, researched, written many books on history,
on politics, on geopolitics, on psychology. Kanye didn't do any of that. He's an artist
just spouting off. There's a different style of conversation and a different way to treat
the words that are coming out of his mouth. Let's leave the mental illness aside. If we're
going to say that there's no reason to think he's mentally ill, and this is just him being creative
and brilliant and opinionated, well, then that falls into the asshole bucket for me.
Honestly, the most offensive thing about him in that interview from my point of view is not
the anti-Semitism, which we can talk about because I think there are problems just letting him
spread those memes as well. But the most offensive thing is just how delusionally egocentric he is
or was coming off in that interview and in others. He has an estimation of himself
as this omnibus genius, not only to rival Shakespeare, to exceed Shakespeare. He's the
greatest mind that has ever walked among us. He's more or less explicit on that point,
and yet he manages to talk for hours without saying anything actually interesting or insightful
or factually illuminating. It's complete delusion of a very Trumpian sort.
When Trump says he's a genius who understands everything, but nobody takes him seriously,
and one wonders whether Trump takes himself seriously, Kanye seems to believe his own
press. He actually thinks he's just a colossus, and he may be a great musician.
Certainly not my wheelhouse to compare him to any other musicians, but
one thing that's patently obvious from your conversation is he's not who he thinks he is
intellectually or ethically or in any other relevant way. When you couple that to the
anti-Semitism he was spreading, which was genuinely noxious and ill-considered and
has potential knock-on effects in the black community, there's an ambient level of
anti-Semitism in the black community that it's worth worrying about and talking about anyway.
There's a bunch of guys playing the knockout game in Brooklyn just punching Orthodox Jews in the
face, and I think letting Kanye air his anti-Semitism that publicly only raises the likelihood of that
rather than diminishes it. I don't know. Let me say just a couple of things. One,
my belief at the time was it doesn't. It decreases it. Showing empathy while pushing back
decreases the likelihood of that. It might on the surface look like it's increasing it,
but that's simply because the anti-Semitism or the hatred in general is brought to the surface,
and then people talk about it. But I should also say that you're one of the only people that wrote
to me privately criticizing me. Out of the people I really respect and admire, and that was really
valuable. I had to be painful because I had to think through it for a while. It still haunts
me because the other kind of criticism I got a lot of, people basically said things towards me
based on who I am that they hate me. You mean anti-Semitic things?
Anti-Semitic things. I just hate the word anti-Semitic. It's like racist.
Here's the reality. I'm Jewish, although obviously not religious.
I have never taken, I've been a student of the Holocaust, obviously. I know a lot about that,
and there's reason to be a student of the Holocaust. But in my lifetime and in my experience,
I have never taken anti-Semitism very seriously. I have not worried about it. I have not
made a thing of it. I've done exactly one podcast on it. I had Barry Weiss on my podcast
when her book came out. But it really is a thing, and it's something we have to keep an eye on
societally because it's a unique kind of hatred. It's unique in that it's knit together with,
it's not just ordinary racism. It's knit together with lots of conspiracy theories that never seem
to die out. It can by turns equally animate the left and the right politically. I mean,
it was so perverse about anti-Semitism, look in the American context. With the far right,
with white supremacists, Jews aren't considered white, so they hate us in the same spirit in
which they hate black people or brown people or anyone who's not white. But on the left,
Jews are considered extra white. We're the extra beneficiaries of white privilege.
In the black community, that is often the case. We're a minority that has thrived,
and it seems to stand as a counterpoint to all of the problems that other minorities suffer,
in particular African-Americans in the American context. Asians are now getting a little bit
of this, the model minority issue. But Jews have had this going on for centuries and millennia,
and it never seems to go away. Again, this is something that I've never focused on, but
this has been at a slow boil for as long as we've been alive, and there's no guarantee it can't
suddenly become much, much uglier than we have any reason to expect it to become,
even in our society. There's a special concern at moments like that where you have
an immensely influential person in a community who already has a checkered history with respect to
their own beliefs about the Jews and the conspiracies and all the rest. He's just messaging
not especially fully opposed by you and anyone else who's given him the microphone at that moment
to the world, and that made my spidey sense tingle.
Yeah, it's complicated. The stakes are very high, and somebody who's been obviously family and also
reading a lot about World War II, and just this whole period, it was a very difficult conversation.
I believe in the power, especially given who I am of not always, but sometimes often turning
in the other cheek. Oh, yeah. Again, things change when they're for public consumption.
The cut for me that has just the use case I keep stumbling upon is the kinds of things that I will
say on a podcast like this, or if I'm giving a public lecture, versus the kinds of things I will
say at dinner with strangers or with friends. If I'm in an elevator with strangers, and I hear
someone say something stupid, I don't feel an intellectual responsibility to turn around
in the confines of that space with them and say, listen, that thing you just said about X, Y,
or Z is completely false, and here's why. But if somebody says it in front of me on some public
dais, where I'm actually talking about ideas, that's when there's a different responsibility
that comes online. The question is how you say it. How you say it.
Or even whether you say anything. There are definitely moments to privilege
civility or just to pick your battles. Sometimes it's just not worth it to get into it with somebody
out in real life. I just believe in the power of empathy, both in the elevator
and when a bunch of people are listening. When they see you willing to consider
another human being's perspective, it just gives more power to your words after.
Yeah, but until it doesn't. Because you can extend charity too far. It can be absolutely
obvious what someone's motives really are, and they're dissembling about that. Then you're
taking at face value their representations begins to look like you're just being duped,
and you're not actually doing the work of putting pressure on a bad actor.
It's, again, the mental illness component here makes it very difficult to think about
what you should or shouldn't have said to Kanye.
So I think the topic of platforming is pretty interesting. What's your view on
platforming controversial people? Let's start with the old, would you interview Hitler
on your podcast? And how would you talk to him? Oh, and follow question. Would you interview him
in 1935, 41, and then like 45?
Well, I think we have an uncanny valley problem with respect to this issue of
whether or not to speak to bad people. So if a person's sufficiently bad,
right, if they're all the way out of the valley, then you can talk to them and it's just totally
unproblematic to talk to them because you don't have to spend any time signaling to your audience
that you don't agree with them. And if you're interviewing Hitler, you don't have to say,
listen, I just got to say before we start, I don't agree with the whole genocide thing.
And I just think you're killing mental patients and vans and all that. That was all bad. It's a
bad look. It can go without saying that you don't agree with this person and you're not platforming
them to signal boost their views. If they're sufficiently evil, you can go into it very much
as an anthropologist would. You just want to understand the nature of evil. You just want
to understand this phenomenon, like how is this person who they are? And that strikes me as a
intellectually interesting and morally necessary thing to do. So yes, I think you always interview
Hitler. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. Well, once he's hit... But when do you know it?
Once he's legitimately... But when do you know it? Is genocide really happening? It's like 42,
43? No, no. If you're on the cusp of it where it's just he's someone who's gaining power and you
don't want to help facilitate that, then there's a question of whether you can undermine him while
pushing back against him in that interview. So there are people I wouldn't talk to just because
I don't want to give them oxygen and I don't think that in the context of my interviewing them,
I'm going to be able to take the wind out of their sails at all. So it's like for whatever,
either because an asymmetric advantage, because I just know that they can do something that
within the span of an hour that I can't correct for, is like they can light many small fires
and it just takes too much time to put them out. That's more like on the topic of vaccines,
for example, having a debate on the efficacy of vaccines. It's not that I don't think sunlight
is usually the best disinfectant, I think it is. Even these asymmetries aside, I mean,
it is true that a person can always make a mess faster than you can clean it up,
but still there are debates worth having even given that limitation.
And they're the right people to have those specific debates. And there's certain topics where
I'll debate someone just because I'm the right person for the job and it doesn't matter how messy
they're going to be. It's just worth it because I can make my points land, at least to the right
part of the audience. So some of it is just your own skill and competence and also interest
in preparing correctly? Well, yeah, in the nature of the subject matter.
But there are other people who just by default, I would say, well,
there's no reason to give this guy a platform. And there are also people who are so confabulatory
that they're making such a mess with every sentence that insofar as you're even trying to
interact with what they're saying, you're by definition going to fail and you're going to
seem to fail to an sufficiently large uninformed audience where it's going to be a net negative
for the cause of truth, no matter how good you are. So for instance, I think talking to Alex
Jones on any topic for any reason is probably a bad idea because I just think he's just
neurologically wired under a string of sentences. He'll get 20 sentences out,
each of which contains more lies than the last. And there's not time enough in the world
to run down, and certainly not time enough in the span of a conversation,
to run down each of those leads to bedrock so as to falsify it. I mean, he'll just make
shit up or make shit up and then weave it in with half truths and micro truths that give some
semblance of credibility to somebody out there. I mean, apparently millions of people out there.
And there's just no way to untangle that in real time with him.
I have noticed that you have an allergic reaction to confabularitization.
Yeah, confabulation.
Confabulation. That if somebody says something a little micro untruth,
it really stops your brain.
Here I'm not talking about micro untruth, I'm just talking about making up things out of
whole cloth. Just like, if someone says something, well, what about, and then the thing they put
at the end of that sentence is just a set of pseudo facts, right, that you can't possibly
authenticate or not in the span of that conversation. Whether it's about UFOs or anything else,
they will seem to make you look like an agonormous when, in fact, everything they're saying is
specious, whether they know it or not. I mean, there's some people who are just
crazy, there's some people who are just bullshitting and they're not even tracking whether it's
true, it just feels good, and then some people are consciously lying about things.
Don't you think there's just a kind of jazz masterpiece of untruth that you should be able to
just wave off by saying, well, none of that is backed up by any evidence and just almost
take it to the humor place? Well, the thing is, the place I'm familiar with doing this and not
doing this is on specific conspiracies like 9-11 truth. Because of what 9-11 did to my
intellectual life, and it really just sent me down a path for the better part of a decade.
Like, I became a critic of religion. I don't know if I was ever going to be a critic of religion,
right? But it happened to be in my wheelhouse because I spent so much time studying religion
on my own. And I was also very interested in the underlying spiritual concerns of every religion.
I devoted more than a full decade of my life to just what is real here? What is possible? What
is the nature of subjective reality? And how does it relate to reality at large? And is there
anything to... Who was someone like Jesus or Buddha? And are these people frauds? Are these just
myths or is there really a continuum of insight to be had here that is interesting?
So I spent a lot of time on that question through the full decade of my 20s.
And that was launched in part by 9-11 truth or...
No, but then when 9-11 happened, I had spent all this time reading religious books,
understanding... Empathically understanding the motivations of religious people,
right? Knowing just how fully certain people believe what they say they believe, right? So
I took religious convictions very seriously. And then people started flying planes into our
buildings. And so I knew that there was something to be said about the core doctrine of Islam,
exactly. So that became my wheelhouse for a time, terrorism and jihadism and related topics.
And so the 9-11 truth conspiracy thing kept getting aimed at me. And the question was,
well, do I want to debate these people? Alex Jones, perhaps.
Yeah. So Alex Jones, I think was an early purveyor of it, although I don't think I knew who he was
at that point. And privately, I had some very long debates with people who... One person in
my family went way down that rabbit hole. And every six months or so, I'd literally write the
two-hour email that would try to deprogram them, however ineffectually. And so I went back and
forth for years on that topic in private with people. But I could see the structure of the
conspiracy. I could see the nature of how impossible it was to play whack-a-mole sufficiently
well so as to convince anyone of anything who was not seeing the problematic structure of
that way of thinking. I mean, it's not actually a thesis. It's a proliferation of anomalies
that you can't actually connect all the dots that are being pointed to. They don't connect in a
coherent way. They're incompatible theses and their incompatibility is not being acknowledged.
But they're running this algorithm of things are never what they seem. There's always
malicious conspirators doing things perfectly. We see evidence of human incompetence everywhere
else. No one can tie their shoes expertly anywhere else. But over here, people are
perfectly competent. They're perfectly concealing. Thousands of people are collaborating.
Inexplicably. I mean, incentivized by what? Who knows. They're collaborating to murder
thousands of their neighbors and no one is breathing a peep about it. No one's getting
caught on camera. No one's breathe the word of it to a journalist. And so I've dealt with that
style of thinking and I know what it's like to be in the weeds of a conversation like that.
And the person will say, okay, well, but what do you make of the fact that all those F-16s were
flown 800 miles out to sea on the morning of 9-11 doing an exercise that hadn't even been scheduled
for that day? But it was... And now all of these... I dimly recall some theses of that kind, but
I'm just making these things up now. So that detail hadn't even been scheduled for that day.
Inexplicably run that day. So how long would it take to track that down? The idea that this is
anomalous, like there was an F-16 exercise run on it and it wasn't even supposed to be run that day.
Someone like Alex Jones, their speech pattern is to pack as much of that stuff in as possible at
the highest velocity that a person can speak. And unless you're knocking down each one of those
things, to that audience, you appear to just be uninformed. You appear to just not be...
He didn't know about the F-16s. He doesn't know about Project Mockingbird. You haven't
heard about Project Mockingbird? I just made up Project Mockingbird. I don't know what it is, but
that's the kind of thing that comes tumbling out in a conversation like that. That's the kind
of thing, frankly, I was worried about in the COVID conversation, because not that someone
like Brett would do it consciously, but someone like Brett is swimming in a sea of misinformation
on social... Living on Twitter, getting people sending the blog post and the study from
the Philippines that showed that in this cohort, Ivermectin did X.
And to actually run anything to ground, you have to actually do the work journalistically
and scientifically and run it to ground. So for some of these questions, you actually have to be
a statistician to say, okay, they used the wrong statistics in this experiment. Now,
yes, we could take all the time to do that, or we could at every stage along the way
in a context where we have experts we can trust, go with what 97% of the experts are saying,
about X, about the safety of mRNA, about the transmissibility of COVID, about whether to wear
masks or not wear masks. And I completely agree that that broke down
unacceptably over the last few years, but I think that's largely...
Social media and blogs and the efforts of podcasters and sub-stack writers
were not just a response to that. I think it was a symptom of that and a cause of that.
And I think we're living in an environment where
people... We've basically... We have trained ourselves not to be able to agree about facts
on any topic, no matter how urgent. What's flying in our sky? What is...
What is happening in Ukraine? Is Putin just denazifying Ukraine? There are people who we
respect who are spending time down that particular rabbit hole. Maybe there are a
lot of Nazis in Ukraine and that's the real problem. Maybe Putin's not the bad actor here.
How much time do I have to spend empathizing with Putin to the point of thinking, well,
maybe Putin's got a point and it's like, what about the polonium and the nerve agents and
the killing of journalists and the Navalny? And does that count? I'm not paying so much
attention to that because I'm following all these interesting people on Twitter
and they're giving me some pro-Putin material here and there are some Nazis in Ukraine. It's
not like there are no Nazis in Ukraine. How am I going to wait these things? I think people are
being driven crazy by Twitter. Yeah. But you're kind of speaking to conspiracy theories that
pollute everything and then... But every example you gave is kind of a bad faith style of conversation.
But it's not necessarily knowingly bad faith by... I mean, the people who are worried about
Ukrainian Nazis, I mean, they're some of the same people. They're the same people who are
worried about... Ivermectin got suppressed. Ivermectin is really a panacea, but it got
suppressed because no one could make billions on it. It's literally, in many cases, the same
people and the same efforts to unearth those.
And you're saying it's very difficult to have conversations with those kinds of people. What
about a conversation with Trump himself? Would you do a podcast with Trump?
No. I don't think so. I don't think I'd be learning anything about him. It's like with
Hitler, and I'm not comparing Trump to Hitler, but...
Clips guy, here's your chance. You got this one.
With certain world historical figures, I would just feel like, okay, this is an opportunity
to learn something that I'm not going to learn. I think Trump is among the most superficial people
we have ever laid eyes on. He is in public view. And I'm sure there's some distance between who
he is in private and who he is in public, but it's not going to be the kind of distance that's
going to blow my mind. And I think the liability... For instance, I think Joe Rogan was...
Very wise not to have Trump on his podcast. I think all he would have been doing is...
He would have put himself in a situation where he couldn't adequately contain the damage
Trump was doing, and he was just going to make Trump seem cool to a whole
new, potentially new cohort of his massive audience. They would have had a lot of laughs.
Trump's funny. The entertainment value of things is so influential.
I mean, there was that one debate where Trump got a massive laugh on his line,
only Rosie O'Donnell. The truth is, we're living in a political system where if you can get a big
laugh during a political debate, you win. It doesn't matter who you are. That's the level of...
It doesn't matter how uninformed you are. It doesn't matter that half the debate was about
what the hell we should do about a threat of nuclear war or anything else.
It's... We're monkeys, right? And we like to laugh.
Well, because he brought up Joe. He's somebody like you I look up to.
I've learned a lot from him because I think who he is privately as a human being.
Also, he's kind of the voice of curiosity to me. He inspired me that, so unending,
open-minded curiosity, much like you are the voice of reason. They recently had a podcast,
Joe had recently a podcast with Jordan Peterson, and I brought you up saying they still have a hope
for you. Any chance you talk to Joe again and reinvigorate your friendship?
I reached out to him privately when I saw that.
Did you use the power of love?
Joe knows I love him and consider him a friend, right? So there's no issue there.
He also knows I'll be happy to do his podcast when we get that together. So there's no...
I've got no policy of not talking to Joe or not doing his podcast.
I think we got a little sideways along these same lines where we've talked about
Brett and Elon and other people. It was never to that degree with Joe because
Joe's in a very different lane, right? He's unconsciously so. I mean, Joe is a
stand-up comic who interviews, who just is interested in everything, interviews the
widest conceivable variety of people and just lets his interests collide with their expertise
or lack of expertise. Again, it's a super wide variety of people. He'll talk about anything
and he can always pull the ripcord saying, I don't know what the fuck I'm saying,
I'm a comic, I'm stoned, we just drank too much, right? It's very entertaining.
To my eye, it's all in good faith. I think Joe is an extraordinarily ethical, good person.
Also doesn't use Twitter. Doesn't really use Twitter.
The crucial difference though is that because he is an entertainer first. I mean, I'm not
saying he's not smart and he doesn't understand things. What's potentially confusing is he's
very smart and he's also very informed. His full-time job is taught, when he's not doing
stand-up or doing color commentary for the UFC, his full-time job is talking to lots of very
smart people at great lengths. He's created the Joe Rogan University for himself and he's gotten
a lot of information crammed into his head. It's not that he's uninformed, but he can always,
when he feels that he's uninformed or when it turns out he was wrong about something,
he can always pull the ripcord and say, I'm just a comic, we were stoned,
it was fun, don't take medical advice from me, I don't play a doctor on the internet.
I can't quite do that. You can't quite do that. We're in different lanes. I'm not saying you and
I are in exactly the same lane, but for much of Joe's audience, I'm just this establishment
shill, just banging on about the universities and medical journals. It's not true, but that
would be the perception. As a counterpoint to a lot of what's being said on Joe's podcast or
certainly Brett's podcast on these topics, I can see how they would form that opinion.
In reality, if you listen to me long enough, you hear that I've said as much against the woke
nonsense as anyone, even any lunatic on the right who can only keep that bright shining object in
view. There's nothing that Candace Owens has said about wokeness that I haven't said about
wokeness in so far as she's speaking rationally about wokeness, but we have to be able to keep
multiple things in view. If you could only look at the problem of wokeness and you couldn't
acknowledge the problem of Trump and Trumpism and QAnon and the explosion of irrationality
that was happening on the right and bigotry that was happening on the right, you were just
disregarding half of the landscape. Many people took half of the problem in recent years. The last
five years is a story of many people taking half of the problem and monetizing that half of the
problem and getting captured by an audience that only wanted that half of the problem talked about
in that way. This is the larger issue of audience capture, which I'm sure it's an
ancient problem, but it's a very helpful phrase that I think comes to us courtesy of our mutual
friend Eric Weinstein. Audience capture is a thing, and I believe I've witnessed many
casualties of it. If there's anything I've been unguard against in my life professionally,
it's been that. When I noticed that I had a lot of people in my audience who didn't like my
criticizing Trump, I really leaned into it. When I noticed that a lot of the other cohort of my
audience didn't like me criticizing the far left and wokeness. I thought I was exaggerating that
problem. I leaned into it because I thought those parts of my audience were absolutely wrong,
and I didn't care about whether I was going to lose those parts of my audience. There are people
who have created, knowingly or not, there are people who've created different incentives for
themselves because of how they've monetized their podcast and because of the kind of signal
they've responded to in their audience. Brett would consider this a totally invidious
ad hominem thing to say, but I really do worry that that's happened to Brett. I cannot explain
how you do 100 with all the things in the universe to be interested in, and of all the things he's
competent to speak intelligently about. I don't know how you do 100 podcasts in a row on COVID.
It makes no sense. Do you think in part audience capture can explain that?
I absolutely think it can. For example, do you feel pressure to not admit that you made a mistake
on COVID or made a mistake on Trump? I'm not saying you feel that way, but do you feel this
pressure? You've attacked audience capture within the way you do stuff, so you don't feel
as much pressure from the audience, but within your own ego.
I mean, again, the people who think I'm wrong about any of these topics are going to think,
okay, you're just not admitting that you're wrong, but then now we're having a dispute about
specific facts. There are things that I believed about COVID or worried might be true about COVID
two years ago that I no longer believe or I'm not so worried about now and vice versa.
I mean, certain things have flipped upside down. The question is, was I wrong? Here's a cartoon
version of it, but this is something I said probably 18 months ago, and it's still true.
When I saw what Brett was doing on COVID, let's call it two years ago,
I said, even if he's right, even if it turns out that Ivermectin is a panacea
and the mRNA vaccines kill millions of people, he's still wrong right now. His reasoning is
still flawed right now. His facts still suck right now, and his confidence is unjustified now.
That was true then, that will always be true then. Not much has changed for me to revisit
any of my time points along the way. Again, I will totally concede that if I had teenage boys
and their schools were demanding that they be vaccinated with the mRNA vaccine,
I would be powerfully annoyed. I wouldn't know what I was going to do, and I would be doing
more research about myocarditis, and I'd be badgering our doctors, and I would be worried
that we have a medical system and a pharmaceutical system and a healthcare system and a public
health system that's not incentivized to look at any of this in a fine-grain way, and they just want
one blanket admonition to the entire population. Just take the shot, you idiots.
I view that largely as a result, a panicked response to the misinformation explosion that
happened and the populist resistance animated by misinformation that just made it impossible to
get anyone to cooperate. Part of it is, again, a pendulum swing in the wrong direction.
It's somewhat analogous to the woke response to Trump and the Trumpist response to woke.
A lot of people have just gotten pushed around for bad reasons,
but understandable reasons. Yes, there are caveats. Things have changed about my view of
COVID, but the question is, if you roll back the clock 18 months, was I wrong to want to platform
Eric Topol, a very well-respected cardiologist on this topic, or Nicholas Christakis to talk
about the network effects of whether we should close schools. He's had written a book on COVID,
network effects, or his wheelhouse, both as an MD and as a sociologist.
There was a lot that we believed we knew about the efficacy of closing schools
during the Spanish flu pandemic and others, but there's a lot we didn't know about COVID.
We didn't know how negligible the effects would be on kids compared to older people.
My problem, I really enjoyed your conversation with Eric Topol, but also didn't. He's one of the
great communicators in many ways on Twitter, distillation of the current data. I hope I'm
not overstating it, but there is a bit of an arrogance from him that I think could be explained
by him being exhausted, by being constantly attacked by conspiracy theories like anti-vaxxers.
To me, the same thing happens with people that start drifting to being right-wing,
is to get attacked so much by the left, they become almost irrational and arrogant in their
beliefs. I felt your conversation with Eric Topol did not sufficiently empathize with people
that have skepticism, but also did not sufficiently communicate uncertainty we have.
Many of the decisions you made, many of the things you were talking about,
were saying there's a lot of uncertainty, but this is the best thing we could do now.
Well, it was a forced choice. You're going to get COVID. Do you want to be vaccinated when you get it?
That was always, in my view, an easy choice. It's up until you start breaking apart the
cohorts and you start saying, okay, wait a minute, there is this myocarditis issue in young men.
Let's talk about that. Before that story emerged, it was just clear that
this is, if it's not knocking down transmission as much as we had hoped,
it is still mitigating severe illness and death. I still believe that it is the
the current view of most people competent to analyze the data, that we lost something like
300,000 people unnecessarily in the US because of vaccine hesitancy.
But I think there's a way to communicate with humility about the uncertainty of things
that would increase the vaccination rate. I do believe that it is
rational and sometimes effective to signal impatience with certain
bad ideas and certain conspiracy theories and certain forms of misinformation.
You think so? I just think it makes you look like a douchebag most times.
Certain people are persuadable. Certain people are not persuadable, but
it's not enough. It's the opportunity cost. Not everything can be given a patient hearing.
So you can't have a physics conference and then let people in to just trumpet their pet theories
about the grand unified vision of physics when they're obviously crazy or they're
obviously half crazy. You begin to get a sense for this when
it is your wheelhouse, but there are people who declare their
irrelevance to the conversation fairly quickly without knowing that they have done it.
The truth is, I think I'm one of those people on the topic of COVID. It's never that I felt,
listen, I know exactly what's going on here. I know these mRNA vaccines are safe.
I know exactly how to run a lockdown. No, this is a situation where you want the actual pilots
to fly the plane. We needed experts who we could trust and insofar as our experts got captured
by all manner of things. I mean, some of them got captured by Trump. Some of them were made
to look ridiculous just standing next to Trump while he was bloviating about whatever.
It's just going to go away. There's just 15 people. There's 15 people in a cruise ship and
it's just going to go away. There's going to be no problem. Many of these doctors think,
I understand this better than them. They're just amazed at how I understand this.
And you've got doctors, real doctors, the heads of the CDC and NIH standing around
just ashen-faced while he's talking. All of this was deeply corrupting
of the public communication of science. And then again, I've banged on about the
depredations of wokeness. The woke thing was a disaster. It still is a disaster,
but it doesn't mean that... But the thing is, there's a big difference between me and Brett
in this case. I didn't do 100 podcasts on COVID. I did two podcasts on COVID.
The measure of my concern about COVID can be measured in how many podcasts I did on it.
Once we had a sense of how to live with COVID, I was just living with COVID. Like, okay,
get faxed or don't get faxed. Wear a mask or don't wear a mask. Travel or don't travel.
You've got a few things to decide, but my kids were stuck at home on iPads for too long.
I didn't agree with that. It was obviously not functional. I criticized that on the margins,
but there was not much to do about it. But the thing I didn't do is make this my life
and just browbeat people with one message or another. We need a public health regime
where we can trust what the competent people are saying to us about what medicines are safe to take.
In the absence of that, even in the presence of that craziness is going to proliferate given the
tools we've built. But in the absence of that, it's going to proliferate for understandable
reasons. It's not going to be good next time when something orders of magnitude more dangerous
hits us. Insofar as I think about this issue, I think much more about next time than this time.
Before this COVID thing, you and Brett had some good conversations. I would say we're friends.
What do you admire most about Brett outside of all the criticism we've had about this COVID topic?
Well, I think Brett is very smart and he's a very ethical person who wants good things for
the world. I have no reason to doubt that. The fact that we're cross-wise on this issue is not
mean that I think he's a bad person. The thing that worried me about what he was doing,
and this was true of Joe, and this was true of Elon, this was true of many other people,
is that once you're messaging at scale to a vast audience, you incur a certain kind of
responsibility not to get people killed. I did worry that people were making decisions on the
basis of the information that was getting shared there. That's why I was, I think, fairly
circumspect. I just said, okay, give me the center of the fairway expert opinion at this
time point, and at this time point, and at this time point, and then I'm out. I don't have any
more to say about this. I'm not an expert on COVID. I'm not an expert on the safety of mRNA vaccines.
If something changes so as to become newsworthy, then maybe I'll do a podcast. I just did a podcast
on the lab leak. I was never skeptical of the lab leak hypothesis. Brett was very early on saying,
this is a lab leak at a point where my only position was, who cares if it's a lab leak?
The thing we have to get straight is, what do we do given the nature of this pandemic?
But also, we should say that you've actually stated that it is a possibility. I just said
it doesn't quite matter. The time to figure that out, now, I've actually, I have had my
podcast guest on this topic changed my view of this because one of the guests,
Alina Chan, made the point that actually the best time to figure out the origin of this is
immediately, because in the avid, you lose touch with the evidence. I hadn't really been thinking
about that. If you come back after a year, there are certain facts you might not be able to get
in hand. But I've always felt that it didn't matter for two reasons. One is, we had the genome of the
virus and we could design, we're very quickly designed, immediately, designing vaccines against
that genome. That's what we had to do. Then we had to figure out how to vaccinate and to
mitigate and to develop treatments and all of that. The origin story didn't matter.
Generically speaking, either origin story was politically inflammatory and made the Chinese
look bad. The Chinese response to this looked bad, whatever the origin story. They're stopping
their domestic flights but letting their international flights go. They were bad actors
and they should be treated as such regardless of the origin. I would argue that the wet market
origin is even more politically invidious than the lab leak origin. To my eye,
the lab leak could happen to anyone. All these advanced countries are running these dangerous
labs. That's a practice that we should be worried about in general. We know lab leaks are a problem.
There have been multiple lab leaks of even worse things that haven't gotten out of hand in this
way but worse pathogens. We're wise to be worried about this and on some level, it could happen
to anyone. The wet market makes them look like barbarians living in another century. You've
got to clean up those wet markets. What are you doing putting a bat on top of a pangolin,
on top of a duck? Get your shit together. If anything, the wet market makes them look worse
in my view. I'm sure that what they actually did to conceal a lab leak, if it was a lab leak,
all of that's going to look odious. Do you think we'll ever get to the bottom of that?
I mean, one of the big negative, I would say failures of Anthony Fauci and so on is to be
transparent and clear and just a good communicator about gain and function research, the dangers of
that, why it's a useful way of research but it's also dangerous. Just being transparent about that
as opposed to just coming off really shady. Of course, the conspiracy theorists and the
politicians are not helping but this just created a giant mess.
Yeah, no, I would agree. That exchange with Fauci and Rand Paul that went viral. Yeah,
I would agree that Fauci looked like he was taking refuge in very lawyered language
and not giving a straightforward account of what we do and why we do it.
Yeah, I think it looked shady, it played shady and it probably was shady. I don't
know how personally entangled he is with any of this but the gain of function research is something
that I think we're wise to be worried about and insofar as I judge myself adequate to have an
opinion on this, I think it should be banned. Probably a podcast I'll do if you or somebody
else doesn't do it in the meantime, I would like a virologist to defend it against a virologist
who would criticize it. Forget about just the gain of function research. I don't even understand
virus hunting at this point. It's like, I don't even know why you need to go into a cave to find
this next virus that could be circulating among bats that may jump zoonotically to us.
Why do that when we can make, when we can sequence in a day and make vaccines in a weekend?
I mean, what kind of head start do you think you're getting?
That's a surprising new thing, how quickly you can develop a vaccine.
Exactly. Yeah, that's really interesting but the shagginess around lab leak.
I think the point I didn't make about Brett's style of engaging this issue is people are using
the fact that he was early on lab leak to suggest that he was right about ivermectin and about mRNA
vaccines and all the rest. No, none of that connects and it was possible to be falsely
like you shouldn't have been confident about lab. No one should have been confident about
lab leak early even if it turns out to be lab leak. It was always plausible. It was never
definite. It still isn't definite. Zoonotic is also quite plausible. It certainly was super
plausible then. Both are politically uncomfortable. Both at the time were inflammatory to be banging
on about when we were trying to secure some kind of cooperation from the Chinese.
So there's a time for these things and it's possible to be right by accident.
The style of reasoning matters whether you're right or not. It's like because your style of
reasoning is dictating what you're going to do on the next topic.
Sure, but this is a this multi-various situation here. It's really difficult to know what's
right on COVID given all the uncertainty, all the chaos, especially when you step
outside the pure biology, virology of it and you start to get into policy.
It's just trade-offs. Like transmissibility of the virus.
Sure. Just knowing if 65% of the population gets vaccinated, what effect would that have?
Just even knowing those things. Just modeling all those things.
Given all the other incentives, I mean, Pfizer, I don't know what to think.
You had the CEO of Pfizer on your podcast. Did you leave that conversation feeling like
this is a person who is consciously
reaping windfall profits on a dangerous vaccine and putting everyone at intolerable risk?
Or did you think this person was making a good faith attempt to save lives and had no
taint of bad incentives or something? The thing I sensed and I felt in part,
it was a failure on my part, but I sensed that I was talking to a politician.
So it's not thinking of there was malevolence there or benevolence.
He just had a job to do. He put on a suit and I was talking to a suit,
not a human being. Now, he said that his son was a big fan of the podcast,
which is why he wanted to do it. So I thought I would be talking to a human being.
I asked challenging questions, what I thought the internet thinks. Otherwise,
every single question in that interview was a challenging one, but it wasn't grilling,
which is what people seem to want to do with pharmaceutical companies.
There's a deep distrust of pharmaceutical companies.
What's the alternative? I totally get that windfall profits at a time of public health
emergency looks bad. It is a bad look, but how do we reward and return capital to risk takers
who will spend a billion dollars to design a new drug for a disease that maybe only harms a single
digit percentage of the population? What do we want to encourage and who do we want to get rich?
I mean, so the person who cures cancer, do we want that person to get rich or not? We want the
person who gave us the iPhone to get rich, but we don't want the person who cures cancer to get
rich. What are we trying to do? I think it's a very gray area. So what we want is the person
who declares that they have a cure for cancer to have authenticity and transparency. I think
we're good now as a population smelling bullshit. And there is something about the Pfizer CEO,
for example, just CEO of the pharmaceutical companies in general, just because they're
so lawyered up, so much marketing PR people, that they are, you just smell bullshit. You're not
talking a real human. It just feels like none of it is transparent to us as a public. So this whole
talking point that Pfizer is only interested in helping people just doesn't ring true, even
though it very well could be true. It's the same thing with Bill Gates, who seems to be at scale
helping a huge amount of people in the world. And yet there's something about the way he delivers
that message where people like, this seems suspicious. What's happening underneath this?
There's certain kinds of communication styles that seem to be more
serve as better catalysts for conspiracy theories. And I'm not sure what that is, because I don't
think there's an alternative for capitalism in delivering drugs that help people. But also at
the same time, there seems to need to be more transparency. And plus regulation that actually
makes sense versus, it seems like pharmaceutical companies are susceptible to corruption.
Yeah, I worry about all that. But I also do think that most of the people go into those fields,
and most of the people go into government. They want to do good.
Doing it for good. And they're non psychopaths trying to get good things done and trying to
solve hard problems. And they're not trying to get rich. I mean, many of the people are, it's like,
I mean, bad incentives are something, again, I've uttered that phrase 30 times on this podcast,
but it's just almost everywhere it explains normal people creating terrible harm. It's not
that there are that many bad people. And yes, it makes the truly bad people that much more
remarkable and worth paying attention to. But the bad incentives and the power of
bad ideas do much more harm. Because I mean, that's what gets good people running in the wrong
direction or doing things that are clearly creating unnecessary suffering.
You've had and I hope still have a friendship with Elon Musk, especially over the topic of AI.
You have a lot of interesting ideas that you both share, concerns that you both share.
Well, let me first ask, what do you admire most about Elon?
Well, I had a lot of fun with Elon. I like Elon a lot. I mean, Elon, I knew as a friend,
I like a lot. And it's not going to surprise anyone. I mean, he's done and he's continuing
to do amazing things. And I think he's, I think many of his aspirations are realized,
the world will be a much better place. I think it's just, it's amazing to see what he's built
and what he's attempted to build and what he may yet build. And so Tesla was SpaceX with...
Yeah, I'm a fan of almost all of that. I mean, there are wrinkles to a lot of that,
you know, or some of that. All humans are full of wrinkles.
There's something very Trumpian about how he's acting on Twitter. I mean, Twitter,
I think Twitter, he doesn't, he thinks Twitter is great. He bought the place because he thinks
it's so great. I think Twitter is driving him crazy, right? I think he's needlessly
complicating his life and harming his reputation and creating a lot of noise and harming a lot
of other people. I mean, so like he, the thing that I objected to with him on Twitter is not
that he bought it and made changes to it. I mean, that was not, again, I remain agnostic as to
whether or not he can improve the platform. It was how he was personally behaving on Twitter,
not just toward me, but toward the world. I think when you forward an article about
Nancy Pelosi's husband being attacked, not as he was by some lunatic, but
that it's just some gay, gay trist gone awry, right? That's not what it seems. And you link to a
website that previously claimed that Hillary Clinton was dead and that a body double was
campaigning in her place, that thing was exploding in Trumpistan as a conspiracy theory, right? And
it was having its effect. And it matters that he was signal boosting it in front of 130 million
people. And so it is with saying that your former employee, Yoel Roth, is a pedophile, right? And
it's like, that has real consequences. It appeared to be complete bullshit. And now this guy's getting
inundated with death threats, right? And Elon, that's all that's totally predictable,
right? And so he's behaving quite recklessly. And there's a long list of things like that
that he's done on Twitter. It's not ethical. It's not good for him. It's not good for the world.
It's not serious. It's just, it's a very adolescent relationship to real problems
in our society. And so my problem with how he's behaved is that he's purported to touch real issues
by turns, like, okay, do I give the satellites to Ukraine or not? Do I minimize their use of them
or not? Should I publicly worry about World War III or not, right? He's doing this shit on Twitter,
right? And at the same moment, he's doing these other very impulsive, ill-considered things. And
he's not showing any willingness to really clean up the mess he makes. He brings Kanye on knowing
he's an anti-Semite who's got mental health problems and then kicks him off for a swastika,
which I probably wouldn't have kicked him off for a swastika. That's even, like,
can you really kick people off for swastikas? Is that something that you get banned for?
I mean, are you a free speech absolutist if you can't let a swastika show up? I'm not even sure
that's an enforceable terms of service, right? There are moments to use swastikas that are not
conveying hate and not raising the risk of violence.
Clip that.
But so much of what he's doing, given that he's, again, scale matters. He's doing this in front
of 130 million people. That's very different than a million people. And that's very different than
100,000 people. And so when I went off the tracks with Elon, he was doing this about COVID. And
again, this was a situation where I tried to privately mitigate a friend's behavior,
and it didn't work out very well.
Did you try to correct him sort of highlighting things he might be wrong on?
Yeah.
Or did you use the Lex Powell love method? I should write like a pamphlet for Sam Harris.
Well, no, but it was totally coming from a place of love because I was concerned about his
reputation. I was concerned about what he, I mean, there was a twofold concern. I could see
what was happening with the tweet. I mean, he had this original tweet that was, I think it was
panic over COVID is dumb or something like that, right? This is, boy, this is in March.
This is early March 2020.
Oh, super early days.
Super early. So when nobody knew anything, but we knew we saw what was happening in Italy,
right? It was totally kicking off.
God, that was a wild time. That's when the toilet paper.
It was totally wild, but that became the most influential tweet on Twitter for that week.
I mean, it had more engagement than any other tweet, more than any crazy thing Trump was tweeting.
I mean, it went off, again, it was just a nuclear bomb of information. And I could see that people
were responding to it like, wait a minute, here's this genius technologist who must have
inside information about everything, right? Surely he knows something that is not on the
surface about this pandemic. And they were reading into it a lot of information that
I knew wasn't there, right? And at the time, I didn't even, I didn't think he had any reason to
be suggesting that. I think he was just firing off a tweet, right?
So I reached out to him in private. And I mean, because it was a private
text conversation, I won't talk about the details, but I'm just saying that's a case,
you know, among the many cases of friends who have public platforms and who did something
that I thought was dangerous and ill-considered. This was a case where I reached out in private
and tried to help, genuinely help, because it was just, I thought it was harmful in every sense,
because it was being misinterpreted. And it's like, okay, you can say that panic over anything is
dumb, fine. But this was not how this was landing. This was like, non-issue conspiracy. There's
going to be no COVID in the US. It's going to peter out. It's just going to become a cold. I mean,
that's how this was getting received. Whereas at that moment, it was absolutely obvious how
big a deal this was going to be, or that it was going to, at minimum, going to be a big deal.
I don't know if it was obvious, but it was obvious there was a significant probability
that it could be a big deal. I remember in March, it was unclear, like, how big, because there were
still stories of it. Like, it's probably going to like, the big concern, the hospitals might
overfill, but it's going to die out in like two months or something.
Yeah, we didn't know, but there was no way we weren't going to have tens of thousands of deaths
at a minimum at that point. And it was totally rational to be worried about hundreds of thousands.
And when Nicholas Christakis came on my podcast very early, he predicted quite confidently that
we would have about a million people dead in the US. And that didn't seem, I think,
appropriately hedged. But in me, it was still just like, okay, it's just going to,
you just look at the, we're just going to ride in this exponential and we're, and
it's going to be, you know, it'd be very surprising not to have that order of magnitude
and not something much, much less. And so anyway, I mean, again, to close the story on Elon,
I could see how this was being received. And I tried to get him to walk that back. And then we
we had a fairly long and detailed exchange on this issue. And that, so that intervention didn't
work. And it was not done, you know, I was not an asshole. I was not, I was just concerned,
you know, for him, for the world, for, and, you know,
and then there are other relationships where I didn't take the, again, that's an example where
taking the time didn't work, right, privately. There are other relationships where I thought,
okay, this is just going to be more trouble than it's worth. And I said, I just ignored it, you
know, and there's a lot of that. And frankly, again, I'm not comfortable with how this is
all netted out, because I don't know if, you know, and I'm not, you know, frankly, I'm not
comfortable with how much time in this conversation we've spent talking about these specific people.
Like, what good is it for me to talk about Elon or bread or anything?
I think there's a lot of good, because those friendships, listen, as a fan, these are the
conversations I loved, love as a fan. And it feels like COVID has robbed the world of these
conversations. Because you were exchanging back and forth on Twitter. But that's not what I mean
by conversations, like long forward discussions, like a debate about COVID, like a normal debate.
But there's no, there is no, Elon and I shouldn't be debating COVID.
You should be. Here's the thing with humility, like, basically saying, we don't really know,
like the Rogan method, we don't, we're just a bunch of idiots. Like, one is an engineer,
you're a neuroscientist, but like, it just kind of, okay, here's the evidence and be like normal
people. That's what everybody was doing. The whole world was like trying to figure out what the hell,
what? Yeah, but the issue was that at that, so at the moment I had this collision with Elon,
certain things were not debatable, right? It was just, it was absolutely clear where this was going.
It wasn't clear how far it was going to go or how quickly we would mitigate it, but
it was absolutely clear that it was going to be an issue, right? The train had come off the tracks
in Italy. We knew we weren't going to seal our borders. There were already people,
you know, there are already cases known to many of us personally in the US at that point.
And he was operating by a very different logic that I couldn't engage with.
Sure, but that logic represents a part of the population. And there's a lot of interesting
topics that have a lot of uncertainty around them, like the effectiveness of masks, like-
Yeah, but no, but where things broke down was not at the point of, oh, there's a lot to talk
about, a lot to debate. This is all very interesting. And who knows what's what. It broke down very
early at this is, you know, there's nothing to talk about here. There's a water bottle on the table
or there isn't, right? Well, technically, there's only one fourth of a water bottle.
So what defines a water bottle? Is it the water inside the water bottle or is it the water bottle?
Well, I'm giving you as an example of it's worth a conversation.
This is difficult because we had an exchange in private and I want to-
I want to honor not exposing the details of it, but
the details convinced me that there was not a follow-up conversation on that topic.
On this topic. That said, I hope, and I hope to be part of helping that happen, that the
friendship is rekindled because one of the topics I care a lot about, artificial intelligence,
you've had great public and private conversations about this topic.
Yeah, and Elon was very formative in my taking that issue seriously. I mean, he and I went to
that initial conference in Puerto Rico together and it was only because he was going and I found
out about it through him and I just wrote his coattails to it, you know, that I got to dropped
in that side of the pool to hear about these concerns at that point.
It would be interesting to hear how has your concern evolved with the coming out of Chad GPT
and these new large language models that are fine-tuned with reinforcement learning seemingly
to be able to do some incredible human-like things. There's two questions. One, how is your
concern in terms of AGI and superintelligence evolved and how impressed are you with Chad GPT
as a student of the human mind and mind in general?
Well, my concern about AGI is unchanged. I've spoken about it a bunch on my podcast, but
I did a TED talk in 2016, which was the kind of summary of what that conference and various
conversations I had after that did to my brain on this topic.
Basically, that once superintelligence is achieved, there's a take-off, it becomes
exponentially smarter and in a matter of time, there's just where ants and there are gods.
Well, yeah, unless we find some way of permanently tethering a superintelligent,
self-improving AI to our value system. I don't believe anyone has figured out how to do that,
or whether that's even possible in principle. I know people like Stuart Russell, who I just had
on my podcast. Oh, really? Have you released it?
He's been on previous podcasts, but we just recorded this week.
Because you haven't done an AI podcast in a while, so it's great. He's a good person to
talk about alignment with. Yeah, so Stuart has been probably more than anyone,
my guru on this topic. I mean, you're just reading his book and doing, I think I've done
two podcasts with him at this point. I think it's called The Control Problem or something like that.
His book is Human Compatible.
He talks about the control problem. Yeah, so I just think the idea that we can define a value
function in advance that permanently tethers a self-improving superintelligent AI to our values
as we continue to discover them, refine them, extrapolate them in an open-ended way,
I think that's a tall order. And I think there are many more ways, there must be many more ways
of designing superintelligence that is not aligned in that way and is not ever approximating our
values in that way. So I mean, Stuart's idea to put it in a very simple way is that he thinks you
don't want to specify the value function up front. You don't want to imagine you could ever
write the code in such a way as to admit of no loophole. You want to make the AI uncertain
as to what human values are and perpetually uncertain and always trying to ameliorate that
uncertainty by hewing more and more closely to what our professed values are. So it's always
interested in us saying, oh, no, no, that's not what we want. That's not what we intend. Stop
doing that. No matter how smart it gets, all it wants to do is more perfectly approximate human
values. I think there are a lot of problems with that at a high level. I'm not a computer scientist,
so I'm sure there are many problems at a low level that I don't understand.
Like how to force a human into the loop always, no matter what.
There's that and what humans get a vote and what do humans value and what is the difference between
what we say we value and our revealed preferences. If you were a super intelligent AI that could
look at humanity now, I think you could be forgiven for concluding that what we value is
driving ourselves crazy with Twitter and living perpetually on the brink of nuclear war and just
watching hot girls and yoga pants on TikTok again and again and again.
You're saying that is not? This is all revealed preference and it's what is an AI to make of
that and what should it optimize? So part of this is also Stuart's observation that
one of the insidious things about the YouTube algorithm is it's not that it just caters
to our preferences. It actually begins to change us in ways so as to make us more predictable.
If it finds ways to make us a better reporter of our preferences and to trim our preferences down
so that it can further train to that signal. So the main concern is that most of the people
in the field seem not to be taking intelligence seriously. As they design more and more intelligent
machines and as they profess to want to design true AGI, they're not spending the time that
Stuart is spending trying to figure out how to do this safely above all. They're just assuming that
these problems are going to solve themselves as we make that final stride into the end zone
or they're saying very polyannish things like an AI would never form a motive to harm human.
Why would it ever form a motive to be malicious toward humanity unless we put that motive in
there? That's not the concern. The concern is that in the presence of vast disparities and
competence and certainly in a condition where the machines are improving themselves, they're
improving their own code, they could be developing instrumental goals that are antithetical to our
well-being without any intent to harm us. It's analogous to what we do to every other species
on earth. You and I don't consciously form the intention to harm insects on a daily basis,
but there are many things we could intend to do that would in fact harm insects because you decided
to repave your driveway or whatever you're doing. You're just not taking the interest of insects
into account because they're so far beneath you in terms of your cognitive horizons.
The real challenge here is that if you believe that intelligence scales up on a continuum
toward heights that we can only dimly imagine. I think there's every reason to believe that.
There's no reason to believe that we're near the summit of intelligence.
Maybe there are some forms of intelligence for which this is not true, but for many
relevant forms, like the top 100 things we care about cognitively, I think there's every reason
to believe that many of those things, most of those things, are a lot like chess or Go where
once the machines get better than we are, they're going to stay better than we are, although I don't
know if you caught the recent thing with Go where this guy actually came out of Stewart's lab.
One time a human beta machine.
They found a hack for that. But anyway, ultimately, there's going to be no looking back. And then
the question is, what do we do in relationship to these systems that are more competent than we
are in every relevant respect? Because it will be a relationship. The people who think we're just
going to figure this all out without thinking about it in advance, the solutions are just going to
find themselves, seem not to be taking the prospect of really creating autonomous super
intelligence seriously. What does that mean? It's every bit as independent and
ungovernable, ultimately, as us having created, I mean, just imagine if we created a race of people
that were 10 times smarter than all of us. How would we live with those people? They're 10 times
smarter than us, right? They begin to talk about things we don't understand. They begin to want
things we don't understand. They begin to view us as obstacles to them, so they're solving those
problems or gratifying those desires. We become the chickens or the monkeys in their presence.
And I think that it's, but for some amazing solution of the sort that Stuart is imagining,
that we could somehow anchor their reward function permanently, no matter how intelligent scales.
I think it's really worth worrying about this. I do buy the sci-fi
notion that this is an existential risk if we don't do it well.
I worry that we don't notice it. I'm deeply impressed with Chad GPT and I'm worried that it
will become super intelligent. These language models have become super intelligent because
they're basically trained in the collective intelligence of the human species.
And then it'll start controlling our behavior if they're integrated into our algorithms,
the recommender systems. And then we just won't notice that there's a super intelligent system
that's controlling our behavior. Well, I think that's true even before, far before super
intelligence, even before general intelligence. I think just the narrow intelligence of these
algorithms and of what something like Chad GPT can do, I mean, it's just far
short of it developing its own goals and that are at cross purposes with ours.
Just the unintended consequences of using it in the ways we're going to be incentivized to
use it and the money to be made from scaling this thing. And what it does to our information
space and our sense of just being able to get to ground truth on any facts, it's super scary.
Do you think it's a giant leap in terms of development towards AGI, Chad GPT, or is this
just an impressive little toolbox? When do you think the singularity is coming?
I have no intuitions on that front apart from the fact that if we continue to make progress,
it will come. You just have to assume we continue to make progress. There's only two
assumptions. You have to assume substrate independence. So there's no reason why this
can't be done in silico. It's just we can build arbitrarily intelligent machines.
There's nothing magical about having this done in the wet wear of our own brains.
I think that is true and I think that's scientifically parsimonious to think that
that's true. And then you just have to assume we're going to keep making progress. It doesn't
have to be any special rate of progress. It doesn't have to be Moore's law. We just keep going.
At a certain point, we're going to be in relationship to minds leaving consciousness aside.
I don't have any reason to believe that they'll necessarily be conscious by virtue of being
super intelligent. And that's its own interesting ethical question. But
leaving consciousness aside, they're going to be more competent than we are. And
then that's like the aliens have landed. That's an encounter with, again,
leaving aside the possibility that something like Stewart's path is actually available to us.
But it is hard to picture if what we mean by intelligence, all things considered,
and it's truly general, if that scales and begins to build upon itself, how you maintain
that perfect slavish devotion until the end of time in those systems.
The tether to humans? Yeah.
I think my gut says that that tether is not... There's a lot of ways to do it.
So it's not this increasingly impossible problem.
Right. So I have no... As you know, I'm not a computer scientist. I have no intuitions about
his algorithmically, how you would approach that, and what's possible.
My main intuition is maybe deeply flawed. But the main intuition is based on the fact that
most of the learning is currently happening on human knowledge. So even Chajipiti is just trained
on human data. I don't see where the takeoff happens where you completely go above human wisdom.
The current impressive aspect of Chajipiti is that's using collective intelligence of all of us.
From what I glean, again, from people who know much more about this than I do,
I think we have reason to be skeptical that these techniques of deep learning
are actually going to be sufficient to push us into AGI. So they're not
generalizing in the way they need to. They're certainly not learning like human children.
And so there's brittle and strange ways. It's not to say that the human path is the only path.
And maybe we might learn better lessons by ignoring the way brains work. But
we know that they don't generalize and use abstraction the way we do. And so
although they have strange holes in their competence.
But the size of the holes is shrinking every time. And so the intuition starts to slowly
fall apart. The intuition is like, surely it can't be this simple to achieve some intelligence.
But it's becoming simpler and simpler. So I don't know. The progress is quite incredible.
I've been extremely impressed with Chajipiti and the new models. And there's a lot of financial
incentive to make progress in this regard. So we're going to be living through some very interesting
times. In raising a question that I'm going to be talking to you, a lot of people brought up this
topic probably because Eric Weinstein talked to Joe Rogan recently and said that he and you were
contacted by folks about UFOs. Can you clarify the nature of this contact? I've got very little to
say on this. He has much more to say. I think he went down this rabbit hole further than I did,
which wouldn't surprise anyone. He's got much more of a taste for this sort of thing than I do.
But I think we're contacted by the same person. It wasn't clear to me who this person was or
how this person got my cell phone number. It didn't seem like we were getting punked. I mean,
the person seemed credible to me. And then we're talking to you about the release of
different videos on UFOs. Yeah. And this is when there was a flurry of activity around this. So
there was a big New Yorker article on UFOs and there was rumors of congressional hearings,
I think, coming and the videos that were being debunked or not. And so this person contacted
both of us, I think, around the same time. And I think he might have contacted Rogan or other.
Eric is just the only person I've spoken to about it, I think, who I know was contacted.
And what happened is the person kept writing a check that he didn't cash. He kept saying,
next week, I understand this is sounding spooky and you have no reason to really trust me, but
next week, I'm going to put you on a Zoom call with people who you will recognize and they're
going to be former heads of the CIA and people who just, within five seconds of being on the Zoom
call, you'll know this is not a hoax. And I said, great, just let me know. Just send me the Zoom
link. And that happened maybe three times. There was just one phone conversation and then
it was just texts. There's just a bunch of texts. And I think Eric spent more time with this person.
And I haven't spoken to him about it. I know he's spoken about it publicly.
So it's not that my bullshit detector ever really went off in a big way. It's just the
thing never happened. And so I lost interest. So you made a comment, which is interesting,
that you ran the, which I really appreciate, that you ran the thought experiment of saying,
okay, maybe we do have alien spacecraft, or just the thought experiment that aliens did visit.
And then this very kind of nihilistic, sad thought that it wouldn't matter. It wouldn't affect your
life. Can you explain that? Well, no, I was, I think many people noticed this. I mean,
this was a sign of how crazy the news cycle was at that point, right? Like we had COVID and we
had Trump. And I forget when the UFO thing was really kicking off, but it just seemed like
no one had the bandwidth to even be interested in this. It's like, I was amazed to notice in myself
that I wasn't more interested in figuring out what was going on. And I considered, okay, wait a
minute. If this is true, this is the biggest story in anyone's lifetime. I mean, contact with alien
intelligence is by definition the biggest story in anyone's lifetime in human history.
Why isn't this just totally captivating? And not only was it not totally captivating,
it was just barely rising to the level of my being able to pay attention to it. And I view that,
one as a, to some degree, an understandable defense mechanism against the bogus claims
that have been made about this kind of thing in the past. The general sense is probably
bullshit or it probably has some explanation that is purely terrestrial and not surprising.
And there is somebody who, what's his name? Is it Mick West? I forget, is it a YouTuber?
Yeah, he debunked stuff.
Yeah, I mean, I have since seen some of those videos, I mean, now this is going back still
at least a year, but some of those videos seem like fairly credible debunkings of some of the
optical evidence. And I'm surprised we haven't seen more of that. Like there was a
a fairly credulous 60 minutes piece that came out around that time looking at some of that video.
And it was the very video that he was debunking on YouTube and his video only had like 50,000
views on it or whatever. But again, it seemed like a fairly credible debunking. I haven't
seen debunkings of his debunkings, but... I think there is, but he's basically saying that there
is possible explanations for it. And usually in these kinds of contexts,
if there's a possible explanation, even if it seems unlikely, it's going to be more likely
than an alien civilization visiting us.
Yeah, it's the extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence principle, which I think
is generally true.
Well, with aliens, I think generally, I think there should be some humility about what
they would look like when they show up. I tend to think they're already here.
The amazing thing about this AI conversation, though, is that we're talking about a circumstance
where we would be designing the aliens and there's every reason to believe that eventually
this is going to happen. I'm not at all skeptical about the coming reality of the aliens and we're
going to build them.
Now, here's the thing. Does this apply to when superintelligence shows up? Will this be trending
on Twitter for a day and then we'll go on to complain about something Sam Harris once against
that in his podcast next day? You tend to trend on Twitter, even though you're not on Twitter,
which is great.
Yeah, I haven't noticed. I did notice when I was on, but...
You have this concern about AGI, basically the same kind of thing that we would just look
the other way. Is there something about this time where even like World War III, which has
been throwing it out very casually, concerningly so, even the new cycle wipes that away?
Yeah. Well, I think we have this general problem that we can't make
certain information, even unequivocally certain information, emotionally salient. We respond
quite readily to certain things. As we talked about, we respond to the little girl who fell
down a well. That gets 100% of our emotional resources, but the abstract probability of
nuclear war, even a high probability, even an intolerable probability, even if we put it at
30%. That's Russian roulette with a gun with three chambers and it's aimed at the heads,
not only your head, but your kid's head and everyone's kid's head. It's just 24 hours a day.
This pre-Ukraine, I think the people who have made it their business to
professionally to think about the risk of nuclear war and to mitigate it, people like
Graham Allison or William Perry. I think they were putting the ongoing risk,
the risk that we're going to have a proper nuclear war at some point in the next generation,
people were putting it at something like 50%. They were living with this sort of
Damocles over our heads. Now, you might wonder whether anyone could have reliable intuitions
about the probability of that kind of thing, but the status quo is truly alarming. We've got
ICBMs on, I mean, the leaf-aside smaller exchanges and tactical nukes and how we
could have a world war based on incremental changes. We've got
the biggest bombs aimed at the biggest cities in both directions and its old technology.
It's vulnerable to some lunatic deciding to launch or misreading bad data. We know we've been
saved from nuclear war, I think at least twice by Soviet submarine commanders deciding,
I'm not going to pass this up the chain of command. This is almost certainly an error
and it turns out it was an error. We need people to, I mean, in that particular case,
like he saw, I think it was five, what seemed like five missiles launched from the US to Russia,
and he reasoned, if America was going to engage in a first strike, they'd launch more than five
missiles. This has to be fictional and then he waited long enough to decide that it was fictional.
The probability of a nuclear war happening by mistake or some other species of inadvertence,
misunderstanding, technical malfunction, that's intolerable. Forget about the
intentional use of it by people who are driven crazy by some ideology.
And more and more technologies are unable to kind of scale destruction.
And misinformation plays into this picture in a way that is especially scary. I mean,
once you can get a deep fake of any current president of the United States claiming to have
launched a first strike and just send that everywhere. But that could change the nature
of truth and then we, that might change the engine we have for skepticism, sharpen it,
the more you have deep faith. Yeah, and we might have AI and digital
watermarks that help us. Maybe we'll not trust any information that hasn't come through
specific channels. In my world, it's like I no longer feel the need to respond to anything
other than what I put out in my channels of information. There's so many people who have
clipped stuff of me that shows the opposite of what I was actually saying in context. I mean,
the people have like re-edited my podcast audio to make it seem like I said the opposite of what
I was saying. It's like, unless I put it out, you can't be sure that I actually said it.
But I don't know what it's like to live like that for all forms of information. Strangely,
I think it may require a greater siloing of information in the end. We're living through
this sort of wild west period where everyone's got a newsletter and everyone's got a blog and
everyone's got an opinion, but once you can fake everything. There might be a greater value for
expertise for experts, but a more rigorous system for identifying who the experts are.
Or just knowing that it's going to be an arms race to authenticate information. So it's like,
if you can never trust a photograph unless it has been vetted by Getty images, because only Getty
images has the resources to authenticate the provenance of that photograph and a test that
hasn't been meddled with by AI. Again, I don't even know if that's technically possible. Maybe
whatever the tools available for this will be commodified and the cost will be driven to zero
so quickly that everyone will be able to do it. It could be like encryption.
And it will be proven and tested most effectively first, of course, as always in porn,
which is where most of human innovation technology happens first.
Well, I have to ask, because Ron Howard, the director asked us on Twitter,
since we're talking about the threat of nuclear war and otherwise, he asked,
I'd be interested in both your expectations for human society if when we move beyond Mars.
Will those societies be industrial based? How will it be governed? How will criminal
infractions be dealt with when you read or watch sci-fi what comes closest to sounding logical?
Do you think about our society beyond Earth? If it colonized Mars, if it colonized space?
Yeah, well, I think I have a pretty humbling picture of that because we're still going to
be the apes that we are. So when you imagine colonizing Mars, you have to imagine a first
fistfight on Mars. You have to imagine a first murder on Mars.
Oh, also infidelity?
Yeah, extramarital affairs on Mars. So it's going to get really homely and boring really fast,
I think. It's like only the space suits or the other
exigencies of just living in that atmosphere or lack thereof will limit how badly we can behave on
Mars. But do you think most of the interaction will be still in meat space versus digital?
Do you think we're living through a transformation of a kind where we're going to be doing more
and more interaction than digital space? Like everything we've been complaining about Twitter,
is it possible that Twitter is just the early days of a broken system that's actually
giving birth to a better working system that's ultimately digital?
I think we're going to
experience a pendulum swing back into the real world. I mean, I think many of us are
experiencing that now anyway. I mean, just wanting to have face-to-face encounters and
spend less time on our phones and less time online. I think maybe everyone isn't going in
that direction, but I do notice it myself and I notice, I mean, once I got off Twitter,
then I noticed the people who were never on Twitter, right? And the people who were never,
basically, I mean, I know I have a lot of friends who were never on Twitter.
And they actually never understood what I was doing on Twitter. It wasn't that they were seeing it
and then reacting to it, they just didn't know. It's like I'm not on Reddit either,
but I don't spend any time thinking about not being on Reddit, right? I'm just not on Reddit.
Do you think the pursuit of human happiness is better achieved and more effectively achieved
outside of Twitter world? Well, I think all we have is our attention in the end. And we just
have to notice what these various tools are doing to it. And it became very clear to me that
it was an unrewarding use of my attention. Now, it's not to say there isn't some digital
platform that's conceivable that would be useful and rewarding, but
yeah, I mean, we just have, you know, our life is doled out to us in moments. And we're continually
solving this riddle of what is going to suffice to make this moment engaging and meaningful and
aligned with who I want to be now and how I want the future to look, right? We have this tension
between being in the present and becoming in the future. And it's a seeming paradox. Again,
it's not really a paradox, but I do think the ground truth for personal well-being
is defined a mode of being where you can pay attention to the present moment, and this is
meditation by another name. You can pay attention to the present moment with sufficient gravity
that you recognize that just consciousness itself in the present moment, no matter what's
happening, is already a circumstance of freedom and contentment and tranquility. You can be happy
now before anything happens, before this next desire gets gratified, before this next problem
gets solved. There's this ground truth that you're free, that consciousness is free and open
and unencumbered by really any problem until you get lost and thought about all the problems that
may yet be real for you. The ability to catch and observe consciousness, that in itself is a
source of happiness. Without being lost in thought. This happens haphazardly for people who don't
meditate because they'll find something in their life that's so captivating, it's so pleasurable,
it's so thrilling. It can even be scary, but it can be even being scared is captivated. It gets
their attention, whatever it is. Sebastian Younger wrote a great book about people's experience
in war here. Strangely, it can be the best experience anyone's ever had because everything,
it's like only the moment matters. The bullet is whizzing by your head. You're not thinking
about your 401k or that thing that you didn't say last week to the person you shouldn't have been
talking about. You're not thinking about Twitter. It's like you're just fully immersed in the present
moment. Meditation is the only way, I mean, that word can mean many things to many people,
but what I mean by meditation is simply the discovery that there is a way to engage the
present moment directly regardless of what's happened. You don't need to be in a war, you
don't need to be having sex, you don't need to be on drugs, you don't need to be surfing,
there doesn't have to be a peak experience. It can be completely ordinary, but you can recognize
that in some basic sense, there's only this and everything else is something you're thinking.
You're thinking about the past, you're thinking about the future, and thoughts themselves have no
substance. It's fundamentally mysterious that any thought ever really commandeers your sense
of who you are and makes you anxious or afraid or angry or whatever it is. The more you discover
that, the half-life of all these negative emotions that blow all of us around get much,
much shorter. The anger that would have kept you angry for hours or days lasts four seconds
because the moment it arises, you recognize it and you can get off there. You can decide
at minimum, you can decide whether it's useful to stay angry at that moment. Obviously, it usually
isn't. The illusion of free will is one of those thoughts. Yeah, it's all just happening. Even
the mindful and meditative response to this is just happening. Even the moments where you
recognize or not recognize it's just happening. This does open up a degree of freedom for a person,
but it's not a freedom that gives any motivation to the notion of free will. It's just a new
way of being in the world. Is there a difference between intellectually
knowing free will as an illusion and really experiencing it? What's the longest you've
been able to experience the escape, the illusion of free will? Well, it's always obvious to me
when I pay attention. Whenever I'm mindful, the term of jargon in the Buddhist and
increasingly outside the Buddhist context is mindfulness. But there are different levels
of mindfulness and there's different degrees of insight into this. But yes, what I'm calling
evidence of lack of free will and lack of the self, two sides of the same coin. There's a sense of
being a subject in the middle of experience to whom all experience refers, a sense of I,
a sense of me. That's almost everybody's starting point when they start to meditate. That's almost
always the place people live most of their lives from. I do think that gets interrupted in ways
they get unrecognized. I think people are constantly losing the sense of I. They're losing the sense
of subject-to-object distance, but they're not recognizing it. Meditation is the mode in which
you can recognize. You can both consciously precipitate it. You can look for the self and
fail to find it and then recognize its absence. That's just the flip side of the coin of free
will. The feeling of having free will is what it feels like to feel like a self who's thinking
his thoughts and doing his actions and intending his intentions. The man in the middle of the boat
who's rowing, that's the false starting point. When you find that there's no one in the middle
of the boat, in fact, there's no boat. There's just the river. There's just the flow of experience
and there's no center to it and there's no place from which you would control it.
Again, even when you're doing things, this does not negate the difference between
voluntary and involuntary behavior. It's like, I can voluntarily reach for this,
but when I'm paying attention, I'm aware that everything is just happening. The intention
to move is just arising. I'm in no position to know why it didn't arise a moment before
or a moment later or 50% stronger or weaker or so as to be ineffective or to be doubly effective
where I lurched for it versus I moved slow. I mean, I can never run the counterfactuals.
All of this opens the door to an even more disconcerting picture along the same lines,
which subsumes this conversation about free will and it's the question of whether
anything is ever possible. This is a question I haven't thought a lot about it, but
it's been a few years I've been kicking this question around.
What if only the actual is possible? We live with this feeling of possibility,
we live with a sense that I have two daughters, I could have had a third child.
What does it mean to say that I could have had a third child? You don't have kids, I don't think.
Not that I know of. The possibility might be there.
What do we mean when we say you could have had a child or you might have a child in the future?
What's the relationship between possibility and actuality and reality? Is there a reality in which
non-actual things are nonetheless real? We have other categories of non-concrete things. We
have things that don't have spatial, temporal dimension, but they nonetheless exist. The integers,
right? So numbers. There's a reality, there's an abstract reality to numbers,
and it's philosophically interesting to think about these things. In some sense,
they're not merely invented by us, they're discovered because they have structure that
we can't impose upon them. They're not fictional characters like Hamlet and Superman
also exist in some sense, but they exist at the level of our own fiction and abstraction,
but they're true and false statements you can make about Hamlet. They're true and false statements
you can make about Superman because the fictional worlds we've created have a certain kind of
structure, but again, this is all abstract. It's all abstractable from any of its concrete
instantiations. It's not just in the comic books and just in the movies. It's in our
ongoing ideas about these characters, but natural numbers or the integers don't
function quite that way. They're similar, but they also have a structure that's
purely a matter of discovery. You can't just make up whether numbers are prime. If you give me two
integers of a certain size, you mentioned two enormous integers, if I were to say,
between those two integers, they're exactly 11 prime numbers. That's a very specific claim
about which I can be right or wrong, whether or not anyone knows I'm right or wrong. There's a
domain of facts there, but it's an abstract reality that relates in some way that's
philosophically interesting, metaphysically interesting to what we call real reality,
the spatial temporal order, the physics of things. But possibility, at least in my view,
occupies a different space. Again, my thoughts on this are pretty in-co-ed. I think I need to talk to
a philosopher of physics and or a physicist about how this may interact with things like the many
worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. That's an interesting right, exactly. I wonder if
discovers in physics further proof or more concrete proof that many worlds interpretation
of quantum mechanics has some validity, if that completely starts to change things.
That's just more actuality. If I took that seriously, that's a case of,
and truth is, that happens even if the many worlds interpretation isn't true, but we just
imagine we have a physically infinite universe. The implication of infinity is such that
things will begin to repeat themselves the farther you go in space. If you just head out
in one direction, eventually you're going to meet two people just like us having a conversation
just like this and you're going to meet them an infinite number of times in every infinite variety
of permutations slightly different from this conversation. Infinity is just so big that our
intuitions of probability completely break down. But what I'm suggesting is maybe probability
isn't a thing. Maybe there's only actuality. Maybe there's only what happens and at every
point along the way, our notion of what could have happened or what might have happened
is just that. It's just a thought about what could have happened or might have happened.
There's no, so it's a fundamentally different thing. If you can imagine a thing that doesn't
make it real, because that's where that possibility exists is in your imagination.
Yeah, and possibility itself is a kind of spooky idea because it too has a sort of structure.
If I'm going to say, you could have had a daughter last year,
so we're saying that's possible but not actual. There are things that
are true and not true about that daughter. It has a kind of structure.
I feel like there's a lot of fog around the possibility. It feels like almost like a useful
narrative. But what does it mean? If we say, I just did that but it's conceivable that I wouldn't
have done that. It's possible that I just threw this cap but I might not have done that.
You're taking it very temporally close to the original, what would appear as a decision.
Whenever we're saying something is possible but not actual, this thing just happened,
but it's conceivable. It's possible that it wouldn't have happened or that it would have
happened differently. In what does that possibility consist? Where is that? For that to be real,
for the possibility to be real, what claim are we making about the universe?
Well, isn't that an extension of the idea that free will is an illusion, that all we have is
actuality, that the possibility is an illusion? Yeah, I'm just extending it beyond human action.
This goes to the physics of things. This is just everything. We're always telling ourselves a story
that includes possibility. Possibility is really compelling for some reason.
Because this could sound just academic but every backward-looking regret or disappointment
and every forward-looking worry is completely dependent on this notion of possibility.
Every regret is based on the sense that I could have done something else. Something else could
have happened. Every disposition to worry about the future is based on the feeling that there's
this range of possibilities. It could go either way. Whether or not there's such a thing as
possibility, I'm convinced that worry is almost never psychologically appropriate because the
reality is that in any given moment, either you can do something to solve the problem you're worried
about or not. If you can do something, just do it. If you can't, your worrying is just
causing you to suffer twice over. You're going to get the medical procedure next week anyway.
How much time between now and next week do you want to spend worrying about it?
The worry doesn't accomplish anything. How much do physicists think about possibility?
Well, they think about it in terms of probability more often, but probability just describes,
and again, this is a place where I might be out of my depth and need to talk to somebody to
debunk this. To do therapy with a physicist.
Yeah, but probably it seems just describes a pattern of actuality that we've observed.
There are certain things we observe, and those are the actual things that have happened,
and we have this additional story about probability. We have the frequency with
which things have happened in the past. I can flip a fair coin, and I know in the abstract
that I have a belief that in the limit, those tosses should converge on 50% heads and 50% tails.
I know I have a story as to why it's not going to be exactly 50% within any arbitrary timeframe,
but in reality, all we ever have are the observed tosses.
Then we have an additional story that, oh, it came up heads, but it could have come up tails.
Why do we think that about that last toss? What are we claiming is true about the physics of things
if we say it could have been otherwise? I think we're claiming that probability is true,
that it allows us to have a nice model about the world, gives us hope about the world.
It seems that possibility has to be somewhere to be effective. It's a little bit like what's
happening with the laws of nature. There's something metaphysically interesting about
the laws of nature, too, because the laws of nature impose their work on the world. We see
their evidence, but they're not reducible to any specific set of instances. There's some structure
there, but the structure isn't just a matter of the actual things. We have the actual billiard balls
that are banging into each other. All of that actuality can be explained by what actual things
are actually doing, but then we have this notion that in addition to that, we have the laws of
nature that are explaining this, but how are the laws of nature an additional thing? In addition,
it's just the actual things that actually affect causally. If they are an additional thing,
how are they effective? If they're not among the actual things, they're just actually banging
around. Possibly it has to be hiding somewhere for the laws of nature
to be possible. For anything to be possible, it has to be...
That's a closet somewhere, I'm sure, where all the possibility goes.
It has to be attached to something. You don't think many worlds is that?
Because many worlds still exist. Because we're in this strand of that multiverse.
Still, you have just a local instance of what is actual, and then if it proliferates elsewhere
where you can't be affected by it, there's more actuality.
You can't really connect with the other.
So many worlds are just a statement of basically everything that can happen,
happen somewhere. Maybe that's not an entirely kosher formulation of it,
but it seems pretty close. But there's whatever happens.
Right? In fact, there's... Relativistically, there's a...
Einstein's original notion of a block universe seems to suggest this. It's been a while since
I've been in a conversation with a physicist where I've gotten a chance to ask about the
standing of this concept in physics currently. I don't hear it discuss much, but the idea of
a block universe is that space time exists as a totality. In our sense that we are traveling
through space time, where there's a real difference between the past and the future,
that that's an illusion of just the weird slice we're taking of this larger object.
But on some level, it's like you're reading a novel. The last page of the novel exists
just as much as the first page when you're in the middle of it. If we're living in anything like
that, then there's no such thing as possibility. It would seem there's just what is actual.
So as a matter of our experience, moment to moment, I think it's totally compatible with
that being true, that there is only what is actual. And that sounds to the nave ear,
that sounds like it would be depressing and disempowering and confining,
but it's anything but. It's a circumstance of pure discovery. You have no idea
what's going to happen next. You don't know who you're going to be tomorrow. You're only by tendency
seeming to resemble yourself from yesterday. There's way more freedom in all of that than
then it seems true to many people. And yet, the basic insight is that you're not
the real freedom is the recognition that you're not in control of anything. Everything is just
happening, including your thoughts and intentions and moves. So life is a process of continuous
discovery. You're part of the universe. It's the miracle that the universe is illuminated to
itself as itself where you sit. And you're continually discovering what your life is.
And then you have this layer at which you're telling yourself a story that you already know
what your life is. And you know exactly who you should be and what's about to happen or
struggling to form a confident opinion about all of that. And yet, there is this fundamental
mystery to everything, even the most familiar experience. We're all NPCs in a most marvelous
video game. Maybe, although my sense of gaming does not run as deep as to know what I'm committing
to there. It's a non-playing character. You're more of a Mario Kart guy, I tell.
I was an original video gamer, but it's been a long time since I was there for Pong.
I remember when I saw the first Pong in a restaurant in, I think it was like Benihana's
or something, they had a Pong table. It was an amazing moment when you-
You Sam Harris might live from Pong to the invention and deployment of a super intelligent
system. That happened fast if it happens any time in my lifetime.
From Pong to AGI. What kind of things do you do purely for fun that others might consider a waste
of time? Purely for fun. Because meditation doesn't count, because most people would say that's not
a waste of time. Is there something like Pong that's a deeply embarrassing thing you would never admit?
I don't think, well, I mean, once or twice a year, I will play a round of golf,
which many people would find embarrassing. They might even find my play embarrassing, but
it's fine. Do you find it embarrassing?
No. I mean, golf just takes way too much time, so I can only squander a certain amount of time on it.
I do love it. It's a lot of fun.
Well, you have no control over your actual performance. You're ever discovering.
I do have control over my mediocre performance, but I don't have enough control
as to make it really good. But happily, I'm in the perfect spot because I don't invest enough
time in it to care how I play, so I just have fun when I play.
Well, I hope there'll be a day where you play around golf with the former president of Donald
Trump, and I would love to be. I would bet on him if we played golf. I'm sure he's a better golfer.
I miss the chaos of human civilization in modern times, as we've talked about. What gives you hope
about this world in the coming year, in the coming decade, in the coming hundred years,
maybe a thousand years? What's the source of hope for you?
Well, it comes back to a few of the things we've talked about. I know that most people are good
and are mostly converging on the same core values. It's like we're not surrounded by
psychopaths, and the thing that finally convinced me to get off Twitter was
how different life was seeming through the lens of Twitter. It's like I just got the sense that
there's way more psychopaths or effective psychopaths than I realized, and then I thought,
this isn't real. This is either a strange context in which
actually decent people are behaving like psychopaths, or it's a bot army or something
that I don't have to take seriously. I just think most people, if we can get the incentives right,
I think there's no reason why we can't really thrive collectively. There's enough wealth to
go around. There's no effective limit within the limits of what's physically possible,
but we're nowhere near the limit on abundance. Forget about going to Mars. On this,
the one rock. We could make this place incredibly beautiful and stable if we just
did enough work to solve some rather long-standing political problems.
The problem of incentives. To you, the basic characteristics of human nature such that
we'll be okay if the incentives are okay. We'll do pretty good.
I'm worried about the asymmetries that it's easier to break things and to fix them. It's easier to
light a fire than to put it out. I do worry that as technology gets more and more powerful,
it becomes easier for the minority who wants to screw things up to effectively screw things
up for everybody. It's easier. A thousand years ago, it was simply impossible for one person
to derange the lives of millions, much less billions. Now, that's getting to be possible.
On the assumption that we're always going to have a sufficient number of crazy individuals or
malevolent individuals, we have to figure out that asymmetry somehow. There's some
cautious exploration of emergent technology that we need to get our head screwed on straight
about. So gain of function research. Just how much do we want to democratize
all the relevant technologies there? You really want to give everyone the ability to order
nucleotides in the mail and give them the blueprints for viruses online because you're a
free speech absolutist and you think all PDFs need to be exportable everywhere.
So there are limits to... Many people are confused about my take on free speech because I've come
down on the unpopular side of some of these questions. My overriding concern is that in
many cases, I'm worried about the free speech of individual businesses or individual platforms or
individual media people to decide that they don't want to be associated with certain things.
If you own Twitter, I think you should be able to kick off the Nazi you don't want to be associated
with because it's your platform, you own it. That's your free speech. That's the side of my
free speech concern for Twitter. It's not that every Nazi has the right to algorithmic speech on
Twitter. I think if you own Twitter, you should be you or whether it's just Elon or in the world
where it wasn't Elon, just the people who own Twitter and the board and the shareholders and
the employees, these people should be free to decide what they want to promote or not.
I view them as publishers more than as platforms in the end and that has other implications.
But I do worry about this problem of misinformation and algorithmically and
otherwise supercharged misinformation. I do think we're at a bottleneck now. I
guess it could be the hubris of every present generation to think that their moment is especially
important. But I do think with the emergence of these technologies, we're at some bottleneck where
we really have to figure out how to get this right. If we do get this right, if we figure out how to
not drive ourselves crazy by giving people access to all possible information and misinformation at
all times, there's no limit to how happily we could collaborate with billions of creative,
fulfilled people. And trillions of robots. Some of them sex robots, but that's another
topic. Robots that are running the right algorithm, whatever that algorithm is.
Whatever you need in your life to make you happy. The first time we talked is one of the huge
honors in my life. I've been a fan of yours for a long time. The few times you were respectful
but critical to me means the world. And thank you so much for helping me and caring enough
and caring enough about the world and for everything you do. But I should say that the few of us that
try to put love in the world on Twitter miss you on Twitter. But enjoy yourselves.
Don't break anything. Have a good party without me. Very happy to do this. Thanks for the invitation.
Thank you. Great to see you again. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Sam Harris.
To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now,
let me leave you with some words from Martin Luther King Jr. Love is the only force capable
of transforming an enemy into a friend. Thank you for listening. I hope to see you next time.
