Okay, dear, so in this lecture we are going to talk about an argumentative essay.
Fine.
The title of the essay there is Does Social Media Make Us Anti-Social?
Okay.
Does Social Media Make Us Anti-Social?
So look at the favorite topic.
From the beginning of the topic you come to know whether I shall go for the topic or I shall go against the topic.
Look at the favorite topic and every argumentative topic you will have two sides,
either to go for the topic or to go against the topic.
Fine.
So argumentative topics are easy to understand because those are not expository topics.
Okay.
In expository topics the things are not in a question type,
but in the argumentative essay the topic will almost like be a question type,
whether to go for the topic or to go against the topic.
And most of the time it will be in a form of a question.
So now look at it like, does social media make us anti-social?
No, it's your choice whether to say yes, social media make us anti-social.
Or whether to say no, social media does not make us anti-social.
That is your choice now.
Okay.
Okay.
It's an argumentative essay based on reasoning, facts and point of views.
Okay.
Expository essays are based on only facts,
but argumentative essays are based on reasoning, facts and point of views.
You will have to go for logical reasoning.
You will have to put the facts and you will have to your own point of view while writing the essay.
The argumentative essay.
Fine.
The important note for an argumentative essay.
That is one can go for or against the topic in an argumentative essay.
Okay.
One can go for or against the topic in an argumentative essay.
You are not bound to either go for the topic or go against the topic.
That is your choice.
Which side you can defend?
You have to go for that.
Okay.
It depends on your defense.
Which side you can defend?
Fine.
You have to go for that.
Whether you can defend the topic or you can go against the topic.
That is your wish.
Okay.
Or can go for both the topic as well as against the topic.
Okay.
Whether you can go for or against the topic.
Or can go or you can discuss both of these sides.
Like you can go for the topic.
You can also go against the topic at a time.
Fine.
You cannot like you can have your own point of view.
Fine.
Outline on the essay.
That is introduction.
Okay.
The first sentence of the introduction.
Look at it.
Social media make us anti-social because it affects our familial relations.
Okay.
Why social media make us anti-social?
Because it affects our familial relation.
How it affects our familial relation?
Because living in one family, the family members have less time for each other.
They are just using social media.
The son will have no time to meet his parents.
His mother in the next room or his sister to sit with them.
Okay.
He will have only time for or she will have only time for social media.
He or she will be busy in social media like the Instagram, the Snapchat, the Facebook,
the Messenger and the WorkSafe and all these things.
And he will have no time to sit with the family.
So it affects the familial relation.
Fine.
The next point is it makes people socially neglected.
Yes.
It makes people socially neglected.
How it makes people, how it makes people socially neglected.
People will have no time to come out to the society and meet their neighbors and the members of the society.
So they are socially neglected.
People don't think that they are part of the society because they are not seen outside in the society and only.
They are not seen in the gathering, the public gathering and the social gathering of the society.
They have their own world inside their home, inside their room and even inside their bed.
Like they will have, they will have no contact with his, with his or her siblings like sleeping or sitting around him in one room.
Like he will have no time for even for them to talk to him.
He will be so much or she will be so much busy in the social media.
Fine.
Social media is devoid of face to face contact.
It is devoid of face to face contact.
Like you will have no face to face contact with the people.
Like you will be just chatting with them.
You will be just, just reading the repost.
You will be just commenting over.
There is a type of like it is not even, it is no, no, no, no room for face to face contact in the social media.
Like people will just read your post or you will read the post or you will have only comment on that, like on that.
Okay.
Or you will have to share the post or you will have to, to, to, to read to the story or like these other things.
Fine.
Or you will read the, you will read someone's status and you will comment on that.
Okay.
It's like things are not easy.
There is no face to face contact.
The next point is it increases vanity and self-adulation.
It increases vanity and self-adulation.
People are like, they go for that.
Like they have no room even to escape all these things.
Fine.
It is a world of isolation which demands complete isolation from rest of the world.
Okay.
Social media is a world of isolation.
Okay.
Which demands complete isolation from rest of the world.
It's a separate world.
It's a separate world of segregation.
People are segregated.
People are isolated.
Like they are isolated in the midst of the heavy and crowded societies.
Like one person will be, one person will have a lot of social, a lot of family members or he will have a lot of friends and he will have many things.
But he will, he won't be able to meet them and to come out of his home.
Like he will be isolated in his room, in his home.
Okay.
That is a different world.
Okay.
People are isolated in social media.
Yes, they will have a lot of friends from around the world.
But they won't be able to meet them or talk to them.
That is just an isolation.
That is, you know, a company doesn't mean only messaging and only texting.
A company means being sitting together, talking together, like drinking together and walking together.
It doesn't mean that only texting is an episode.
So it's a separate world, isolated.
People are isolated from the rest of the world.
They have their own world.
Fine.
The next point is, it creates uncertainty and unpredictability.
People are like, it creates uncertainty and unpredictability.
It creates unpredictability.
Things become unpredictable.
You cannot predict anything.
Like you will be predicting something else and it will have something else.
Many of the boys, like they will have friends, they will have a friend request or friends,
like the account will be the name of a girl or something like that.
But in reality, that will be something else.
Okay.
That is unpredictable.
You cannot predict that this person is a girl or this person is a boy.
Okay.
That is unpredictable and uncertain because many of the boys are using girls' accounts these days.
Girls also use boys' accounts for some purposes.
So it's unpredictable.
Like, okay.
And some people, like the anti-static actors, like the Violators,
they also use certain types of IDs.
You cannot predict that he is a traitor or he is a patriot.
And then he's working for the country or against you.
You cannot predict anyone.
So there's no predictability.
There is no uncertainty.
No, no certainty things are not certain and things are not predictable on social media
You cannot say something about anything on the social media. Okay, it is
lying date
Social media has psychological implications is
Social media has psychological implication
People are the social media users. They are psychologically
like their psychologically being converted and being like
Attracted to the social media. They have psychological implication
They did they will not be feeling physically and mentally good when they are using social media a lot
Okay, because they forget the real world and then they start living in the world of social media
They have no clue of the the real world that and then they think in these social media
They didn't drink and they eat and all the things when they they do these they think about the social media
Who's ever psychological implications as well
Because they didn't the real world isn't an active word
This is not the word of commenting and liking and messaging and texting. It's a real world. Fine. So it's have a psychological
implication
It has shaken the foundation of the nature is old tradition and non fine
It has shaken the foundation of the centuries old traditions and now how
Long ago like previously people used to visit one another to visit the homes and talk and
Have gossips and all these things but these people don't visit each other
Okay, there is a traditional norm and people don't visit each other when it would be eat previously people would go and they would
Impress each other and they would wish to eat greetings
They're all the but these days that is not the case only text are only comment on a a post
Happy eat to everybody and friends would come and they will come and they will comment on the posting happy eat
You will and that is that is not you know, that is the thing these days
People don't visit physically each other like to prohibition the happy eat only commenting and only texting that is an effect because
Because that has challenge the old tradition and norms of the society fine
people used to people used to like they do to visit the
The the ailing person to visit the L person the sick person
But these days they will only come and get will soon get well soon. That is they don't visit
I had seen your status. You were L and I commented on that. Okay, fine
See this is not the thing fine. Someone will get married these days and he will post on the social media and people will come
Congratulations, congratulations and congratulations. No one will go to his or her home for
For wishing him or her the engagement ceremony or the wedding ceremony. So that is that is the thing these are the things fine
It creates vulnerabilities. Yes, it creates vulnerabilities, you know people are
in the the the the the the information and the secrecy is our vulnerable these things can be easily traced
okay, the
the
IDs and the secrecy is these are not safe. Okay
The information these things are not safe on social media
These can be
Be traced by some hackers and all the people and they can be used for illegal purposes
Now, you know vulnerabilities mean the things when things are vulnerable
It means that things are easily to be reached to fine and affected by
So this is all about the
social media
Social media is a kind of addiction. Yes, it's a kind of addiction people are addicted to social media
Social media like the word save the snap day the Instagram the messenger the felboard when they don't use this that they feel a kind of like
They feel a kind of pain. They feel a kind of
like
Restlessness rest less. They're they they feel restless now when they don't use the social media
Suppose you might have seen an addicted person everywhere
He will go he will must open the Facebook app and to check whether someone has texted me someone has posted and like that
He will check or she will check the word save also the messenger the insta the snapchat in order to see
He will be thinking or she will be thinking in his or her mind that someone might have texted me
So that is a kind of addiction. Okay, people are addicted to social media
Like they cannot live without the social media. They must use the social media
They will have no money for the rest of the thing, but they will have the money for going to
to have activated an
Internet pegging in order to see whether someone has texted me on like that. Fine. So it is a time up, you know
It is an addiction social media is an addiction conclusion
so
In the conclusion, we would say that social media it make us an anti-social like they it
Do all these things with us
But in order to skip the addiction one should not be too much you too much the
Too much related or too much
Attracted toward the social media because it has some
positive and negative
Implications both. Thank you for watching us and hope you might have understood the argumentative essay stay with us
