Hello, you found the portal. I'm your host Eric Weinstein and I think that
today's must be the most unusual episode yet of a podcast that has been
marked by almost regular unusual episodes. Now, this is the first podcast that
I'm recording at home. I don't really have a home recording studio so we're
really doing this from chicken wire and masking tape. But I am sheltering in
place because of the worldwide COVID pandemic and what we've been asked by
the state of California and by the federal government is to shelter in
place for an upcoming month because today is April 1st. Now, during a pandemic, I
can assure you that no one is interested in April Fool's jokes. So the
question is what to do with the April Fool's tradition in a situation in which
nobody wants a prank. I thought that this was probably the best time to launch an
idea that I've been playing with for years. And that idea is that it is
dangerous to have a world in which we are afraid to talk about what we think
is true. When I think about what happened during the beginning of the COVID
pandemic, I find that we were in general intimidated from sharing our fears about
the virus. We were told that if we wore masks that we were acting in a peculiar
fashion. If we refused to shake hands that we were behaving in a strange and
unpleasant social way. We did not want to be alarmist. We did not want to be seen
as chicken little. And in fact, it was extremely important that we not be seen
as xenophobic given that the outbreak was originating in Wuhan, China. In fact,
perhaps the most dangerous idea was that this outbreak might have been connected
to some research being done in a lab, perhaps a bio weapons lab. We really don't
know where this epidemic began. What is the etiology of something that has
caused the entire world economy to effectively shut down? What I believe is
that that silence has been deadly. We have many people who have now lost their
lives because we did not feel free to exchange ideas to think and to talk. And
in fact, many of the people who warned us first were the freest members of
society having been previously canceled by standard mainstream institutions and
their associated media. So what I thought would be important for an April Fools
Day that no one wants to actually participate in was to deal with an idea
that maybe one day a year we should all be free to share crazy ideas that are
going around between our ears and in our head. We're having conversations with
ourselves wondering is anyone else seeing the same thing that I'm seeing? But
we are too afraid because the social stigma for actually believing in things
that maybe things are possible or perhaps there's a conspiracy somewhere.
Perhaps we are ill-prepared. For example, I believe that our current pandemic is
exacerbated because our government and our readiness czars failed to stock
adequate supplies and that these supplies were called for in the academic
literature for years. There was absolutely no excuse not to have personal
protective equipment stocked for doctors and nurses and hospitals to say
nothing of all of the people who were in the front lines of treating patients
sick with COVID. Now, currently I don't believe that you can trust the World
Health Organization. Absolutely not. I don't think you can trust the Surgeon
General of the United States and I absolutely don't think you can trust
the CDC because they are all covering for our inadequacy. This was a problem
that we always knew was coming and we at one point had stocks which apparently
were depleted under a previous administration and not restocked under
this administration. In fact, our fear of dealing with a pervasive
institutional incompetence has blinded us to the degradation in our society
across all major institutions. As I've discussed before in the program, I
believe that this has a singular etiology. That is, that because of embedded
growth obligations coming from the previous era of unsustainable post-war
growth from about 1945 to 1971-73, something like that, we built in
expectations to our system that cannot currently be met. We will not have
technology that follows the same breakneck pace of innovation. As a result,
we have a system whereby the heads of our organizations are forced to cover for
their inadequacies because growth is built into the system that cannot be
sustained. Therefore, there is not the funding, the manpower, there is not the
wherewithal to continue many of our programs because we do not actually
have the ability to continue to simply grow our way out, at least so far. So
what's today's program about? Well, I thought that what I would do is to let
go of something that I've been keeping pretty close for, I think, about 37
years. When I was around 19, I started, it's hard to talk about, when I was around
18 or 19, I was at the University of Pennsylvania and I thought I saw a
glimmer of hope. I thought I saw that some new equations that were being played
with might actually provide a solution to some of the problems that had
bedeviled Einstein and others for years in the quest for a unified field
theory. Now, it's an embarrassing thing to say that one is a unified field
theorist. It is effectively equivalent to saying I'm interested in perpetual
motion machines or that I have a private cure for cancer that I'm trying on
rabbits in my backyard. However, I actually think that it's important to
fess up because that's exactly what this is. Now, in my situation, I have an
extremely unusual history and I really don't want to get bogged down in all of
the things that happened while I was a student trying to develop this theory
because it is not a particularly happy story. I believe that this theory is an
incredibly joyous one. Now, in this situation, I want to talk about what it
means to have a theory of everything. We've never seen one and, in fact, not
only have we never seen a theory of everything, we've never even seen, I
believe, a candidate for a theory of everything. And because a theory of
everything would have to have different characteristics that might believe
every theory that has gone before, we don't think enough about what the
difference is between what we would normally call in physics an effective
theory and a fundamental one. Now, if you're familiar with the MC Escher
drawing called Drawing Hands, it is a lithograph of two hands apparently
drawing each other into existence on some kind of a canvas or piece of paper.
That is sometimes referred to as a strange loop, but it, in fact, is an
attempt to answer the question, what is the fire that lights itself? This is the
problem that bedevils us when we search for a unified theory that doesn't
bedevil us, in my opinion, in any previous effective theory. Now, why is
that? Well, many people confuse a theory of everything as if they imagine that
it's a theory in which you can compute every eventuality. And it is absolutely
not that because the computational power is very different than the question of
whether or not the rules are effectively given. I've analogized it to a game of
chess and knowing all of the rules is equivalent to a theory of everything.
Knowing how to play chess well is an entirely different question. But in the
case of a theory of everything or a unified field theory, if you will, many
people also take it to be an answer to the question, why is there something
rather than nothing? And I don't think that this is, in fact, what a theory of
everything is meant to be either. Now, why is that? Well, because I believe at some
level it is impossible for most of us to imagine an airtight argument,
mathematically speaking, which coaxes out of an absolute void a something.
However, there's a different question which I think might actually animate us
and which is the right question to ask of a potential candidate. And that is, how
does one get everything from almost nothing? In the M.C. Escher drawing or
lithograph, hands drawing hands or drawing hands, what we see is that the paper is
presupposed. That is, if you could imagine the theory of everything, it would be
like saying, if I posit the paper, can the paper will the ink into being such
that the ink gives rise to the pens and the pens draw the hands, which in fact
manipulate the pens to use the ink. That kind of a problem is one which is of a
very different character than everything that has gone before. It is also, in my
opinion, an explanation of why the physics community has been stalled for
nearly 50 years since around 1973 when the standard model was intellectually in
place. Now, consider this. We have never had in modern times a drought where no
person working in pure fundamental theory has taken a trip to Stockholm just as a
rough indicator for contributing to the standard model. No one, in my opinion,
since let's see, Frank Wilczek, who was born in 1951, no one born after that time
has in fact contributed to the standard model in a clear and profound way. That
is not to say that no work has been done, but for the most part, the current
generation of physicists has for more than 40 years and almost 50 years remained
stagnant within the standard paradigm of physics, which is positing theories that
are then verified by experiment. Now, my belief, which is relatively radical, is
that there is no way to get to our final destination using the tools that have
gotten us to where we are now. In other words, what got you here cannot get you
there. And in particular, one of the biggest problems we have is the political
economy of science. We have effectively starved our scientific enterprise for
resources, creating a dire and cutthroat competition, which has completely
deranged the scientific tradition. And so one of the things that's going to
happen in this lecture is that I'm simply going to announce that I have broken
and have broken for many years with just about every expectation of standard
science. That is not to say that the equations or the style of presentation is
going to be foreign, quite the contrary. I have every intention of writing up some
results in standard terminology wherever possible using popular mathematical
typesetting programs, but it goes far deeper than this. My belief is that what
we've created is a career structure, a journal structure, an employment structure,
an access structure that cannot possibly complete the job. And why is that? Well,
what if in the last leg, in fact, we had a situation by which an attempt at the
fundamental theory would result almost certainly in career suicide? Now, if you
think of that as an explanation, you would realize that it has the power to
synchronize failure across many seemingly independent experiments. And I
believe that that's exactly what's been going on through the so-called string
theory revolutions one, two, and perhaps three. Now, in that case, what happened was
a theory became fixed in the minds of really the baby boom generation of
physicists because it allowed for infinite elaboration within a mathematical
or more particularly a geometric context. And those supposed physicists spent
their time submitting papers to what's called the high energy section of the
so-called preprint archive. But in fact, most of these papers have nothing to do
with high energy physics whatsoever. And if you're looking for the designation,
it's HEPTH, high energy physics dash theory. Now, if you look through those
papers, they don't seem to have much to do with particles. They don't seem to
have to do with forces in spacetime. They seem to have to do with very strange and
obscure mathematical issues. And in the years since the string theory program
got particularly reanimated, I guess that would be around 1984 with the
anomaly cancellation of Green and Schwartz, what you'll find is that
physics became very active and simultaneously ground to a halt. It
failed to remain a physical subject. It became something like a medieval quest
for the number of angels to dance on the head of a pit. Now, in this
circumstance, I think it's very important to realize that this is not a paper and
we are not submitting to the archive. In fact, the archive requires people who
are not employed at universities to get permission from some member of the
community, which is called an endorsement, which I find absolutely insulting
and I refuse to go along with. Furthermore, we are expected to cite
papers, sometimes which are behind paywalls, and I think that it's
absolutely immoral to ask people to pay outside the system to read the papers
to cite other people's work. I could go on about the number of things that are
currently wrong with the system, but instead what I would like to do is to
simply joyously reject it. I have every intention of simply sharing this with
you and jealously guarding my right to shepherd this through. Now, what does
that mean? In two previous episodes, we've had interactions with academicians,
which I think are interesting and bear-screwed. In the first case, in an
interview with the economist Tyler Cowan, I talked to Tyler about the fact
that the Boschian Commission was in fact committing economic malpractice. Now,
why was that? It was because they had decided that they needed to transfer a
trillion dollars over 10 years and that they had found a devious way of doing
it, which is to adjust the CPI. By backing out the amount of adjustment needed to
get a trillion dollars, they decided that a 1.1% overstatement in the CPI would
cause a reduction in entitlements, that is Medicare and Medicaid payments,
together with Social Security, as well as an increase in taxes because tax
brackets are also indexed. Now, to my mind, it is absolutely unconscionable to
say that you have a right to transfer wealth cryptically by adjusting a
fundamental barometer. That would be like saying, in order to meet our global
warming targets, we have to recalibrate all the thermometers to show that, in
fact, things have cooled. One simply can't do that in science, but Tyler's
response I found was very interesting. His perspective was that this was, in
fact, not a terrible thing because it was, quote, directionally correct. And in
general, he believed that because the CPI should be considered overstated, that
this was not the world's most terrible thing to do as an economist. I respect
Tyler a great deal and I enjoy his company, but I have to say that I am
absolutely of a different opinion. My belief is that one has no rights and no
ability as a scientist to fudge the data to meet social goals in this fashion.
Another interesting interaction was the interaction with Professor Agnes
Collard of the University of Chicago. Now, when she listened to episode 19
about Brett Weinstein, she found that it was a very compelling episode. But
strangely, even though the point of the episode was to surface Brett's long
forgotten theory, because Brett had not been acknowledged as having predicted
that laboratory mice would in particular have radically elongated telomeres,
where it was thought that all mice had long radically elongated telomeres, which
has incredible potential implications for drug testing and all of the work that
is done on laboratory rodents as model organisms. This is an episode you should
definitely listen to if you haven't already. But Agnes's perspective was
very different than mine. Her feeling was that because we were in a situation in
which the work actually surfaced, that the system worked even if it was the case
that Brett's name was erased from the history of the development and that his
theory was put in a situation in which it was not able to carry the day because,
in fact, there was no record of the fact that a prediction had been made. Now, I
disagreed with Agnes on that program vociferously. But what I found was is
that it was very telling. In general, our academic population has given up on a
previous and quaint idea of decency, proprietary, truth, fairness, because
there simply isn't the resource for everyone. Now, I believe that current
science is not necessarily unsalvageable, but it will be unsalvageable if we don't
get the very people that I rail against far more money. And I know that's very
confusing. But my belief is that the inadequate resources that we have put
aside are very similar to the inadequate masks that we have put aside for our
doctors. We have asked some of the world's most gifted and smartest people to
devote their lives to the study of science and technology. And we have
inadequately prepared them. We've put their lives and their families' lives
under incredible pressures. And what I wish to do is to, in fact, point to the
very people who I've been most angry at for years and say that part of the
problem is that we need to take a hard look at how we've invested in science
and technology and give the very people that I'm most angry at more money. I
will explain more about this later, but I do want to give you an introduction to
this episode. What I will be doing is to screen a very unusual and somewhat
awkward lecture at the University of Oxford. Now, why is it so awkward? Well,
first of all, I had left standard research perhaps 20 years earlier, almost.
Further, I'm not a physicist and I have only taken one or two courses in the
physics major sequence. I think I've taken one semester of mechanics and
perhaps I took an advanced general relativity course in college. But in
general, no one goes into a theoretical physics department and attempts to
lecture physics physicists on physics. And why is that? Well, because physics is
incredibly demanding and this is almost certainly the world's most interesting
and most accomplished intellectual community. These are guys who don't miss
a trick. There are so many things to know and it is such a difficult field that
it is effectively almost impossible to contribute from outside. Chemists don't
do it and once in a blue moon, mathematicians will attempt to talk about
actual real physics. So one thing that you're seeing is a very unusual
circumstance where somebody is trying to figure out how to give their first
lecture in a physics department and it concerns the possibility of a theory
which attempts to solve the problem of how does a fire light itself. Another
thing that you'll see is that it's relatively difficult to read my hand
writing. I'm not going to make any bones about it. I've been very vocal about
having learning differences, dysgraphia, dyslexia, all sorts of different issues.
Symbols come extremely difficult to me. I don't want to spend this time making
excuses. What I do want to say is the following. I will be attempting to record
a short PowerPoint presentation for after the lecture to say at least some of
what some of the constructions are more clearly. This is not meant to be the
actual presentation of the theory. What this is is an introduction, a down payment
and above all a historical account of what happened seven years ago at the
University of Oxford when I tried to present these ideas. I've talked before
about the twin nuclei problem and our need to get off of this planet and if we
have a hope of getting off of this planet it really comes from fundamental
physics. You see 100 years ago or perhaps 105 when Albert Einstein gave us
general relativity he effectively consigned us for life to the solar
system. Why is that? Well his model, his geometric model of space and time
effectively creates a speed limit known as C or the speed of light. Now there are
three rocks that are at least interesting for habitation by humans
although two of them are marginal the moon and Mars. One of them of course is
unbelievable the earth but I doubt that we're going to be able to steward the
earth through our new godlike powers which I've called the twin nuclei
problem of cell and atom. We've unlocked the power of both and I don't think we
have the wisdom to stay all in one place. So the question that I had was if
there is any ability to escape to the cosmos that we can see in the night sky
where would it come from? We are almost positive that Albert Einstein's theory of
relativity is in some weird way incomplete. The Schwarzschild singularities
which give us black holes and the initial singularities of the Robertson
Walker Friedman universe which are associated with the Big Bang are some
clue that there is some subtle flaw in Einstein's theory. So how to go beyond
Einstein? I mean what Einstein did to Newton was to recover Newton as a
special case of a more general theory that is more flexible and in fact this
is the same problem that we have because Albert Einstein's theory is so
fundamental we effectively begin every theoretical physics seminar with a
statement about spacetime. In other words Albert Einstein is locked in at the
ground floor. So if we can't get below the ground floor to the foundations it's
very difficult to make progress. This is one of the things that is making it
almost impossible for us to go beyond the initial revolutions of the 20th
century. Do I know that this new theory if it works will allow us to escape? I do
not. There's no one who can say that and I don't think I have the skills to
develop the physical consequences of the theory even if the theory turns out to
be mostly right. What I will say is that I think that the theory is the first of
its kind that I've seen. I believe that in part what you will see is that at a
minimum it is like fool's gold. It appears to explain why we think we see
three three generations but it also says that perhaps they aren't really three
generations of matter. Perhaps there are only two even though physicists tell us
that there are at least three or perhaps more. I believe that physics tells us
that the universe is chiral that is left right asymmetric but the theory is
itself not chiral. Instead it chooses to present a different idea which is that
perhaps chirality is emergent much the way our hands are individually left
right asymmetric as our pinky is not a reflection of our thumb but the thumb on
each hand is a pairing to the other one as is the pinky. Now what does that mean?
It means that if perhaps there is matter and there is force that is decoupled
from our ordinary world that that matter might restore the parity or the
chirality rather would break the chirality and restore parity between
these two halves the matter we see and the matter that is missing. There are a
good number of other things that happen in the theory. It replaces spacetime with
what I've termed an observer's. Now an observer's is an unusual gadget in that
it's thought of as two separate places where physics takes place connected by
a map. That means effectively that we are in something like a stadium where
there is there are stands and there is a pitch and the playing field that we
think we see may not in fact be where most of the action is taking place. In
fact not all of the fields live on the same space so when we see waves and
particles dancing around they may have separate origins in each of the two
components of the observers. What I hope to do after this is to gracefully and
gradually develop the theory under my leadership. Now why do I say that? There
is a belief in physics and in most fields that the field should behave in a
communal fashion and that people should put forward their ideas and other
people should joyously build upon them and that the community should be allowed
to name the various accomplishments for whoever they say accomplish those
things. There's not a way in there's not a way in hell that I'm letting that
happen. My experience with this community is that it simply can't be trusted to
behave equitably given the fact that it is so resource starved and constrained
people simply do not have the freedom to be generous kind and accurate as to who
did what. Furthermore there is an incredible premium on cherry topping
that is who finished something off is considered bizarrely much more
important than who found something to begin with. Imagine you located an
island and you name the island after the first person who could plant the flag on
the top of the highest peak. This is patently offensive and ridiculous.
There's a story years ago about how Hilbert almost scooped Einstein by giving
the Hilbert action from which Einstein's equations could be recovered. Really? Not
a chance. So if Hilbert came up with the Hilbert action and recovered Einstein's
equations so what? I mean the real theory actually takes place in Einstein and
Grossman before Albert Einstein even works out a lot of the flaws in the
original theory. It's about the ideas it's not about the formulas and it's not
about racing to the final form. Now I know that the community won't agree with
that but think about this. What I'm doing is taking an incredible risk. I'm
addressing you here on April Fool's Day and I'm saying that if there is a fool
it is certainly me because I have sat on this theory for almost 40 years. Now I've
never known is it true is it false it's impossible to tell when you're only
talking to yourself but in this situation what I've done is is I've taken a
tremendous amount of risk and now I'm trying to share it with you. Hopefully I
know that well Newton did his greatest work when he was sheltering
sheltering from a great plague in England and I would like to think that
perhaps whether or not this is correct simply the act of somebody trying
earnestly to share hope and some path forward would be uplifting. Now under the
worst circumstances if this doesn't work what do I think? This is a question I'm
asked frequently and there are two things that I'll say. Many years ago around 1987
I put forward some equations that I thought might become my thesis at the
Harvard Department of Mathematics and they were disallowed for a variety of
reasons. Those equations were later discovered in I believe 1994 and I sat
in a lecture in which I saw these equations go up on a board at the very
end at MIT and I looked at those equations and I said huh those are the
exact equations I was told could never work. Why is the leading physicist in the
world placing them on the board and saying that these are the equations from
which all of something called Donlinson theory can be derived? What I'm giving you
at least at a minimum had the ability years earlier to provide those
equations from a different source. There's something called cyber-witten
theory which I have no claim on but the actual equations that are called the
cyber-witten equations came originally as an outgrowth from investigations of
this theory. So at a bare minimum the cyber-witten revolution should have
happened at Harvard rather than Princeton and it should have been
recognized that this theory was capable of at least at a minimum giving birth
to that as a side project. The other thing that I think is incredibly
important is is that we've never seen how a universe that looks like ours
could possibly emerge from almost no assumptions whatsoever and I believe
that even if this theory were to turn out to be wrong which I don't think is
likely, I believe that it would give us something to go on. We would at least
have a first candidate of how a hopeful theory of everything would look and how
it would go wrong. So under any circumstance I think that I'm going to be
fine if the theory doesn't work out. I will have at least taken my shot on goal
and I think that that's probably more than almost anyone can ask from a life
to attempt to make contact with the deepest question that we've ever had
which is what is this place and what brought it into being. Lastly I want to
just talk about a personal aspect of this which is what does it mean to come to an
end? Whether or not this theory in fact does what I claim I think it does. I
don't know but I do know that sooner or later in the era of intercontinental
land exploration someone found the last land mass and that must have been a
very strange moment when there was nothing left to do. I think whether or not
this theory in fact accomplishes that is one question but we all have to plan
for what it is that we think will happen when man at last learns his own source
code. In fact this was the last edge question that I answered for John
Brockman which is does something unprecedented happen when man at last
learns his own source code? I don't know the answer to this but I want to return
to the same spirit that I started this when I was 18 or 19 which is that of
joyous investigation of brave open-hearted undertakings and I also
want to bring back a different style of scientific investigation. There has been
far too much communalism. In fact there is a belief that there are no lone
researchers and that everything is produced by a community and pardon my
French but this is absolute horseshit. I have been so long alone with these
principles equations and ideas that I don't even know what my adult life will
look like once I discord them and I begin to talk about them with the
community at large. I've talked to many theoretical physicists who've taken some
interest in them but I've never put out enough to absolutely ensure that people
are seeing what it is that I'm seeing. So whether or not the April Fool's joke is
on me I cannot tell you but I can promise you that I'm not trying to play
one on you. What I hope to show you is a lecture that was the first of three
versions of this lecture that were delivered in Oxford over the course of
a week and one of the things that has held me back is that I have a great
number of people who I have to thank for effectively being my underground
railroad when my career got into serious trouble to make sure who made sure that
I always had an opportunity to fight another day and some of the most
important of those people one of whom occurs on this video is Marcus DeSotois
and Marcus I just wanted to say thank you for your bravery your courage your
friendship and your encouragement I know I've been absolutely impossible to you
I've made you wait for this and I just want to say how much I love you. I also
want to thank Isidore Singer for effectively saving me from not getting a
PhD by I think putting pressure on the Harvard Department and for coming to my
assistance making sure that I got a postdoc at MIT despite not having any
publications at all. I'd like to thank Raoul Botte who's no longer with us who I
should have invited to my wedding I was very angry at him but I didn't realize
that he was saving me in a very difficult situation against a department that
probably just wanted to see me gone. I'd like to thank Peter Thiel one of my
closest friends who's like a brother to me for allowing me these seven years
since this lecture to lick my wounds to get strong to have a 401k to buy a
house and to begin coming back to regular society after a very difficult
and strained career. I'd like to thank Abdel Abdel Ali and Michael Grossberg
the two greatest best friends from college a guy could have. I'd like to thank my grandfather
Harry Rubin who believed in things that couldn't possibly be true and made some
of them happen. I'd like to thank my parents Karen and Les Weinstein for all the good
things that they did. I'd like to thank my brother Brett Weinstein and his
family Heather and the kids for sticking by me and I'd like to thank my in-laws in Bombay
India I hope you guys are well and lastly I would very much like to thank my wife and my two kids
for putting up with a lot of lost weekends a lot of lost vacations and believing that just maybe
there was something to this and sticking by me all these years so I hope everybody really
enjoys this it may not be comprehensible and after this video finishes I'll do a short
presentation of some of the constructions that took place not all of the equations and things
which I think some of them were sort of botched on the board because I became disoriented the night
before and rearranged things in a way that probably wasn't optimal but I'll attempt to
clarify these things going forward and to begin to present the theory as I see whether or not I
can bring myself to once again work on it somewhat close to full time as a 54 year old father of two
so sit back relax and coming up next is the first of my three lectures at Oxford University
on Geometric Unity be well
well welcome to this special Simone lecture and my name is Mark Stisotoy I'm a professor of mathematics
here and the Simone professor for the public understanding of science and Charles Simone
prepared a manifesto when he endowed this chair to guide the holder of the professorship in their
mission and I'd like to read one part of that manifesto to you it said scientific speculation
when so labelled and when the concept of speculation and its place in the scientific method has been
made clear to the audience can be very exciting it is a very effective communication tool and it is
by no means discouraged and it is in the spirit of this part of my mission as a Simone professor
that I would like to introduce today's Simone special lecture I first met Eric Weinstein when
we were both postdocs at the Hebrew University just over 20 years ago and I had the feeling then
that he was working on something big but it wasn't until two years ago that Eric met me in a bar in
New York and we began he began to explain the mathematics that he'd been working on in private
for the last 20 years as he took me through the equations he had been formulating I began to see
emerging before my eyes potential answers to many of the major problems in physics it was an
extremely exciting daring proposal and also mathematically so natural that it started to
work its magic on me over the last two years I have had the privilege of being taken through the
twists and turns of Eric's ideas after our postdocs in Israel while I went the academic route
getting my professorship here in Oxford Eric went a more independent route working in economics
government and finance so he comes here today as something of an insider and an outsider a difficult
place from which to propose bold ideas but having spent time seeing how powerful these ideas appear
to be I felt it that it was time that Eric shared his ideas more widely as I believe his perspective
could give the scientific community a new story to explain some of the big questions on the scientific
books I'm therefore very happy to provide a platform here in Oxford for Eric to share his ideas
on a new theory he calls geometric unity the lecture will be approximately 70 minutes after
which we will have a period to ask questions Eric
so it's well it's a great pleasure to be here in Oxford for those of you who are not aware
it is possible that no other university in the world has kept so tightly and kept the faith for
so long with Einstein's great vision of a final theory for physics as a theory of pure geometry
a sort of elegance and simplicity of the highest order and the names that are associated with Oxford
that weigh heavy on me are Atia Penrose Siegel Woodhouse Hitchin it's a very long list of people
who even when fashion did not hold those ideas in favor always kept the faith that there was much
to be learned from the geometric perspective on physics of course unified field theory in some
sense acquired a stigma with Einstein's failure to find it and the sense that even someone like
Einstein being tempted by the siren song of geometry might lose their footing and go astray
and in the years since we've had a replacement theory which is that what is really calling
our generations is the quest to quantize general relativity and gravity and I'd like to to go
back to the sort of earlier perspective that there is no evidence to date in my mind that
we are being called to quantize general relativity directly in fact there's been more effort spent
on that quest without very tangible results than Einstein spent as one man searching for years
for unified field theory so we have to in some sense begin to undo some of what we think we know
in order to truly reconsider and allow me to put some of these ideas before you today
Marcus asked me to begin presenting these ideas here and hopefully this is a first opportunity
but if the ideas are not good then lighting on the aisles will lead you to safety and your exits
may be behind you but in the event of a good flight hopefully this will begin a conversation
rather than end one I feel in some sense that I'm presenting the works of another man a younger man
someone who came of age right in the middle of the great string theory boom with the anomaly
cancellation in 1984 and I look at this work and I see a young person struggling with the idea why
can't I see that string theory is going to answer all of these questions over the next 10 years as
we were told at the time and making a very dangerous decision which was I think I'm not
going to follow that particular path and I'm going to follow another and it's not clear where this
path is going to lead us but we're going to explore it today and see as best we can so in some sense
I've been able to polish some of that young man's work but I'm also struggling to reconstruct it
because as someone spending full time on that theory he knew a lot of things that I no longer know
so with that as a beginning I'm just going to say one disclaimer which is that this is not a
usual talk and whatever contract a speaker usually has with the audience right now we're
going to break that contract this is a this is a talk about ideas and some of these ideas are bold
some of them may offend some people because there's a sense that you don't have a right to be
considering those ideas but I go back to the admonition of Jim Watson that said if you're going
to try to make progress big progress you are by definition unqualified to be doing whatever it is
that you're doing so in that spirit let us begin what is physics to physicists today how do they
see it different from the way in which we might imagine the layperson sees physics ed witton
was asked this question in a talk he gave on physics and geometry many years ago and
he pointed us to three fundamental insights which were his big three insights in physics
and they correspond to the three great equations so the first one is is that somehow physics takes
place in an arena and that arena is a manifold x together with some kind of semi romanian
metric structure something that allows us to take length and angle so that we can perform
measurements at every point in this spacetime or higher dimensional structure leaving us a
little bit of head room the equation most associated with this is the einstein field equation
so it says
that a piece of the riemann curvature tensor the ritchie tensor minus an even smaller piece the
scalar curvature multiplied by the metric is equal or plus the cosmological constant
is equal to some amount of matter and energy the stress energy tensor so it's intrinsically a
curvature equation the second fundamental insight i'm going to begin to start drawing pictures here
as well so if this is the spacetime manifold the arena the second one concerns symmetry groups
which cannot necessarily be deduced from any structure inside of the arena they are additional
data that come to us out of the blue without explanation and these symmetries form a non-abelian
group which is currently
su3 color cross su2 weak isospin cross u1 weak hypercharge which breaks down to su3
cross u1 where the broken u1 is the electromagnetic symmetry
this equation is also a curvature equation the corresponding equation and it says that this
time the curvature of an auxiliary structure known as a gauge potential
when differentiated in a particular way is equal again
to the amount of stuff in the system that is not directly involved in the left hand side of the
equation so it has many similarities to the above equation both involve curvature one involves a
projection or a series of projections the other involves a differential operator
the third point
surrounds the matter in the system
and here we have a Dirac equation again coupled to a connection
but one of the great insights is that the reason for the lightness of matter in the
natural mass scale of physics has to do with the fact that this psi really should have two
components and the differential operator should map to one component on the other side of the
equation but the mass operator should map to another and so if one of the components is missing if
the equation is intrinsically lopsided chiral asymmetric then the mass term and the differential
term have difficulty interacting which is sort of overcompensating for the mass scale of the
universe so you get to a point where you actually have to define a massless equation but then just
like overshooting a putt it's easier to knock it back by putting in a Higgs field in order to
generate an as-if fundamental mass through the Yukawa couplings
some matter is asymmetric
and therefore light
and then interestingly he went on to say one more thing he said of course these three central
observations must be supplemented with the idea that this all takes place
treated in quantum mechanical fashion or quantum field theorem
so it's a bit of an aftermarket modification rather than in his opinion at the time one of the
core insights
I actually think that that's in some sense about right now one of my differences with
with the community in some sense is that I question whether the quantum isn't in good enough
shape that we don't know whether we have a serious quantum mechanical problem or not we
know that we have a quantum mechanical problem a quantum field theoretic problem relative to the
current formulations of these theories but we know that in some other cases the quantum
becomes incredibly natural sometimes sort of almost magically natural and we don't know whether the
true theories that we will need to be generalizing in some sense have beautiful quantum mechanical
treatments whereas the effective theories that we're dealing with now may not survive the quantization
so what I want to do
is I want to imagine a different sort of incompatibility
so let's take our great three theories and just visually treat them as the vertices of a triangle
so I'm going to put general relativity in Einstein's formulation
and I'm going to put the probably won't write this again Yang Mills Maxwell Anderson Higgs
theory
over here and I'm going to write the Dirac theory
what I want to explore is the incompatibility is not at the quantum level
but the geometric input all three of these are geometric theories and the question is
what are the compatibilities or incompatibilities at the level of geometry before the theory is
treated quantum mechanically well in the case of Einstein's general relativity
we can rewrite the Einstein theory by saying that there's a projection map due to Einstein
of a curvature tensor where I'm going to write that curvature tensor as I would in the Yang Mills
theory that should be an LC for Levy Chavita so the Einstein projection of the curvature
tensor of the Levy Chavita connection of the metric on this side and on this side
I'm going to write down this differential operator the adjoint of the exterior derivative
coupled to a connection
and you begin to see that we're missing an opportunity potentially what if the FAs
were the same in both contexts then you're applying two separate operators one zeroth order
and destructive in the sense that it doesn't see the entire curvature tensor the other inclusive
but a first order and so the question is is there any opportunity to do anything that combines
these two but the problem is is that the hallmark of the Yang Mills theory is the freedom to choose
the data the internal quantum numbers that give all the particles their personalities beyond
the mass and the spin
addition to all of that freedom is some means of taking away some of the redundancy that comes
with that freedom which is the action of the gauge group now we can allow the gauge group
of symmetries to act on both sides of the equation but the key problem
is is that
if I act on connections on the right
and then take the Einstein projection this is not equal
to first taking the projection
and then conjugating with the gauge action
so the problem is is that the projection is based on the fact that you have a relationship between
the intrinsic geometry if this is an ad-valued two form the two form portion of this
and the adjoint portion of this are both associated to the structure group of the tangent bundle
but the gauge rotation is only acting on one of the two factors yet the projection is making
use of both of them so there is a fundamental incompatibility and the claim that Einstein's
theory is a gauge theory relies more on analogy than an exact mapping between the two theories
what about the incompatibilities between the Einstein theory of general relativity and the
Dirac theory of matter I was very struck that if we're going to try to quantize gravity and we
associate gravity with the spin to field g mu nu we actually have a pretty serious problem
which is if you think about spinners electrons quarks as being waves in a medium
and you think about photons as being waves in a different medium
photons medium does not depend on the existence of a metric
one forms are defined whether or not a metric is present yet spinners are not
so if we are going to take the spin to g mu nu field to be quantum mechanical if it blinks out
and does whatever the quantum does between observations in the case of the photon it's
saying that the waves may blink out but the ocean need not blink out in the case of the Dirac theory
it is the ocean the medium in which the waves live that becomes uncertain itself so even if
you're comfortable with the quantum to me this becomes a bridge too far so the question is
how do we liberate the definition
how do we get the metric out from its responsibilities it's been assigned far too many
responsibilities it's responsible for a volume form for differential operators it's responsible
for measurement it's responsible for being a dynamical field part of the field content of the
system lastly we have the compatibilities between yang mills and in the dirac theory
these may be the most mild of the various incompatibilities but it is an incompatibility
of naturality where the dirac field einstein's field and the connection fields are all
geometrically well motivated we push a lot of the artificiality that we do not understand
into the potential for the scalar field that gives everything its mass so we tend to treat
it as something of a mysterious fudge factor so the question is if we have a higgs field
why is it here and why is it geometric
it has long been the most artificial sector of our models
the proposal that i want to put to you today is that one of the reasons that we may be having
trouble with unification is that the duty our duty may be to generalize all three vertices
before we can make progress that's daunting because in each case it would appear that we
can make an argument that this that and the other vertex are the simplest possible theories
that could live at that vertex we know for example the dirac operator is the most fundamental of
all the elliptic operators in euclidean signature generating all of the tia singer theory we know
that einstein's theory is in some sense a unique spin to massless field capable of communicating
gravity which can be arrived at from field theoretic rather than geometric considerations
in the yang mills case it can be argued that the yang mills theory is the simplest theory that can
possibly result where we're taking the simplest lagrangian in the einstein case looking only at
the scalar curvature in the yang mills case we have no substructure and so we're doing the most
simple minded thing we can do by taking the norm square of the curvature and saying whatever the
field strength is let's measure that size so if each one of these is simplest possible doesn't
occum's razor tell us that if we wish to remain in geometric field theory that we've already reached
bottom and what we're being asked to do is to abandon this as merely an effective theory
that's possible and i would say that that in some sense represents a lot of conventional wisdom
but there are other possibilities there are other possibilities that while each of these may be
simplest in its category they are not simplest in their interaction
for example we know that dirac famously took the square root of the client gordon equation
to achieve the dirac equation he actually took two square roots one of the differential operator
and another of the algebra on which it acts but could not could we not do the same thing by
reinterpreting what we saw in donaldson theory in chern simons theory and finding that there are
first order equations that imply second order equations that are non-linear and in the curvature
so let's imagine the following we replace the standard model
with a true second order theory we imagine that general relativity is replaced by a
true first order theory and then we find that the true second order theory admits of a square root
and can be linked with the true first order theory this would be a program for some kind of
unification of dirac's type but in the force sector the question is does this really make any
sense are there any possibilities to do any such thing
so what i'd like to do is i'd like to talk a little bit about what the geometric unity proposal is
so we have a division into intrinsic theories and auxiliary theories
between physics and mathematics more specifically geometry an intrinsic physical theory would be
general relativity an auxiliary physical theory would be the gang mills theory with the freedom
to choose internal quantum numbers at the mathematical level an intrinsic theory would be
let's be a little fastidious
the older semi-romanian geometry the study of manifolds with length and angle
but auxiliary geometry is really what's taken off of late since the revolution partially began
at oxford when his singer brought insights from stony brook to the uk and so we're going to call
this fiber bundle theory or modern gauge theory geometric unity is the search for some way to
break down the walls between these four boxes what's natural to one theory is unnatural to another
semi-romanian geometry is dominated by these projection operators as well as the ability
to use the levy-chavita connection now some aspects of this are less explored torsion
tensors are definable in semi-romanian geometry but they are not used to the extent that you might
imagine in the case of fiber bundle theory the discovery of physicists that the gauge group
was fantastically important came as something of a shock to the mathematicians who had missed that
structure and have since exploited it to great effect so what we'd like to do is we'd like to
come up with some theory that is intrinsic but allows us to play some of the games that exist
in other boxes how can we fit how can we try to have our cake eat it and use all the full suite
of techniques that are available to us so our perspective is is that it is the quantum that
may be the comparatively easy part and that the unification of the geometry which is not occurred
may be what we're being asked to do so let's try to figure out what would a final theory even look
like when i was a bit younger i remember reading this question of einstein which he said i'm not
really interested in some of the details of physics what really concerns me is whether the creator
had any choice in how the world was constructed and some people may have read that as a philosophical
statement but i took that as an actual call for a research program so i'd like to describe that
research program and try to unpack what i think he was saying we talk a lot about unification but
we hardly ever actually imagine if we had a unified theory what would it look like
let us imagine that we cannot figure out the puzzle of why is there something rather than
nothing but if we do have a something that that something has as little structure as possible
but still invites us to work mathematically so to me the two great theories that we have
mathematically and in physics are calculus and linear algebra if we have calculus and linear
algebra i'm gonna imagine that we have some manifold at least one of dimension four but
it's not a spacetime it doesn't have a metric it's not broken down into two different kinds of
coordinates which then have some bleed into each other but still maintains a distinction
it's just some sort of flabby proto spacetime and in the end it's got to fill up with stuff
and give us some kind of an equation so let me write an equation
so
i have in mind differential operators parameterized by some fields omega
which when composed are not of second order if these are first order operators but of
zero with order and some sort of further differential operator
saying that whatever those two operators are in composition is in some sense harmonic
is such a program even possible so if the universe is in fact capable of being the
fire that lights itself is it capable of managing its own flame as well and closing up
what i'd like to do is to set ourselves an almost impossible task which is to begin with this little
data in a sandbox to use the computer science concept so if here's physical reality
standard physics
is over here we're going to start with the sandbox
and all we're going to put in it is x4
and we're going to set ourselves a straight jacketed task of seeing how close we can come
to dragging out a model that looks like the natural world that follows this trajectory
while it may appear that that is not a particularly smart thing to do
i would like to think that we could agree that it is quite possible
that if that were to be the case we might say that this is what einstein meant by a creator
which was his anthropomorphic concept for necessity and elegance and design having no choice
in the making of the world so with that let us begin
to think about what we mean today by geometric unity
g u comes in four flavors but i'm only getting one shot to do this so i'm going to do the most
exciting of them to me there's a completely exogenous flavor
and what i'm going to do is i'm going to take the concept of observation
and i'm going to break the world into two pieces a place where we do our observation
in a place where most of the activity takes place and i'm going to try to do this without loss of
generality so in this case we have x4 and it can map into some other space and we're going to call
this an observer's the idea of an observer's is a bit like a stadium you have a playing field and
you have stands they aren't distinct entities they're coupled and so fundamentally we're going
to replace one space with two exogenous model simply means that u is unrestricted although
larger than x4 so any manifold of four dimension higher that is capable of admitting x4 as an
immersion the next model we have is the bundle theoretic in which case u sits over x as a fiber
bundle the most exciting which is the one we'll deal with today is the endogenous model
where x4 actually grows
the space u where the activity takes place so we talk about extra dimensions but these are in
some sense not extra dimensions they're implicit dimensions within x4 and last to proceed without
loss of generality we have the tautological model in that case x4 equals u and the immersion is the
identity and without loss of generality we simply play our games on one space okay
now we need rules the rules are sorry okay feedback no choice of fundamental metric
so we imagine that einstein was presented with a fork in the road and it's always disturbing
not to follow einstein's path but we're in fact going to turn einstein's game on its head and see
if we can get anywhere with that right it's also a possibility that because einstein's theory is so
perfect that if there's anything wrong with it it's very hard to unthink it because everything
is built on top of it so let's make no choice of a fundamental metric and in fact let's go more
ambitious and let's say we're going to reverse the logic of einstein einstein the metric is
fundamental but the levy-chavita connection from which we deduce the curvature is emergent
all right so the fundamental theorem of romanian geometry is that every connection
causes every metric causes a connection to emerge and then the curvature is built on the connection
we turn this around we imagine we're looking for a connection and we wish it to build a metric
because connections are amenable to quantization in a way that metrics are not
the next point is that we always want to have a plan to return to finite dimensions
without losing sight of the quantum and lastly we want to liberate matter from its dependence
on the metric for its very existence so we now need to build fermions onto our four
dimensional manifold in some way without ever choosing a metric if we're even to have any hope
of playing a game involving matter starting from this perspective of no information other
than the most bare information let's get started we take x4 we need metrics we have none we're
not allowed to choose one so we do the standard trick is we choose them all
so we allow u14 to equal the space of metrics on x4 point wise therefore if we propagate on top
of this let me call this the projection operator if we propagate on u14 we are in some sense
following a Feynman-like idea of propagating over the space of all metrics but not at a field level
at a point wise tensorial level is there a metric on u14 well we both want one and
don't want one if we had a metric from the space of all metrics we could define fermions
but we would also lock out any ability to do dynamics we want some choice over what this
metric is but we don't want full choice because we want enough to be able to define the matter
fields to begin with it turns out that if this is x4 and this is this particular endogenous
choice of u14 we have a 10-dimensional metric along the fibers so we have a g10 mu nu further
for every point in the fibers we get a metric downstairs on the base space
so if we pull back the cotangent bundle
we get a metric g4 mu nu on pi star of the cotangent bundle of x
we now define the chimeric bundle right and the chimeric bundle is this direct sum of the vertical
tangent bundle along the fibers with the pullback which we're going to call the horizontal bundle
from the base space so the chimeric bundle
is going to be the vertical tangent space of 10 dimensions to u direct sum
the four-dimensional cotangent space which we're going to call horizontal to u
and the great thing about the chimeric bundle is that it has an a priori metric
it's got a metric on the four metric on the 10 we can always decide that the two of them are
naturally perpendicular to each other furthermore it is almost canonically isomorphic to the tangent
bundle or the cotangent bundle because we either have four out of 14 or 10 out of 14 dimensions
on the nose so the question is what are we missing and the answer is that we're missing exactly the
data of a connection so this bundle chimeric c we have c is equal to the tangent bundle of u
up to a choice of a connection theta and this is exactly what we wanted we have a situation
where we have some field on the manifold x in the form of a connection which is amenable more
friendly to quantization which is now determining a metric turning around the levy chevita game
and the only problem is is that we've had to buy ourselves into a different space than the one we
thought we wanted to work on but now as theta changes the fermions are defined on the chimeric
bundle and it's the isomorphism from the chimeric bundle to the tangent bundle of the space u which
is varying which means that the fermions no longer depend on the metric they no longer depend on the
theta connection they are there if things go quantum mechanical and we've achieved our objective
of putting the matter fields and the spin one fields on something of the same footing
but and i want to emphasize this one thing most of us we think a lot about final theories
and about unification but until you actually start daring to try to do it you don't realize
what the process of it feels like now try to imagine conducting your life where you have no
children let's say and no philanthropic urges what you want to do is you want to use all of your
money for yourself and die penniless right like a perfect finish assuming that that's what you
wanted to do it would be pretty nerve-wracking at the end right how many days left do i have how
many dollars left i have this is the process of unification in physics you start giving away
all of your most valuable possessions and you don't know whether you've given them away too early
whether you've husband them too long and so in this process what we've just done is we've started
to paint ourselves into a corner we got something we wanted but we've given away freedom we're now
dealing with a 14-dimensional world so let me just sum this up by saying
between fundamental and emergent
standard model and g r
let's do g r fundamental is the metric
emergent is the connection
here in g u it is the connection that's fundamental in the metric that's emergent
in the next unit of g u so this is sort of the first unit of g u there any quick questions
having to do with confusion or may i proceed to the next unit
okay the next unit of g u is the unified field content what does it mean for our fields to
become unified there are in fact only at this moment two fields that know about x
theta which is the connection that we've just talked about and a section sigma
that takes us back
so that we can communicate back and forth between u and x
we now need field content that only knows about u which now has a metric depending on theta
okay
a particular member of the audience is a hedge fund manager who taught me that there is something
of a universal trade and a universal trade has four components you have to have a view
you have to have a trade expression you have to be able to calculate your cost of carry
and you need a catalyst our view is going to be that somebody doesn't understand what trade is
possible and we're going to make a trade that looks like one of the worst trades of all time
and hopefully if we if we have enough conviction we're going to have a catalyst to show that we
actually got the better part of the deal what is that trade what is it that we think has been blocking
progress
in gr and romanian geometry as we've said we have the projection operators and we also have the
levy-chavita connection
in the auxiliary theory
we have freedom to choose our field content and we have the ability to get rid of much excess
through the symmetries of the gauge group
we are going to take particle theory we're going to make a bad trade or what appears to be a bad
trade which is that we are going to give away the freedom to choose our field content which
is already extremely as i think i said in the abstract baroque with all of the different
particle properties and we're going to lose the ability to use the gauge group because we're going
to trade it all
you have the family cow
and you have some magic beans
so it's now time to trade the family cow for the magic beans and bring them home
and see whether or not we got the better of the deal
okay
what is it that we get for the levy-chavita connection
well not much one thing we get is that normally the space of connections is an affine space not a
vector space but an affine space almost a vector space a vector space up to a choice of
origin but with the levy-chavita connection rather than having an infinite plane with an
ability to take differences but no real ability to have a group structure you pick out one point
which then becomes the origin that means that any connection a has a torsion tensor a which is equal
to the connection minus the levy-chavita connection so we get a tensor that we don't usually have
gauge potentials are not usually well defined they're only defined up to a choice of gauge
so that's one of the things we get for our levy-chavita connection but because the gauge
group is going to go missing this has terrible properties from with respect to the gauge group
it almost looks like a representation but in fact if we let the gauge group act there's going to be
an affine shift furthermore as we've said before the ability to use projection operators
together with the gauge group is frustrated by virtue of the fact that these two things do not
commute with each other so now the question is how are we going to prove that we're actually making a
good trade okay first thing we need to do is is that we still have the right to choose intrinsic
field content we have an intrinsic field theory so if you consider the structure bundle of the
spinners right we built the chimeric bundle so we can define Dirac spinners on the chimeric
bundle if we're in Euclidean signature a 14-dimensional manifold has Dirac spinners
of dimension two to the dimension of the space divided by two right so two to the 14 over two
two to the seventh is 128 so we have a map into a structure group of U128
at least in Euclidean signature we can get to the mixed signatures later
from that we can form the associated bundle
and sections of this bundle
are either depending upon how you want to think about it the gauge group H
or C a space of sigma fields
nonlinear
there's no reason that we can't choose this as field content again we're being led by the nose
like a bull if we want to make use of the symmetries of the theory we have to promote
some symmetry to being part of the theory and we have to let it be subjected to dynamical laws
we're going to lose control over it but we're not dead yet right we're fighting for our life to make
sure that this trade has some hope so potentially by including symmetries as field content we will
have some opportunity to make use of the projection so for those of you who
so when I was thinking about this I used to be amazed by ships and bottles and I must confess
that I never figured out what the trick was for ships and bottles but once I saw it I remembered
thinking that's really clever so if you've never seen it you have a ship which is like a curvature
tensor and imagine that the mast is is the Ricci curvature if you just try to shove it into the
bottle you're undoubtedly going to snap the mast so you imagine that you've transformed your gauge
fields you've kept track of where the Ricci curvature was you try to push it from one space
like ad-valued two forms into another space like ad-valued one forms where connections live
that's not a good idea instead what we do is the following imagine that you're carrying around group
theoretic information and what you do is you do a transformation based on the group theory
so you lower the mast you push it through the neck having some string attached to the mast
and then you undo the transformation on the other side
this is exactly what we're going to hope is going to save us
in this bad trade that we've made like because we're going to add field content that has the
ability to lower the mass and bring the mast back up we're going to hope to have a theory which is
going to create a commutative situation but then once we've had this idea we start to get a little
bolder let's think about unified content we know that we want a space of connections a
for our field theory but we know because we have a levy-chivita connection that this is going to be
equal on the nose to ad-valued one forms as a vector space the gauge group represents an ad-valued
one forms so if we also have the gauge group but we think of that instead as a space of sigma fields
what if we take the semi-direct product at a group theoretic level between the two and call this
our group of interest well by analogy we've always had a problem with the Poincare group being too
intrinsically tied to rigid flat minkowski space what if we wanted to do quantum field theory
in some situation which was more amenable to a curved space situation it's possible that we
should be basing it around something more akin to the gauge group and in this case we're mimicking
the construction work see here would be analogous to the Lorenz group fixing a point in in minkowski
space and ad-valued one forms would be analogous to the four momentums we take in the semi-direct
product to create the inhomogeneous Lorenz group otherwise known as the Poincare group or rather
its double cover to allow spin so we're going to call this the inhomogeneous gauge group
or Iggy and this is going to be a really interesting space because it has a couple
of properties one is it has a very interesting subgroup now of course h includes into g by
just including onto the first factor but in fact there's a more interesting homomorphism
brought to you by the Levy-Civita connection so this magic beam trade is going to start to
enter more and more into our consciousness if I take an element h and I map that in the obvious
way into the first factor but I map it onto the more cartain form I think that's what I
wish I remembered more of the stuff into the second factor it turns out that this is actually a
group homomorphism and so we have a non-trivial embedding which is in some sense diagonal between
the two factors that subgroup we are going to refer to as the tilted gauge group and now
our field content at least in the bosonic sector is going to be a group manifold an infinite
dimensional function space league group but a group nonetheless and we can now look at g mod
the tilted gauge group and if we have any interesting representation of h we can form
homogeneous vector bundles and work with induced representations and that's what the fermions
are going to be so the fermions in our theories are going to be h modules
and the idea is that we're going to work with vector bundles curly e of the form
in homogeneous gauge group
product it over the tilted gauge group
now just as in the finite dimensional case we have a linear and a non-linear component
right because at a topological level this is just a Cartian Cartesian product so if we wish to take
products of fermions of spin orial fields we have a place to accept them we can't figure out
necessarily how to map them into the non-linear sector but we don't want to so just the way when
we look at supersymmetry we can take products of the spin one-half fields and map them into the
linear sector we can do the same thing here so what we're talking about is something like
a supersymmetric extension of the inhomogeneous gauge group analogous to supersymmetric extensions
of the double cover of the inhomogeneous Lorentz or Poincare group
further because this construction is at the level of groups we've left a slot on the left hand side
on which to act so for example if we want to take regular representations on the group
we can act by the group g on the left hand side because we're allowing the tilted gauge group
to act on the right hand side so it's perfectly built for representation theory and if you think
back to Wigner's classification and the concept that a particle should correspond to an irreducible
representation of the inhomogeneous gauge group uh inhomogeneous Lorentz group we may be able to
play the same games here up to the issue of infinite dimensionality so right now our field
content is looking pretty good it's looking unified in the sense that it has an algebraic
structure that is not usually enjoyed by field content and the field content from different
sectors can interact and know about each other provided we can drag something of this out of
this with meaning now what would it mean to be able to use a gauge group in an intrinsic theory
like this we would be talking about something like an action let's say a first order action
and it would take the group g let's say to the real numbers
invariant not under the full group but under the tilted gauge subgroup
and now the question is do we have any such actions that are particularly nice and could
we recognize them the way Einstein did by trying to write down not the action and Hilbert was the
first one to write that down but you know I always feel defensive uh because I think Einstein and
Grossman did so much more to begin the theory and that the Lagrangian that got written down
was really just an inevitability so just humor me for this talk and let me call it the Einstein
Grossman Lagrangian uh Hilbert certainly done fantastic things and has a lot of credit elsewhere
and he did do it first but here what we we had was that Einstein thought in terms of the differential
of the action not the action itself so what we're looking for is equations of motion
or some field alpha where alpha belongs to the one forms on the group
now in this section of g u
unified field content is only one part of it but what we really want
is unified field content plus a toolkit
so we've restricted ourselves to one gauge group this big unitary group on the spinners
using whatever sort of inner product naturally exists on the spinners and not spinners value
in an auxiliary structure but intrinsic spinners
the toolkit that we have
is that the adjoint bundle
looks like the Clifford algebra
at the level of vector space
which is just looking like the exterior algebra on the chimeric bundle
that means that it's graded by degrees chimeric bundle has dimension 14 so there's a zero part
or one part or two part all the way up to 14 plus we have forms in the manifold and so the question
is if I want to look at omega i valued in the adjoint bundle there's going to be some element
phi i
which is pure trace
right because it's the same representations appearing where in the usually auxiliary directions as well
as the geometric directions so we get an entire suite of invariants together with trivially
associated invariants that come from using the hodge star operator on the form so I'm just going
to call them for completeness I'm not going to deal with them
now this is a tremendous amount of freedom that we've just gained normally we keep losing
freedom but this is the first time we actually begin to see that we have a lot of freedom and
we're going to actually retain some of this freedom through the to the end of the talk
but the idea being that I can now start to define operators
which correspond to the ship in the bottle problem I can take field content epsilon and pi
where epsilon where these are elements of the inhomogeneous gauge group in other words epsilon
is a is a gauge transformation and pi is an is a gauge potential
and I can start to define operators
so
in this case
if I have a phi which is one of these invariants in the form piece I can either take a contraction
or I can take a wedge product in the lee algebra piece I can either take a lee product
or because I'm looking at the unitary group there's a second possibility which is I can
multiply everything by i and go from skew her mission to her mission and take a Jordan product
using anti commutators rather than commutators so I actually have a fair amount of freedom
and I'm going to use a magic bracket notation which in whatever situation I'm looking for knows
what it wants to be is does it want to do contraction does it want to do wedge product
lee product jordan product but the point is I now have a suite of ways of moving forms around
so for example I can define a shiav operator
that takes i forms valued in the adjoint bundle
to much higher degree forms valued in the adjoint bundle
so for this in this case for example it would take a two form
to a d minus three plus two or a d minus one form so curvature is an ad valued two form
and if I had such a shiav operator
it would take ad value two forms to ad value d minus one forms which is exactly the right
space to be an alpha coming from the derivative of an action this is exactly what einstein was
doing he took the curvature which was large and he bent it back and he he sheared off the vial
curvature and they took that part and he pushed it back along the space of metrics to give us
something which we nowadays call richie flow an ability for the curvature to direct us to the
next structure well we're doing the same thing here we're taking the curvature and we can now
push it back onto the space of connections
three plus i
so in this case the idea is is that we've actually got something for our magic beans
we have an ability now to get equations of motion which go along the group in some sense
it's as if it was a gradient vector field except we're using forms rather than vectors
but now what are the transformation properties well because the curvature
so you have shiav
because the curvature of a connection hit by a gauge transformation is equal on the nose
to the adjoint action on the le algebra of the curvature
we know that if we have two possible actions of conjugation under a bracket and the bracket
respects the action of the gauge group we know that this is going to be well preserved in other
words we're going to get a form that is gauge invariant relative to the tilted gauge group
and so as a result we now have the possibility for equations of motion which are well defined
even though they involve projection operators because we've built the symmetries into the
theory and we're working on a group manifold to begin with
what about the torsion can we rescue the torsion here again we have good news
the torsion is problematic but if i look at a different field which i'm going to call
the augmented torsion and i define it to be the regular torsion which would be pi
minus this expression
this turns out to be beautifully invariant again so neither this term nor this term is gauge
invariant but they fail to be gauge invariant in exactly the same way so an important principle
of life which i took too long to realize is that if you have one disease you're in real trouble
but if you have two diseases you always have the possibility of having one disease kill the
other disease this is true in renormalization theory it's true in black shoals theory it's
true all over the place so what we have here is we've got more diseases into the theory but
an even number of diseases allow us to have no disease at all so now we have two great tensors
we've got one tensor coming from the curvature and the schiav operator we have another tensor
coming from the torsion and its augmentation
no we're doing okay
okay we're not doing physics yet we're just building tools we've built ourselves a little
bit of freedom we have some reprieves we've still got some very big debts to pay back
for this magic beans trade we're in the wrong dimension we don't have good field content
we're stuck on this one spinner we've built ourselves some projection operators we've picked up
some symmetric non-linear sigma field
what can we write down in terms of equations of motion let's start with einstein's concept
if we do schiav of the curvature tensor of a gauge potential hit with an operator
defined by the epsilon sigma field plus the star operator acting on the augmented torsion
of the pair this contains all of the information when pi is zero in einstein's tensor in other
words there is a spinorial analog of the vial curvature a spinorial analog of the
traceless Ricci curvature and a spinorial analog of the scalar curvature this operator should
shear off the analog of the vial curvature just the way einstein's projection shears off
the vial curvature when you're looking at the tangent bundle and this term which is now gauge
invariant may be considered as containing a piece that looks like lambda times g mu nu
or a cosmological constant and this piece here
can be made to contain a piece that looks like einstein's tensor and so this looks very much
like the vacuum field equations but we have to add in something else
i'm going to be a little bit vague because i'm still giving myself some freedom as we write this up
but we're going to define whatever tensor we need for this term these terms here this is gauge
invariant this is gauge invariant and this is gauge invariant with respect to the tilted gauge group
these two tensors together should be exact and this tensor on its own should be exact
and we're going to call the exact tensor the swervature
so the particular schiav operator we call the swerve so that swerve curvature plus the adjustment
needed for exactness and another gauge invariant term which is not usually gauge invariant
so that's pretty cool if that works we've now taken the einstein equation
we've put it not on the space of metrics but we've put a generalization and an analog on the
space of gauge potentials much more amenable to quantization with much more algebraic structure
and symmetry in the form of the inhomogeneous gauge group in its homogeneous vector bundles some of
which may be super symmetric now the question is we've we've integrated so tightly with the matter
fields we have to ask ourselves the question can we see unification here
let's define matter content in the form of omega zero tensored in the spinners which is a fancy
way of saying spinners together with a copy of the one forms tensored in the spinners
and let me come up with two other copies of the same data
so I'll make omega d minus one just by duality so imagine that there's a hodge star operator
and when I was a little kid I had the soma cube I don't know if you ever played with one of these
things they're fantastic and I later found out that this guy who invented the soma cube which you
had to put together pieces there was one piece that looked like this this object and he was like
this amazing guy in the resistance during world war two so I would like to name this the somatic
complex after I guess his name is piet Hein I think so this this complex I'm going to choose
to start filling in some operators the exterior derivative coupled to a connection but in the
case of spinners we're going to put a slash through it let's make this the identity
we'd now like to come up with a second operator here and this second operator here should have
the property that the complex should be exact and the obstruction to it being a true complex to
nil potency should be exactly the generalization of the einstein equations thus unifying the
spinorial matter with the intrinsic replacement for the curvature equations
well we know that da composed with itself is going to be the curvature
and we know that we want that to be hit by a schiav operator
and if schiav is a derivation you can start to see that that's going to be curvature so you want
something like f a followed by schiav over here to cancel then you think okay well how am I going
to get at getting this augmented torsion and then you realize that the information in the
inhomogeneous gauge group you actually have information not for one connection but for two
connections so in one case i can do
plus star to pick up the a sub pi
but i'm also going to have a derivative operator if i just do a star operation
so i need another derivative operator to kill it off here so i'm going to take minus
the derivative with respect to the connection h inverse da not h which defines a connection
one form as well as having the same derivative coming from the levichivita connection on you
so in other words i have two derivative operators here i have two ad-valued one forms
the difference between them is going to be of zero with order and it's going to be precisely the
augmented torsion that's the same game i'm going to repeat here
so i'm going to do the same thing here i'm going to define a bunch of terms
where in the numerator i'm going to pick up the pi as well as the derivative
in the denominator because i have no derivative here i'm going to pick up
this h inverse da not h
i'm going to do that again on the other side
there are going to be plus and minus signs but it's a magic
bracket that knows whether or not should be a plus sign or a minus sign i apologize for that
but i'm not able to keep that straight and then there's going to be one extra term
where all these t's have the epsilon and pi okay so some crazy series of differential
operators on the northern route so if you take the high road or you take the low road
when you take the composition of the two the differential operators fall out and you're left
with an obstruction term that looks like the einstein field equation
well that's pretty good if true
can you go farther well look at how close this field content is
to the picture from deformation theory that we learned about in low dimensions
the low dimensional world works by saying that symmetries map to field content
map to equations usually in the curvature and when you linearize that if you're in low enough
dimensions you have omega zero omega one sometimes omega zero again and then something
that comes from omega two and if you can get that sequence to terminate by looking at something
like a half signature theorem or a bent back diram complex in the case of dimension three
you have an a t a singer theory and remember we need some way to get out of infinite dimensional
trouble all right you have to have someone to call when things go wrong overseas and you have
to be able to get your way home and in some sense we call on a t and singer and say we're in some
infinite dimensional space can't you cut out some finite dimensional problem that we can solve even
though we start getting ourselves into serious trouble and so we're going to do the same thing
down here we're going to have omega zero add omega one add direct sum omega zero add
omega d minus one add and it's almost the same operators
and this is now not just a great guess it's actually the information for the deformation
theory of the linearized replacement of the Einstein field equations so this is computing
the diris risky tangent space just as if you were doing self dual theory or churn simon's theory
you've got two somatic complexes right one of them is bows one of them is firming
the obstruction to both of them is a common generalization of the einstein field equations
what's more is if you if you start to think about this
this is some version of hodge theory with funky operators so you can ask yourself well what are
the harmonic forms in a fractional spin context well they're different depending upon whether
you take the degree zero piece together with the degree two piece or you take the degree one piece
let's just take the degree one piece you get some kind of equation so i'm going to decide that i have
a zeta field which is an omega one tensor spinners and a field nu which always strikes me as a yiddish
field nu is omega zero tensor s okay
what equation would they solve if we were doing hodge theory relative to this complex
the equation would look something like this
there'd be one equation that was very simple
and then there'd be one equation that would be like really hard to guess
okay
gosh i don't know i hope i'm not screwing this up but
you know look all these boards i still feel like i'm managing to run out of room
so
Now, if you have something like that, that would be a hell
of a Dirac equation.
You've got differential operators over here.
You've got differential operators, I guess I didn't
write them in.
But you would have two differential operators over
here, and you'd have this differential operator coming
from this more cartain form.
So I apologize on being a little loose here.
But the idea is you have two of these terms of 0th order,
three of these terms would be first order.
And on this side, one term would be first order, and
that's not there.
That was a mistake.
Oh, no, sorry.
That was a mistake, calling it a mistake.
These are two separate equations.
So you have two separate fields, nu and zeta, and you
have a coupled set of differential equations that
are playing the role of the Dirac theory.
Coming from the Hodge theory of a complex whose obstruction
to being a cosmology theory would be the replacement to
the Einstein field equations, which would be rendered
gauge invariant on a group relative to a tilted subgroup.
OK.
So now we've dealt with two of the three sectors.
Is there any generalization of the Yang-Mills equation?
Well, if we were to take the Einstein field equation
generalization and take the norm square of it, oh, there's
some point I should make here, just one second.
I've been treating this as if everything is first order.
But what really happens here is that you've got symmetries,
you've got symmetric field content, you've got ordinary
connections, and we're neglecting to draw the fact
that there have to be equations here, too.
These equations are first order.
So why do we get to call this a first order theory if there
are equations here which are of second order?
Well, it's not a pure first order theory.
But when I say a first order theory in this context, what I
really mean is that the second order equations are completely
redundant on the first order equations by virtue of the
symmetry principle.
That is, any solution of the first order equations should
automatically imply a solution of the second order equations.
So from that perspective, I can pretend that this isn't here
because it is sufficient to solve the first order equations.
So I can now look, let's call that entire replacement, which
we previously called alpha.
I'm going to set alpha equal to epsilon because I've actually
been using epsilon.
The portion that is just the first order equations, and take
the norm square of that, that gives me a new Lagrangian.
And if I solve that new Lagrangian, it leads to
equations of motion that look like exactly what we said
before.
And it ends up defining an operator that looks something
like this.
dA star, the adjoint of the Schiave operator.
So in other words, this piece gives you some portion that
looks like, right, from the Swervicher tensor, there's
going to be some component that's playing the role of
Einstein's field equations directly in the Ricci tensor,
but generalized.
And then you're going to have some differential operator
here so that the replacement for the Yang-Mills term, instead
of dA star of fA, you've got these two Schiave and an adjoint
Schiave together in the center, generalizing the
Yang-Mills theory.
Then you say, well, how come we don't just see the Yang-Mills
theory?
Why don't we see general relativity as well?
But in the full expansion, there's also a term that's
zero at the order that's effectively acting like the
identity, which hits this as well.
So you have one piece that looks like the Yang-Mills theory,
and in these second order equations, you also have a
piece that looks like the Einstein theory.
And this is in the vacuum equations.
So then the question is, how do you see the Dirac theory
coming out of this?
And so what we're just trying to put together now before we
come out with the manuscript for this is putting these two
elliptic complexes together, the Dirac terms, go between the
two complexes.
So the idea is that the stress energy tensor should be the
up and back term, and the Dirac equations should come out
of the term that goes up and over versus the term that goes
over and up.
And you need some cancellations to make sure that
everything is of zero with order,
properly invariant, et cetera.
And that's taking a little time, because frankly, I'm not
good at keeping track of indices, minus
signs, left, right.
It's a learning disabled nightmare.
So we've got one more unit to go.
I mean, there's a fifth unit that has to do with
mathematical applications, but this is sort of a physics
talk for today.
Is there any questions before we go into the last unit and
then really handle questions for real?
All right, let me show you the next little bit.
We've got problems.
We're not in four dimensions, we're in 14.
We don't have great field content, because we've just
got these unadorned spinners, and we're doing gauge
transformations effectively on the intrinsic geometric
quantities, not on some safe auxiliary data that's tensor
producted with what our spinners are.
How is it that we're going to find anything realistic?
And then we have to remember, everything we've been doing
recently has been done on U.
We've forgotten about X.
How does all of this look to X?
So X is sitting down here, and all the action is happening
up here on U14.
There's a projection operator.
I've used pi twice.
It's not here in the field content, it's just projection.
And I've got a sigma, which is a section.
What does zeta pulled back or nu pulled back look like on
X4?
All right.
OK.
Let's try to think about how we would come up with this field
content, starting from first principle.
Let's imagine that there's nothing to begin with.
Then you have one copy of matter, whatever it is that we
see in our world, the first generation.
In order for that to become interesting, it has to have an
equation, so it has to get mapped somewhere.
Then we see the muon and all the rest of the matter that
comes with it.
We have a second generation.
Then in the mid-1970s, Pearl finds the tau particle, and we
start to get panicked that we don't understand what's
going on.
One thing we can do is we can move these equations around
a little bit and move the equation for the first
generation back.
And then we can start adding particles.
Let's imagine that we could guess what
particles we'd add.
We'd add a pseudo generation of 16 particles, spin 3 halves,
never before seen, not necessarily super partners,
but we read a Schwinger matter with familiar internal quantum
numbers, but potentially so that they're flipped, so that
matter looks like anti-matter to this generation.
Then we add, just for the heck of it, 144 spin 1 half
fermions, which contain a bunch of particles with
familiar quantum numbers, but also some very exotic looking
particles that nobody's ever seen before.
Now we start doing something different.
We make an accusation.
One of our generations isn't a regular generation.
It's an imposter.
At low energy in a cooled state, potentially it looks just
the same as these other generations.
But were we somehow able to turn up the energy?
Imagine that it would unify differently with this new
matter that we've posited, rather than simply unifying
onto itself.
So two of the generations would unify onto themselves, but
this third generation would fuse with the new particles
that we've already added.
We consolidate geometrically.
We can add some zero-eth order terms.
And we imagine that there is an elliptic complex that would
govern this state of affairs.
We then choose to add some stuff that we can't see at all.
That's dark.
And this matter would be governed by forces that were
dark, too.
There might be dark electromagnetism, and dark
strong, and dark weak.
It might be that things break in that sector completely
differently.
And it doesn't break down to an SU3 cross SU2 cross U1,
because these are different SU3s, SU2s, and U1s.
And it may be that there would be a high-energy SU5, or
some petite salam model.
Imagine then that chirality was not fundamental, but it was
emergent, that you had some complex.
And as long as there were cross terms, these two halves
would talk to each other.
But if the cross terms went away, the two terms would
become decoupled.
And just the way we have a left hand, and we have a right
hand, and you ask me, imagine you have a neurological
condition, and an oliver sac, sort of an idiom, and
somebody's only aware of one side of their body.
And they say, oh my god, I'm deformed.
I'm asymmetric.
But we actually have a symmetry between the two things
that can't see each other.
Then we would still have a chiral world, but the
chirality wouldn't be fundamental.
There'd be something else keeping the fermions light.
And that would be the absence of the cross terms.
Now, if you look at what happens in our replacement for
the Einstein field equations, the term that would
counterbalance the scalar curvature.
If you put these equations on a sphere, they wouldn't be
satisfied if the t term had a zero expectation value, because
there would be non-trivial scalar curvature in the
swervature terms, but there'd be nothing to counterbalance it.
So it's fundamentally the scalar curvature that would
coax the VEV on the augmented torsion out of the vacuum to
have a non-zero level.
And if you pumped up that sphere and it smeared out the
curvature, which you can't get rid of because of topological
considerations, let's say from Chern-Vey theory, you would
have a very diffuse, very small term.
And that term would be the term that was playing the role of
the cosmological constant.
So in a large universe, you'd have a curvature that was
spread out, and things would be very light, and things would
get very dark due to the absence of curvature
linking the sectors.
And that turns out to be exactly our complex.
So in other words, just to recap, starting with nothing
other than a four-man fold, we built a bundle U. The bundle
U had no metric, but it almost had a metric.
It had a metric up to a connection.
There was another bundle on top of that bundle called the
Chimeric Bundle.
The Chimeric Bundle had an intrinsic metric.
We built our spinners on that.
We restricted ourselves to those spinners.
We moved most of our attention to the emergent metric on U
14, which gave us a map between the Chimeric Bundle and the
Tangent Bundle of U 14.
We built a toolkit allowing us to choose symmetric field
content, to define equations of motion on the cotangent space
of that field content, to form a homogeneous vector bundle
with the fermions, to come up with unifications of the
Einstein field equations, Yang-Mills equations, and Dirac
equations.
We then broke those things apart under decomposition,
pulling things back from U 14, and we found a three-generation
model where nothing has been put in by hand.
And we have a 10-dimensional normal component, which looks
like the spin-10 theory.
I can tell you where there are problems in this story.
I can tell you that when we moved from Euclidean metric to
Minkowski metric, we seemed to be off by a sign somewhere, or I
could be mistaken.
I could tell you that the propagation in 14 dimensions
has to be worked out so that we would be fooled into thinking
we were in a four-dimensional world.
There are lots of things to ask about this theory.
But I think that the question is, what's the best way to
ask about this theory?
But I find it remarkable that tying our hands, we find
ourselves with new equations, unifications, and three
generations in a way that seems surprisingly rich, certainly
unexpected.
And I think I'll stop there.
Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So thanks for watching that video.
What I thought I would do, since that was the first time I'd
really presented the theory at all in public, and I'd gotten
somewhat turned around on my trip to England and trying
probably stupidly to do last-minute corrections, got me
a bit confused in a few places.
And I wrote some things on the board I probably shouldn't
have.
I thought I would try a partial explainer for technically
oriented people so that they're not
mystified by the video.
And any errors here are my own.
I'm known to make many, so hopefully they won't be too
serious, but we'll find out.
So this is a supplementary explainer for the Geometric
Unity talk at Oxford that you just saw.
First of all, I think the most important thing to begin
with is to ask what new hard problems arise when you're
trying to think about a fundamental theory that
aren't found in any earlier theory.
Now, every time you have an effective theory, which is a
partial theory, there is always the idea that you can have
recourse to a lower level strut, so you don't have to
explain in some sense everything coming from very
little or nothing.
I think that the really difficult issue that people
don't talk enough about is the problem of the fire that
lights itself.
And I think this was beautifully demonstrated by
MC Escher in his famous lithograph, Drawing Hands,
where he takes the idea of the canvas or the paper as a
given, but somehow he imagines that the canvas could
will into existence.
The ink needed to draw the hands that move the pen to
draw the hands.
That concept is actually the super tricky part, in my
opinion, about going from effective theories to any
attempt at a fundamental theory.
So with that said, what I want to think about is what
antecedents does this concept have in physics?
And I find that there really aren't any candidate theories
of everything or unified field theories that I can find
that plausibly give us an idea of how a canvas would
will an entire universe into being.
And so that really, to me, is the conceptual problem that I
think bedevils this and makes this step quite a bit more
difficult than some of the previous technical steps.
If you ask for antecedents, however, there is one that,
at least within physics, is relatively famous.
And that is by John Archibald Wheeler.
And it is a picture, in some sense, of the universe
contemplating itself.
And so this idea that somehow the universe would
contemplate itself into existence, maybe the letter
U is, in some sense, analogous to the paper, and
somehow the I, rather than the hand, is drawn across to
look at a different part of the U. And whether or not that
has meaning is intrinsically always a question.
People are animated by it, but I don't know that people
have actually worked on it.
The quote of Einstein's, I think, that really speaks to
me often the most, and maybe even was my thesis problem,
was he asked whether the creator had any choice in how
the universe was constructed.
And so I think if you believe that the canvas is itself
the that which generates all of the content and all of
the action, you're left with a puzzle as to how would you
move forward from this.
It might be easier, in a mathematical sense, to
temporarily put the U on its back to put it more in line
with a standard picture that many mathematicians and
physicists will be familiar with.
In sector one of the geometric unity theory, spacetime is
replaced and recovered by the observers
contemplating itself.
And so there are several sectors of GU, and I wanted to go
through at least four of them.
In Einstein's spacetime, we have not only four degrees of
freedom, but also a spacetime metric representing
rulers and protractors.
If we're going to replace that, it's very tricky, because
it's almost impossible to think about what would be
underneath Einstein's theory.
Now there's a huge problem in the spinorial sector, which I
don't know why more people don't worry about, which is
that spinors aren't defined for representations of the
double cover of GL4R, the general linear group's
effective spin analog.
And as such, if we imagine that we will one day
quantize gravity, we will lose our definition not of the
electrons, but let's say of the medium in which the
electrons operate.
That is, there will be no spinorial bundle until we
have an observation of a metric.
So one thing we can do is to take a manifold xd as the
starting point and see if we can create an entire universe
from no other data, not even with a metric.
So since we don't choose a metric, what we instead do is
to work over the space of all possible
point-wise metrics.
So not quite in the Feynman sense, but in the sense
that we will work over a bundle that is of a quite a bit
larger dimension.
So for example, if x was four-dimensional, therefore d
equals 4, then y, in this case, would be d squared, which
would be 16, plus 3d, which would be 12, making 28,
divided by 2, which would be 14.
So in other words, a four-dimensional universe,
a four-dimensional proto space time, not a space time, but
a proto space time with no metric, would give rise to a
14-dimensional observers portion called y.
Now, I believe that in the lecture in Oxford, I called
that u.
So I'm sorry for the confusion, but of course, this shifts
around every time I take it out of the garage.
And that's one of the problems with working on a theory in
solitude for many years.
So we have two separate spaces, and we have fields on the two
spaces.
Now, what I'm going to do is I'm going to refer to fields on
the xd space by Hebrew letters.
So instead of g mu nu for a metric, I just wrote
gimel mem nun.
And the idea being that I want to separate Latin and Greek
fields on the y space from the rather rarer field that
actually live directly on x.
So this is a little bit confusing.
One way of thinking about it is to think of the
observers as the stands plus the pitch in a stadium.
I think I may have said that in the lecture.
But this is what replaces the questions of where and when in
the newspaper story that is a fundamental theory.
Where and when correspond to space and time?
Who and what correspond to bosons and fermions?
And how and why correspond to equations and the Lagrangian
that generates them?
So if you think about those six quantities, you'll realize
that that's really what the content of a fundamental
theory is, assuming that it can be quantized properly.
Most fields, and in this case, we're going to call the
collection of two tuples omega.
So inside of omega, that will be in the first tuple, we'll
have epsilon and pi written in sort of a non-traditional
variation of how we write this symbol for pi.
In the second tuple, we'll have the letters new and zeta.
And I would like them not to move because they honor
particular people who are important.
So most fields, in this case, omega, are dancing on y,
which was called you in the lecture, unfortunately.
But they're observed via pullback as if they lived on x.
In other words, if you're sitting in the stands, you
might feel that you're actually literally on the pitch,
even though that's not true.
So what we've done is we've taken the u of Wheeler, we've
put it on its back, and created a w structure.
And the w structure is meant to say that there's a bundle on
top of a bundle.
Again, geometric unity is more flexible than this, but I
wanted to make the most concrete approach to this
possible for at least this introduction.
And sometimes we don't need to state that y would, in fact,
be a bundle.
You could be an immersion of x into any old manifold.
But I'd like to go with the most ambitious
version of GU first.
So the two projection maps are pi 2 and pi 1.
And what we're going to say up top is that we're going to
have a symbol z and an action of a group rho on z standing
in for any bundle associated to the principal bundle, which
is generated as the unitary bundle of the spinners on the
chimeric tangent bundle to y.
That's a bit of a mouthful, but the key issue was that on the
manifold y, there happens to be a bundle which is isomorphic
non-canonically to the tangent bundle of y, which has a
definite and canonical metric.
And in fact, that carries the spinners.
So this is the way in which we get spinners without ever
having to choose a metric.
But we pick up some technical debt to use the computer
science concept by actually having to now work on two
different spaces, x and y.
And we're not merely working on x anymore.
This leads to the mark of zoro.
That is, we know that whenever we have a metric by the
fundamental theorem of Romani in geometry, we always get a
connection.
It happens, however, that what is missing to turn the
canonical chimeric bundle on y into the tangent bundle of y
is, in fact, a connection on the space x.
So there is one way in which we've reversed the fundamental
theorem of Romani in geometry, where a connection on x
leads to a metric on y.
So if we do the full transmission mechanism out,
Gimmel on x leads to alpha sub-Gimmel for the Levy-Civita
connection on x.
Alpha sub-Gimmel leads to G sub-alpha, which is, sorry, G
sub-alpha.
I'm not used to using Hebrew in math.
So G sub-alpha then is a metric on y.
And that creates a Levy-Civita connection of the metric on the
space y as well, which then induces one on the
spinorial bundles.
In sector two, the inhomogeneous gauge group on y
replaces the Poincare group and the internal symmetries that
are found on x.
And in fact, you use a fermionic extension of the
inhomogeneous gauge group to replace the supersymmetric
Poincare group.
And that would be, with the field content, zero forms
tensored with spinners direct sum one forms tensored with
spinners all up on y as the fermionic field content.
So that gets rid of the biggest problem, because the
internal symmetry group is what causes the failure, I think,
of supersymmetric particles to be seen in nature, which is
we have two different origin stories, which is a little
bit like Lilith and Genesis.
We can't easily say we have a unified theory if space time
and the SU3 cross SU2 cross U1 group that lives on space
time have different origins and cannot be related.
In this situation, we tie our hands and we have no choice
over the group content.
So just to fix bundle notation, we let h be the structure
group of a bundle, p sub h, over a base space b.
We use pi for the projection map.
We've reserved the variation in the pi orthography for the
field content, and we try to use right principal actions.
I'm terrible with left and right, but we do our best.
We use h here, not g, because we want to reserve g for the
inhomogeneous extension of h once we move to function spaces.
So with function spaces, we can take the bundle of groups
using the adjoint action of h on itself and form the
associated bundle, and then move to c-infinity sections to
get the so-called gauge group of automorphisms.
We have a space of connections, typically denoted by a, and
we're going to promote omega 1 tensored in the adjoint bundle
to notation of script n as the affine group, which acts
directly on the space of connections.
Now, the inhomogeneous gauge group is formed as the
semi-direct product of the gauge group of automorphisms
together with the affine group of translations of the space
of connections.
And you can see here is a version of an explicit group
multiplication rule.
I hope I got that one right.
And then we have an action of g that is the inhomogeneous
gauge group on the space of connections, because we have
two different ways to act on connections.
We can either act by gauge transformations, or we can act
by affine translations.
So putting them together gives us something for the
inhomogeneous gauge group to do.
We then get a by connection.
In other words, because we have two different ways of pushing
a connection around, if we have a choice of a base
connection, we can push the base connection around in two
different ways according to the portion of it that is coming
from the gauge transformations, curly H, or the affine
translations coming from curly N.
We can call this map the by connection, which gives us two
separate connections for any point in the inhomogeneous
gauge group.
And we can notice that it can be viewed as a section of a
bundle over the base space to come when we find an
interesting embedding of the gauge group that is not the
standard one in the inhomogeneous gauge group.
So our summary diagram looks something like this.
Take a look at the tau sub A0.
We will find a homomorphism of the gauge group into its
inhomogeneous extension that isn't simply inclusion onto
the first factor.
And I'm realizing that I have the wrong pi.
That should just be a simple pi projecting down.
We have a map from the inhomogeneous gauge group via
the by connection to A cross A, connections
cross connections, and that that behaves well according to
the difference operator delta that takes the difference of
two connections and gives an honest ad-valued one form.
The infinitesimal action of a gauge transformation, or at
least an infinitesimal one, on a point inside of the group, is
given by a somewhat almost familiar expression, which
should remind us of how the first term in the gauge
deformation complex for self-dual Yang-Mills actually
gets started.
And so by acting via this interesting embedding of the
inhomogeneous gauge group on the embedding of the gauge
group inside its inhomogeneous extension, but the
non-trivial one, we get something very close to the
original first step of the two-step
deformation complex.
Now, in sector three, there are payoffs to the magic beans
trade.
The big issue here is that we've foregone the privilege of
being able to choose and dial in our own field content, and
we've decided to remain restricted to anything we can
generate only from XD, in this case, X4.
So we generated Y14 from X4, and then we generated
chimeric tangent bundles on top of that.
We built spinners off of the chimeric tangent bundle, and we
have not made any other choices.
I think it's U128, U2 to the 7th.
That is our structure group, and it's fixed by the choice of
X4, not anything else.
So what do we get?
Well, as promised, there is a tilted homomorphism, which
takes the gauge group into its inhomogeneous extension.
It acts as inclusion on the first factor, but it uses the
Levy-Tvita connection to create a second more cartan form.
I hope I remember the terminology right.
It's been a long time.
The map is injective because it's injective under the first
factor, but it actually gives us a non-trivial embedding of
the gauge group in its inhomogeneous extension, which
makes the whole theory work.
We then get to Shiav operators.
A Shiav operator is a map from the group
across the ad-valued i-forms.
In this case, the particular Shiav operators we're
interested in is mapping i-forms to d minus 3 plus i-forms.
So for example, you would map a 2-form to d minus 3 plus i.
So if d, for example, were 14, and i were equal to 2, then
14 minus 3 is equal to 11, plus 2 is equal to 13.
So that would be an ad-valued 14 minus 1 form, which is
exactly the right place for something to form a current.
That is the differential of a Lagrangian on the space.
Now, the augmented torsion.
The torsion is a very strange object.
It's introduced right at the beginning of learning
differential geometry, but it really doesn't get used very
much.
One of the reasons it doesn't get used in gauge theory is
that it's not gauge invariant.
It has a gauge invariant piece to it, but then a piece that
spoils the gauge invariant.
But because we have two connections, one of the ideas
was to introduce two diseases and then to take a difference.
And as long as the disease is the same in both,
the difference will not have the disease,
because both diseases are included, but with a minus sign
between them.
So the augmented torsion is relatively well-behaved,
relative to this particular slanted or tilted embedding
of the gauge group in its inhomogeneous extension, which
this is very nice, because now we actually
have a use for the torsion.
We have an understanding of why it may never have figured,
particularly into geometry, is that you need two connections,
rather than one, to see the advantages of torsion at all.
So here's an example of one ship and a bottle operator.
I think this would be sort of analogous,
if I'm not mistaken, to trying to take the Ricci curvature
from the entire Riemann curvature.
But if you think about what Einstein did,
Einstein had to go further and reduce the Ricci curvature
to the scalar curvature, and then sort of dial
the components of the traceless Ricci and the scalar curvature
to get the right proportions.
So there are many Schiave operators,
and you have to be very careful about which one you want.
And once you know exactly what it is you're trying to hit,
you can choose the Schiave operator to be bespoke
and get the contractions that you need.
Now, I've made you guys sit through a lot,
so I wanted to give you sort of humorously
a feeling of positivity for the exhaustion.
So the years of anxious searching in the dark,
with their intense longing,
their intense alternations of confidence and exhaustion
and the final emergence into the light,
only those who have experienced it can understand it.
I've just always thought this was like
the most sensitive and beautiful quote,
and I wish it were one of his better known quotes,
but I think it's so singular that it's hard to feel
what it was that he was talking about,
because in fact, he sort of explains this in the last line.
So given that you've been on a long journey,
here is something of what geometric unity equations
might look like.
So in the first place, you have the swerved curvature,
the shiab applied to the curvature tensor.
That in general does not work out to be exact,
so you can't have it as the differential of a Lagrangian.
And in fact, we talk about swirls, swerves, twirls, eddies,
there has to be a quadratic eddy tensor
that I occasionally forget when I pull this thing
out of mothballs.
And the two of those together
make up what I call the total swervature.
And on the other side of the equation,
you have the displaced torsion,
which I've called the dysplasian.
And to get rid of the pesky sort of minus sign
and hodge star operator,
this would be the replacement for the Einstein equation,
not on x where we would perceive it,
but on y before being pulled back onto the manifold x.
So a condensation of that would be very simple.
In simplest terms, we would be saying
that the swervature is equal to the dysplasian.
At least in this sector of the four main equations
of theoretical physics,
this would be the replacement for the Einstein equations,
again, on y before being pulled back to x.
Next is the sketch of the fermionic field content.
I'm not sure whether that should have been sector four,
sector three, but it's gonna be very brief.
I showed some pictures during the lecture
and I'm not gonna go back through them,
but I wanted to just give you an idea
of where this mysterious third generation,
I think, comes from.
So if we review the three identities here,
we see that if we have a space V,
thought of like as a tangent bundle,
and then you have spinners built on the tangent bundle.
When you tensor product the tangent bundle
with its own spinners, it breaks up into two pieces.
One piece is the so-called Cartan product,
which is sort of the sum of the highest weights,
and the other is a second copy of the spinners
gotten through the Clifford contraction.
So that's well known,
but now what I think fewer people know,
many people know that the spinners
have a sort of an exponential property.
That is, the spinners of a direct sum
are the tensor product of the spinners
of the two summands of the direct sum.
So that's a very nice sort of version of an exponential.
An exponential would take a sum
and turn it into a product.
What happens when you're trying to think
about a tangent space in Y is being broken up
into a tangent space along an immersed X
together with its normal bundle.
So imagine that X and Y are the tangent space to X
and a normal bundle.
So the Rarita-Schwinger piece,
that is the spin three halves piece,
has a funny kind of an almost exponential property
that is the Rarita-Schwinger content
of a direct sum of vector spaces
is equal to the Rarita-Schwinger
of the first tensor-producted
with the ordinary spinners in the second,
direct sum with the ordinary spinners in the first,
tensor-producted with the Rarita-Schwinger content
of the second sum in.
But then there's this extra interesting term,
which is the spinners on the first sum end,
tensor-producted with the spinners on the second sum end.
Now recalling that when I started my career,
we did not know that neutrinos were massive
and I figured that they probably had to be massive
because I desperately wanted a 16 dimensional space
of internal quantum numbers, not 15,
because my ideas only work if the space
of internal quantum numbers is of dimension two to the N
and one of my favorite equations at the time
was 15 equals two to the fourth.
Not literally true, but almost true
and thankfully in the late 1990s,
the case for 16 particles in a generation
was strengthened when neutrinos were found to have mass.
But that remaining term in the southeast corner,
the spinners on X, tensor spinners on Y,
looks like the term above it in line 2.15.
And that in fact is the third generation of matter
in my opinion.
That is, it is not a true generation.
It is broken off and would unify very differently
if we were able to heat the universe
to the proper temperature.
So starting to sum up, this is not the full theory.
I'm just presenting this in part
to dip my toe back into the water.
It's a daunting task to try to address people
about something you've been thinking about for a long time
and have no idea whether it's even remotely correct.
This is the Einsteinian replacement
and it must be pulled back to X, that's the first thing.
The Yang-Mills Maxwell piece comes from a direct square
of the Einstein replacement.
That is, I don't believe that we're really looking
for a unifying equation.
I think we're looking for a unifying direct square,
Dirac famously took the square root
of the Klein-Gordon equation
and he gave us the Dirac equation.
And in fact, I believe that the Dirac equation
and the Einstein equation are to be augmented
and fit into the square root part of a Dirac square.
And I believe that the Yang-Mills content
and Higgs version of the Klein-Gordon equation
would go in the square part of the Dirac square.
So two of these equations unify differently than two others
and the two pairs are unified in the content
of a Dirac square.
The Dirac piece will be done separately elsewhere
when we get around to it
and contains the Rita Schwinger field content
which is fundamental and new.
There are only two generations in this model.
I think people have accepted that there are three
but I don't believe that there are three.
I think that there are two
and that the third unifies with other matter
at higher energies.
The Cortic-Higgs piece comes
from the Dirac squaring of a quadratic.
Remember, there's an eddy tensor
which is quadratic in the augmented torsion.
The metric does multiple duties here
is it's the main field in this version of GU
with the sort of strongest assumptions
as field content that is originally on X
whereas most of the rest of the field content is on Y
but it also acts as the observer
pulling back the full content of Y
onto X to be interpreted as if it came from X all along
generating the sort of illusion
of internal quantum numbers.
And I should say that the Petit-Salam theory
which is usually advertised as,
I think SU4 cross SU2 cross SU2
is really much more naturally spin six cross spin four
when the trace portion of the space of metrics
is put in with the proper sign.
If you're trying to generate the sector
that begins as X1 comma three.
Remember, XD where D equals four
is the generic situation
but you have all these different sectors.
I believe that these sectors probably exist
if this model is correct
but we are trapped in the one three sector
so you have to figure out what the implications are
for pushing that indefinite signature up
into an indefinite signature on the Y manifold
and there are signatures that make it look
like the Petit-Salam rather than directly
in the spin 10 SU5 line of thinking.
So we will attempt to present the full theory shortly
and shortly keep in mind this took seven years
to just bring me to want to come back to this
but it must be reassembled from decades of notes
and that's part of the problem when you're working alone
and you're not really expecting to talk to anybody.
So I want to thank you for your patience and your time
and I just want to read a bunch of names
of people who matter to me
and if I have done anything wrong
this is not no reflection on them.
Marcus DeSotois, Peter Thiel,
Isidore Singer, Raoul Bot, Michael Grossberg,
Adil Abdoulali, Harry and Sophie Rubin,
Brett Weinstein and family,
Heather Hying and Zach and Toby,
Peter Fried, Scott Axelrod, Nima Arkani-Hamed,
Louise Alvarez-Game, Edward Frankel,
Jorah Barnatan, Shlomo Sternberg, David Kajdan,
Daniel Barquet, Karen and Les Weinstein,
Haynes Miller, Ralph Gomery, John Tate,
Sydney Coleman, Graham Siegel, Robert Herman
and here in Esther Malani.
Errors and omissions because I have
too many people to thank are all my own
as for the claims that should reflect badly
on no one else other than myself.
And most especially, I just want to say
that I've asked a tremendous amount from my family
to stick with me on this quixotic quest.
And I want to thank Pia Malani,
Nyla Weinstein and Zev Weinstein.
I love you all very much
and thank you for making this possible.
I do want to leave you with one thought.
I really think that we've gotten completely
bent out of shape about trying to formalize
and rootenize science and it doesn't work.
You cannot mandate science as social engineering.
You can't decide that science is always
in the zeitgeist and done by committee.
In fact, it is essential to understand
that science will not conform to what you want.
One of the things that I'm very proud of
and I think is quite true is the saying
that great science has the scientific method
as its radio edit.
I don't think that great science
has actually done the way we say it's done.
And I think the directs 1963 Scientific American article
should be read by absolutely everyone.
Every time major theories have come out,
they've almost always been wrong,
but they're not wrong in an important way.
And I think that we have to fix the political economy
of people racing to correct theories
or point out that there is no agreement with the experiment.
We are killing many of our best ideas
by creating a terrible and combative environment
which already attempts to apportion credit
for work and more importantly risk
undertaken by individuals.
And I just think that I want people to understand
that I've always wanted to share this,
but I detest the culture that I saw that cropped up
around what has now become known
as the cyber-witten equations.
When they were put forward,
there was a period of time where I watched people
as if at a feeding trough,
trying to stay up around the clock
to use a new machine tool that had been given to them
to claim credit.
And it profoundly pushed me away from the community.
We have to become more ethical
and we have to honor the people
who are trying to speak and act imaginatively.
Now, if this doesn't work, if it's silly,
I'll have egg on my face and I'll go on, I'll be fine.
But I'm very worried that maybe some of the best ideas
are between the ears of people without the confidence
in the Hutzpah and just the sort of almost psychotic drive
to push things across the finishing line.
We've got to be kinder and nicer and more decent
and stop stealing people's lives, their credit,
their future and their ability to have families
and make a living and that's absolutely essential to me.
And I look forward to finding out whether this theory
has merit to it or it is without merit,
but I guarantee that if I'm going to go down with the ship,
I'm also not going to be knocked off the ship
as I was many years ago, completely unfairly.
And I won't dwell on it,
but the amount of power you professors have
is absolutely almost without parallel
because nobody really understands enough
to adjudicate disputes that happen in academics.
I'm going to insist that we fund you better
and that you are nicer to the people
who depend upon you in this beautiful chain that we call
science, scientific method and most particularly,
American science, which I think is still
the envy of the world.
So you've been through the portal.
I know it was a long slog.
I hope you found it interesting and enjoyable
and we'll see you again soon.
Be well everybody, stay safe.
