Good afternoon, Tevin Bernardo. Welcome back. Welcome back to
my body solution. How are you? Good to see you. Great to see
you, man. How have you been busy? I can imagine. I mean,
Bernardo, the last time we spoke, I mean, your video has been
very engaging. A lot of people have been going back and forth
in the comment section. I mean, it's been an intriguing journey
to watch.
Cool. I spoke to Sue Blackmore, I think it was last week. And
I was thinking about the, the wonderful discussion you guys
had, the theologution with Kurt. How was that for you?
It was a while ago, because it was published quite a while
after it was recorded. I mean, I like Sue. I met her in person a
couple of times. So yeah, if you like someone, it's pleasant to
talk. I don't think she's an illusionist at all. Because the
way she defines illusionism is not what other people call
illusionism. But other than that, I think it was a productive
engagement.
It was it was amazing. The last time we spoke, we touched on so
many different topics, but we spoke about Carl Jung, Schopenhauer,
mental health, psychiatry, life, death, religion. And to a point
where I was trying to figure out how do I approach this
conversation? How do we do a part two that's engaging and that
the listeners and viewers want to watch? And the conclusion I've
drawn is, let's do a crash course on analytic idealism. And what
inspired me was obviously your course with the Essentia
Foundation. I mean, brilliant course, well structured. How do
you feel about that? How do you feel about this approach?
I'm game.
I'm keen. And look, so I've broken it down into the seven
chapters. And I think we'll move from chapter to chapter. At any
point, I feel that there's anything I want to clarify, or to
provide some new content for the listeners. I think it's a great
opportunity. And for you to also rectify clarify anything you
think you might have wanted to say, and and feel like this is the
perfect opportunity. Do you want me to run down the seven
chapters for you? Or do you just want to go step by step?
Help me out, give me this structure.
Okay, so the first question, I mean, we'll go through chapters,
the first one will be investigating whether our ordinary
intuitions about the nature of reality and the world at large
can be true at all. Is the world really what it looks like on
the screen of perception? Then on the, no, no, so do you want me
to just break it down for you want to go?
Let's do it one by one. So I don't have to push the many things
to my stack before it starts popping.
Okay, then let's do I think yeah, let's start off with that
chapter one. So this is a crash course on analytic idealism for
all the listeners.
So the question is, is the world what it what it seems to be in
the sense that does the world contain these forms and shapes
and entities and events that we discern on the screen of
perception? And the answer is a categorical note, there are many
things about analytic idealism that are sort of best gases
guided by reason and evidence. But other things are pretty
established, they are just not mainstream yet, they didn't
percolate up to the froth of culture. The world cannot be
what it seems in the sense that it cannot have those shapes and
forms and events and spatial temporal positions that we
discern on the screen of perception, because for the
latter to be true, our inner states would have to mirror the
external states of the world. But there is no a priori upper
bound to the dispersion or entropy or level of disorder of
the states of the world. We cannot decree that the world has
an upper bound in entropy. So if we were to mirror the states of
the world in our inner states, then our inner states would
have no upper bound in their entropy. And therefore, perceiving
the world could be deadly, you could melt into hot meat soup.
Because your internal entropy has to be bound, unbound
internal entropy is not compatible with life, we would
become soup, literally. So no, our inner states do not mirror
the world. Another line of argument is evolution wouldn't
have given us a perceptual apparatus that mirrors the
states of the world. It would be confusing, it would be
information overload. What we want is to be able to discern
the salient aspects of the world in an encoded form that
facilitates prompt responses to environmental challenges, and
also limits our internal entropy. So to summarize it all, the
world as it is in itself is not physical, because what we call
physical are the things we discern on the screen of
perception, which are describable through physical
quantities, such as length in centimeters, weight in kilograms,
electric charge in Coulombs, and so on and so forth. But these
cannot be the way we would describe the real states of
the world. These are descriptions of our internal
cognitive representations, not of the states that they
represent the external states. So the real external states of
the real external world are not physical in the sense that they
are not describable through physical quantities. And then
it raises the question, are there states that are not
describable through physical quantities? Obviously, how many
centimeters does your thought have? How many kilograms does
your emotion weigh? What's the electric charge in Coulombs of
your of your depression, your fantasy? So what the prospect
that it raises is that the external world is probably
made of what we call mental states, experiential states. And
the physical world is our cognitive inner representation
of the real external states of the world.
Tell me, Bernardo, how, how aligned is this view with, are you
familiar with the work by Jude Caravan? And I mean, of course,
you are with, you're not really okay. But with Don Hoffman, I
mean, you know that your guys idealism theories are very similar.
Of course, we spoke about this before, where you separate at
the point where I think he takes conscious agents to be
fundamental. So you need that human consciousness element.
No, so is that not we don't don't doesn't say that humans are an
instance of
So, so fundamentally, when you think about the pioneers of
of this thought, because Don obviously wrote about the case
against reality and your work also describes I mean, when you
talk about the fact that we have this dashboard in terms of the
use the plane as a common example, and measurement, briefly
elaborate on that just for all the listeners who are not
familiar with that analogy.
Think of an airplane. An airplane has sensors that measure the
external states of the sky, air pressure, wind direction,
humidity. In the case of a weather radar, it will pick up
also all these elements, but in a more compound manner. So the
airplane has sensors. Now, the results of the measurements that
are performed by the airplanes sensors are displayed to the
pilot on a dashboard. So the states of the dashboard represent
the real states of the world outside. But the dashboard isn't
the real world outside. That's obvious. Yet you can fly the
plane without a transparent windscreen, you can fly the plane
instrument alone, because the dashboard conveys accurate
information about the states of the world without being the
state of the world. So the idea here is that our perception
perception states, the colors we see the sounds we hear, the
smells we feel the texture on our skin all that. These are
dashboard representations of the real states of the world. We are
airplane pilots that were born inside a cockpit without
windows. And all we have ever had is the dashboard. And we come
we've come to take the dashboard for the world, which is
understandable, but not under the light of 21st century
analytic philosophy and science, because we should know better
now than to make what Donald Hoffman calls a rookie mistake,
which is my metaphor to take the dashboard for the sky. One
represents the other. It doesn't mean that the representation
is the thing represented.
Do you ever feel that there would be a way for us to, to get
that dashboard to not be our own main perceptive reality? Do you
feel like whatever reach a point where we can actually see
beyond into the true nature of reality? And what if whatever
that is, whatever that means?
Mystics throughout history seem to claim that that is possible.
It hasn't been possible to me. And I'm not sure about the
analytic coherence of that claim, but I'm open to my ability
to analyze things rationally to be limited. I mean, why would the
nature have to conform to the limitations of a monkey like me,
a primate that has been running around with an intellect for
only about 30,000 years? I mean, for all I know, it may be
possible. I think on the basis of reason and evidence and not
spiritual introspection and insight. I think the dashboard is
an artifact of life. The dashboard was constructed by
evolution in the journey that life has undertaken on this
planet. So if you don't want to have the dashboard on your way,
that time is coming because you're gonna die. And once you die,
this dissociative process in the mind of nature that we call
ourselves will no longer be dissociated because life is what
the dissociation looks like. If there is life, it means there
is dissociation because life is the representation. It's what
that dissociation looks like. It's the extrinsic appearance of
the dissociation. And the dashboard is an artifact of the
dissociation. Because the dashboard is the panel that
allows you to have commerce from external states to internal
states. But for there to be external versus internal, there
has to be a boundary. Otherwise, everything is just outside or
everything is just inside and there is no boundary and then
there is no dashboard. What is that boundary that boundaries, the
dissociative boundary is it's what is it's a cognitive
boundary enforced by the dissociative process we call life
because it looks like metabolism when represented on
another dashboard. So the end of life is the end of that
boundary. And therefore it's the end of the dashboard. And it's
the difference between perceiving the world and being the world.
So to be honest, personally, I'm not in a hurry to get rid of the
dashboard.
I'm okay if it takes a while.
Have you ever thought about what I mean, evolution obviously
provided us with these tools, hid the truth from our eyes in a
sense. Why would you think that is the case? Do you think that
they could have been alternative ways to do this? Do you think
that there were other options possibly available options to
what to perceiving reality in a different way? I mean,
I think every species has a slightly different dashboard. I
don't think they are completely different because of
convergent evolution. If doing things one way worked out very
well for one branch of the evolutionary chain. Chances are
that other branches will hit upon that as well and that will be
fixed by evolution because it works well and therefore things
will converge. So I don't know that our dashboard, you know, our
screen of perception is the most optimal way to cognitively
represent the external states of the real world. But if it's not
that, it's not a bad way either. Otherwise, we wouldn't be here
talking about it. So I don't think it's the only way. I think
there are conceivably, almost infinite other ways to represent
the world. But it's a way that works. And I would expect that
even other species will have similar dashboards, similar
perceptual screens, but not identical, because it doesn't
need to be identical bees see ultraviolet. There are species
that detect infrared. Some species have sonic radar, and we
don't have. What is it like to be a bat or a dolphin? So ours is
not it's certainly not the only one. This is certainly not the
only way. But seems to have been good enough for the past. What
seems to genus Homo has been around at 1.8, maybe 2 million
years.
When you had, I remember, I think you once spoke about I think
you had one psychedelic trip. How did your dashboard change at
that point?
We have had several psychedelics. In my mid 30s, I was writing
about consciousness and I thought it would be lapsed to the
point of irresponsibility to write about consciousness and not
investigate consciousness through every avenue that we know to
be safe. So I did several fairly high dose psychedelic trips. I
am in a country where it's legal to the point that before I did
my first trip, I went to my doctor and I told him what I was
about to do and asked for him to check me up. So I had my liver
checked, I had my heart checked blood pressure. Now that good
stuff checked and was given an okay. And here we go. I don't know
whether psychedelics psychedelic trip is so overwhelmingly rich
and intense, that it's very difficult to make statements
about what the causality behind what you are experiencing is.
Where does that stuff come from? Is it from outside me? Is this
my own stuff, my own shit, the skeletons in my own
cupboard, cupboard? Is it from aliens? Is it from another
dimension? It's virtually impossible to say this. And to
be honest with you, I don't think it's very important either
because the most baffling thing about the psychedelic trip is
that it seems to be exactly what you need. And where it comes
from is utterly unimportant because the effect will be the
same. So I don't know that psychedelics allow you to see
the world, this world as it is. Could they do that? Yeah, I
even suspect they might to some extent do. But even in that
case, even if they do to some extent allow you to see our
surroundings as our surroundings really are. And there's good
reason to think that they might be doing that because
psychedelics reduce brain activity. So chances are that
what is being reduced is in fact, the dissociative process
itself, the dissociative boundaries being weakened. So
you're taking in things as they are as opposed to
representing them on a dashboard. But I don't think
that's the only thing psychedelics do, or even the
main thing because if that were the main thing they do, we
could die from a psychedelic trip because our the entropy of
our inner state to be unbound again. You see, so I don't
think that that's the only thing is that that is going on. And
even to the extent that that is going on, I think it sort of
gets mixed in with all kinds of other things. So it's
impossible to make a statement that Oh, that particular
experience, that was the world as it really is. I personally
feeling capable of making that pronouncement.
I mean, so while sticking to this chapter's theme moment on
our intuitions and whether it is a true reflection of reality,
when when people do have these trips or make certain claims,
whether it's religious psychedelic trips, spiritual
claims, and the way they link it to idealism, how do you feel
that impacts the field of analytic idealism?
Spiritual claims in general. I don't have the delusion that I
am in some sense, owner of analytic idealism or even
idealism. So what people make of it, it's their own personal
freedom and their own personal responsibility, as long as
they don't attribute that to me or attach that to analytic
idealism as a pronouncement of analytic idealism, what they
make of it in their own lives, I think it's, it's, it's their
business. It's, it's their responsibility. It's their
lives. The way analytic idealism informs their lives is their
own thing. So long as they don't attribute spiritual claims to
analytic idealism itself, or to me, I think it's okay.
Okay, great. So, okay, we've touched on that is reality what
it looks like. Anything else you want to touch on regarding our
screen of perception, and this nature of reality that you find
on that. Okay, let's discuss then why mainstream physicalism
in general fails on all key post enlightenment values, such as
coherence, internal consistency, parsimony, explanatory power,
and empirical adequacy.
Okay, let's start with coherence.
Mainstream physicalism is internally contradictory. Probably
more ways than one, I will mention one. And physicalism will
say, we have these physical quantities that describe the
contents of the screen of perception. So if I lift a
heavy piece of luggage, I can describe that that heaviness that
I feel as 50 kilograms, or the likeness of a feather that I
feel as five, five grams. So physicalism starts with the
obvious, we describe the perceived world through physical
quantities. This is metaphysically neutral and
eminently reasonable Galileo started doing this. But then
physicalism makes a very weird step. It says, Oh, those
descriptions, those physical quantities, they precede the
thing described. What really exists is not the feeling of
heaviness that I have when I lift the 50 kilograms piece of
luggage. What really exists is the 50 kilograms. And somehow my
feeling of lifting it arises from the 50 kilograms or is
modulated by the 50 kilograms. And the same thing for
everything else, what really exists are kilometers, joules,
coulombs, seconds, grams, and so on and so forth. And the things
that are described through these quantities, they are
secondary and they arise from the quantities. That's, that's
eminently incoherent. It's like saying, I can pull the
territory out of the map, the map which describes the
territory precedes the thing that is described. The moment you
do that, your descriptions lose their semantic anchoring,
because the lines on a map only have meaning so far as you can
link them to the territory. But if the map precedes the
territory, the lines mean nothing. And that's what we
call the hard problem of consciousness. We cannot derive
the territory out of the map, because the map loses its
meaning unless from the moment zero, it's cementically anchored
to the territory. So to translate it into real life, we
cannot derive the sweetness of eating an apple from the mass
charts being momentum of the molecules constituting the apple.
Of course not for the same reason that you cannot pull Cape
Town out of the map of Cape Town, because the map loses its
semantic anchoring the same way mass charts being a momentum, if
you say that they precede the sweetness of the apple, they lose
their semantic anchoring. In other words, they mean nothing.
And you cannot derive anything out of something that doesn't
have meaning. So that was coherence. What was the next
one?
Internal consistency.
Physicalism defines matter as that which has nothing to do with
the qualities of experience. And then tries to explain the
qualities of experience in terms of matter. Good luck with
that.
I mean, that settles it. It is quite a tough one. I mean, it's
particularly knowing that mainstream physics has had so
many different revelations over time. And each time we seem to
be more and more confused about it. And, and knowing that
matters like 99.9 recurring percent, we just don't know
what it is. There should be clear indication that we really
just don't know what matters.
The human psychology is such that the most obvious and self
evident bullshit gains an aura of plausibility. If enough people
are long enough time, tell you that it's true. That's human
psychology.
That's very true. Okay, let's go into the next one.
The one ontological category that we absolutely know to exist
because it precedes theory are the qualities of experience
qualitative stuff. That's how we begin. That's how we begin
experiencing the world. That's how all everything started. And
then we started theorizing after that, but it begins with
qualities. Now, the most parsimonious account of reality
would be one that explains reality in terms of qualities
alone, not the not only the qualities you experience, or
only the qualities that I experience, but qualities as a
type, as a type of existence. If we can make sense of nature in
terms of qualities alone, that's the most parsimonious because
it only grants existence to the one ontological category that
we know absolutely sure, surely to exist because it precedes
theory. Physicalism, however, postulates another one.
Physicalism postulates another type of existence that's not
qualitative at all, but can be exhaustively described in terms
of quantities alone. Mass charts being momentum, geometrical
relationships and so on and so forth. That is only justified if
you can't make sense of reality account for the dynamics of
nature in terms of qualities alone. If you can't, then okay,
you postulate something else. But if you can, then postulating
something else violates the principle of parsimony. And
physicalism does that. All we need to account for nature is
that there are external states beyond our individual minds,
external qualitative states, experiences that are not mine or
yours. They are experiences of nature out there. These are real
external states. But they can also be experiential just like
mine and yours. In the same sense that my thoughts are
external to you. But they are still experiential states. If you
were not around, I would still be having my thoughts. From your
perspective, they are external and objective, but in their own
nature, intrinsic nature, they are subjective and qualitative.
So that's all we needed to explain nature, external,
qualitative states. But physicalism conflates everything,
and in postulating external states outside our minds, it
thinks that those external states should also be non mental,
because anything outside our minds should be non mental. Why?
Why the hell? I mean, my thoughts are mental, but they are
outside your mind. So from your point of view, if I tell you,
well, the black holes is made, black holes are made of
experiential states. It's entirely analogous to my
thoughts, being experiential and outside your minds too. So
that's a, that's a grotesque violation of the principle of
parsimony.
Yeah, the last two are explanatory power and empirical
adequacy. I mean, a part of it, I mean, I wanted to ask you
about certain things like the observer effect or perhaps even
the big bang and how we explain all of these using this concept
now and understanding it differently.
I'm not sure what people mean by the observer effect.
Yeah, because it has to be an observer and it has to be
separate at that point.
I don't know how to map it to the technical aspects of quantum
theory, what people refer to as the observer. There is a
measurement problem. That's probably what people mean by
the observer effect. I don't know. Okay, why is physicalism
then not empirically adequate?
Physicalism assumes that what really exists are physical
states. In other words, states that can be exhaustively
described through numbers or quantities alone.
And we call those states strictly physical states.
If physical is miscorrect, then physical states or physical
entities or physical properties have standalone existence
because they are supposed to be the bottom level of reality.
All states such as mental states are supposed to arise
epiphenominally from physical states. But what really has
standalone existence, in other words, states that do not
depend on anything else to exist, those are physical states,
physical entities do not depend on anything non physical to
exist. They do not depend on processes to exist because
physical entities are the bottom level of reality.
Experiment contradicts this. There is a series of experiments
which had been going on about 45 years and each one the Nobel
Prize in physics last year, which shows that if you have two
particles, physical particles that are entangled, and you
shoot one at the speed of light in one direction, and you shoot
the other in the opposite direction. And then after a while,
let's say scientist Alice makes a measurement on particle A.
And at the same time, scientist Bob makes a measurement on
particle B. And Alice and Bob do not talk to one another. It
turns out that what Alice chooses to measure about particle A
determines what Bob sees when he looks at particle B. How can
this be? If particle A and B are fundamental, if they have
standalone existence, they should be whatever they are
irrespective of what Alice chooses to measure. Right?
Measurement is supposed to merely disclose what the particle
already was immediately prior to measurement. That's not what
turns out to be the case. Alice's choice of what to measure
technically, for instance, the the axis of angular momentum in
which you measure angular momentum, that choice by Alice
determines 100% what Bob sees when he measures particle B. How
can particle B change and be something different? Because of
what Alice on the other side of the universe chose to measure
about particle A. So what this is telling us is that physical
entities do not have standalone existence. Physical entities
are a product of measurement. They arise from measurement. The
thing that is measured, the state that is measured in the
first place isn't physical. It can give you a metaphor. Suppose
you love football, but you can't go to the stadium. So you buy
two television sets and you put them in your living room, and
you watch the match on both televisions at the same time.
But on different broadcasters. Now, assuming that each
broadcaster has their own cameras in the stadium, so the
images on the two televisions will not be the same because
they are produced by different cameras, but they will be
completely correlated because they're images of the same
football match. Now, if a time traveler from the 19th century
were next to you watching this in your living room, the time
traveler would be discombobulated, flabbergasted.
How do the little man inside the box to the left can run
exactly in synchronicity with the little man inside the box
to the right? Without communicating, the box are
separate. How do the little man on the left know what to do
based on what the little man to the right are doing? The
mistake our time traveler does is to confuse the appearance, the
image of a phenomenon, the representation of a phenomenon
for the phenomenon itself. The time traveler thinks that
there are real little man inside the two boxes. He doesn't
understand that those images are just that images of something
else, of a reality. But that reality is in the stadium. What
you see on the television are just appearances thereof. And
the appearances are synchronized because they are
both appearances of the same thing. Now, what the Alice and
Bob experiment tells us is that what Alice sees and what Bob
sees, the particles they measure, they are the images on the
television screen. And Bob's measurements are completely
correlated with Alice's measurements. Just for the
same reason that the images on the two television screens are
correlated with one another. In other words, the particles are
not the thing in itself. The particle is the appearance that
arises upon measurement when the cameras shoot a frame in the
stadium. That's why they're synchronized. They are both frames
of the same underlying reality. And the clue that that's on the
underlying reality is the same is the word entanglement. And we
have to part with this notion that when we make a measurement
and we see a particle, that the particle was the thing measured.
No, the particle is the image on the television screen. The
thing measured, measured isn't a particle, it isn't physical. It
isn't exhaustively describable through physical quantities. It
is almost certainly a mental state, not in your mind or my
mind or my mind, a mental state out there in nature at large.
I mean, you spoke about entanglement and I mean, I'm just
thinking about you mentioned that Nobel Prize. And when you
think about Nobel Prizes, they're usually given to settled
sciences. So when something is settled, you get the prize. I
was just discussing the other day how Einstein never got the
Nobel Prize for the for relativity rather, for the
photoelectric effect rather than that. But more and more, there's
a growing body of evidence that seems to be showing us just how
true this non locality actually is. The fact that something that
happens here is can happen 12.8 billion light years away. And
how do you feel that these new physical data? Well, we'll call
it physical data for now, actually provides more evidence
for your claim rather than for the physicalists out there.
The Nobel Prize tends to be given to discoveries that have
meaningfully and positively impacted human life. So that's
something to keep in mind. Even the Nobel Prize last was given
to those scientists, because of quantum communication and
quantum encryption. In other words, it tends to focus on the
applications, rather than the raw theory, which is one of the
reasons why there is Nobel Prize in mathematics. You wait until
it's applied by engineering, and then you get a Nobel Prize in
mathematics, there is the Feuds Medal, which is something
different, but just as important. Look, there is no question
that these new scientific results, which are not only
foundations of physics, like we talked about, but also in the
neuroscience of consciousness, we've known for 10 years now,
and this result has been repeated ad nauseam, that psychedelics
only reduce brain activity. So we're going to go back to the
use brain activity, they don't increase brain activity anywhere
beyond measurement error. That's also not what physicalist
intuitions would expect. There is no question that these results
are not what the physicalist intuition would expect. But
what happens is, and this is nothing new, this has been the
case throughout the history of science. And if you want to know
about it, read a wonderful little book called the structure of
scientific revolutions written in 1969, I believe the third
edition, which is the one you should read. What's happening
now is what has happened many times before in history. A certain
metaphysics, a certain worldview, a certain paradigm, which is the
word used in that book, resists evidence that contradicted. And it
keeps on resisting that evidence until it becomes completely
untenable. And so there are two conditions. One, it becomes
completely untenable, you run out of excuses. And two, you have
to have an alternative that is viable. You never abandon a
paradigm or a metaphysics or a worldview, just because it is
untenable. Human psychology sticks to what it knows isn't
true, until it has an alternative that looks more
appetizing. These two conditions have to be fulfilled. And the
alternative cannot be something that you find in a book after
you devoured an enormous library for for 10 years. It cannot be
hidden. It has to be in your face. It has to be talked about. It
has to be known. It has to be common knowledge in a culture.
Analytic idealism or idealism in general has not achieved that
status yet. There are a surprising number of academics who do not
understand idealism. They mix it up with solipsism. They mix
it up with upon experientialism. It's a catastrophe of ignorance.
So that the one that first criteria is not yet met. But the
second one is also not met, which is we haven't run out of
excuses yet. And our tolerance for absurd excuses has increased
a lot because of science fiction. We have become trained by
mainstream science science fiction to completely abandon our
natural sense of plausibility. Think of theories like black
mirror and stuff like that, you know, you can upload your
consciousness to a computer. And I mean, it grudges nonsense. Or
the aberration view of multiverses. There are many
multiverse theories, some of which are quite reasonable. But
this particular one is egregious as well, which is no, the way we
explain how Alice and Bob's measurements are correlated is
that everything that can happen actually does happen just in a
parallel universe. Yeah, congratulations. You just found a
way to accept anything, any kind of bullshit that doesn't
violate first principles can now be accepted on the basis of
this. But look, from the moment my mouth started open, when I
said the last word, countless gazillions of physical
universes, as big as this one have popped into existence out of
nothing for no reason, for which we have precisely zero
empirical evidence. We now accept this as plausible. Yeah. Now
there are YouTube videos from respectable channels like
veritasium that say, Well, this is probably true. I mean, you
have to hang your rationality at the door when you come into a
room before you say you say that. But we have legitimized
nonsense through science fiction, which has given enormous
scope for excuses. So it allows people to say, Well, those
experiments that just won the Nobel Prize, they don't mean
actually, that physical entities do not have standalone
existence. You know why? Because there are these hidden
variables in nature that are global, they're spread across
space and time, they're everywhere. And, and they do
exactly what needs to be done for us to continue to believe in
physicalism. Oh, but how? Oh, we have no idea. Okay, what are
those hidden variables? Can you at least theoretically define
them? No, we define them in terms of what they need to do so we
can continue to believe in physicalism. Is there any
evidence for these hidden variables? No, not an iota. Yeah.
I mean, this is worse than religion. This is, it's much
worse than religion, because in religion, you at least are
basing your faith in some states, like your intuitions. Some
you're basing it in some states in some in something that
comes across as substantial in some way. But this is based on
nothing. This is based on trying to make nature fit your
theory, as opposed to making your theory fit nature.
Unfortunately, we this is widespread. So we are nowhere
near running out of excuses, because we've now been with
grown in our culture to accept tremendous implausibility as
something that may be the case. It's probably true. Multiverse is
probably true.
Multiple
Yeah, there's a lot of those. Okay, so chapter two, I think
look, so physicalism, we've we've concluded we've spoken about
why that felt and all those post enlightenment values.
Anything else about physicalism you want to touch on, Bernardo?
Anything else?
Let's go to chapter three, right? Let's investigate. Now we'll
move on to the next one. I mean, this one is something I know
you're very passionate about talking about as well. Let's
investigate the insoluble problems of constitutive pan
psychism. Passionable metaphysics postulates
consciousness to be a fundamental property of matter.
Let's first look at the differences. What idealism
says is that everything is mental state, not your mental
states alone, or my mental states alone, mental states at
large, everything's a mental state. Physical states are
representations of mental states upon measurement. But even the
physical states are mental, because the contents of the
screen of perception, the things we see, your touch, feel
their experiential as well. So we have mental states representing
other mental states. All there is is mental state. Matter is a
mental representation of other mental states. Pencychism is not
like that. Pencychism says what really exists is matter. And
matter has physical properties that are not mental, such as
mass, charge, pain, momentum. But in addition to having
physical properties, matter also has mental properties that are
fundamental in irreducible. So mass, charge, momentum, and
experience. Still, an experience is now seen either as a
property of matter, or as the intrinsic nature of matter. In
this latter case, it comes closer to idealism, but not much.
Because even if experience is the intrinsic nature of matter,
the structure of reality is still the structure of matter, the
structure we perceive on the screen of perception. In other
words, reality is still made of tiny little particles that come
together to form bigger physical arrangements and bigger
consciousnesses. Because the mental states somehow are
supposed to combine with one another until giving giving rise
to what it feels like to be us. A combination of the mental
states of every every subatomic particle in our brain,
something like this. So constitutive Pencychism is
different from idealism. Now, why is constitutive Pencychism
obviously wrong? There are many reasons. I mentioned one
reason. And then I'll try to dissect the intuition behind
Pencychism. So even drop that motivation to begin with. But
first one empirical reason, Pencychism assumes that at the
bottom level of nature, according to modern physics,
there are subatomic particles. In other words, discrete little
building blocks with spatial boundaries that form structure by
the way they either split apart or come together. This is
incredibly naive. These would have been acceptable in physics
in the up to the mid 1920s. But by the late 1940s, we've known
better. When physicists, and by this, what I mean is high
energy physicists or theoretical physicists working
foundations of physics, because you know, you have solid state
physicists and applied physicists, applied physics
guys, and they they tend to make the same mistake. They, because
it's a model that works in practice, let's think of nature
as casillons of little bricks. But we know that's not the case,
because since the advent of quantum field theory in the late
40s, well, that was quantum electrodynamics by Feynman, and
then that was extrapolated not only to electromagnetism, but to
all the other families of particles. So now we have quantum
field theory. We know that what we call particles, we use the
word as a metaphor. Particles are like ripples, excitations of
underlying quantum fields. A ripple on a lake can be
characterized through physical quantities. A ripple has a
certain height, has a certain speed, a direction of movement,
a certain width and breath. But that doesn't mean that the
ripple is something other than the lake. The ripple is a doing
of the lake, you cannot fish the ripple out of the lake. The
ripple is something the lake does. There is only the lake,
there are no ripples. You see what I mean? So in exactly the
same way, there are only the quantum fields, there are no
elementary subatomic particles. And yet, we talk about the
properties of elementary subatomic particles, spin,
charge, momentum, yeah, just like the ripple has a certain
height, speed, direction of movement. It doesn't mean that
there is anything to particles other than the underlying
quantum field. There are only quantum fields and they are not
spatially bound. They do not have spatial boundaries, they cut
across the entire universe. And this is true in very
significant ways, because without it, we could not explain a
great many things. For instance, we could not explain
particle interactions, which is how I grew up, you know, my
first job was at CERN. And CERN is about the experimental
study of particle interactions, you use a collider to make
particles interact. When particles interact, they produce
other particles that were not part of them. For instance, when
you produce a Higgs boson in the atlas experiment at CERN,
that Higgs boson decays into particles that were not part of
the Higgs boson. And that's what we measure. You can never
measure the Higgs boson, it decays too quickly before it
interacts with any measurement surface. So one of the
possibilities is that the Higgs boson decays into two muons or
heavy electrons. But the Higgs boson is not made of two muons.
There aren't muons inside the Higgs boson. And yet, somehow
the Higgs boson, when it ceases to exist, two muons appear. And
that's what we measure. How do you explain that? Well, you
cannot explain it without quantum field theory. Because the
muon was a certain ripple, and that ripple decayed into two
other ripples. And that's all there is to it. There were there
was never Higgs boson, there were never two muons. There were
patterns of excitation of underlying quantum fields,
which decay and become a take on different patterns. A ripple
can decay and become lower in height, longer in breath, and
reduce speed. That's why particles decay into other
particles. Or another thing that you cannot explain without
quantum field theory, unless you you are prepared to accept
magic, it's quantum fluctuations. No, the spontaneous
appearance and disappearance of elementary particles in a
complete vacuum. I mean, this is bloody magic, if you think
particles are little bricks, little bricks pop into
existence, and little bricks pop out of existence. No, that's
not what's happening. What's happening are the the unavoidable
noise, or the unavoidable excitation on the surface of a
lake. If you look, even a very calm lake, if you look at it
with a magnifying glass, you see there are tiny little ripples
appearing and disappearing everywhere. The same thing on
the fabric of reality, and that's quantum fluctuations. I
mean, I could, I could go on and on. There are no bloody
particles. There are only feuds. Feuds are not spatially
unbound. Therefore, in so far as constitutive panpsychism
assumes very naively, that the elementary building blocks of
nature are particles, which it does for it to be able to work.
It's just wrong. This is not a philosophical opinion. This is
a scientific bloody fact. The whole thing is based on a
surprising ignorance of, we could say modern physics, but it's
by now a century old. I mean, it's not even really very
modern anymore. But for the past 50 years, we've been trying to
go beyond quantum field theory and fold gravity into it. I
mean, that quantum field theory is right. I mean, it's the most
successful theory in the history of mankind. So yeah, it's
panpsychism is is wrong. Now let's explore the intuition
behind it. Sorry for the long-winded go ahead. I mean,
this is this is literally your opportunity to do that.
The intuition behind panpsychism is that we are compound
beings. We are made of discrete little cells, billions of them.
Therefore, our minds should be compound as well. Our consciousness
should also be made of a combination of casillions of
little consciousnesses. Our subjectivity should be made of
the combination of casillions of little subjectivities. Because
after all, we are compound. So should our consciousness be
compound? Ergo constitutive panpsychism. Now this makes all
kinds of mistakes. The first one, which I would just mention
without going in depth is it mistakes the structure of what
is represented on the screen of perception for the structure of
the perceiver. It's like mistaking the pixelation of my
screen for a pixelation of my subjectivity.
Particles or elementary subatomic processes, they are the pixels
of the screen of perception, not necessarily the structure of
the perceiver. But you say, well, you are a perceiver. And if I
would look at your body with a big money magnifying glass, I
would see that it's made of little pixels, little subatomic
particles. And I know my body is not my subjectivity. My body is
the appearance of my subjectivity on a screen of
perception. My body is itself a representation. It's what my
subjectivity looks like on the screen of perception that we call
the physical world. So that pixelation you're seeing is the
pixelation of the representation of my subjectivity, not
necessarily of the subject. So that's one error. The other
error is more subtle, so I won't spend a little more time with
it. It's this very notion that we are actually assembled
together by a number of cells. If we look at a grown human
body, yes, you'll find lots of cells. And then you may confuse
it with a car, because a car is also made of parts. We are made
of parts cells, the cars made of parts. What you have to
remember is how the car came to being and how a human being came
to being. A car was assembled, parts were brought together from
different places, and then welded together or bolted
together to form a car. Our car truly is a compound entity. But
we are not. We were not formed by gazillions of little cells
crawling towards one another on the ground and then piling up
on top of one another until, hey, you're a human being. That's
not how it happened. We grew. We were not assembled. And if you
look at growth, immediately after fecundation, and you know
that, of course, better than most people are hearing, the egg,
the fertilized egg is a single cell. It's not a compound
organism. It's one cell. Three days later, it's eight cells. But
if you look at it, you realize that those eight cells is just
a linguistic way to say that the original zygote, the original
egg fertilized, developed in their structure. Our cells are
not parts. They are a kind of self similar or fractal in
their structuring of the original zygote. In other words, I am
still that zygote that was in the womb of my mother nine months
before I was born. It's just that that zygote got bigger and
created internal differentiation in a self similar way. So it
started as a cell. So it's internal differentiation has the
shape of guess what cells because it it was a cell, it only
knew how to be a cell. So it's internal differentiation is cell
like. There's nothing really counterintuitive or surprising
about this. We are as unitary and non compound as adults as we
were when we were a one day old zygote in the womb of our
mothers. It's just that it's a big and highly in internally
differentiated zygote right now. We are not compound so that very
intuition behind panpsychism is wrong because it naively
presupposes that we were formed by casillions of cells crawling
towards one another and piling up on top of one another to make
us. No, sorry, that's not how it worked. And the clue to it is
that every cell has the same genome. That's the physical
clue that we are not compound.
And tell me, Bernardo, why do you think it's on the rise the way
it is?
Panpsychism, that is because we as a culture, even amongst the
elites, cultural elites in academia, I use this word in a
rather pejorative sense. So I mean it pejoratively. I think
this whole elite stuff is one of the biggest bullshit in the
history of mankind, which doesn't mean that everybody's an
authority on anything. But anyway, I digress. There is this
sense in academia, and in cultural elites, that, you know,
what physicalism indeed, doesn't work. We are screwed. It's not
going to go anywhere. Chris, of course, just lost his bet to
David Chalmers made 25 years ago, that in 25 years, science
would have an account for experiential states or
consciousness. Well, it doesn't. And it's not any further than
it was before. In fact, things got worse. So Christo, we have
to give Dave, I think. What was it? I think it was a case of
wine. I forgot what the bet was. So there is this sense that
there's this sense of impending doom for physicalism. But
there is a very strong psychological need to see
this process, not as an error, but as a step in a kind of
evolutionary path, in which we are constantly getting things
more and more right. So physicalism was a step forward. But
it was not the final step. So now we have to take the next step
by reusing the good parts of physicalism, namely that the
universe is made of matter. And now we just add experience as a
fundamental property of matter or the intrinsic nature of
matter. And physicalism still sort of survives. And we have
this warm fuzzy feeling that it was not all for nothing. You
know, we were not stupid. We just didn't see far enough. And
therefore, panpsychism now now adds the ingredients that was
missing. And merrily, we go on words, you know, it's a
progression, it's not an error. That's the psychology
underlying this, we want to hold on to as much as possible of
what we used to believe, even after we realized that it will
not deliver the child that the child is stillborn, we still
want to stick to as many aspects of it as possible, in
order to go to bed with that feeling that we didn't waste our
intellectual lives. Well, this is complete nonsense, of course,
this injects human subjectivity into what is supposed to be a
rational reason and evidence based process. No, physicalism is
just bloody wrong. And that's the end of it. We owe nothing to
it. Science doesn't depend on physicalism. Science is metaphysics
agnostic. Science is the study of what nature does. Not what
nature is. All scientific entities, theoretical entities are
convenient fictions. Nature behaves as though those entities
really existed. Whether they really exist or not is irrelevant.
We can still build mobile phones and put a man with a spaceship
on an asteroid, even knowing that Newton's laws of motions
were wrong. Newton's laws were wrong. And we put an asteroid
on this, sorry, a spaceship on the surface of an asteroid using
Newton's laws of motion, because things behave as though they
were true. So these convenient fictions are the basis of both
science and technology. We owe nothing to physicalism. The only
thing we owe to physicalism is that less scientists died, burned
at the stake during the early stages of the enlightenment. You
know, after Bruno was burned in 1600 in a central square in
Rome, burned at the stake for holding scientific views,
scientists realized, damn, we have to come up with the story
here to say that, you know, we are working on something
completely different from the church, and we are not a threat
to the church. So what was the domain of the church? Well, the
church is the claims domain over a psyche, the Greek word for
spirit, and so but also mind with in Greek, there is in ancient
Greek, there was no differentiation between mind and spirit.
And so it was all psyche. It's okay. That's the domain of the
church. Let's invent another one, one that is not psyche, one
that is not mental. And we will not burn at the stake and lo
and behold, it worked. And the problem is that the early figures
of the enlightenment knew what they were doing. The needy
who is on record saying, materialism, the old word for
physicalism, materialism doesn't work. But we have to keep on
using it as a weapon against the church. I mean, this is written
it's on record. They knew that. But at some point, with the
bourgeois intellectual revolution of Darwin, the mid 19th
century, intellectual elites figured not only can we survive
the church, we can supplant the church. And drunken, as they
were in that time, they started believing their own snake oil.
And they bought into physicalism, there were other psychological
factors as well, you know, you get rid of hell, you get rid of
the greatest fear of mankind, which is what will we experience
after we are dead. That has been the greatest anxiety of
mankind throughout our history. And in the mid 19th century, it
was gone. I mean, this is what this is fantastic stuff, right?
And then we we forgot that certain things were never meant to
be truly believed. They were political tools. And now we
believe that shit.
Sincerely. Sincerely.
You mentioned so many different things that I want to touch on.
I mean, I think the first thing that stood out, I mean, you
mentioned Christ of Cochone, and he lost that bit. I spoke to him
quite recently. And I'm just thinking about when if you were
there when Francis Crick was started this whole talk about the
neural correlates of consciousness, what do you have
said to him?
Christoph, I regard Christoph very highly. And I tell you why
Christoph is sincere. Yes. He's not a politician. He's not
trying to protect his image, or his respectability, or his
grants. He's honest, he's sincere. And his view of things
therefore evolves. Because as he thinks more deeply about things
as he's exposed to more evidence, as he exposed to different
ideas, he is incorporating all of that in his inner mental
processes. Outwardly, of course, he will be cautious, because
nobody in science or analytic philosophy wants to be coopted
by the nonsensical fringes. Nobody wants to do that. I run
this risk more than most because idealism has for so long
been associated with religion and spirituality. Even though
that's not my angle on it, I run that risk. But I'm not an
academia, I don't depend on grants. I pretty free to say
what I really think. But Christoph, I think he's quite
sincere. And the influence of Francis Creek on him was of
course, immense. Christoph was very young. Francis was already
Nobel Prize winner. Francis was beyond the Nobel Prize winner.
I mean, he's the guy who discovered DNA. I mean, this is
the Nobel amongst the nobles. This is the meta Nobel Prize.
Right. And the guy was his mentor. I had a mentor to Rudy
Bock, who was a famous physicist at CERN. He was a father figure
to me. I know what it is to be in the field of a mentor. And I
don't know for a fact that that happened to Christoph. But
Christoph is human, just like the rest of us, I would be
surprised if that hadn't been a fact, a factor there. So in
other words, I am prepared to give Christoph all kinds of
passes for because I believe in his sincerity. Yes, I believe in
his honesty.
Yeah. And your thoughts on just general neural correlates of
consciousness, anything you want to say about that?
I think it is undeniable that there are correlations between
patterns of brain activity and inner experience. I just
interpret that differently. Instead of thinking of patterns
of brain activity as the cause of inner experience, I interpret
them as the appearance of inner experience. In other words,
brain activity is what inner experience looks like when it's
observed from the outside. And this is not surprising, the
appearance of a phenomenon correlates with the phenomenon,
it's an appearance of I mean, right? So it's a different
interpretation, but not a denial of the fact of the
correlation, the correlation is there. And to do neuroscience,
all you need is the correlation. Because an objective
measurement of brain activity gives you an extrinsic
appearance of what's going on in the mind of the subject. And
that ought to be tremendously useful. So analytic idealism
does not contradict neuroscience. On the contrary, it
validates neuroscience metaphysically, you should keep
on doing brain scans. Because that appearance is what the
phenomenon you're interested in looks like. You look at the
image of a phenomenon to study it. There's nothing wrong. I mean,
this is the essence of science. Sciences, we look at the image
of a phenomenon. For instance, when I'm in my workbench here
behind me, and I'm using an oscilloscope to measure electrical
activity, I don't think that that picture on the screen of my
oscilloscope is the phenomenon. No, it's what the phenomenon
looks like upon measurement. But that appearance is extremely
useful. I use it every day. Now, do the same thing for brain
activity, you're looking at the appearance of the phenomenon
you're interested in and that that science, that's legitimate.
So I think looking for the neural correlates of consciousness,
pay attention to the words, the neural correlates of consciousness,
not the neural causes of consciousness is incredibly valid. I
think there is an issue that for a long time we mixed up the
neural correlates of consciousness with the neural
correlates of metaconsciousness. In other words, reportable
experience, which is something extra on top of the experience
itself. But awareness of this conflation is growing. And so now
we will be adopting, say, no report paradigms to look at the
true neural correlates of consciousness. And I'm all for
it. I'm all for it. I think neuroscience is critical for a
healthy future of the human species. And I am not skeptical of
neuroimaging to the extent that others are because those bugs
were found in analysis software a couple of years ago, and people
said, Well, throw away 23 years of neuroimaging. I don't think
that I think some results are so robust that despite those bugs,
many of the conclusions can still be set to hold. So I'm not
antagonistic at all. What I'm antagonistic of is when a
neuroscientist is biased and tries to fit or communicate his
results in a way that makes it sound compatible with physical
autism. That I think is dishonest. I think it's a lie. I think
not only it defaces science, but it's immoral. And I think things
like that should end scientific careers. When it may become
public.
I think before we close off a chapter three, which is by the
way, Christoph is guilty of none of what I just said. I had
other people in mind. Okay. Do you want to mention them or should
we just move on? No. Okay. Before we ever pay attention to my
output to know who I'm talking about.
I mean, we're closing off on panpsychism. Before we do that,
we have to address the elephant in the room, which I think in this
case has to be Philip Goff. Because the last time we spoke
about we had a chat, you mentioned Philip Goff and how he
changes his views all the time, but we didn't go into it. So I
think this is a perfect time to touch on that.
Oh, but that's cruel, because now you're you're inviting me to
freely criticise a colleague.
I mean, if Philip's a colleague of mine, too, we've chatted as
well. So this is not this is not a platform for hatred or
anything, but just more fan a critique of his ideas.
Now, if you give me a specific point that I disagree with,
point that Philip makes and I disagree with, I'm prepared to
argue why Philip is wrong. But if you just invite me to say,
okay, now, no, okay, criticize Philip Goff.
Okay, not Philip Goff version of panpsychism.
It is a form of constitutive panpsychism in which instead of
saying that experiential, experiential states are a
property of matter, he says, experiential states are the
intrinsic nature of matter. In other words, matter is
experiential states. And physical properties are sort of
epiphenomenon. So it comes very close to idealism in a sense,
but not at all in another sense, which is it still attributes
to consciousness, the structure of matter. And that's the error
of taking the pixelation of the image or the structure of the
thing that is represented as an image. For instance, on your
screen right now, I appear pixelated. Unless you're using
an apple retina display, if you look close enough, you see that
Bernardo on your screen is made of little rectangles. But
that's the pixelation of my representation on your screen.
Bernardo himself is not made of little rectangles. So when
Philip says the structure of nature is the structure of
elementary subatomic particles, he's making precisely this
mistake. He's taking the pixelation of the appearance for
the structure of the thing that appears. And he also makes the
mistake, which is was forgivable for him when he began of
taking elementary subatomic particles as irreducible
things. While physics, for the past 90 years, is or at least
80, knows that no, particles are just ripples of fields, what
really exists are the fields. Now I've made this criticism to
Philip years ago. And his response was to say, Well, but
there is one possible theory of physics, which acknowledges that
there really are particles. And that's Bohmian mechanics.
Came up and came out in a famous double paper by David Bohm in
1951. Famous pilot wave theory, which is an interpretation of
quantum mechanics, according to which particles really exist as
little things. But there is a reason why that thing was never
taken seriously by the vast majority of scientists. There
are many reasons. Many of them technical. There is that check,
or is it Slovakian, there's a check physicist, Mottel, I
forgot, Ludo, Lubeau's Mottel, I forgot his name. But he once
wrote sort of a definitive criticism of Bohmian mechanics,
it took the time to elaborate in every technical detail why that
thing is just nonsensical. But an intuition survived because
there was a famous experiment done many years ago with droplets
on a fluid that were that was claimed to emulate the results
of the double slit experiment, but with a little droplets in
other words, physical little entities. But three years ago or
four, paper came out showing that those results were because of
experimental errors. Those results were not valid. So even the
intuition behind it, it's now gone. So Bohmian mechanics is
history. It just it doesn't have a chance. And even if it had
it's such a niche thing that if Philip hangs the plausibility of
his view on that, as he did a couple of years ago, then might
as well give up. Instead of going to Joe Rogan and other
podcasts and talking about something that by now he
shouldn't know is untenable. There's something else he
should know, but apparently he's still talking about it. He says
idealism is inflationary compared to panpsychism. And the
reason is he says, Well, Bernardo, you yourself talks about
mind underlying the physical world. So you have these two
things, the physical world and mind, which makes me go that,
Oh, my God, no, I would expect that from a podcast listener,
but not from a professor. He's running away with language and
failing to understand what is meant. Under idealism, mind
underlies matter only in the sense that the thing that really
exists is mind. And what we call matter is itself a mental
process that represents mental processes. In other words, there
is only mind, there aren't two things. The usage of the word
underlies is just to cater to popular intuitions. You see a
physical world. There is something that underlies that in
the sense that the sky underlies the indications on a dashboard.
But the dashboard and the sky are physical. The sky is not a
separate ontological category. In the same way, the physical
world is mental because it's an experience I have. And what
underlies this mental process is another mental process that is
represented by the first one. In other words, there are only
mental processes. There's absolutely no inflationary
approach here. If you bother to think about it for 10 seconds
and try to understand what is meant, as opposed to sticking to
the mere word underlies, as if it signaled ontological
inflation, it doesn't, sorry.
But not before. I wanted to move on to chapter four before
this, but I mean, I have to ask you this question. I know,
because Philip and Keith now have the podcast mind chat. I mean,
I love the fact that more people are chatting about this, we're
getting into this a lot more in depth. What are your thoughts
on that as a concept? Because I know Philip does say that if
panpsychism does not work, he's most the most reasonable theory
that he thinks is second best is illusionism.
I think it's the stupidest thing in the history of philosophy.
It's a completely self defeating thing that only survives by
making its own proponents very confused and all tied up in a
conceptual web. So, so confused that at some point they squint
their eyes and wave their hands and say, Oh, and behind all that,
that's the answer. That's, that's how it survives it. It's not
a product of clear thinking that let's first address it from
the obvious perspective. We will go deeper because most listeners
should believe that the proponents cannot be this drastically
wrong, that they see a little deeper than this. So the obvious
perspective is an illusion is already an instance of a
conscious process, you experience an illusion. So you
cannot dismiss the existence of consciousness by appealing to
illusions, because illusions are already instances of that
which you want to dismiss. So it's, it's immediately self
defeating. If consciousness is an illusion, then consciousness
exists. If every content of consciousness is an illusion in
the sense that it doesn't correspond to external states of
affairs, consciousness would still exist. And actually it
would be the only thing that exists, because it's all
illusion. So there is nothing else. There is only the
illusion. Illusion is already an instance of consciousness. And
then you might think, Oh, but these guys with PhDs, they must
they must see deeper than this. There must be something to
illusionism beyond this, right? Not really. But they think
there is and I'll tell you what they think is there. What they
say is the following. And this could be a paraphrasing, not
only of Keith Frankish, but of Danny Dennett, his master as
well. It goes like this. If my experiences are actually just
brain activity. Why do my experiences not look like firing
neurons? If my experience is firing neurons? Why do they not
look like firing neurons? Right? If I experience the night
sky, the night sky doesn't look like firing neurons. The theory
goes as follows. Well, it's because the brain produces a
kind of summary digest of its own activity. And what we
experience is that sort of summary digest. Now, the summary
digest is not the original brain activity. And that's why we
don't experience things that look like brain activity, that
look like firing neurons. It's because what we experienced is
a summary digest produced, produced by the brain of its own
activity, and not the original activity itself. Does it sound
reasonable?
It's difficult for me to say because I mean, initially, when I
came into this podcast, I actually supported illusionism as a
theory of consciousness.
It does sound reasonable, doesn't it?
So that's the thing to me, it actually does something reasonable.
Now let's take the next step. What is this summary digest?
It's brain activity. It cannot be anything else. Yes. Because
if you say, well, it's the soul, then you're not an illusionist.
If you say it's mental stuff, then you're not an illusionist.
Right? You could say, well, it's not brain activity, it's liver
activity. But you still have the same problem that I'm about to
tell you. The argument is we don't experience firing neurons
because what we experienced is a summary digest of firing
neurons. But that summary digest can only be firing neurons.
There is nothing else it can be. So why doesn't the summary
digest itself?
Feels like firing neurons. Oh, because there must be a meta
summary digest. Yeah, but the meta summary digest can only be
firing neurons. And infinite regress is upon us. You cannot
escape this. Yes. And people think they can escape this by
doing all kinds of linguistic hand waving. Key, for instance,
the way he defines qualia makes you dizzy. And at some point,
you realize that there really is nothing there. There is just an
attempt by otherwise intelligent people to accommodate their
belief system. And therefore, fooling themselves, they need to
fool themselves in order to accommodate their own belief
system. And they will fool themselves linguistically and
through conceptual obscurantism, which is not malicious,
normally obscurantism is malicious. You do that in order
to deceive other people. But there is such a thing as auto
obscurantism, which is something your mind does to
safeguard its own belief system. So it's not just a
guard, its own belief system. So you will start adding layers
of conceptual abstraction one on top of another until you can't
see the end anymore. Oh, but there is something there. Therefore,
I can continue to believe that materialism is right.
Do you think you fully grasped Sue's version of illusion or
delusionism?
No, it's not illusionism. Because if you look at the
conversation, he she defined illusionism as the idea that
that some things we experience are illusions. Well, yeah, it's
certainly right. But it's not what Danny Danette and Keith
Frankish make of illusionism. Because the problem of illusionism
is that it is either incoherent or it is irrelevant. You see,
because if it is relevant, then it offers an avenue for solving
the hard problem of consciousness. And for it to do
that, it has to convince people that consciousness doesn't
exist, that it's some kind of illusion, which backfires because
an illusion is already an instance of consciousness, but
never mind. So for it to be relevant, it has to solve the
hard problem, or at least offer an avenue for treating the
hard problem.
Or in that case, the in this case, the illusion problem is
what they refer to.
Yeah. Yeah. So for it to be relevant, it has to do that. But
if it does that, it's incoherent. Now, if you don't want it to
be incoherent, you have to redefine illusionism in a way that
makes it coherent. But then it no longer addresses the hard
problem at all. And therefore, it's irrelevant. So illusionism
is either nonsensical, or it is irrelevant. And and and that's
a conundrum. And because of that, he will see true illusionists
not not so so based on our conversation, she clearly is not
an illusionist in the strict sense of the word.
I mean, I spoke to her last week, her view is more, it's more
about our delusions about how we approach consciousness and the
illusions of how we perceive the word per se, or the way we
perceive everything about this concept. So it's a lot of
nonsense in there. Yeah, lots of illusions in there. Yeah, the
problem is that
they, this can be a way to create straw man. I had a
direct of this, I once wrote an article criticizing the work of
a neuroscientist from California, Antonio Damatio, I think,
no, yeah, Antonio Damatio, the guy who said consciousness
doesn't doesn't exist. It doesn't happen. He's on record saying
that in an article on new science cover feature. And I
criticize that. And and the way I criticize that was that what he
defined as consciousness is not what philosophers call
consciousness at all. It's not even what the regular person on
the street would call consciousness. He defines
consciousness as a kind of immortal soul, a kind of a ghost,
a kind of persistent self that inhabits our body. And then he
proceeds to dismantle that notion that there is no self, no
personal self, all of which I agree, there is no stable personal
self, there is no personal self this. It's an illusion. The
personal self is an illusion. But that's not what we mean by
consciousness. What what we mean by consciousness is the
qualities of experience. And Damatio's argument doesn't even
touch that. So I criticized him. And he replied, with pure
ad hominence, portraying me as some kind of spiritual woo woo
wacko, religious fanatic. And I was amazed with that. I mean, I
confess it drew a smile, because it was a answer to a criticism
that in over 800 words, didn't at all touch the criticism. It
wasn't a non answer. And but it dawned on me that it is the
illusionists that are confused about what is meant by the word
consciousness. It is they who are thinking of disembodied souls
or permanent personal selves. It's they who make that mistake.
And now they found a way to refute the mistake they make. But
they project that on other people. But the other people are not
making that mistake. You see what I mean? Like Danny Dennett, he
went to great lengths to dismiss the homunculus idea that
consciousness is a little guy sitting inside your head watching
the output of your brain. I mean, that's nonsense. I mean,
congratulations, you refuted something. Everybody in the
world in the 21st century. No, it's untrue. But don't attribute
that nonsense to me. Don't attribute it to the analytic
idealism, and then go and burn the straw man you created. So what
dawned on me after that interaction with Damazio was
that they are not refuting the confusion of others, the
illusionists, they are refuting their own confusion. And they
think that they are refuting other people. I don't think that's
what's going on here. Yeah, what about Galen Strossen and
Mysterionism?
Mysterionism by definition is not a step forward. In term, it's
not a positive step forward, in the sense that it's not bringing
new clarity. It can be positive in the sense that it at least
avoids the bullshit avoids the bullshit of saying, Oh,
consciousness is just brain activity. No, brain activity is
probably is certainly correlated with consciousness. But the
causality here is right to substantiate that for one and a
half century, and failed. And now we know for sure that it's not
there. So at least we avoid that false conclusion by saying, Well,
we don't know what it is. So there is a negative step forward
in the sense that you negate a step backwards. But you don't
produce a step forward by saying, Well, we don't know what it
is. Yeah, I think it's, it's too soon to give up. Because the
problem is not as intractable as it seems. It only seems
intractable. If one makes some unexamined assumptions that make
it intractable. But if you drop those like unexamined
assumptions, and you clear your head, and you approach the
problem with a clear, unprejudiced head, it's certainly
not as intractable as it would otherwise seem. So I'm not
prepared to give up.
Yeah, I will meet. What was the other thing you said,
Mysterionism?
And I think I just said, yeah, Galen Strossen, I was just
mentioning Galen Strossen and trying to think there's no other
theory of consciousness. But anyway, chapter four is pretty
much moving away from the other theories of consciousness, where
I wanted to go into depth on analytic idealism itself,
discussing how it makes sense of reality without requiring
anything other than nature's soul given, which is experience.
So I think, let's do that.
Can I can we take a quick bio break? I need to go to the toilet.
Let's do my bottle.
I just realized that would have actually been a perfect
opportunity for me to test out some of these bumpers I created.
Okay, yeah, but not a yes. So let's go into depth. Let's go in depth
into analytic idealism itself, discussing how it makes sense of
reality without requiring anything other than nature's soul
given, which is experience.
Yeah. So to make sense of nature, we have to grant that there is an
external world that we inhabit. If I were in your studio with you
right now, I would describe it in a way that would be consistent
with your own experience of it. So our experiences are not
identical. But they are clearly modulated by something outside
them, some set of states that we inhabit and which surround us.
In other words, solipsism, we cannot not solipsism, we cannot
say that the whole of nature is made of individual mind states, in
other words, mind states within people and animals, and avoid
postulating an external world. I believe that is impossible.
There are attempts to do that, that are not necessarily
incoherent, tends to go by words like radical constructivism or
inactivism. But I believe, and that may be just my being old
fashioned, or too stupid to understand some of these
approaches, I believe ultimately to prove impossible to get rid of
the external world. There has to be external states that we inhabit.
But in admitting this, we do not need to make them non mental.
To make them non mental is equivalent to the following is
equivalent to be standing on the earth, looking until the horizon,
and understanding that everything we see until the horizon is
colloquially physical in the sense of no contents of perception.
But then saying beyond the horizon, it's not planet Earth
anymore. Until the horizon, it's planet Earth. But beyond the
horizon, I acknowledge there is something beyond the horizon,
but it's no longer planet Earth. Why? Beyond the horizon, it's
just more of the same type of what is in the horizon.
In the same way, beyond individual minds, it's more stuff of
the same type that individual minds are made of. In other words,
mental processes, mental states, they are beyond the horizon.
They are not within my individual mind. If I stopped existing,
those external mental states would still exist. If every living
being would die, those mental states would still exist. They
existed before the first living being popped into existence.
But they were still intrinsically mental. It's just more earth
beyond the horizon. That's the idea. And with that, you can
explain nature as something separate from our individual
minds and which is not susceptible to our whims, our
fantasies, our fears, will not change what it does because of
our morning affirmations. There is still a world out there that
is objective from our perspective, but from its own
perspective, it is subjective. Just like my thoughts are
objective to you, but from their own intrinsic perspective,
they are subjective. So that's an analytic idealism in a nutshell.
And the question that remains unanswered is, what creates this
inside outside division? Because to speak of individual minds
and a world outside individual minds, you need boundaries that
determine the inside of the individual mind. If everything is
mental, what mental process accounts for this boundary? Well,
the answer is a mental process we have known to exist already for
centuries, but we know for sure is a fact of nature for the past
20 years or so. And that's dissociation. Dissociation can
literally make you blind to what is right in front of your open
eyes, as has been shown in Germany in 2015. So dissociation
creates a cognitive boundary within a single mind that leads to
the appearance of multiple disconnect centers of awareness.
In psychiatry, these different centers of awareness go under
the technical name altars, or alternative personalities.
Studies by Harvard show that 25% of people with dissociative
identity disorder have dreams in which multiple altars partake
at the same time. They experience the same dream, each
from its own perspective. And they see one another as
characters within the dream. They can even club each other
over the head, speak to one another, touch one another. And
when the person is awake, a person with dissociative identity
disorder, depending on the alter that is in executive control
of the body, that alter will relate to the therapist the same
dream, but from its own point of view, describing the other
altars as characters within the dream, and the other altars do
the same thing. So the hypothesis is that, okay, there are
only mental states. So, you know, the unified field of physics
is a field of subjectivity. Excitations of this field of
subjectivity are what we call experiences. And within this
field, dissociative processes form that create this cognitive
boundaries. We know since 2014, that people with dissociative
identity disorder, if you put them in a brain scanner, there
is something a dissociative process looks like in an fMRI. In
other words, dissociative processes have an appearance,
they look like something. In the context of nature at large,
what dissociation looks like is biology. It's life. Life is
the appearance of dissociation. It's what the
dissociation in the mind of nature and the field of
subjectivity that is nature, it's what it looks like when it
forms. And that's why when you look in the mirror, you see a
living being. And when you look at other people who can't read
your thoughts, and don't know what's happening in the Galaxy
of Andromeda right now, they too are the extrinsic appearance
of dissociative processes. And that's why they can't read your
thoughts. That's why they don't know what's happening in the
Galaxy of Andromeda, even though they're all part of the same
underlying field of subjectivity, the one, the one
mind of nature, they cannot access cognitive content beyond
their own dissociative boundary. And because of this
dissociative boundary, we lose access to the mental states in
the world that surround us, which which is itself made of
mental states. But evolutionarily speaking, it's very
important for our survival that we can collect information
about the environment around us, negotiate that environment to
perceive threats, to perceive food and water. So it stands to
reason that we would have evolved to indirectly represent
external states, as these external states impinge on our
dissociative boundary. Because even in a person with
dissociation, let's not talk about pathological dissociation,
let's talk about something that everybody can relate to. We all
undergo dissociation all the time. Most of the time, it's not
pathological. For instance, if you're having relationship
problems with your partner at home, and it's really grieving
you, but in the morning, you have to go to work. So what do we do?
We park our problems. That's a way to induce a form of
dissociation. When you are at work, you're not experiencing
your, your relationship problems, you're experiencing
your work. But that dissociated emotion is impinging
indirectly on your work life. It is modulating the tone of your
thoughts, you may become more negative, less optimistic. It's
modulating your react your reactions to environmental
challenges. For instance, you become more brisk, abrupt, and
rude towards people. All that is happening while you're still
dissociated from your relationship problems, because
you've parked them. But the dissociated process is still
impinging on your dissociative boundary and modulating what's
happening inside. Now, the same thing in nature, when a living
being forms, that's the appearance of a dissociative
process. But the mental states around that living being are
still impinging on that dissociative boundary, and
evolution, of course, leverage that impingement to collect
information about what's happening outside, even though
because of dissociation, you are no longer able to directly
access external states. And that's what we call perception.
Perception is a way to collect the sensory input, the sensor
input of the airplane that comes in the form of impingement, and
then translate it into an experience that gives you a sort
of at a glance view of what's around you. And we make all that
vision. Now, what would be the alternative? The alternative is
that you're not dissociated. So you're a telepath. Now, if
you're a perfect telepath, it would be impossible to survive.
Imagine a telepath in the middle of a roused political
oriented crowd, you become completely dysfunctional. So
what you need is to have a sort of not direct at a glance view
of what's going on. So you see people agitated, but you don't
get overwhelmed by it. You have a dashboard representation of the
mental states there are outside, but you're not directly
experiencing those mental states or that would be the end of
your dissociation. So that's what perception is. Perception is
the way evolution has found to allow our inner mental states
inside the dissociative boundary to be modulated by
external mental states that impinge on our dissociative
boundary. And what we call the physical world is basically the
contents of the screen of perception. And physical
quantities such as meters, coulombs, seconds, these are
descriptions of the representations. So the hierarchy
you get is that real states are mental states out there beyond
your dissociative boundary. Physical states are inner
cognitive representations of these external mental states. And
physical quantities are descriptions of these cognitive
representations of this inner physical sort of physical
states. So life is what dissociation looks like. Death is
the end of dissociation. There is still an external world that
you cannot change just by doing your morning affirmations.
Otherwise, believe me, my world would have changed already
long ago. Science is still valid. Science is a way to model and
predict the behavior of the external mental states. It
says nothing about what those states are. That's not part of
the scientific methodology. It's only part of the methodology of
people who are very confused about the difference between
science and philosophy. And often they are science spokes
people, people who don't do science just talk about it. Yeah,
that's it.
So I mean, that's a wonderfully in depth summary of it all. I
mean, the overall, I think that for people who want to listen to
this further and find out more about it, they should definitely
go watch the essential course because this is definitely a
crash course. But I think let's move on to chapter five, because
you've already dived quite deep into analytical idealism at
this point. Chapter five is we review empirical evidence from
the fields of foundations of physics and neuroscience of
consciousness, which seems to directly contradict mainstream
physicalism and suggest the validity of analytic idealism.
So one of these things we already touched upon, which is
the physical entities do not have standalone reality. They are
produced out of an act of measurement. And this is very
easy to understand with the dashboard metaphor. If physicality
is what appears on the dashboard. If the airplane
sensors don't make a measurement, then the dashboard shows
nothing. Is it so complicated to understand? It's not, it's not
magical. It's not quantum. Oh, my God, the quantum
mysterious. No, there are no physical entities unless you
measure for exactly the same reason that the dashboard
dials show nothing. Unless they are plane sensors, measure. What
we have to abandon is this notion that the external world is
the physical world. It isn't. The external world is what is
measured. The physical world is the representation of the
measurement results on the dashboard. So physical experiments
show have shown already, unless you believe in egregiously
gratuitous and inflationary science fiction, like ever
Russian multiverses, or the magical undetermined hidden
variables of super determinism, unless you're prepared to
entertain fantasy. Experimental evidence has refuted the
standalone existence of physical entities. And neuroscience of
consciousness now has a number of examples that show a inverse
correlation between brain activity, and the richness and
intensity of experience. The most famous one is of course,
psychedelics. You have the richest, most intense
experience of your life, while the activity of your brain has
only reduced with respect to the to the baseline. But there is
more pilots undergoing g force training. In centrifuges, they
pass out. But when they come round, they report, and I will
quote, memorable dreams. In other words, what we take to be
unconsciousness is just unresponsiveness. They those
people are not unconscious at all. They are experiencing memorable
dreams. Or another example, acquired savant syndrome, people
who suffer accidents or a shot in the head or suffer head, head
trauma, they suddenly become capable of incredible mathematical
feats, or they start composing music, like professional
composers, even though they have no training, or they become
exquisite artists. So that's another instance of impaired
brain function leading to broader consciousness. Or Vietnam war
veterans, that's a study from 2016 war veterans, more than 100 of
them were studied, damaged to specific parts of the brain is
correlated with a much higher propensity to so called spiritual
or religious insight. My more prospective study was done in
Italy in 2010, in which people who were to undergo
operations for the removal of brain tumors, they were studied
for an index called self transcendence, your ability to
identify to something bigger than yourself. They were scored
for that before and after surgery. And after surgery, which
always causes damage in surrounding cerebral tissue,
spiritual self transcendence, the index of self transcendence is
much higher. So people have a broader, deeper experience of
life, despite impairment of brain function, or even trivial
things to have in like choking in Asia's worldwide have figured
out, and this is a very dangerous thing, that partial
strangulation can give you a psychedelic trip, you can go to
other dimensions, speak to alien beings, fathomable experience,
just by partial strangulation, of course, some of them die,
because turned out they actually get strangulated. But
strangulation, which reduces blood flow flow to the brain and
therefore reduces metabolism, a generalized reduction of brain
metabolism leads to much richer and intenser experience. I could
go on and on and on. But this shows that experience is not
caused by brain activity, because there are cases in which
brain activity reduces and experience increases and both
happened in significant amounts, significant degrees. So what
this shows us is that brain activity is what experience in
their experience looks like. And unlike the cause of a
phenomenon, the appearance of a phenomenon doesn't need to be
complete. It doesn't need to tell everything there's to know
about the phenomenon. For instance, I see an appearance of
you right now, but I can't see what's underneath your skin. I
don't know what's on your back. I can't see the details of your
metabolism. Your appearance correlates with what you are,
you're conscious in their life. But it doesn't tell me
everything there is to know about that in the exact same way.
Brain activity correlates with your conscious in their life, but
doesn't tell you everything there is to know about conscious in
their life. If it were a cause, it would need to. There cannot be
anything to a phenomenon, but what you can trace back to its
causes. But an appearance doesn't need to be complete. And
that's why in all these instances you have experience that
cannot be traced back to brain activity.
I mean, you've given so many different neuroscience of
consciousness examples there. I mean, I'm definitely not going
to say, or be one of those guys going to say, I'll find each
paper and put the link down below. Anyone listening and
watching just I have done that already. Although you are not
one of those guys, there are many of those guys out there.
Yeah, that's funny. Now I'm talking about for the audience,
if they want to find those things, they're just going to have
to Google it and research it on their own.
Oh, if you go to which chapter was it chapter five?
Chapter five. Yes. So yeah, you go to the description of that
video. And it's not all because there are just too many, but
it's a couple of dozen there. At some point, I thought this
should be enough for the worst skeptic at this point.
Okay, no, then I'll definitely have that leg ready for them.
Within that something I thought about while you were talking,
but otherwise, because part of it was the fields of foundations
of physics. Well, I don't think we touched on this. But what do
you think about pen roses and Stuart Hameroff's kind of quantum
consciousness theory?
I don't think it, I think it was a valid attempt, but I don't
think it pans out. Now, but pen roses, objective collapse. I
think it looks at things the wrong way. And now I mean,
extremely dangerous territory, because I'm about to criticize
a physics Nobel Prize winner. But sometimes physicists get
sidetracked by wrong or unexamined philosophical
assumptions. And for those, I am a bit of an authority. So what
I'm about to say, I say with humble humility towards pen
rose, because I have profound admiration for him more than
respect. But we are all humans, nobody gets it perfect. So and
I'm too committed to truth, to not say what a few needs to be
said, just because of my extraordinary respect for Sir
Roger. I don't think there is such a thing as collapse. I think
collapse is a merely operational concept that allows us to
operationalize experiments and talk about them. But it doesn't
reflect an actual element of reality. I don't think anything
collapses in reality. And therefore, objective collapse is
an illusion, because there isn't collapse to begin with. And I
think Sir Roger started from the assumption of collapse, because
operationally, it's useful. You know, you have a quantum system
in a superposition. If you touch it, it will deco here and
collapse. So that's what we experience doing science. So I
understand the tendency to try to take it for a fact, an
objective event. I don't think it is. I don't think if you have
specialist viewers, they will now raise all kinds of questions.
So at least continue a little bit more, at least to give an
impression to people that I have thought about it, maybe I
didn't give you a complete answer, but I have thought about
decoherence is not collapse. What we take to be collapsed is
merely decoherence. But decoherence is such a marked effect
that we think collapse really exists. So what do I think is
happening? What is decoherence? Let's start like that. Okay,
if you have a microscopic quantum system in a superposition,
that superposition has information. When you touch that
quantum system with a classical apparatus, the information in
the superposition will sort of leak into the classical
environment. In other words, you can no longer see the
superposition. But the superposition is not lost.
That information didn't go away. It just became diluted in the
classical environment, the moment you touched the quantum
system. So nothing collapses, the superposition still exists in
the broader classical environment, but you can't
perceive it for the same reason that you cannot perceive a drop
of ink in the ocean. When you drop ink in the ocean, the
droplet didn't disappear. It didn't collapse out of
existence. The information in the droplet needs molecules,
properties of its molecules, it's still there. It's just
diluted and dispersed in a much broader context. So that's
that's decoherence. You lose your ability to see the
information in the superpositions. If you run an
interference experiment, you will not see an interference
anymore, because it's now diluted in the classical
context. What the coherence does not tell you is how the
classical context became classical to begin with. Because
the whole thing is based on this notion that, okay, the
laboratory equipment and the laboratory itself is classical.
But if everything is quantum, how did that become classical to
begin with? That's where we need to review our understanding of
foundations of physics. But the point I'm trying to make for
now is that what passes for collapse is merely decoherence.
Nothing truly collapses. The question we need to answer is how
things appear classical to begin with.
Okay, interesting. I wanted to ask you about this, but I was
considering just moving on to the next one, but I was going to
ask about the last one regarding superdeterminism.
Oh, yeah, I had a debate with Zabina Hossenfalder a while
ago. How do I describe that without coming across in a way
that I don't want to read? I think I read your paper about it
already.
I can repeat some of the criticisms I made of super
determinism towards Zabina. If you link the video, then people
can go back or I wrote about it as well. You wrote about it.
Yeah. But in a nutshell, what super determinism tries to
account for is the measurement problem. For instance, the
correlations between Bob's measurements and Alice's
measurements, even though Alice and Bob cannot communicate, and
the particles were already in flight for a while, so the
particles couldn't communicate with one another either.
Superdeterminism tries to address that by saying that
the statistical character of an individual quantum measurement,
which cannot be determined, when you make a single quantum
measurement, the outcome is random, all you can determine is
a law of large numbers. If you make enough measurements, then
we know the statistic distribution of the results. But
for individual results, they are random. In other words, they
violate determinism. What superdeterminism says is that, no,
there is no violation of determinism. We just cannot
predict the outcome of a single measurement because there are
variables involved that we don't measure, that we know
nothing about. And it's those hidden variables that actually
determine everything. And that's then extrapolated to
account for the whole of quantum mechanics and preserved
notions such as physical entities do have standalone
existence. And the correlations between Alice and Bob's
measurements is just because these hidden variables are not
spatially located, so they provide a kind of instantaneous
transmission of information that causes the correlations.
What these, if you elaborate, if you go a little bit deeper
into this general idea and try to explore what it means in
practice, what you get is the following. I will use a method
for, but the method for really corresponds to the
technicality of the thing. What is being postulated here is
the following. If you were, suppose you are an astronomical
photographer and you want to make a picture of the moon at
night. So you take your camera out to your backyard, you put
it on a tripod, you point it at the moon, and then you
will program the parameters of the camera, such as exposure,
exposure time, and aperture. What super determinism says is
that what the moon is depends on the settings of your
camera. So if you change the exposure, you change the
aperture, the moon will change. The settings of your
experimental apparatus determines what the thing that
you measure is. How does it do that? Here are the variables.
We don't know. But that's what it does. And why is this
interesting in order to preserve materialism for the
following reason? If you believe that your camera settings
change the moon itself, then whatever your photo shows will
be consistent with your theory. Because the photo that comes
out is no longer an objective representation of the thing
measured. It is now a representation of your
experimental settings. Nothing is objective anymore.
Everything depends on experimental settings. Because
your experimental settings will change what things are via
these hidden causal chains. Worse yet, even if you postulate
a theoretical entity such as hidden variables that have
not been shown yet to exist, for which there is no evidence,
even in that case, the minimum that is expected from
decent scientists is to specify what it is that you're
postulating to exist. Not to just say hidden variables, but
no, no. Tell me something more. More or less, what is it
supposed to be? Where am I supposed to find it? What
would be the physical parameters under which I could
expect to measure them or to find them? Give me something to
give you a concrete example. When Higgs predicted the Higgs
boson in the 60, Peter Higgs, there was zero evidence for the
Higgs boson. But he told us what was the expected energy
level. He told us what it was expected to decay into so he
could know what to find. He told us the circumstances and
parameters and conditions under which we could expect to
produce it. He gave us the ranges of different physical
properties of the Higgs boson. No evidence for it, but he
told us what the Higgs boson was supposed to be if you
postulate a theoretical entity. At the very least, you have to
specify what it's supposed to be so people can look for it.
And sure enough, we went looking for it and we found it.
By the way, we found it within the range that Peter Higgs
predicted. It was not being in the middle of it. It was a
little higher on the energy level, but it was within range.
This is science. But Zabina, she doesn't even begin to tell
you what it's supposed to be. So how does she define hidden
variables? Hidden variables are whatever is necessary to be
in nature such that I can continue to believe in
materialism and determinism. That's not science. And during
the debate, she told me now she did determine the hidden
variables. She even referred to a paper and I believed her. I
thought, well, then I failed in my homework. She determined
it somewhere. Turned out that she just, well, I'll just say
it. She just lied to my bloody face and it was an outright
lie because I went to the paper she mentioned and there is no
such a thing down there. The paper was a toy model of hidden
variables, which was never meant to apply to reality. It was
a mathematical exercise so they could train about writing
the equations. Path integrals. Zabina's path integral for
superdeterminism has a term called quantumness, which is
supposed to be minimized. And it's like, come on. I mean, this
isn't theory. This isn't science. This is hand-waving. And in
the very paper she referred to, the first author of, who was
not her, he says at the end, this is just a toy exercise. The
hidden variables we are specifying here cannot exist in
reality because we are violating several things we know to
apply in reality. So it is, so far it may change. Somebody
may specify coherently some hidden variables and give us
ranges and give us something that we can work with. But right
now, it's a kind of unfalsifiable religion. It's
something that is defined in terms of which, in terms of
which, what you want, in terms of what you want to believe
nature to be or how you want to, how you want nature to
behave. So you don't say what the hidden variable is. You
just say there is something that does whatever needs to be
done so I can continue to believe what I believe. This isn't
science. It borders on the unethical, in my opinion.
At least it has a cool name, super determinism. It's a
pretty nice name. I think let's move on to chapter six,
Bernardo. So in this chapter, we're going to discuss the
distinction between phenomenal consciousness and meta
consciousness, arguing the so-called unconscious reflex
merely a lack of the latter, not the former.
So phenomenal consciousness is present when there is
experience. I'll give you an example. Right now, everybody
listening to this is experiencing their breathing. They
are experiencing the air going into the lung, the dilation of
the rib cage. They are experiencing, they are flowing
through their nostrils. But they, right before I said it,
they didn't know that they were experiencing their
breathing. They were not telling themselves in their
minds, oh, I'm now breathing. This can happen also with
subtle forms of pain, especially with men. Men can
be in pain for days, that has happened to me. And only
realize after days, oh, I've been feeling this pain for a
while. So I was experiencing pain, but I couldn't report on
my pain even to myself. I was experiencing my breathing,
but I was not reporting on my breathing even to myself.
So phenomenal consciousness requires the experience,
the pain, the breathing, but not the report of the
experience. When an experience is accompanied by the
internal report, I am now having this experience that's
now meta consciousness or conscious meta cognition.
That's your ability to introspectively assess the
contents of your own mind and then describe them for
yourself. Now we know these two things are separate at the
very least. I mean, arguably, we have known this forever
because it's very reasonable. And in the annals of
philosophy, we have people talking about it without
using the name Nietzsche talked explicitly about the
distinction between consciousness and meta consciousness.
So did Schopenhauer. So did Kierkegaard. So there's
history about that. But technically, we've known
things at least 2002 that there is this distinction when
Jonathan Schuller published a paper in which he showed that
not only these two things are separate, they can even
differ. You can have one experience and report on
something else. There are dissociations between
consciousness and meta consciousness, which is the
title of the paper, dissociations between consciousness
and meta consciousness. What often people talk about
when they say consciousness, what they mean is
meta consciousness. The experience is that not only we
have stuff that we not only experience, but that we
know that we are experiencing them. In other words, it
requires this higher level mental function called
re-representation. An experience is already a
representation. If you see a balloon in the sky, that
balloon you perceive is an inner cognitive representation
of external states of affairs. But when you tell
yourself, I am experiencing a balloon now, you
re-represent that inner cognitive representation,
such that the re-representation points to the
representation and say, that is happening. This
re-representation is a higher level mental function
that perhaps only humans have. And if other animals have
only higher animals, pachyderms, cetaceans,
other higher primates, but it's not there in earthworms.
Probably it's not there in a cat. A cat's not going around
saying, I feel hungry now. I have the experience of
hunger. The difference between consciousness and
meta consciousness is the difference between I am
hunger and I feel hungry. Because when you are not
meta conscious, the experience is all there is.
There isn't the subject who is having the experience.
There is only the experience. So you are the hunger.
But when you say, I am experiencing hunger right now,
that's meta consciousness right there. And humans
are so big in this meta consciousness business
that we mistake it for raw consciousness itself.
Yes. At some point, I mean, what are your thoughts?
Because I remember the last time we spoke, we spoke
about how David Chalmers perfectly framed the
hard problem of consciousness for everyone, because
that's the first step to getting a solution to a
problem. It's framing it correctly. And then now we
obviously started the meta problem of consciousness.
What were your thoughts when you came out with that infamous new line?
The meta problem of consciousness is why about 30% of people
do not see the hard problem of consciousness.
I'll talk about this just to conclude my previous
thought, because I didn't connect it back to the story line.
The important thing about making this distinction between
consciousness and meta consciousness is that
when we talk about unconscious states,
we may actually be talking about non-meta conscious states.
Under idealism, everything is a conscious state or a mental state.
So there is no such a thing as unconsciousness.
So how do we, how do we account for these
nominally unconscious states? Well, we can account for them in two ways.
One is they're not unconscious. They're just not meta conscious.
And the other one is they're not unconscious. They're just not accessible
to the reporting ego because of internal dissociative processes
in inner dissociation. That's why we talk about unconsciousness.
It's not that there is actual, there are actual states that are not conscious.
It's just that those states are not accessible due to
lack of metacognition or lack of associative links.
They are not accessible to reportability, even self-reportability.
Now the meta problem of consciousness is the problem of
why a certain percentage of people do not see the hard problem of consciousness.
Why they do not, they do not recognize its existence.
The hard problem of consciousness is the following.
There is nothing about physical parameters
in terms of which we could in principle deduce the qualities of experience.
In other words, there's nothing about the configuration or disposition of
subatomic particles and fields in your brain,
in terms of which we could deduce in principle what it feels like to eat an
apple or to have a bellyache or to experience a disappointment.
There is no link between the two. And I already gave you an explanation for
why there is no link between the two. It's physical parameters are descriptions.
They are the map. But when you try to put the descriptions
prior to the thing described, the lines in the map lose their meaning.
They mean nothing. And if they mean nothing, of course you cannot
account for the qualities of experience or deduce the qualities of experience
from a map that means nothing. It's very clear.
Now the problem is why do some people not understand this?
Some people think that there is no hard problem of consciousness.
That it's perfectly reasonable that the physical parameters of your brain as a
material object leads to conscious experience.
I have theories about this. There are different reasons
why some people don't recognize it. I think the leading reason is that
they do not understand what physicalism means
or entails. They do not understand physicalism.
And that's something that I discovered by personal interactions with friends
of mine who are very technically capable, very
erudite people, not philosophers, engineers, scientists.
They do not understand physicalism. I had a friend a couple of years ago
here in my backyard and we were having a beer in my backyard.
And at some point I sort of got lost in my own thoughts and I made a
comment out loud which was basically an inner thought.
I said, look at this garden. I had several trees in my backyard and lots of
plants. Under physicalism, all of this is inside your head.
Why did I say that? Because under physicalism the qualities of perception
are created by your brain inside your head. The green of my garden is inside
your head. Oh yeah, there is stuff out there in my
garden but it has no qualities. It's a set of mathematical equations floating
in a vacuum. It's the best way you can visualize that.
All the qualities that I associate with my garden they are supposed to be
produced by my brain inside my skull. So they own my garden as I perceive
is supposed to exist inside my head which is absurd. And I made that comment
and my friend jumped. He has a doctorate in computer science. He jumped and said
what nonsense. Physicalism says no such a thing. Of course your garden is out
there and then it dawned on me that many people who identify as
physicalists do not understand physicalism.
They think that the only thing that is inside your head
are endogenous experiences like thoughts,
fantasies, emotions. But that perceptual experience is really out there.
No, that's not physicalism. Physicalism says that perceptual experiences too
are inside your head. Is that not naive realism?
Yeah, it's a form of naive realism. So I think it's my suspicion
that many people who do not recognize the hard problem
fail to do so because they do not understand physicalism.
If they truly understood physicalism they would have to acknowledge that
there is an impassable bridge between quantities and qualities.
Fernando, anything else you want to touch on between that distinction between
phenomenal and meta-consciousness and the unconscious relation?
Good to go. Good to go. Okay, so the closing part of the
chat of this crash course on analytic idealism.
We respond to any objections that you found most appealing, most
convincing, close to convincing you otherwise,
and then obviously you can leave us with some personal reflections about
idealism in life. Many of the objections are based on
a misunderstanding of idealism. For instance, some time ago
Son Harris was at the Lex Friedman podcast
and he was asked a question about idealism and I will paraphrase his answer.
I don't remember the words exactly but his answer was like
the notion that all of this out there, the cosmos,
is in my mind. It's obviously nonsensical and
I was appalled by that because here's someone who brandishes a degree in
philosophy from Stanford University and idealism is part of the
ABC one-to-three canon of philosophy and he didn't know what idealism is.
It's farcical, almost. If that's your misunderstanding of idealism,
then as per your misunderstanding, idealism is not true.
But the idealism you're talking about is your own delusion about what it means.
It's not the real idealism. Most of the criticisms are based on
these kinds of misunderstandings and they can come from people even
who brandish a philosophy degree from Stanford University.
Ignorance suffixed by the letters PhD is the worst form of ignorance because
it's plausibly believable. Other criticisms are based on
assumptions that people make without knowing that they are making them.
For instance, criticism that often come that I often hear from very highly
educated people is the following. Bernardo, if I have a needle
and I stick it in your arm, that physical process of a needle
piercing your skin will lead, will cause the mental
process called pain and you will withdraw your arm.
So here we go, a direct arrow of causation from a physical process to a
mental process. Ergo, mental processes are not fundamental
and idealism is not true. Now, do you see this strawman here?
Under idealism, there are no non-mental processes.
Under idealism, that needle piercing your skin
is a dashboard representation of a mental process.
A mental process that impinges so strongly on your dissociative boundary
that it directly modulates inner states within the dissociative boundary.
We call that pain, but the whole thing is mental.
The needle or the glass of alcohol that you drink,
those are dashboard representations of transpersonal mental processes
that impinge or even pierce your dissociative boundary.
So the arrow of causation is not from physical to mental,
it's from mental to mental. And that mental processes
causally affect other mental processes of a different type is trivial.
Your thoughts modulate your emotions every day. You have a bad thought.
Look how you feel. Or if you're feeling bad, pay attention to your thoughts. Your
emotions modulate, causally modulate your thoughts every day.
Mental processes causally impinge on other mental processes.
This is trivial. There is nothing extraordinary about it.
So that needle causing pain is just an instance of that.
A transpersonal mental process piercing through your dissociative boundary
and causally impacting your inner mental processes. We call that pain.
Or you could call that something positive in the case of a caress.
But that hand caressing your skin, that too, is the dashboard representation
of a mental process that is impinging on your dissociative boundary.
Finally, there is a deeper type of criticism that I already talked about.
Which is based on this notion that under idealism there is only one field of
subjectivity. That's how we avoid the combination problem.
We start from something that is already universal.
And now all you have to explain is the appearance of separation.
Which lo and behold is very easy to do because we have an empirically
established phenomenon in nature called dissociation that does exactly that.
So we escape all of these discussions about the conceivability of a hypothesis.
Forget conceivability. It's an empirical reality.
Whether you can coherently conceive of it or not, it's your problem.
Don't mix epistemology with ontology.
Dissociation exists whether we understand it or not.
But you still have this one field of subjectivity.
And a frequent criticism against it is this notion that
we are compound organisms made of parts, made of cells.
Therefore, our consciousness must be compound.
It cannot be just one dissociative process in a big unity.
It has to be something that forms from parts.
But I already discussed the fallacy here is to think of human beings as assembled as opposed to grown.
Tell me, did you touch on... I'm trying to think if you did touch on the difference between
solipsism and idealism. Did you touch on that?
There is a lot of confusion out there which is where it's solipsism.
So the strict definition of solipsism is the view that you are the only conscious entity that exists.
And that everything in the world, in the universe, is your own dream.
That the other people you see, they are figments of your imagination.
There is nothing it's like to be other people.
There is only something it's like to be you seeing other people.
In other words, other people are just shells with no ghost inside.
They don't have their own conscious perspective.
They're just images you produce in your own dreamy mind.
Solipsism is a non-starter.
It's not something that can be discussed because if you are a believer in solipsism
and you're consistent with it, you're never going to defend it.
You're never going to talk about it because you're just talking to yourself.
Do you argue with solipsists often?
A true solipsist will not argue.
What's his name?
Alan Watts, he made a joke once.
Imagine a conference of solipsists.
Each one of them thinks that everybody else is an illusion.
Why would they go to the conference?
Why would you defend solipsism to someone else?
These other persons are supposed to be a figment of your own imagination.
Who are you talking to?
There is no debate around solipsism.
Bertrand Russell, in the early 20th century, he said,
people who maintain to believe in solipsism actually act in contradiction to that professed
belief. They don't act consistently with that professed belief.
In other words, they aren't really solipsists.
You see, solipsism is unfalsifiable because every evidence pro or against
solipsism is construed by the solipsist as a figment of their own imagination.
But it is not the most reasonable explanation.
There is a line of argument that shows you
that solipsism is not the most reasonable explanation.
And it has to do with observing other people's behavior that is caused
by emotions or experiences that you haven't yet had.
So therefore, you could not have imagined them.
And therefore, solipsism is not the best explanation.
But that's strictly speaking solipsism.
And it's completely different from idealism.
A solipsist would say other people are not conscious.
They only exist as shells that I imagine.
An idealist would say other people are dissociative processes in the mind of nature.
There is something that is like to be them.
They have their own conscious point of view too.
A solipsist would say there are no external states of the world.
This is all my personal gene.
They are all inner states.
An idealist, an objective idealist would say no, no.
There is really an external world out there.
That is not in my mind.
But that external world is also mental.
It's not in my mind, but it's mental.
Just like your thoughts are mental, but they are not in my mind.
They are external to me.
So yeah, these are declaring spectacular differences
between solipsism and idealism.
Things get confused when people use the term solipsism in a non-rigorous manner.
I have a friend, for instance, who talks about cosmic solipsism.
He says, no, no.
There is really just one mind and it's dreaming this whole thing up.
And I admit that you are it too.
And that's non-dualism.
That's Eastern non-dualism.
And this is idealism indeed, but it's not solipsism strictly speaking.
Cosmic solipsism is idealism.
Why will we use two words instead of one?
Just call it idealism.
And by calling it cosmic solipsism, you create confusion
with this strict definition of solipsism.
So I steer away from it.
I disclaim everything that has the word solipsism
because acquiescing to it is conducive to confusion.
And I do think they're really so closely associated
in the sense that people mistake the two views
that you should actually do that.
It's a good way to avoid that.
Any other objections, Bernardo?
Or do you think you've covered them all?
Oh, certainly not.
Oh, well, all the main ones at least,
the ones that are slightly convincing.
Yeah, the ones that came to my mind the quickest, I have covered them.
Okay, not great.
So then I think the closing part's obviously,
I know you're not a mystic.
I know you're not someone who's very spiritual.
You're not very spiritually inclined.
You don't like giving that type of advice or opinions on it.
But you're closing personal reflections on idealism and life in general.
And then we can conclude this crash course on...
An idealism.
Idealism is the most self-evident, obvious, intuitive, natural,
and empirically adequate world view that we could have.
And we just took a wrong path because of social political reasons
in the early Enlightenment.
We started believing our own snake oil.
There was a reason for coming up with this fiction of materialism
at that time.
It was a social political reason.
And then we started mistaking our own fantasies,
social political tools for realities.
And this has brought us where we are.
And you might say, well, it's been a long time.
No, less than two centuries.
It's nothing.
It's the blink of an eye in the cultural history of humanity.
We will overcome this.
We put our foot in the wrong place.
We will overcome.
We'll bring our feet back to the path.
And we'll continue to go forward.
And it will be a historical blip.
That's all there will be to physicalism in the future.
So don't think for a moment that because physicalism is mainstream
that this and of itself makes it extraordinarily plausible
because throughout human history, the mainstream has always been wrong.
At least throughout Western history, the mainstream has always been wrong.
We have absolutely no reason to think that miracle upon miracle right now
for the first time, it will be right.
It will not.
It is not.
The plausibility of physicalism is a cultural artifact.
It has been manufactured by people who were born and are told
that physicalism is true from their school teachers, their parents,
their family doctors, and the eight o'clock news anchor.
And they think, I don't need to think about these metaphysical questions
because all these people who were alive before I was even born,
they already did the thinking for me.
They arrived at this conclusion.
And this conclusion apparently bases all science.
So it must be true.
And people like Bernardo Castro, they're just taking too much psychedelics.
Too much too many drugs.
I haven't taken psychedelics in years now, but it's very easy to come at this
conclusion and very tempting because it's the lazy conclusion.
It's the conclusion that doesn't put the responsibility on your shoulder
to be critical about your own beliefs.
In that sense, it's attractive like a religion.
It gives you the answers without asking you to do any of the hard work.
Now, in the second half of life, this comes back to bite you
because believing in it becomes then a personal habit.
And it's very difficult to part from it once it has become a personal habit.
And in the second half of life, it's a terrible thing to believe in
because it gives you the picture that the universe is dead
and life has absolutely no meaning.
That if all of everything you learn, all of your hard earned lessons,
the product of the suffering you had to undergo throughout life,
all of those are supposed to be physical brain states
that lose their coherence once you die.
And therefore, it's all for bloody nothing.
All for nothing.
Don't think that when you're 28.
But when you're 48, you start, oh, shit.
All this shit and it's for nothing.
And then the way to get out of this completely unnecessary dilemma
that leads to depression and anxiety
is to review assumptions.
But now those assumptions have become a lifelong habit.
And it's very difficult to even see them, let alone revise them.
But if you can revise them, if you can value your own individuality,
your critical individuality as a worthy opponent to mainstream stories,
if you have enough trust in yourself to trust your rationality,
to a Nico extent, as the story is the outside,
you can demolish this artificial source of depression and anxiety
and realize that what there is is mind and life is a configuration of mind.
That configuration ends.
Your body disappears.
You're no longer dissociated.
But everything you learn through this terrible roller coaster that we call life,
which is exquisitely prone to suffering and pain,
everything you learn, everything, all of your maturation process,
all of your edification process as a suffering human being,
it doesn't disappear because at the end of the dissociation, the boundary is over.
Therefore, the mental contents of that dissociative process are now
seeded in a much broader cognitive context.
They are now seeded into nature at large.
And it wasn't all for nothing if you can get to this point.
You will not suffer a day of existential depression in your life anymore.
What you will suffer again from is a kind of death anxiety
that our ancestors knew very well, but we don't.
What we fear is oblivion, which is a kind of existential anxiety.
But we no longer fear what we will experience after the end of life, the great unknown.
Because we think we are not going to be there to experience it.
So we are not we're not fearful at all about the state of consciousness that comes after life.
Well, that's the bad news.
That anxiety comes back.
If your listeners have gone through an experience of ego dissolution through psychedelics,
that's a sample of what might be coming.
And there is some degree of dread about it.
You're going to exit the state of consciousness
that you've experienced your whole life, which is where you feel comfortable.
It's our safety zone.
It's that state of consciousness where you can repress the stuff you don't want to feel.
You don't want to know.
And with the end of that state of consciousness we call life,
you may not be able to repress any of this shit anymore.
And then what?
Yeah.
So your life will be very meaningful again.
Meaning will be will be permeating every single aspect of your life,
whether you want it or not, whatever you do or don't in your life,
it will still be immersed in meaning and you cannot avoid it.
But shit, when the time comes, you may be in your pants again.
Because yeah, I am afraid of that transition.
No, you're making me quite afraid right now.
I mean, for someone who claims to not be as a spiritual storyteller or mystic,
that is quite mystical, I must say.
Well, if we equate mysticism with human, being human, dealing with what it means to be human,
such as our sense of meaning and our anxieties, then yeah, then everything.
Yeah, that's what I meant.
That is what I meant.
I didn't mean mystical.
Yeah, I'm not spiritually in the sense of some external deity that is interfering with
states of affairs in nature, according to some premeditated plan.
No, I don't think that applies.
I think we're both the same in that regard.
Bernardo, thank you so much.
I mean, this was pretty cool.
I was figuring out how we could do this.
And I think this was the perfect approach.
How are you feeling?
Anything you want to add to that?
Anything you want to say?
Passed pretty quickly.
Exactly.
I mean, I looked at the time and I was actually quite surprised.
But how are you feeling?
Everything you feel like you've got everything off your chest or is a good crash course?
You're right.
Yeah, I think we covered good ground.
Yeah, thank you so much, Bernardo, for joining me again.
I mean, I'll try and think outside the box for the next one.
Thanks for having me again.
It's been a pleasure.
It's been an absolute pleasure.
Cheers, Bernardo.
Thank you so much.
Crash course done.
Thank you.
