Look, the last time we spoke down, we, we touched on the fact that physics and evolution
agree, space time is doomed. At this point, it is not fundamental reality, nor its objects.
And today, I think our focus is going to be on your paper, conscious agents and the subatomic
world, which I've read a couple times, and still I don't think I understand it as much as I
have to. It's very complicated. I don't have a physics background, but I'm hoping this conversation
is going to help enlighten me a bit more. Wonderful paper, by the way. How was it working with
Chetan and Swapham again? How's it going? Very, very fun. Chetan has been a collaborator for more
than 30 years, so we go back a long time from our youth. And so we're continuing to have fun
collaborating with each other. You know, we bounce ideas back and forth. He's the mathematical genius.
I'm the mathematical flunky, but he's trained me enough so I can actually talk with him about it,
and then he can do the actual hard math stuff. And then Swapham is a world-class experimental
particle physicist. He's at CERN and the Fermilab, and he contacted us out of the blue earlier
this year. He'd seen our work on consciousness and his possible relationship to particle physics,
and he thought that there's some possible good stuff there. And so he looked at what we were
doing in the paper. We were already halfway through that paper writing it when he contacted us,
and he decided to join forces and work with us on it. So we're really glad to have a real
professor of particle physics. He's a professor at UC Berkeley, now emeritus, but also at CERN
and Fermilab. So Swapham has been very, very helpful. He's a no-nonsense guy. He knows what's
real and what's not. And so he helps really guide us in terms of the... We have to be daring,
but sometimes you're daring and obviously wrong, so he helps us.
That's amazing. And the fact that you guys have someone like that, I mean, in this paper, you
propose a mathematical model in which conscious agents are fundamental and interact via Markovian
dynamics. And some agents create space time as an interface where by the interact and physics
is the projection of that ancient dynamics onto the interface. So this is quite a fascinating
idea altogether. I mean, in a nutshell, you're basically saying that conscious agents create
the subatomic world. Let's start by exploring that basic concept.
That's right. So it is out of the box, but here's what I think is the current state of play and
physics that calls for out-of-the-box thinking like this. And that is that space time, first space and
time, were the foundation for Newtonian mechanics. And that was fantastic for several centuries.
And so successful that many physicists, like in the 1890s, figured that it was done. Physics
had little mop-up jobs to do here and there, but it was done. And bright students should go
elsewhere too, because there was just nothing for really bright people to do. Well, that all
blew apart in 1900 and then 1905 with Planck's work and then Einstein's work. And basically,
by 1905, it was over for space and time, and it was over for Newtonian as being fundamental. Of
course, we still use Newton to this day, but as a fundamental theory, it was over. But it took
a few decades for some to find that out, right? The 1922 Nobel Committee giving Einstein his
prize made it clear it was not for relativity theory, not for his theory of space time. So,
I mean, even though it had been over for 17 years, it takes a long time for the community to
understand and move on. Well, so now, Einstein's space time has been a fantastic foundation for
more than a century, special in general relativity theories. But in 2005, David Gross,
the Nobel Prize winner for his work on the strong force, wrote an article that was, of course,
in honor of Einstein and the 100th anniversary of his 1905 miracle year and his special theory
of relativity. But then he, in the right spirit of science, he said, space time is doomed. Thank
you, Einstein for space time. But now space time is doomed. It's time for us to move on. And that's
the way good science is. And since then, a lot of others have echoed the same thing in Neymar,
Connie Hamed and Nathan Cyberg and Ed Whitton and so forth, you know, are basically saying in
their own words, space time is doomed. And what that means is not that we're going to throw space
time away, but that it's it's not a deep enough structure to be thought of as foundational. It
has specific limits. It has no operational meaning beyond the Planck scale, which is like 10 to the
minus 33 centimeters and 10 to the minus 43 seconds. It just it has no operational meaning,
which means that it's not usable beyond that. And it's really pointing to its own limitation.
So the question is, how do we go next? Because most people think, well, you know,
space time is the fundamental reality. How could any objects or any entities be
outside of space time? Space time is everything there is. That's the way we think. And so this
requires a new level of creativity, because the idea is you have to open your mind. Space time
is not fundamental. You have to think, could there be new structures entirely outside space
time, not curled up inside space time, the little hidden dimensions are entirely outside.
And in the last nine years. So this is relatively recent.
Physicists have published structures they've discovered beyond space time, not curled up
again inside space time, entirely outside space time. And most people have no idea what that
could even mean. What could you possibly mean about structures that are outside of space time?
But that's that's where we're headed. And so that's what we're doing
in in our work on conscious agents. And I'll just say the reason for what we're doing is this.
The physicists have discovered structures that are that are static, like geometric
objects and structures like permutations and so forth. But but they haven't yet
posited a dynamics that would account for these structures. And so the structures are like the
amplitude hydrant and things called decorated permutations and cosmological polytopes and so
forth. So so they have these these structures. But you know, ultimately, physics goes after
dynamics. But this is going to be different because these are going to be
dynamical entities, not inside space time, but dynamical entities, utterly and completely
outside of space time. And so that's not going to be comfortable. What what in the world could we
what are these things that are not inside space time? I mean, you and I are, you know,
here we are inside space. What are these things that are not inside space time
that are dynamical? And what are they doing and why? So you can see that this is this is not a
trivial endeavor. And you have to, you know, you work, of course, we're going to make mistakes
here. And that's what we're so we're we're proposing. I'll put it in the the least
tendentious way. We're just proposing that there are these dynamical entities
beyond space time that have a Markovian dynamics. And the argument for this Markovian dynamics
in part is that we show how a Markovian dynamics projects to decorated permutations
and through and therefore through decorated permutations into space time. So so what we're
doing is we're saying the physicists discovered decorated permutations beyond space time.
And it's a big surprise, you know, permutations of what and for why what who ordered this,
basically, you know, why why should that be what we're discovering beyond space time. And what
we're saying is, well, we discovered that if you have any Markovian dynamical system, the so called
the the ergodic communicating classes of it, the recurrent communicating classes of the Markovian
dynamics are classified by decorated permutations. So that's a new result in a paper we published
in January. So we we, as far as we can tell, no one had ever published that before. And so we
discovered that and that gave us a way to take our Markovian dynamics and say this could be
a the kind of dynamics that's beyond space time because it does map into these decorated permutations.
And so there's some kind of dynamical entities. That's the least tendentious way to put it.
What we're proposing is more tendentious. We're saying, well, we're also after consciousness,
we're interested in consciousness and the hard problem of consciousness, what's relationship
and consciousness and brain activity. And so we're trying to in some sense kill two birds
with one stone, what's beyond space time? And can we solve the hard problem of consciousness
at the same time with that? So we're proposing these are dynamical entities that we'd call
conscious agent. But you know, the mathematics stands by itself, if you don't like the conscious
interpretation, just say they're dynamical entities beyond space time. But I'm interested
in pursuing the conscious agent interpretation myself, and how this can help us with the hard
problem of consciousness. I think, look, at the moment, you're doing very fascinating work. I've
got a lot of notes in front of me. I made tons of notes because your paper is quite extensive.
As of today, I'm not sure it's not yet published, if I'm correct, Don, the current paper.
That's right. It's going to be, we submitted it as a
contestant in a competition for the Institute of Neolithic Sciences. And we're one of three
winners of that competition. And so it's going to be released on June 24. So there's going to be an
online, I think Zoom, anybody that wants to can join in and I'll be talking for 20 minutes,
describing our work there. And then the other two groups that are winning will also be describing
their work. So it's June 24 at the Institute of Neolithic Sciences, you can just go online and
and is free to log in. Okay, great. At some point, I will put a link to that. And just by the way,
for everyone listening or watching, I'll put the link to our previous conversation as well,
because there we discussed conscious realism, user interface theory, we discussed quite a few
things. But keeping in track with this paper, the theory of conscious agents that these two assumptions
pretty much they exist conscious experiences, such as the taste of chocolate or the mood of elation,
that's something you've written. And they exist probabilistic relations among experiences as
well. But then you go further to describe describe what are called CA nets. So talk to me about what
a CA net is, and then we'll move from there and just go through the paper in a bit of a systematic
approach. That's right. So the way I think to think about it, that's the most easy for most
people would be think about the Twitterverse, right? That's a big interacting social network,
there's millions of Twitter users, probably billions of tweets that are going along. And
if you think about it, you're following certain people. If you're Twitter, you follow certain
people, there may be a few dozen or a few hundred or a few 1000 people that you're following. And
there might be, you know, a few dozen or if you're lucky, a few 1000 or a few 100,000 that are following
you. And so it's a really complicated social network. And there are lots of subgroups that
are they have their own interests and the things that they're they're following and so forth. And
so that's what you should think about when you think about this conscious agent network. There
are a bunch of these agents, they're interacting. What they're passing instead of tweets is they're
passing experiences, they're affecting and effectively, tweets are affecting your experiences,
they're thinking how you they're affecting how you think, what what videos you see, what what
what you're you know, what cat video you're looking at and laughing at. And so they're
affecting your experiences. So that's that's quite parallel. And so this is just
doing a Markovian dynamics of this network of conscious agents and proposing that that's the
fundamental reality. And again, by the way, I'm absolutely not doctrinaire about this. This is
like my attitude is, we're taking our first baby steps out of space time. Yeah, of course,
we're going to be wrong. But you got to you've got to do something precise. And and and it's going
to be you know, I think future work will look at that as our work is simple. And but hey, you know,
it was bold, and it was precise. And that's that's so we're trying to make a bold and precise
step outside of space time. And we're proposing this Markovian dynamics.
So that's that's sort of the top level. Now, I should say why, you know, you mentioned that
we're talking about experiences and probabilistic relationships among experiences, you might,
you might wonder, well, why in the world did they just do that? I mean, they're thinking
about consciousness, there's a lot of stuff in consciousness, there's the self, there's learning
memory and problem solving and intelligence. And there's just a ton of stuff that free will.
Why aren't they, you know, talking about all of that and putting that right into their model? And
the reason we're not putting that right up front is the whole point of a scientific theory is to
have as few assumptions upfront as possible. If you throw in the kitchen sink, what are you going
to explain? You want to make the work as hard as possible for you as few and as trivial the
assumptions as you possibly can. And then you have to do all the hard work to explain all this
other stuff. So so our attitude was, if we just say that there are conscious experiences, like
the taste of chocolate, smell of garlic, whatever it might be, and probabilistic relationships among
them. And we can then say, okay, the probabilistic relationships will be Markovian. Basically,
it just means probability with a finite memory. That's all it really means, probability with
the finite memory of what happened in the past. Okay, we start with that. Then we can build networks
of these interacting, trivial conscious entities. But these networks, we can show are computationally
universal. So anything you can do with neural nets, you can do with these conscious agent nets,
even though they start off with just experiences and probabilities of relationships among experiences,
you can build anything that you want out of it because they're computationally universal. So
we can build theories of learning memory problem solving intelligence, and so forth.
We can do all of that. And it's even more interesting because Markovian dynamical systems
are not limited to computation. They're defined on probability spaces. And the measurable sets
in the probability spaces which they're defined on need not be computable. So this could actually,
we're not doing that right now in our work, we're only looking at the computational aspects. But
if we upgrade our brains, we might be able to go after the non computational, the beyond
computational aspects. But I'm happy just to look at the computation for now. But so that's sort of
the top level view and why we picked what we picked. If we put a self in there to begin with,
it seems like we're just throwing too much of the kitchen sink in upfront. And same thing with
intelligence and even specific kinds of memories. I mean, we have this one, just a finite memory of
conversations. But then you think about humans, we have episodic memories and memories about
things learned in language, the structure of language, the grammars of language that we know.
And so there's lots of different kinds of memories, short term memory, long term memory.
So that will have to all build out of networks. So that's sort of the top level.
I think that that approach is both, it's a humble approach and very strategic in a sense.
Obviously, you don't want to put too much out there and focus on too much. You want to
maintain a core focus. And I think that's great. But I think it's also nice to see someone who's
claiming something so extravagant. I mean, to some people, this is very outside the box. It's
extremely out there. And when they approach you with any questions, I always see, I love how humble
your approach is. Because you'd expect someone who's claiming something so outrageous to actually say,
defend themselves a lot, but you don't, you often say, your goal is to be proved wrong,
you want people to actively prove you wrong. That is something science. Yeah, that's what I
actually love about your approach to this whole thing. So far, when you've started since starting,
how much like, let's say pushback have you gotten from the scientific community?
This is, I'm just stepping up the paper for now. So my, a lot of my closer colleagues are, you know,
studying consciousness, the hard problem of consciousness. And so my training is in cognitive
neuroscience and artificial intelligence. And, and so a lot of my colleagues and good friends
who are physicalists and looking after looking for how the brain or computer systems could create
consciousness. So we're all good buddies and friends and so forth. I think most of them aren't
persuaded by a long shot. And I'm sure a few secretly think that, you know, I, you know,
you have a lot of promise, but look what he's squandering it, you know, so, so yeah, I'm sure,
but you know, they'll be polite and have a beer and we'll have a good discussion and so forth.
So, you know, and that's to be expected to mean it's, it's, there's nothing new under the sun.
This is the way it's always been in science that most of the quote unquote innovations turn out
to be wrong. And the ones that turn out to be right aren't usually recognized for a long time.
And that's just, that's, and that's the way it should be. Science is a conservative
enterprise in the sense that as a social institution, it's conservative. Of course, we
need entrepreneur, individual entrepreneurs within science to push different ideas and,
and take them to their limits. And of course, in most cases, be wrong. But, but then science as a,
as a social institution checks and rechecks and shows you where you're wrong or where
you need to polish your assumptions and so forth. So, so yeah. But, but then, you know,
the pushback goes both ways when my, whenever I get together with my colleagues on stage who are
physicalists, the one question I always ask is, okay, so you have a theory in which, you know,
integrated information patterns or orchestrated collapse of quantum states of neuronal micro
tubules or some global workspace architecture. You claim gives rise to conscious experiences.
Okay, great. So what specific conscious experience like the taste of chocolate or
whatever, whatever, anyone you want, can you give me one example where you say,
this pattern of integrated information must be the taste of chocolate. And these are the reasons
why that pattern of integration is necessarily the same thing or give rise to the taste of chocolate
could not possibly be the taste of vanilla. I mean, this is supposed to be a theory of
consciousness. So what one conscious experience can you explain? And there's, and this is
a stunning result. There is in all of the physicalist theories. And I include it in that group.
They may say it's not necessarily physicalist, but
yes, anyway, yeah, I just spoke to Christoph Koch the other day. And I know it's almost,
it's kind of like an idealist, I'm sorry, a hand psychist approach, but you're not really
psychist. Yeah, exactly. They would say, yeah, that's right. So so but I would say that they're
trying to have some kind of, you know, computational core, like an integrated information
shape or something like that, that gives rise or is identical to the so if you think it gives rise
to it or is identical to give me one, just give me one example where your theory works on ones.
I want one specific conscious experience that we can go test. But if you don't have one,
a specific conscious experience that we can go test, how can this be a theory of consciousness?
And so there's, there's literally not one experience that has been able to be explained
by any of these theories, where they say this pattern of, you know, neuronal collapse of micro
quantum states of neuronal microchipals must be the taste of chocolate or this global workspace
architecture and this pattern of activity must be the smell of, you know, a cherry.
There's nothing on the table. And, and I think, you know, Stephen Pinker understands this. He's,
he's a, you know, a friend of mine for many years and brilliant. And he likes the global workspace
model. But he says in his recent book, The Enlightenment Now book, I think 2018 or something
like that, that he likes the global workspace, but, but the connection between the state of
the global workspace and specific conscious experiences, he says, is something is the,
is the last dollop of a theory that will have to be stipulated. And he's right. The connections
are stipulated. So there's not, they're not explained. And that's the key thing.
They're, they're, they're saying we have a theory of consciousness, but no specific
conscious experience is ever explained. It's always stipulated. And so, so what I always say
to my friends is, look, you guys, you're, you're stipulating these, you know, like the neuronal
workspace, the global, the global workspace architecture or IIT or, you know, orchestrated
collapses, you're stipulating that, and you're stipulating these conscious experiences. And
then you also have to stipulate the relationship between them. Well, I'm only stipulating the
conscious experiences. And I propose to show you where space time and physical objects come from.
So based on what we call Occam's razor, you know, the theory with the simplest
set of assumptions wins, this theory should prevail because we don't have, I don't have to
stipulate as much as you stipulate. So that's my attitude about it. And one reason I took this
direction, if I could have given a physicalist theory, I would have. But I realized decades ago,
it's not possible. It's just not possible. And why, why waste my time?
So as strange and as counterintuitive as it might be, let's just let go of space time. Let's, you
mean, if I have to let go of, if I, if I'm wrong, do I have conscious experiences? I'm not sure I'm
right about anything. So, so I'm, you know, again, I might be wrong, but, but boy, you know,
so let's assume that there are conscious experiences, taste of chocolate, smell of,
let's just make that mathematically precise. And then let's see if it's possible to boot up
space time. And that's what this last paper is about. So, okay, well, finally, I can say
we can have a Markovian dynamics of these conscious experiences interacting. And the,
the physicist told us that we need to get it mapped onto decorative permutations if we're
going to map it into space time. Well, we can do that we can map, but that's a new mathematics,
but we, we, we discovered this new mathematics, we map Markovian dynamics to canonically into
decorative permutations. And then the physicists tell us how to take it into scattering amplitudes,
like particle scattering in space time. So that's, that's sort of the big picture of why,
why we're making these bold, crazy moves beyond space time. The bottom line is,
when you try to do it inside space time, you learn first, space time is doomed,
10 to the minus 33 centimeters. And second, the best and brightest minds,
my colleagues are brilliant. These best and brightest minds on the planet cannot figure
out how to boot up conscious experiences, not even one from inside space time. And,
and it's not because they're done, they're brilliant. It's just that you can't do it from within
space time. And, and that will be the lesson, but we had to really, we had to spend a lot of hard
work and a lot of careers to learn that it can't be done.
Don, are there any specific people you can think of who do not follow your theory or perhaps even
go against it? Who's you find relatively convincing or at least respect and admire their work? For
example, someone with a neuroscientific theory or philosophical differences, any people that stand
up to you? Any theories? Oh, well, I mean, I know most of all, all the big players and their friends,
and I think they're brilliant. And I think that the theories are brilliant. It's just that I think
they're brilliantly wrong. I think that, but the thing is that they have insights and some of those
insights might be salvageable and reused in a completely different framework. In other words,
maybe there is something about integrated information theory that will turn out to be
very interesting. But it won't be that it's how
unintelligent and unconscious systems with the right kinds of information,
theoretic properties, either give rise to consciousness or, or just are conscious
is going to be different. If we think of space time, not as the fundamental reality,
but just as a user interface, maybe integrated information theory might be telling us something
about what patterns in our user interface are giving us better pointers to the consciousness
behind the interface. So they're not, they're not telling us how consciousness is created.
They're telling us how our, how our interface sometimes, sometimes the interface will give us
better insights into consciousness and sometimes less. So maybe it will, you know, there will be a
complete rethinking of, of what they've done. So it's not that their work will be lost,
but it will be just reinterpreted, just like a lot of Newtonian stuff gets reinterpreted,
you know, in an Einstein framework and so forth. So, so, you know, I, you know,
Stuart Hemeroff, I love to hang out with him and, you know, these are all good people and friends.
What about Bernardo Castro? I mean, your thoughts on his work and what he, and everything he talks
about regarding idealism? Well, Bernardo and our good friends and I've, I've begged him to come work
with us. He's got, he's a philosopher, but he also has another PhD with a lot of mathematical
chops. So he, so I would love to, and anytime Bernardo wants to come work with us because,
you know, philosophically, we're on the same page, right? Our theory is an idealist theory,
and, and I respect Bernardo's decision to, to spend his valuable time taking up the
philosophical aspects of this. And we've decided to, I mean, there is a little philosophy in what
we do, and we have a collaborator, Robert Prentner, who was a professor, I'm not, not a professor,
but, you know, his PhDs and one of his PhDs is in philosophy. And so he brings a lot of
philosophical sophistication that I don't have to, to our work in idealism. But, you know, my,
my background, I have a little bit of background in philosophy enough to talk and get myself in
trouble, but not enough to be a professional. And, and I don't know enough math to be a
mathematician, but, but I know, and how to collaborate with the, the appropriate people
who can listen to me and say, well done, it's not quite right. But here, this, this will, this will
fix it. What are some of your favorite aspects of Bernardo's work? What, what, what intrigues you most
about it? Well, I think that Bernardo is giving good philosophical arguments for why physicalism
is, in some sense, almost self-contradictory and, and, but, but couldn't possibly be
the way forward and why idealism shouldn't be dismissed. I mean, I think a lot of, for most
philosophers, well, most people just in general, the, the a priori assumption is that, of course,
space time is fundamental. And the burden of proof was in whoever wants to say that, you know,
this consciousness stuff is, is, I mean, surely you, you have the burden of proof if you talk
about consciousness being fundamental, because we all can see that space time and particles and
physical stuff is fundamental. Of course, brains are there and create consciousness.
You have to be a fool. I mean, you know, to not, to not think that. So, so Bernardo does a good
job of turning the tables and saying, no, really, the burden of proof is on the physicalist.
And science itself is already saying that we need to move into a post space time
framework for, for, for science. So, so I like Bernardo's work. And he's, he's very forceful.
We have different personalities in terms of how we present our ideas, very, very different
personalities. But, but he and I, when we get together, we get along quite well, quite well.
Yeah. No, Bernardo, when I spoke, when I had, when I interviewed him, he actually asked me
during our round two, he wants me to interrogate him a lot more intensely, apparently. So he likes
to be challenged. He loves that active interrogation. He said, don't be like, I was like, I can't help
him, but he wants that. Anyway, let's go back to the paper. Right. So we think of conscious agents,
trace change, decorated permutations. And then you go to the amplitude hindering and then
particles and space time, let's run through that process. How do we get from conscious agents to
particles in space time? Right. So, I mean, that's a very, it's a layered question because there's
so much to actually go into that. There's so much. I know. Maybe we'll go into it a bit more in detail
afterwards. Oh, just a summary. Okay. So just top level summary. Okay. Yeah. So the top level,
the idea is that there are, there is a Markovian dynamics, which basically a Markovian dynamics
is the simplest probabilistic dynamics you could imagine, which doesn't mean to say that it's simple,
but it's just the simplest that you could write down. And within that dynamics of these, what we
call conscious agents, but these entities beyond space time, certain, there are certain patterns
of the dynamics where you get coherence, where a group of them have a stable dynamical system.
We call these recurrent communicating classes or ergodic. So you have a big dynamical system,
but subsets of states are ergodic. And they give you a little ergodic Markov chains where
they have long term behavior that can be described by a probability measure,
an invariant probability measure. And it's these different ergodic subsets, essentially,
of the dynamics that we've discovered map on to the decorator permutations. So the decorator
permutations are basically telling you which states go together. This group are together,
form an ergodic set, this group form an ergodic set. So that's what the decorator permutations
are doing. So that's the new interpretation that we're proposing. So that's the new, actually a new,
as far as we can tell, a new contribution to mathematics. And then from that, the
physicist then can take the decorator permutations and show that how they're related to
something called an amplitude hydrant. And now this is not for all particles, the amplitude
hydrant is only for massless particles. And it's also that it's a special case where
it's a supersymmetry n equals four supersymmetric kind of thing. So it's in some sense a toy model,
but it's close enough to reality that physicists take it quite seriously. And more recent work,
they've been able to let go of the toy and do it for all masses and spins. But for now,
and we're trying to understand that new work and connect with that as well. But for now,
we can say this map gives us for the massless particles. And we think also the massive
a map through decorator permutations, through the amplitude heating for the massless particles,
and they're into scattering in spacetime. And by scattering, I mean, you know, you have like the
Large Hadron Collider and other Fermilab colliders and so forth, where you take particles at high
velocities like two protons or electron smashing into a proton. And you see it's,
you see the particles smash into each other and then the stuff going out. And you try to figure
out what's going on, just like trying to figure out how cars are made by smashing them into
each other and seeing all the wheel flies off and hubcap and the engine. It's hard work,
you can imagine. So how do you figure out, you know, it's not easy, but it takes a lot of,
but that's what they're doing. There's, there's smashing particles together and seeing what flies
out. And it's called particle scattering. And that's what you can predict using these decorator
permutations and the amplitude heat. And you can actually predict the probabilities, what they
call the amplitudes for these. And so what we're doing now is, is saying what properties of the
conscious agent dynamics, these recurrent classes correspond to mass, momentum, spin, energy. And
how do the evolving Markovian dynamics project to what we look and see as scattering of particles
and space time. That's sort of the top level picture. Okay. So look, it's interesting when
you think, okay, so when you think of a collection of agents, I know at some point you mentioned
in your paper, I think it was Erwin Schrodinger's essay, Mind and Matter. You mentioned how it links
to this concept. How are these two links, that concept of, or his book on mind and matter?
Well, Schrodinger and a number of, of the early quantum theorists. We're thinking about
like the collapse of the wave function. You have, in quantum theory, you have Schrodinger's equation
for non-relativistic quantum systems. And you have this differential equation which shows how the
state evolves as a function of time. And it's deterministic and unitary. But when you make a
measurement, that equation no longer holds. If you, if you want to actually say what value of the spin
you got, or what value of the position you got, or momentum, you have a different, it's the collapse
operator. And, and that's non-linear. The Schrodinger equation is linear. So, so you have this weird
situation in quantum theory where when essentially you're not looking, there's one evolution.
And when you look, when you measure, it's a different dynamics. Well, that's not a very happy
situation for most scientists. I mean, that's not happy at all. And, and the, you know, of course,
that's led to all sorts of, you know, multiverse kinds of explanations and, and many worlds
interpretations and so forth. Basically, it's more than many worlds, not the multiverse, many
worlds that came out of that. So, I think you're at some point you spoke about any collection of
agents is itself an agent. And, and then you said there is ultimately one agent. That sort of links
to this. Right. That's right. So yeah, that gets to what Schrodinger was after was there is some kind
of unity behind all this diversity. And Schrodinger was looking at that. He I think was interested
in some of the Eastern mystical ideas, and, and, and, and sites them. And so there's this notion of,
of some whole wholeness, some unity beyond space time. And, and maybe we're going to have to go
there. David Bohm also, in his book wholeness and the Implicant Order, has the same, same idea.
This is different than his pilot wave work. You know, but, but his book wholeness and the Implicant
Order is going after the same kind of thing. I think that Schrodinger was talking about that
maybe we have to go to a deeper point of view in which there is a reality beyond space time.
That is somehow unified. And we go, we do go there. So yeah, thanks for, you know,
sort of putting me on track here. We do go there with our work because we
it turns out to be the case that we can think about ever larger conscious agents.
And then any huge conscious agent can be articulated into a bunch of interacting
smaller conscious agents, which, which constitute it. And, and so we're, we're sort of led to,
you know, we can have accountable the infinity of agents, which are all part of one agent,
then an aleph one, aleph two, there's the whole canterarchy and Cantor's hierarchy of,
of infinities, we can imagine agents with, you know, aleph two trillion states
in it and having a dynamics and then all the sub agents that could come out of it.
And ultimately this, this learn about leads you to say there's, well, there's ultimately just one
agent, but we could never actually write down the mathematics for it. We can only write down,
you know, projections of it, you know, the, the, the part, the partial agents that cut,
that are part of it. But even there we might be able to make some progress, but it is interesting
that the mathematics is, you know, if consciousness is fundamental and we're using this mathematics,
there is one agent and you can do a lot of mathematics, but you'll never get to that one
agent. Your mathematics will never be able to, you can address projections of that one agent,
you can do that, but you'll never be able to give the mathematical theory of the dynamics of the
one agent. Yeah. What are your thoughts on mathematical realism in general, your views on
that concept? I think that's a deep, deep question. And I, I go back and forth on it. My,
you know, I, the way it's typically put, our mathematical theorems invented or discovered,
right? That's, that's the big, the big divide. And
my, I go, I go back and forth on that myself. I really go, go back and forth. Somehow my,
my feeling is that perhaps the equation, the question itself is making a false division and
it's both. I mean, that, that in some sense, if we really understood this, if I even understood
my own ideas about consciousness being fundamental deeply enough, I would realize that the difference
between invention and discovery here was, was artificial on my part, that, that, that I wasn't
thinking deeply enough. But, but again, I'm not able to think deeply enough to, to actually
say anything deeper about that. So if I had to bet on one, I would say discovered.
Not invented. But, but my, our own work on consciousness makes me head myself and say,
ultimately, we may find that invention is discovery. Yeah. So,
so that's, that's very, very deep. Yeah, no, it is kind of both. Back to the paper. So at some
point you said, a physicist discovered the surprise to their surprise, sorry, that decorated
permutations invariantly categorize the physical content of scattering amplitudes for particles
in space time. And then there you go on to say that you guys prove that Markov chains project
a kind of kind of sorry, where am I reading sorry, project to decorated permutations and
thus onto particle scattering. How do you guys prove that? Well, so we, what we show is that
what we prove it by actually writing down the projection. So, so, so what we do in the paper
is we say here for any Markov chain, here is the algorithm by which you get a decorated permutation.
And then when you, when you look at it, the algorithm is basically telling you
how to divide the entire state space of the Markov chain into this, the collections of states
that have their own recurrent communicating class. So, so the way we prove it is to actually do it.
We, we, we, we give you the prescription for, for the algorithm for doing it.
I think on page 11 of your paper, you discussed the precise hypotheses and you,
and you labeled them one to six. I don't know if you want to go through that because that's
actually quite a very fascinating component of this paper all together. Right. And obviously,
at some point when the paper is out, I will put a link for everyone listening or watching
just to follow through. Yeah, there, it should be a link should be put up any day now by the
Institute of Noetic Sciences, certainly by the 24th of June, which is just a week from Saturday,
you know, it'll be up because that's when we're going to be doing, I should probably pull up
the paper, but, or I could just talk at top level about the paper and just so you can go
through those points. I think so that that'll be quite, I think good for the listeners and the
viewers as well. I mean, number one, you talk about each elementary particle of the standard
model of physics, each boson, lepton and quark is a projection of a recurrent communicating class,
and it's Markovian kernel that arise in samplings of trace chains of conscious agents. That's the
first one. And then you go on from very fascinating work. Right. So I'll pull that page 11, page 11.
Okay. I mean, let's run through those hypotheses and discuss how you call you act. I think that's
a really good idea. Yeah. Okay, so there it is. Okay, each, okay, that right, okay, each elementary
particle, the standard model of physics, each boson, lepton and quark is a projection of recurrent
communicating class. And it's Markovian kernel that arise in samplings of trace chains of conscious
agents. So it's one thing. So what we're doing there is get back where I can see you. Okay.
So what the first thing we're doing is we're saying there's going to be
a mapping between the dynamics of conscious agents and elementary particles in the standard model
of physics. So the bosons, leptons and quarks, those, the bosons are the mass, well, the force
carriers, some of the more massless photons and gluons are massless. The others, the the Higgs and
the Z and W plus and minus are are massive. And then there's leptons, which are like electrons,
muons and Tows and electron neutrinos, tau neutrinos and muon neutrinos. And then there are the quarks.
There are up and down, charm and strange and top and bottom quarks. So then and that's the whole
basic particles. Then you combine those to get other things like pions and mesons and other
other things that you that you protons and neutrons. And so our first thing that we're
proposing is that there is a mapping between the conscious agent dynamics and these elementary
particles. And that is the recurrent communicating classes of the Markovian dynamics of conscious
agents that will correspond to these elementary particles. Now, I should say,
not every recurrent communicating class of the conscious agent dynamics will project to a particle.
Yes, a probably a trivial subset. There's the Markovian dynamics is going to have a lot of
stuff going on there. What we're doing here is saying, okay, ultimately, we have to get a mapping
from the conscious agent dynamics, not just to particles, but to organisms, to brains, to neurons,
to neural networks. And so we're going to there's going to be a mapping. So what we're doing in
this paper is saying the first connection we're going to try to make is to elementary particles.
And so the obvious question is why? I mean, I mean, clearly, everybody thinks that brain activity
is related to this. And, you know, it's it's so why go after, you know, bosons, leptons and quarks
when surely the the low hanging fruit is the brain. And that's that's where we have the neural
correlates of consciousness and so forth. So you guys are already, you know, shooting at the wrong
target. And the reason we're going after the elementary particles is because we figure that
those are the most simple connections that we can make. And I said that even though I'm not a
particle physicist, I'm a cognitive neuroscientist, for me, talking about the brain is much, much
easier than talking about elementary particles, I'm having to do lots and lots of remedial reading
and homework to even talk the lingo. And but but I realized it's it's it's hopeless to go
after the brain is too complicated. The simplest thing inside space time are these elementary
particles. So if we're going to do this, the best shot we have is to connect to the elementary
particles and then gradually work our way up. Okay, elementary particles. Now can we get to
protons and neutrons? Oh, we okay. And then can we get to atoms? Now can we get to molecules?
Now can we get to larger molecules? No. Okay, now we can try to maybe climb our way up to the
brain. But that that's not going to happen in my lifetime. I mean, I if we can get the particles
in my lifetime, I'll be delighted. So that's that's our strategy. We're not going after particles,
because they're the most important thing or the most interesting thing. They're the simplest
possible thing, which is not to say simple, but they're the simplest possible connection
that we could make. So that's, that's why we're we're going after them. And
and most recurrent classes of the conscious agent dynamics will have nothing to do
directly with particles, most of it. But we're going to try to find the, you know,
mappings that that do relate to particles, so we can build our way up. So that's sort of the
meaning of that first thought. And the second one. So then number two,
properties of a free particle, the spin, the mass, the energy momentum,
are projections of the properties of the kernel of the recurrent communicating class.
For example, the periodicity, the entropy rates, hitting times and stationary distributions of
that communicating class. So the idea here is, there's one thing to say, recurrent communicating
classes correspond to at least some of the corresponded particles. But you need to do more.
You need to say which particles as it was on a left on a quark. And you all need to say, okay,
what property of the recurrent communicating class of Mark Markov dynamics corresponds to the
energy, what corresponds to the mass, the momentum and the spin, right? No hand wave now, right? You
said a recurrent communicating class projects to a particle. Well, particles have energy,
momentum, spin, mass, then mass. So where's the beef? What's, but in other words, you know,
the very same thing I was pointing at my good friends and colleagues where I said,
where's the beef? What's, you know, what specific conscious experience can you get out of your
theory? The same finger points back at me. You're saying recurrent communicating classes give us
position momentum and spin will give me on exactly what property of the recurrent communicating
class is the mass, for example. So we have a proposal for each one of those in this, in this
document. For mass, it's, we propose it's what's called the entropy rate of the of the dynamical
system of the recurrent communicating class. And entropy is, you know, a measure, everybody
knows entropy is a measure of disorder. An entropy rate basically takes a Markovian kernel that has
a bunch of rows and columns, right? It's, it's, think of it as a square matrix. And if each row,
each row is a probability measure, essentially, each row of a Markovian kernel is a probability
measure. So if it's an n by n matrix, you have each row is has n entries in it and in all the
entries sum to one. They're all, they're all non negative. They're greater than zero. They're
all between zero and one and they all sum to one. That's effectively what a Markovian kernel is.
If you write down an n by n matrix, each row has numbers between only between zero and one and each
row sums to one, you've got a Markovian kernel. That's what it is. And if the, if that Markovian
kernel is, is recurrent, that is that any state within, you have n states, if you can get from
any state to any other state, you can find that amount of time and back again, basically,
then it's recurrent. And if it's, if the entropies in the rows are not all zero,
in other words, if you have some, if, if a row has just zeros and then there's a single one in that
row, that's a legitimate row in general. But, but a recurrent class in which every row is like
that is a periodic Markov chain. You, and you're, and you're going basically from step, you know,
state one to state three with probability one and then to state four with, you know, and then back
to state two, whatever it might be, you're going from each one with probability one. So that's a
periodic chain. Those, each row has zero entropy in that case. But what we will, it's a little
complicated, but I'll just say this, the entropy rate basically says this, saying that that's the
means if the Markovian kernel is periodic. So if you're in this state, then you will necessarily
with probability one go to that state. And there's, so there's a, it's almost like a deterministic
set of states that you go through and cycle. So you're cycling through states in a specific order,
that will have zero mass. So we propose that periodic kernels map to massless particles.
Massless bosons. Makes a lot more sense when you say it. I mean, from reading the paper,
it's a lot, it's a lot better to hear you say it. Yeah, it is more, there's more intuition,
this was the intuition that sort of guided it. Well, no, I'll tell you what the intuition
was that guided it, but, but in the case of, I'll just say a little bit more of what it means
than I'll give you the intuition that does as much detail as you want on go, go ahead. Yeah.
Okay. So if, if there are entries other than zeros and ones in your recurrent communicating class,
then it's going to have mass, according to this entry rate, it'll be massive. And the reason why
we were thinking about it this way was the following intuition. What does,
what does mass mean intuitively, right? This is what the kind of thinking you have to do when
you're trying to make these connections. You have to say, okay, we're trying to say what aspect of
conscious agent dynamics corresponds to physical mass. We're going to have to think abstractly,
what do we really, what is mass in the physical, and at least inertial mass in some sense,
well, I'll just say mass in general, has something to do with how much you can be
influenced and how much you influence, right? If you, if, if you're massless, you have less
influence than if you're massive. And so what would correspond to influence in a social network?
Who are the influencers in a social network? So this is the way you have to think to, because
these, these conscious agent networks are social networks. So think, you know,
the internet, Twitterverse and so forth. Well, the influencers are those who have the most followers
and, and so if, in other words, they have the most connections,
the more, so Hoffman has a lot fewer connections on his website than Google. Google has, you know,
a few, a couple dozen more connections than Hoffman has a lot more power and they're a lot richer.
So, so that, that's the notion of influence. How connected are you? Well, now, if we look at this
Markov chain, if this state has, in this role of the Markovian kernel has all zeros and only a
single one, that means it's not talking to anybody except one guy. He's only talking to one guy.
Well, that's as little influence as you can have. And if you're talking only to yourself,
then you're, then, then you're, you're, you're out, you, so, so that was, you can see the
intuition that went into this. And so, but if you're, if you're connected to everybody,
you're going to be more influential. Well, if you look at how you're going to be connected
to everybody, that means that the entropy in your row is going to increase. The more connections you
have in general, you're going to be having more non-zero entries in your row. And if every entry
is non-zero, that's going to, in general, you know, it's a bit of a handway, but, but it's going to,
in general, mean that you're going to have greater and greater entropy. So we just said, okay,
let's make it, in some sense, the, the influence of a state is the entropy of its row, right?
But now we're talking, we have to give a, an influence for the, in some sense, a mass to the
whole recurrent class. So we need to weight all the, all the influences of those other guys. We
have to weight them. What's the right weighting that we have to give to them? Well, the old, there's
only one canonical measure for the weighting is so-called invariant measure. It's the, there
is a probability measure that the, when you multiply, so if we have a kernel P, we'll call this
matrix P, and we have a measure M. So M is the measure. If M times P equals M,
that's called an invariant measure. So M, P equals M. There's, for recurrent communicating
class, there's a unique measure that has that property. And so that's the invariant measure,
is the measure that's left alone by the whole kernel. And so we use that to weight
the entropies of the rows. And that, and, and Claude Shannon, you know, the inventor of information
theory, he was the one who first defined entropy rate. I mean, I'm sort of giving sort of the
kinds of ideas that might go into that. But Claude Shannon is the genius who invented information
theory. And he came up with the definition of entropy rate. So we just borrowed Claude Shannon's
definition of entropy rate and said, that is, for the intuitions I just gave, give some notion of the
influence or inertia of this group of interacting conscious agents. Each row corresponds to an
agent and its interactions. And that then leads to, as soon as you make that move,
that means that periodic Markov chains, we go from one state to the next state, you know,
one agent talks only to this agent, he only talks to the next agent and so forth.
They're massless. So somehow now, see, this is now that one definition gives us a real
grip on things, because we know that the massless particles always move at the speed of light.
Right. So now we all we get a handle. Okay, so, and the massive ones are always moving less than
the speed of light and their projection into space time. Now, now, so that, so that gives us another
thing, then we can say, okay, well, we have the mass, we made one other postulate, and that is that the
we go to the paper.
Talk about periodicity. It entropy rates hitting times and stationary distributions.
That's right. So let me let me just go down to
make sure I say what we did correctly, even though it's my own work.
I mean, okay, we all often do we write papers and then we do forget certain details. It's
normal. Yeah, here saying the wrong, it has to be said exactly right or you're wrong.
So the one one thing we're saying is that a communicating class, so this recurrent
communicating class, if it has n states, it has momentum and
and it has a mass equal to its entry rate, we just talked about. Okay, so that's so that's
so I bring that up because that's another postulate. The momentum is the number
of states, the number of agents in the class, that's the momentum. And once you have those two
things, then the energy falls out, right? So so once once you have those, then you then we used,
well,
there, one could say we're cheating a little bit and Schwabhorn has suggested to me that we'll
need to think more about this. We're using the physics equation now that relates energy,
momentum and mass, mass squared. But so we do that for now and we may need to give deeper
motivation for it later. But but right now, I'll just say with that proviso, once we have the
momentum being the number of states and we have the mass being the entry rate, then the energy
falls out as as from from Einstein, from Einstein's special theory of relativity.
And so so now we've got energy mass in momentum. The spin is now spin is an interesting tricky
thing. Spin of a particle is
is something that's I think counterintuitive to a lot of people. It's
if you if you're spinning, you have a basketball player that's spinning a basketball on the
fingertip, you can go at any speed that you want, you know, they can go fast, slow, but spin for
per particles, you can only go spin at certain speeds, and there's no speed in between.
You jump at your spin values, which so the spin is is counterintuitive. What we do is we use
a branch of mathematics called geometric algebra, sort of a generalization of something called
cliford algebra. And we this this this gets a little bit technical, but what we what we do is we use
trying to see if there's a way to say this.
Here's an intuition when a Markovian kernel
right, it's a it's an n by n matrix. If you can ask yourself, what does it do if I have
an n dimensional space, and I have unit vectors, a unit vector pointing on each of the n dimensions.
Let's just think about three dimensions that let them keep it real easy. So I have a three by three
Markovian kernels got three rows and three columns. And it's and I have I'm looking at
three vectors, my finger, my thumb, that are orthogonal and that are each is length one.
And I ask, okay, when when this Markovian kernel
acts, it's going to move these vectors around. That's what it does. It moves, it moves them around,
it may shrink them, it might expand them. So, so suppose I start off with a unit volume. So this is,
I have three vectors, and each is like one inch long. And so I've got a one inch cube is a cube
one inch, one inch cube. When I act on it with the Markovian kernel, those vectors are going to move,
they're going to like scrunch in or spread apart somehow. And some of them are going to get longer.
I can't do that with my fingers. So we're going to get shorter. That would be too painful. But, but,
what's going to happen is, and they may switch, maybe maybe this one, it was this one, but maybe
this one switches over and they, they, they can cross in certain ways. So the volume of
that they define, right, they're going to follow here, they're a cube, but they're going to in
general have a parallelogram of some kind, or a parallel pipette parallel pipette that they're
going to define. And the volume is going to be somewhere between zero and one, it won't increase
the volume, but it can decrease the volume. And it can change the sign. If I think of this as a,
you know, using the right hand rule that this is a positive sign volume, then maybe that is a negative
sign volume. Okay, so it can go be, so it can change the volume, which was one to any volume
between minus one and plus one. So that's what the kernel is doing. And that operation on these
basis vectors is what we call the spin. What it does to the volume is the spin. So that, so there
is a way to do it intuitively. Oh, that's, that's okay. There is a way to do it intuitively.
If you, if you want to go into the final detail, you more than welcome though, Don.
Okay, yeah, well, that was, that was a good one because that is actually an accurate
an accurate description of what we're, what we're saying is happening, what, what the spin is.
And by the way, one thing that this then tells us
is if only periodic
chains are massless,
then you can, from what I just said, one can show that if
the
number of states is even
you have to, again, now you look at our paper, you say it exactly right. You rather make sure.
Yes. This is tricky enough. It's very complicated. So I'm glad you actually have the paper on hand.
Yeah, I just want to make, make sure I say it exactly right.
I don't want to say it wrong and then have to.
Yeah, then the comment section goes wild.
That's right. Okay. So if C, if this class is massless and has n states, if n is even,
then this matrix has to have spin minus one. Well, it's spin one, but with minus sign. Okay,
spin one, but minus sign. And if it's, if the number of states is odd, then it has spin one
that's with positive sign. And what that means is
you can't have.
Which page are you on at the moment? This is page 27.
Yeah, what that means, it was stunning to me. What it means is
if you have a massless
particle, according to our theory,
and you change the sign of the spin, plus one to minus one,
it has to have a change in energy. Yes. Change in, yeah, change in energy. It has to have. So you
cannot have two massless particles of the same energy and opposite spins. It's not possible.
So when I, so when I ran, when I realized that from our mathematics, and I thought,
oh, well, that's, that's weird. That's, that seems to be, that's a very, very strange prediction.
Oh, well, maybe that's where we're going to be shown to be wrong. I mean, that's,
that's really wild. Or, or if it's true, maybe, you know, you can have n and n plus one. So maybe,
you know, the, the, there could be
an energy of, you know, one million, and then it has to be one million plus one. So maybe it'd be
too small to, to see the, the difference that I was thinking. So that's what I don't know about
physics. It was, it was a couple of weeks later that I realized, no, this is what, what they found
is, is that there's this fine structure to, like the orbital, the electron orbitals. Now,
now what, what's going on there is you, in the Bohr model of the atom, you have these
different orbitals. But when you look at them very, really fine, you find that there are,
there's actually two, two little bands there. And so the photons that you're going to get
aren't the same energy photons. They're actually, there's this fine. So, so always, and so there's
a lot of fine structure there. And so, so that doesn't mean that we're right, but it means that
one thing that I thought, well, that's to blow us out of the water. I mean, this is a pretty strong
prediction that there's going to be this fine structure. Well, yeah, there is a, they call,
there is this hyper fine structure and, and there's the fine structure constant. So now
I'm very interested in looking at the fine structure constant and seeing how that plays a
role in our covenant dynamics. So, so, so you, but that by itself made me think, well, you know,
of course we're probably wrong, but this is pretty, this is a pretty interesting game now.
Well, you know, the math came and hit me in the face and said, you're predicting that you
can't have two massless particles of opposite spin and have the same energy. That is a strong,
strong prediction. I mean, there you, there you can be, I mean, surely you can be falsified right
on the get go from with that one. And it doesn't look like we're falsified right out of the get
go on that one. So, so that gives me hope not that we're ultimately right, but that this course
may have a lot of writing to do before we find out its limitations. I see. What's up on the,
what's up? Is I'm pronouncing it correctly? Shwapon? Was he part of? Shwapon, yeah. Is he the one
who figured this out or was it, was it you, you, you and Prakash? What did you guys come to? I did.
Oh, you did? Yeah, I was the one who, but then as soon as I said it, Shwapon, of course, knew about
the, I mean, of course, structure. So it was, it was me, you know, because of my ignorance,
not knowing about it and going through a couple of weeks of sweating and thinking about it.
I was the one who had first noticed that, oh, wow, we make this weird prediction.
And I worried about it for a couple of weeks until I happened to run across a video.
I was doing some remedial physics training on myself and I happened to run across this video
in hyperfine stride. I said, you've got to be kidding me. I couldn't have asked for something
better than that. So it was, it was my ignorance. First, Shwapon, it was just falling off a log.
He, he understood this and Chaiton. Yeah. Okay, let's move on to number three then of the, of the
hypothesis. Each projection is perceivable by some CA via a window of some finite number of steps
in which the agent observes the corresponding trace chain. And yeah, I think at this point,
we can discuss trace chains and everything around that. Yes, let me pull up page 11.
All right, right, right. Page 11. Yeah, I find this page actually, this, I love the way you set
this up. Oh, good, good. It makes it a lot easier for me, particularly for this interview and this
conversation. Right. Yeah. And that was partly because the Institute of Metic Sciences asked for
a certain format in the, in, in these proposals. So it was very helpful to, to make it, and their
goal was to try to make it accessible. So they did a good job of that. So you're doing number three,
okay, each projection is perceivable by some CA via window. Unless there was something about
number two that you still wanted to touch on, are you fine? Are we done with that one?
Yeah, I'll just say one, one other thing about two that might be of interest in that is
we haven't yet worked out the, like, the notion of the velocity of particles in space time.
But we know that the massless particles go at the speed of light. So we know that answer.
So whatever our ultimate story is going to be about the massive particles and their speed.
And I can just say at top level, the kind of thing I'm thinking about right now,
that our team was thinking about, but I won't, this is what I'm thinking about. I'm not going
to blame my team for any bad ideas. So if it's a bad idea, it's, it's, it's all Hoffman. If it's a
good idea, it's the team. And that is, we want some notion of the, of velocity within this Markov
kernel that will translate to what we call through projection to velocities in space time.
And the massless particles, which are the periodic ones, you, you, that means that,
you know, from this state, you always go with probably one to that state, and then probably
one to next, there's no messing around, you go bang, bang, bang, bang. You, you, if there are
n states, you go through a cycle in n steps, no, it takes you only n steps to go through a complete
cycle and every cycle. But for the other, if it's massive, then it might take you if it,
even if there's n states, it might take you five n steps before you actually start with
one particle and visit all the other particles and get back to where you were. Right. So that's,
there's a notion of, of, you can see there's a notion of speed that, that's very natural there.
And it's technical term is the commuting time. So you can talk about the commuting time
of an ergodic chain. And so what we're thinking about, what I'm thinking about again,
I won't blame them yet, is that the commuting times of within a communicating class
are going to somehow be related to the velocities that we say the particle has in space time.
But that hasn't been, that's not in our proposal. And, and we're still working on that. But, but
given that I've already, you know, given my provisos, they'll just put it out there. It's
part of the reason I'm doing that is, is people can see how fun this is, right? You're, you're,
you're playing. This is, you're exploring, you're playing. And you go, what about this? What is,
what if this property of the dynamics of conscious agents corresponds to what we call velocity in
space time? Of course, I'm probably wrong. But hey, it's a fun idea. And, you know, it's not
obviously stupid. And we'll see. And it's the exploration that really matters. I mean, it's
such an enjoyable journey. And watching you talk about it as well, you can tell how much you're
having fun discussing it. I mean, it's, it's very apparent. I'm like a kid in a candy store with
this stuff. You know, you know, all along that, that of course you're probably wrong, but you also
have a feeling that there may be something of this that actually sticks. It may, some of this
may stick. What we'll see. And some will be corrected and so forth. Sometimes you have to be
brave and put the idea out there. That's just, that's what science is. That's right. The nice
thing about this is I do get emails a lot from people who have, that are probably very, very
brilliant. And they have lots of ideas about how cockiness related to space time. But, but
out of 100 emails, I won't get one where someone has said, here's the mathematical connection
that I'm proposing. And until you can do that, there's nothing that scientists can look at.
It's when you say something, here's the mathematical connection. And this connection says,
you cannot have a massless boson
with one energy having the same, you know, a plus and minus spin one. It can't be, when your
mathematics gets that, that specific, then you've got something that scientists will look at because
in most times they'll say you're wrong. And here, you know, this prediction is wrong. But, but until
you are mathematically precise, you're not even wrong. And see, that's the point. You're not on
the playing field until you can be wrong. Exactly. There's no scientist will pay attention to you.
Yeah, at least I'm wrong, maybe. Yeah, no, hopefully, I mean, hopefully, you're not wrong.
Hopefully, you're right. Hopefully, not wrong. Anyway, let's go to number three.
Yeah, okay. So each projection is
perceivable, perceived by some consciousness agent via a window of finite steps, in which
an agent observes the corresponding trace chain.
So, so the idea is, how are we going to get from the conscious agents to the observations that we
make? You have mass and energy and so forth. Well, we're going to have to use other conscious
agents. We're going to have to use systems of consciousness. So what we're going to have are
systems of conscious agents, basically, that do this mapping. What we're, what we're doing right
now in this proposal is we're not trying to go through and show how you construct a dynamic of
conscious agents to do this, we're going to, for now, we're just going to make the correspondence
between these recurrent communicating classes and their properties and, and spacetime will
ultimately, we want to actually build a, if spacetime is an interface, right?
And it's constructed by a network of conscious agents, like a neural network,
but it's a network of conscious agents that's doing this construction. We need to write down
what that construction is and then show how it works to create that, that interface.
But we can do, and we do plan to do that, but that's, that's, you know, one step at a time.
That's, we have probably several years of work on this particle stuff before we actually start
to do, to do that. But one thing I will say on that is that my, my feeling is if we take,
once we have built that network of conscious agents that is taking the map from conscious
agents into our spacetime network, and we take that and we turn it on itself, we actually use
the interface that they construct to look at the set of conscious agents that are creating the
interface. Okay. That's a really self-referential kind of thing, but this is pretty cool. What are
you going to see? Well, I think in some cases you'll see like in, for us, it'll look like neurons
and brains. Okay. Neurons and brains are what you see in your interface when you take the network
of conscious agents that they're constructing your interface and have it look at the construction
process itself. And that's why I think neuroscience is going to be, we need more funding for neuroscience,
not less. I think neurons don't exist when they're not perceived. So, neurons cause none of our
behaviors. But neurons are the symbols that we see in our interface that are the best,
the symbols closest to the construction process of our interface. And, and so neuroscience is
going to be a lot more complicated than we thought. We thought, I look into brains, I see neurons and
synapses and calcium and sodium and potassium and other ions. And that's because that's what's really
there. That's what's, no, no, no. That's your interface description. It is hiding an unbelievably
complicated dynamics behind it. You thought neural networks are complicated than they are,
but each neuron is hiding behind it. An incredible, so we need far more funding. This is
job security for neuroscience for a long, long time. To reverse engineer neurons into this
network of conscious agents is going to be a lot of work. So, and so we're, but we're not,
we're going to try to work on that interface, but I suspect I'm going to have to pass the
torch to a younger generation. That's, that's a hard, hard problem. It's a lot of work.
What I will say on, on that, that point three is what we can do is, is say,
what that process is going to have to do. If I have some big master Markov chain,
well, typically when you're thinking about a Markov chain, it goes as an infinite number of
steps, that the chain is an infinite number of steps. What happens when you, so suppose I have
just like a three by three matrix, right? And I'm not, or four by four, you know, small matrix.
Well, you and I haven't lived forever. We're not seeing an infinite chain of steps. So we must be,
we must be sampling. We must have this, this dynamics outside of space time
of conscious agents. And we have to make the sample, maybe we have a window, maybe it's like,
I look at a trillion steps, which is a lot of steps or a million steps or a thousand steps,
but it's not infinite. I mean, I'm not looking at an infinite number of steps. So we're sampling.
So now we get into the statistics of sampling. I've got this Markovian dynamics.
And if I, if I sample, and I then look at what, and estimate the kernel that I've sampled,
I'm not going to get exactly the right value. I'm going to get a kernel that's maybe close.
The more samples I have, my estimate of what the kernel is can be closer to the real thing,
but it's not going to be the real thing. So we're going to have sampling errors.
And then we're also going to have just due to temporal sampling, but you could also have space,
what we might call spatial sampling. Suppose I have, you know, a trillion states and I have
this huge recurrent communicating classes got a trillion states. Well, you know,
I don't think there's any computer on earth right now that could actually simulate
that Markov kernel, because you, you, it has one trillion times one trillion entries.
It's got, I don't know how many, there's a lot of entries in it. And, and so to just do one step
of that thing is going to be a tremendous amount of compute power, just to compute one step.
If you want to compute a million steps, I don't think, I think supercomputers are going to be,
you know, grinding to a halt. So, so simulating this thing is going to be, is going to be difficult,
right? We're going to have to, but, but what we can do is talk about,
I talked about there was this one huge master Markovian kernel that we can never look at.
We're going to have to look at just some of its states. We can't look at all of them.
And so you can take a big Markovian kernel and look at, at only what happens on a few of its
states and get a new Markovian kernel. So, the, the whole Markovian kernel is influencing what
you see on the smaller states, right? It's influencing them. But what you're doing is you,
you're getting a kernel just on the small side of it. And that's called a trace process.
So you, when you take a big kernel and you say, what, what kernel does it induce on a subset of
states? That's called a tracing process. And so, so that's going to be like spatial sampling.
So we'll have temporal windows and spatial windows. And what we're going to be doing,
what we're proposing in the, in this proposal is those windows are what we're going to use to try
to model the, the momentum distributions of quarks and gluons inside the proton. So particle
scattering of experiments have looked at quarks and gluons inside the proton, a proton at one
scale has like three valence quarks, two up and one down. But when you go at smaller spatial
resolution and smaller temporal resolution, that dissolves. You see at the very finest resolution
that they've gotten so far, you see what they call a gluon sea or an ocean of gluons. So it's,
so it's all these massless particles just in there. And they're just roiling all over the place.
And then when you back off a little bit, you reduce the spatial and temporal, what they call
the Bjorken X and Q-squared. These are the technical terms they use. Bjorken X is like the
temporal window and the Q-squared is like the spatial window. When you back off,
then you get to the point where the gluons, they say are splitting into quark, anti-quark pairs.
And then, and so you get this, what they call a quark sea. And you get, so all this energy
and momentum in, in these quarks. And then when you back off, you, you still have all the gluons
messing around and all these little sea quarks, but then you get these three big valence quarks.
So the proton is really a complicated mess. And what we're going to try to do is show that
as we go from really, really small windows of time and larger windows of trace,
we're getting closer to that gluon sea. And as we back, as we trace on fewer and fewer states,
so we're making the trace smaller, but we're making the, and we're making the temporal window bigger,
then we're getting closer to the valence quarks. So what we're hoping to do is show
for, for a particular class of master kernels that we can do various trace chains and sampling
windows and, and model all of the, what, what they call the momentum distributions,
one-dimensional and then ultimately three-dimensional momentum distributions
at the various Bjork and X and Q squared.
I was just going to ask you about that. What are one-dimensional momentum fractions or
longitudinal momentum fractions? Yeah, apparently the, the current techniques
that particle physicists have, have allowed them to assess the momentum only in, in one
dimension, not all three, but they're, apparently there are some new techniques
that, that are coming online that will allow them to estimate in three dimensions. And so,
so what we, what we'd like to do is even before they get all the three-dimensional data, if we
could, if we could match the one-dimensional data and predict the three-dimensional data
before they get it, that would be really cool. We'll see.
Oh, for sure. Okay, number four, done. Do you want to check it up on your own or should I?
Yeah, I'll pull that one up again.
All right. This is, this is a very interesting conversation. I'm so glad we're talking about
it because the paper makes so much sense listening to you express yourself.
Oh, good. Probably easier than just reading the paper.
Yeah. I mean, for the listeners and the viewers, whoever are too lazy to read the paper, I recommend
they do, but it is a lot better to have you chat about it.
Yeah. It gives the intuitions that I didn't, you know, we didn't have the space. This proposal,
we had a specific word limit for each section. So we had to get the ideas and we couldn't really
say, here's where our intuitions, this is what we were thinking. I'm able to do that here,
but I couldn't do that in the proposal.
I think that's a big function of this podcast is to allow you the opportunity to do this.
Absolutely. I appreciate that. Yeah. So four says the projection perceived by a conscious agent
is the discrete sampling of the trace chain, of a trace chain of a larger dynamics onto the
states of that consciousness. So we've really gone into that. So I just said that, you know,
there's going to be a trace chain done. So number five is the particles perceived by a
conscious agent depend on a subset of states and the number of steps in the window is trace.
And that's the, that's the interesting thing. We, so most of us think, you know, an electron is an
electron. That's because it really is an electron and a proton is a proton because it really is
a proton and so forth. A quark is a quark. And this, our whole approach here forces us to say,
no, there are no, in ultimate reality, there are no particles. There are no quarks,
leptons and so forth. Those are entirely artifacts of our user interface.
They're not insights into the nature of objective reality. They're statistical artifacts.
They're sampling artifacts. So for example, if I have a small temporal window,
suppose I'm only looking at two states and I only look at, say, three steps.
And what I find in those three steps, particularly that I see only three steps in my little two
state subset, and I noticed that in one step, state one went to state two.
And then in the next step, state two went to state one. And that's all I've got.
Well, then I can put a, my matrix would be like this, be zero one, one zero. That would be my
matrix. Now that might have been a projection of a matrix that have numbers that were not ones and
zeros in it. It might have had all sorts of weird numbers in it, right? There could have been,
but because it's an artifact, I only looked at a small number of steps. The matrix that I see
is zero one, one zero. I see a periodic matrix. In other words, I see in our language, a massless
particle. But the mass is not because there's a deep massless particle. It's because that's an
artifact of my small sampling size. And what we're, what the intuition here is, why are the
physicists seeing all these massless particles when they make their temporal window so small
for the reason I just gave? When you're looking at lots of states and small window,
you're only going to have zeros and ones everywhere in your matrix. That's all you're
going to have. Those are massless. So that's why you get this glue on C. And why is it when you
start to increase the temporal window and reduce the number of states that you start to see mass?
Well, yeah, now you start to get things besides zeros and ones in your matrix. You're starting to
get massive particles. That's the big idea about how like a top level, we think we're going to be
able to get the momentum distributions for the massless, then going to massive, and then finally
the valence, the valence course. Now, an obvious for, you know, the intelligent listener will go,
you know, it's one thing to say, what you just said is another thing to get the exact momentum
distributions. And I agree. To get the exact momentum distributions, we're going to have to do
more than just the hand wave that I just said. But the hand wave lets you know that there is
some reason to hope that we could get it. But to get it exactly, we're going to have to have exactly
the right class of master matrix. So what is the bigger Markovian matrix that we're going to start
with that we're going to do all the sampling of traces and windows of time? And so that's going to
be for a computational experiment that we proposed. And we're putting together ideas about how to
construct. It won't just be one master matrix, it'll be a whole class of them that will have
this property. But we have a lot of freedom, frankly, we'll be able to play with this until we
get a master, a group of master matrices that do the job. So I don't see any
principled obstruction right now to us doing that. In fact, the argument might eventually go the
other way. Hoffman, you had so many ways to do it. What is this really telling us? And in the answer,
I think we'll probably be, but we had so many ways that wouldn't do it as well. So this is very
interesting to ask. If there's this huge dynamics of conscious agents, what trivial aspect of it is
being captured by our space time? In other words, we think of space time as the be all and end all.
And what we're going to be saying is, no, no way. Space time is one of an infinity
of different user interfaces, an infinity. And we have to let go of the constraint on our thinking
and our creativity and open up to the possibility that there's all these other interfaces. And so
by showing that, yeah, maybe we'll find that there's a whole class of matrices, an infinite
class of matrices that will give us our space time. But we'll show that that infinite class of
matrices has measured zero in the set of bigger matrices. And that will sort of make the point that
space time is just a headset. And in my view, as I've said in a number of podcasts, I think
we got a cheap model. It's only three dimensions of space. I would like to be able to visualize in
20 dimensions or 1,000 dimensions, and I can't. I feel really real stupid. I mean, I can imagine
a three dimensional geometric puzzle and I can make, I can see it, a four dimensional geometric
puzzle completely beyond me, 10 dimensional. Now it's like theorem and proof, theorem and proof
to even crawl your way up to figure out what's going on with the geometry of an object in 10
dimensions. And we're doing that. I mean, Chaitan and I, our team, we're trying to study the space
of all possible Markov kernels. Like the space of all 10 by 10 Markov kernels is a polytope.
And it's the Markov polytope of, you know, on 10 states. And it's, I've forgotten how many
dimensions. I think it, oh, yeah, well, it's an end to the, so it's a 10 to the 10th dimensional
space. And it's a, so it's a 10.
Now I think it's, so it's n times n minus one is the number of dimensions of the polytope itself,
but it's embedded in an end to the, oh, sorry, it's got, this I'm making the point.
I'm now trying to talk about a higher dimensional thing. And you can see I'm, I'm, I'm struggling
and so forth. Whereas in three dimensions, I could just see it, you could just see it.
And here, now it's there improved, there improved even talk about this stuff. And so,
so that's why I feel like we're cheated. And I, you know, I would love, you know, once we take
off this headset, I'd love to put on one that's, you know, that has a trillion dimensions and boy,
that'll be, that'll be something. And why only three dimensions of color? Why not a trillion
dimensions of color? I mean, the mantis shrimp seems to have more than 10 colors. The pigeons have
four humans get stuck, most of us with only three. Yeah. I can, you know, pigeons apparently
seeing colors that I can't even imagine. I just feel cheated. So I can't wait to, you know, well,
I'll wait. I'm not here to die right away. But you know, think about it, they can see ultraviolet
to mean birds and see ultraviolet. I mean, snakes in the red with this we saw the red
logically just read some birds, I think can see polarization. We can't see polarization.
Bats perceive an echolocation. What does that like to perceive echolocation? I mean,
they see a three, quote unquote, see a 3D world with echolocation. What's that like?
There's a famous paper about what's it like to be a bat? Thomas Nagel.
Yeah, that's right. Nagel, exactly right.
No, no, let's move on to the basics then. Done? Six, yeah. So larger subsets of states and smaller
windows of sampling seem under simulations to favor periodic perceptions, which we conjecture
project a massless particle. Yeah, that was exactly the point I was just making that
with, you know, the smaller temporal window with more states than your trace,
it's more likely that you'll get just zeros and ones in the in the kernel that you create.
And therefore, it'll be a massless particle. So so that was
Yeah, so we went through all six. Yeah. So if that's, I think, first of all,
that's brilliant page in its own. But talk to me about the towards the end of the paper.
I think you talk about future experiments, the computational experiment that you proposed.
Right. Let's talk about that. What's what's what is the next step here all together?
Well, so the next step, I think, is
we're gonna need some bigger computers. Because these Markov chains, you know, as you as the
number of states grows as and grows, the number of entries in the Markov kernel
grows as n squared. It's gonna continue to go. This is huge.
So the next step is going is going to be
I think there's a few steps. And so I can use this as a recruiting time. We need
we need some geniuses to help us out. The pedestrian thing will be to
find and it's not pedestrian, but you know, relatively pedestrian to as I mentioned,
to find this class of master Markov chains. And the set of subsets of states and windows,
temporal windows that will give us the momentum distributions that they're seen inside the core.
But now there's but and so but that's just the first that's what this proposal is about.
And that's the whole thing for this proposal. But that's obviously just the first baby step.
If we can't do that, then we're wrong. And but if we do that, that doesn't mean we've
we're done. It means we've taken our very first baby step. There's this huge world to explore now.
So I mean, a part of the exploration,
we really then want to understand in greater detail, this mapping from the Markovian academics,
the Markov kernels, through decorated permutations into space time, that that really
right now that and the physicists are working really hard on that. I mean, among them are
Neymar Konihamed and his collaborators. And they have they were the ones who discovered
the decorated permutations, the amplitude, hedron. But but they haven't stopped there,
they're they're looking, they're looking, they've got stuff on effective field theories and
what they call the EFT hedron. And so there's, I think a lot of algebraic geometry, we need
an algebraic geometry, someone up with a brilliant mind and a PhD in algebraic geometry
to work with us. And so if someone, if there's someone who's listening to this,
and you have a PhD in algebraic geometry, you find this interesting, contact me because we
we had one, we had a wonderful friend, Bruce Bennett, and brilliant algebraic geometry.
And he he died, we've lost him, and we need an algebraic geometry to
to help us here. Because the a lot of the stuff is the connections we need to make
require algebraic geometry. And that is an incredibly difficult branch of mathematics.
It's way above my pay grade, I mean, way above my pay grade. So we need, we need people way
above my pay grade here to work on this. But that will really nail down, right? Our mapping
between Markov kernels and decorated permutations and the algorithm, we mean, that's an important link.
But it's like the the initial bridge, we need to build a multi lane highway,
you know, to bridge the conscious agent domain into space time. So we really need,
now that we know that we think we have a connection, we need to have really smart people
working with us to help us, you know, where I, you know, I won't even be able to understand
what they say. It's algebraic geometry is really really, but I will try. I will I will give it my
level best. So there's there's a ton of work in algebraic geometry to really nail down
exactly how the properties of the Markov dynamics map to properties like uniterity,
locality, and so forth inside space time. And really, all the all the complexities of that
the physicists have found in quantum field three, I mean, quantum field three is incredibly complicated
kind of thing. There are all sorts of interesting different Casimir fact and all this interesting
stuff. Getting these momentum distributions inside the proton. We chose that now because it's the
most important, but because we think it's the the e perhaps the easiest thing we could do immediately
to make people say, Oh, well, it's not obviously wrong. Okay, you know, they can do something
it's small, but they can do something. Maybe then we can get me real smart people way above my
pay grade who can then start to move in who know their quantum field theory, and no algebraic
geometry and a bunch of other branches of mathematics that are going to be so so in other
words, if we if we succeed beyond my wildest hopes in this, we will have only taken a tiny
baby step and we really need reinforcements from really smart people to move it forward.
Yeah, a lot of them in mathematics is going to be the king here. Well, of course, we need
the theoretical physicists who know the current theoretical physics because we that's what we
have to project you as the limiting case. But for my money is going to be the mathematical
physicists who are going to really be able to bring this thing home. I think, well,
to just summarize this last part of the paper, you said the computational experiment proposed
here explores how the strong force which dominates inside protons may arise from a dynamics
of conscious agents. Future computational experiments will explore gravity, the weak
force, the electromagnetic force, dark matter and cosmology from the big bang to the entropic
death of the universe. I mean, there's so many areas here you're going to explore.
Which ones are you most excited about? Well, I feel like a kid in a candy store. I want to
know them all and I want to explore them all. But each one is will require a team of geniuses.
Different experiences as well. To do it. But I'll just give you one.
Here's one that's really interesting to me.
Our dynamics of conscious consciousness, Markovian dynamics,
need not have an arrow of time. So it's a dynamical system, but it need not have an arrow of time.
By that, I mean, you could write down a Markovian dynamics in which the entropy doesn't increase.
There's no second law of thermodynamics in it. But it's a theorem that if you take such a dynamics
and you project it by conditional probability. So I've got this big dynamics, it has no arrow of
time, but I'm going to project it in a way that loses a little bit of information. But I've got
like a projected dynamics. So I've got a new Markovian dynamics. But it's slightly simpler than
the bigger one because it's a projection. The new dynamics will have an arrow of time
because it lost information. So the projection will have increasing entropy.
Now, that's very suggestive to me that once again, here we are in a world that we think is
ruled by the second law of thermodynamics. It started with the Big Bang, it's going to end
maybe in an entropic death or some big crunch, who knows. But it's going to, it's got a finite shelf
life on this universe. And things are running down. And that's a fundamental principle in physics.
It's also the fundamental thing in evolution of natural selection, right? Where the fundamental
limited resource that we're competing against is time, right? If I don't get food in time,
I die. If I don't mate in time, the species doesn't survive. So time is the fundamental
limited resource. And so this, this fact suggests to me that, of course, we expected to get space
in time as artifacts of the projection. So space and time are not fundamental. They're
not fundamental to the deeper reality. They're only properties of this projection. Well, here's,
here's how time is an artifact. It's a theorem. You can have no entropic arrow of time, but when
you take a projection, you will necessarily have. And so it's an artifact. It's not an, so our arrow
of time is not an insight into reality. Time is not fundamental. That notion of time is not
fundamental. It's entirely artifactual. And that means, and I've done a lot of work in evolution
of a natural selection and, you know, I'm very interested in evolutionary game theory. And I
think evolution is absolutely the best and cleanest scientific model we have to explain
biological evolution and so forth. So I love that theory. But this is saying that that is a theory
inside our space-time interface. It's wonderful theory inside our space-time interface. It does
not generalize beyond. We could imagine that, so I'll say, inside space and time, we have organisms
competing for limited resources and going extinct and so forth. We have an arrow of time.
But that could be a projection of a Markovian dynamics where there are no, there is no competition.
There are no limited resources and there is no arrow of time. And so what ultimately,
another thing I'd love to do is to show exactly how evolution of a natural selection arises
as the projection of a dynamics where there is no competition and no limited resources. And that,
see, that's what we really want. When we transcend a previous scientific theory,
we don't disrespect it. Quite the opposite. We respect Newton. What a genius. I mean,
hats off to Newton. He was brilliant. But it's limited. Einstein is better. But space-time itself
is doomed. And so we're going to transcend space-time. But we're going to, again, hats off to Einstein,
to quantum field theory, and to evolution of a natural selection. Whatever new theory we propose
beyond space-time has to project into space-time and give us back those theories. That's going to
be the discipline that our new theory has to satisfy before we are willing to saddle up on
that pony and take it where it's going to go. If that doesn't give us back Einstein and Darwin
and quantum field theory and so forth inside space-time, then that's not the horse we need to
ride. That's the wrong horse. So these theories are still doing incredible work for us. So you
can see the attitude is not, oh, we're right and they're wrong. And those stupid, no, no, no, no,
no. That was brilliant work. And every scientific theory is just the next baby step, mine included.
You know, century from now, hopefully much, much sooner, if this holds up, it'll be viewed as just
a next baby step. And we know the next generation will know far deeper and will understand what
I've done, what we've done is just a special case of something far more general. And that's
just the nature of science. There is no theory of everything in principle. There can be no theory
of everything because every scientific theory starts with assumptions. We need to tell Kurt that.
Is that John Mungle? There's no theory of everything. Oh, right, right, right. He has
theory of everything. Well, and I think most scientists who talk about a theory of everything
is with a wink and a nod, because I think they understand that, and I think Kurt as well.
I think he understands that. That goes with this podcast as well, when you think about it,
because I called it mind body solution, paying homage to the mind body problem. But I don't
really think I've got, we're going to find the solution. It's more of a, it's just in the name.
Yeah, that's right. The hunt. But in principle, we can never get a final theory of everything,
because every theory has to have assumptions, and those are the things that you don't assume.
I'm sorry, that you don't explain. You assume them, but you don't explain them. So that means
we'll never get the final explanation. Although we may be ourselves the final explanation. There
are theories in which you are what you're looking for, but you'll never be able to write it down.
So you are it, but you can't write it down because you transcend anything
that you can write down. But this is infinite job security for science, and I love that.
I love that as well. I mean, your goal is to give the scientific community a reason to take seriously
the idea that consciousness is fundamental, that consciousness can be modeled with precise
mathematics and make precise experimental predictions, and that the dynamics of consciousness
gives rise to space time physics by projection. And when you think about this whole journey
and everything you've done regarding this paper specifically, what has been the most
fascinating aspect of it all, and just the coolest part of it all for you?
For me, it blew me away. A couple of things blew me away just in the last year. A year ago,
we didn't have this mapping from Markov chains to the decorated permutations.
And when we could do that, a light went on in me, I go, oh, wow, this is real. This is a real
potential here. And then when we said, okay, well, that's cool, but you need to get masked
being an energy momentum, and you've got to get those from kernels. Good luck. And when we started,
when they started cracking, when we started getting what we just described today,
and then when we got that hyperfine structure prediction, that really, that was when I began
to start to believe that this might be the next baby step. This might actually be,
I couldn't believe it seemed too good to be true. So we'll see. Maybe it is too good to be true.
Maybe it isn't. But what I would say is this, the thing you read at the end about trying to
make precise predictions and so forth. That's what makes what we're doing here different from
panpsychist approaches, where, and again, these are my good friends and so forth. So there's
nothing personal here at all. But panpsychism means a lot of things. So I'll say the version
of panpsychism that I'm thinking about here is a version in which we take spacetime as fundamental,
we take quantum field theory as given, and the particles of the standard model is given,
the leptons, bosons, and the quarks. And what we do is we say consciousness is the fire behind
those equations. Each particle has, you know, an electron has some conscious experience, a gluon
has some conscious, and the different colors of gluons have different conscious experiences and
so forth. And my attitude about that is there's no progress. We're not explaining consciousness,
where it's panpsychism, but that version that I just talked about of panpsychism is really a
dualism. Physics stuff is real. In addition, there's consciousness behind it. And there's no
principle. What experience, what specific experience should the electron have? And how does that
differ from the electron neutrino and the tau neutrino and the tau and the mua? What are the
specific experiences that are attached to each one and why? No one's trying that. Good luck.
So to just say that their experience is, from my point of view as a scientist,
just nothing's been accomplished. Nothing has been accomplished. It's a dualism, the version I just
said. What we're trying to do in contrast is say, okay, we're not assuming the standard model in
spacetime is fundamental. They're not part of our assumptions. We have to derive them, all of it.
We're assuming consciousness, conscious experiences is fundamental. And we're going to
have to project into spacetime and explain all that. And that seems, we haven't done it yet.
So I'm not congratulating myself, but I'm saying that at least that attempt, that direction of
attempt is very different from saying, well, electrons have experiences and tau and mua have
experiences and quarks and gluon. As a scientist, I find that exceedingly unsatisfying. I don't see
where it's going to go in terms of giving me new mathematics that can actually do something,
make predictions, and eventually make new technology. If this approach we're talking about works,
if we can actually talk about the dynamics of conscious agents outside spacetime, and we understand
what particles are and what mass is, we understand
how spacetime is constructed as an interface,
then think about what you can do. If you're playing Grand Theft Auto, you're a user, you might be a
super user, and you're able to drive your car and outrun everybody. It's fantastic. That's a great
skill. But if you know the code, if you understand Grand Theft Auto is just a piece of software,
and you wrote the code or you know how it's written, then you can do stuff that's completely
miraculous to the guy who's the expert inside Grand Theft. You can take all the gas out of his
tank. You can change, you can give him flat tires. You can take away a steering wheel, or you could
change the geometry of the road he's driving. You can do, or you can get him from A to B
without going through the space. You can just get him, you can just, you could appear anywhere you
want to in space. So if we really, if it's really possible for us to show how spacetime is just a
headset, and we know the software of conscious agents that creates that headset, and it turns out
we can tinker with that software. I mean, it's a question of whether we can tinker with it, but
if we can tinker with it, then the Andromeda Galaxy is something like 2.4 million light
years away. Going through spacetime, we're not going to get there anytime soon. But what if we
don't have to go through spacetime? What if we can just go around spacetime and just be there?
That the technologies that this might open up are completely mind blowing. So, so that's, again,
I'm saying that it's guaranteed, but I can guarantee you that the panpsychist version thing
that I said, we'll never get there. There's nothing that even has a hope. This at least has a hope.
We'll see if the hope is dashed. But at least it's a direction where it might happen. We'll see.
I mean, if it does, it's absolutely crazy. I'm pretty sure someone who's listening to this last
portion of the podcast, if they just decided to listen to that, think we're talking about some
crazy things. I mean, it's highly plausible when you take everything into account. It makes sense.
Could possibly be the future. That's right. But to someone who believes in Flat Earth,
around Earth, is a crazy thing. Yeah. Done. I mean, this is the last time we did this thing
where I told you last minute objections, anything you think you're going to get any sort of
feedback on perhaps counter arguments. This is a chance for you to just express certain views
and anything about this paper that you find you didn't speak about yet that you want to just clarify
or mention. Just one thing that I'll point out.
These are objections that I get all the time in emails from people. They'll say,
also, it's two things. So Hoffman, of course, you say that what we see is not the truth. It's
our construction. Well, what if a car hits you from behind? You didn't see it coming,
but it still killed you. So there you go. It's all over. The car really does exist.
That's simply just not a counter example. I mean, if you're again in Grand Theft Auto,
right, and you're driving and there's a, well, if you look behind you and you see that the
red Porsche is about to come up and crash you from behind, right? Well, if you don't look,
you're not going to see that red Porsche and you're not going to render it. So there's no red
Porsche, right? In the supercomputer, there is no red Porsche. Does that mean that you're not going
to get hit from behind anyway and have damaged? No, you're still going to get hit, but there was no
red Porsche. There's some reality, namely the supercomputer and the software that's going to
enforce, but the reality is not what you see in your headset. So that's, so for that whole
class of arguments, well, Hoffman, why don't you step off a cliff? It will kill you even if you
don't think it's real. All those, just my response for people with those objections,
if you just think about putting on a headset and being in a virtual reality game, just run your
question, the same thing that you think is an objection to what I'm saying, just run it in
virtual reality and see if it still flies there. When you think about in virtual reality, you'll
realize, oh, wow, it would happen even if I didn't render it. But the render thing doesn't
exist. The Porsche doesn't exist. The cliff doesn't exist until I render it. But the software
is not the Porsche or the cliff. The software is something utterly outside the headset.
And that, that is a reality. So I'm not denying reality. I'm just denying that space time is the
reality. So that's one objection. The other objection, and hopefully that will save a lot,
you know, thousands of people having to write me emails saying, you know, here's an obvious
objection to what you're saying.
The funny thing about that is, is that you obviously claim that consciousness is fundamental,
but then you've got people like Dennett and Frankish who also get told the same counter
argument. I mean, if consciousness doesn't exist, I get knocked by a bus. Did it really happen?
That's exactly right.
Because I'm unconscious. And by the way, they're both wonderful men. I mean,
even though we disagree, I mean, they're great, then they're bright. And I'm glad to have people
that bright that disagree. Yeah, and then you just raised real quick is
the objection that when I say that evolution by natural, and I didn't go that into that too much
today, but when I say that evolution by natural selection, we use evolutionary game theory to
show that we evolved not to see the truth, that natural selection would not shape us to see the
truth. There are a lot of people, including some professional philosophers who have come back
and said, that is self contradictory. And the contradiction is this. So evolution by natural
selection Darwin's idea is that there are physical objects called organisms competing
in space and time for physical resources like food and eggs. And now evolutionary game theory
is a mathematical statement that's supposed to capture Darwin's idea. Now either evolutionary
game theory succeeded, and it faithfully represents Darwin's ideas, or it didn't.
If it didn't, then you can't use evolutionary game theory to show that organisms and spacetime
are doomed. And if it did, if evolutionary game theory does successfully capture Darwin's ideas,
then you couldn't possibly use it to show that he was wrong. So there's no way that you can do
what you're doing without shooting yourself on the foot, logically, either way. So as one philosopher
put it, Hoffman is in an unfortunate dialectical situation. So I'm in an unfortunate dialectical
situation. And, and my response is, no, I'm in the normal situation of how science progresses
from one theory to the next. The way science progresses is you take your ideas like Einstein's
idea that spacetime is fundamental and the speed of light is universal. And that if you're an
elevator, and you're falling, you'll be messless. You would, you would weigh nothing. Those are
his intuitions. He labors and labors and labors for, for general relativity for many, many years,
and, and sleepless nights, deep, deep struggle. In 1915, he puts down his field equations. Okay.
Now, when you use Einstein's field equations, and also his, his 1905 paper, where he uses
Planck's constant to essentially introduce quantum theory, although I didn't like it,
he introduces quantum, when you bring in quantum field theory, which, which is based on spacetime,
and you bring in Einstein, right? So the, which I'll assume spacetime is fundamental,
fundamental. You look at the mathematics, the mathematics tells you that spacetime
has no operational meaning beyond the Planck's scale, 10 to the minus 30 centimeters, 10 to the
minus 43 seconds. In other words, Einstein's theory that was capturing his intuitions about
spacetime comes back and tells us that spacetime itself cannot be fundamental.
So Einstein is now in this very unfortunate dialectical situation. Either these mathematically
precise theories captured Einstein's intuitions, or they did not. If they did not, then they
couldn't possibly show that spacetime was not fundamental. And if they did capture his, his
intuitions, then they wouldn't contradict him. That's the mistake. They wouldn't contradict him.
They wouldn't contradict him. Every scientific theory has premises.
And the, when you make it, but it has a limited scope, every scientific theory has limited scope.
When you write down the mathematics, what you hope is your mathematics is precise enough to find
what is the limited scope of your assumptions. How far do your assumptions go? And where do
they stop? Because a scientific theory is not a theory of everything. It's has a limited range.
So what the power of science is, is we make our mathematics, our assumptions precise,
not so that our assumptions can never be disproved, but so that we can find their limits and say,
spacetime is great until you get to 10 to the minus 33 centimeters and then goodbye.
And, and so that's the way science progresses is by one set of equations capturing one set of
intuitions and showing you their limits. And then being the, the test bed for your next set of ideas,
because you're, now you have to take a leap, right? There's this, and this is the fun of science.
Well, part of the fun. I mean, the mathematics is fun, too, if you're a mathematician,
it's hard for me. I can see how it could be fun, but it's just hard for me. But the, the fun is,
now you have to take a creative leap to get a new framework and then project it back into the old
framework and make sure you get that old framework or generalization of that old framework.
The old framework can't tell you what leap to take, but it can tell you if the leap was wrong,
because if it doesn't project back to, so, so that's how science progresses. It's not that
if our mathematical theories capture our intuitions, they could never prove us wrong.
It's that, that mathematical theories that capture our intuitions better show us the limits of those,
of those assumptions, or they're not terribly useful, right? Because, because we know we don't,
we know we don't have the final theory. We know that. The only question is, are our equations
smart enough to help us to see the limits of our current theory, or not? If, if, if not,
then our mathematics hasn't gone far enough, we need to get a deeper mathematics find the limits
of our current. So, so that's, at some point, I have to write a paper to respond to, you know,
because this has been published in philosophy journals and so forth. And so I'll, I'll need,
but there, you know, there's a finite amount of time. And I think addressing it here is easy. It
takes me 10 minutes to address it. Writing the paper would take me months. And I'm not sure
at this point in my life, I want to spend months doing that when I have some other more
fun stuff to do. So I may, who knows, I may never respond in writing. This may be the only thing
I do. We'll see. I think, look, ideally, you're doing a great job at the moment. I mean, I've
watched many of your podcasts, you do, you do such a fantastic job at a certain
repetitive answers that you've got that work perfectly. So when I watch some of your interviews,
I'll enjoy that some of your answers are well rehearsed in the sense that you know
exactly what's been working and what isn't. And I think that's right. This could be very
complicated. So it's helpful to cut through it all and try to get to the clean intuition,
because otherwise it can be very murky. Yeah. Yeah. Don, before we end this paper specifically,
I mean, let's just summarize it. The fact is that subatomic particles created from consciousness.
That's, that's pretty much what we're talking about. That's, that's the proposal. I wouldn't
say the fact, but I would say that that's the proposal. Anything about this paper that you
want to talk about in detail specifically that you feel we haven't touched on that you want to address?
Not, not today, except to say that it should be posted pretty soon. And within a week and
a half, it should be posted online. And I'll send, I can send you a link to when the Institute of
Neolithic Sciences posts the link, but it's going to be Saturday, June 24th at 11 o'clock,
a Pacific time that there's going to be a live zoom where all the three groups that got
awarded this prize will be discussing their proposals. And so I recommend it. It's free.
People can log on. Yeah. And I'm excited for that. Thank you, Don. It's once again a pleasure.
It's always been a pleasure to have been following you. Thank you so much, Devin. I really appreciate it.
I mean, you asked great questions. And thank you so much. I mean, I've been, I can't wait to
continue to watch this journey and hopefully continue to interact about it. Every paper that
comes out, you can expect an email from me. I'll be happy to do, I'll be happy to alert you to
the papers too. It's been a pleasure. Thank you so much, Don. And good luck. I cannot wait for
this paper to be published. And I'm looking forward to the, I think the view is in for a treat for
this one. And that's, it's pretty epic work. Thank you so much.
