Janja, you have a great approach of addressing the problems of consciousness. You go through
the why, the how, the why not, the what, the where. So these are talking about the heart
problem, the binding problem. What is the difference between conscious and unconscious
brain processes? Where is the seat of consciousness? So I'd like you to start this conversation
by running us through these processes. And in doing so, I'd also appreciate if you could
talk me through your views on all of this prior to your quantum biology revolution,
because it's always interesting to see how someone's view changes over time as well regarding
the familiar concepts.
Okay, so first, why are we interested in consciousness? Because if you look, if you
go to the butcher shop and you look at a brain from a cow, it just looks like meat. That's
what our brain would look like, a lump of meat. And the strangest thing in the universe, in
my view, is the fact that a lump of meat can know it's there. And that to me is profoundly
puzzling and strange, because nothing else outside of that lump of meat inside our heads
and presumably other people's or other animal's head has this property of knowing itself,
knowing that it is around, that it is a thing. And, and that property is, is kind of mysterious
because it's outside of science. Science does not talk about this. It's not an area that
can ever look inside our heads and describe our experience. It's only a first person account
that we can ever give our experience. And yet, it's the most important part of us. It's what
would life be like if we were totally zombies, as the conscious community tends to call it. If
we were zombies that have no consciousness, what would be the purpose of life then? So it's
profoundly important. It's something that, in one way or another, I have always had an
interest in. I've always been interested in the history of ideas and history of ideas going
back to the myths and stories and, and the religious basis of where the religion comes
from. It seems to be comes from the same question, really, that what is it that's inside us that
is the us that is important to us and makes us feel that we're worth maintaining our life?
So that, to me, is the most profound and interesting question of the whole, of not only
science and the whole of the world. Of course, there's not only science that deals with the
problem. It deals with the puzzle of consciousness, lots of literature and art also is around this
this strange understanding we have of ourselves and our perceptions.
So that's always been the puzzle. And I didn't really get interested in trying to
figure it out scientifically until over 20, 25 years ago, something like that, I guess,
and when I was, I wrote a book which called Quantum Evolution, it was published in 2000.
I became interested in the idea that quantum mechanics may be involved in
in life, in life more generally, not consciousness at this stage, but I thought it might be involved
in evolution. And I grew in touch with, because I didn't know very much if anything at all about
quantum mechanics, I grew in touch with Jim Alcalely, who is a famous broadcaster and physicist,
who was at the same university as me at the University of Surrey. And it was then about
evolution and mutation and whether quantum mechanics may be involved in this. And we're
still pursuing that at the University of Surrey and unraveling that question of whether quantum
mechanics is involved in mutation. But it did get me profoundly interested in the role of quantum
mechanics in in life more generally. And then I thought it's a book. And I persuaded a publisher
to give me an advance to write it, which was called Quantum Evolution. Now, in the book proposal,
I had chapter 13, which was reserved for probably the most famous conscious, you know,
idea, the idea put forward by Roger Penrose and Stuart Hammerhoff, that consciousness can be
explained by quantum mechanics. And it's very new gravity and gravitational collapse of wave
functions. That sounded kind of interesting. And I thought, well, that's a good thing for
chapter 13. That was the final chapter of the book, which otherwise looked at things like
enzymes and DNA and that kind of thing. So but chapter 13, I thought, okay, it's consciousness.
And then when I started reading it, I knew enough about quantum mechanics at the time to kind of
gave me pause and thought, well, actually, what they're proposing, Hammerhoff and Penrose
doesn't work. They propose an interesting idea that structures called microtubules in the brain,
which transport neurotransmitters up and down neurons, that they could be in a quantum mechanical
state. And by this time, by the time I got to chapter 13, when writing the book, I'll get you
a lot about quantum mechanics, a lot more than I did before I put it down as a topic for chapter
13. And I realized, no, that's not going to work. Microtubules are the busiest structures in the
brain. They're always doing stuff. There's no way they could be in a quantum mechanical state.
So I was convinced by their story, but reading Roger Penrose's, I then read Roger Penrose's
Emperor of the Mine, Emperor of the Mine, the Emperor of the New Clothes,
Roger Penrose's book, On Consciousness, who come to me the title in a moment, but
he convinced me that consciousness is a kind of field. And that's the fundamental idea that goes
behind all of field theories of consciousness and my own idea that when I look at my window here
in the UK, and I see trees, I see walls, I see people moving around, I don't see them as
independent things. They're all part of a single structure, which is my conscious mind.
And how do you account for that in science? When, if we encode information, say, in a computer,
it's all split down into binary digits. And one binary digit will be there, another one will be
over there, and they're all distributed all over the place. And this brings us to the binding problem,
which is a famous problem in consciousness, that how is all the information bound up in your brain,
but the matter is divided up into lots of discrete units like atoms and neurons, etc. and biomolecules
or microtubules, they're all separate stuff. And information is distributed amongst all of them.
So for example, if I'm looking at the trees across the road, facets of the trees such as the color
of the leaves, the color of the bark, the shape of the leaves, the texture, the movement of the
branches as they're swaying in the wind, all of those facets are encoded in different parts of
our brains in different neurons, in different areas of the brain. But that's not what it feels
like. It feels like our conscious mind is stuck together. It's a single physical entity of which
we are at the center of. And how do you make that? And what Roger Penrose proposed in his
Emperor of the Mind, or whatever the book is called, something like that, is that it was a field.
And what we mean by field is like the gravitational field that holds us,
holds me on my seat at the moment. If you're standing up, it holds you to the ground. And
the field is everywhere around. It's invisible. It's everywhere. But the field at the sole of
your feet, if you're standing on the ground, is an integration of the mass of your body
and the mass of the entire planet. That's what's holding you at the soles of your feet to the
ground. And that's kind of remarkable. And that's feature of fields, physical fields,
that all of the information is distributed everywhere within the field. It is indivisible.
There's no place where the soles of feet, the soles of your feet, or the contemplation of
Australia, which is contributing to you being standing at that point, it's everywhere within
the field. It's not just in Australia. It's at the soles of your feet as well. That information
which provides a little bit of the gravitational force that holds you there. And that's really,
I thought, what we needed for consciousness. Penrose thought that many people before him
have thought that. When I did more research, it goes back to Gestalt philosophers,
back in the early part of the 20th century, they also proposed that consciousness was some kind
of field. But that kind of fell out of favor when neuroscientists started studying the brain and
seeing that, well, you see neurons, you don't see fields, you see neurons, and they communicate by
these synapses and neuron firing and all that kind of stuff. And that doesn't involve fields.
So the idea that consciousness was some kind of field fell into disuse, if you like. Penrose
re-energized it with his proposal that it was a quantum field. What the quantum mechanics,
what quantum mechanics does is it turns matter into a field. So if you have an atom of matter
that's behaving quantum mechanically, then it doesn't have a fixed position in space,
just like the information of the mass of Australia isn't a fixed position in the gravitational field
of the earth, it's everywhere. Well, an atom can be everywhere in quantum mechanics. So quantum
mechanics is really a science about fields. So if there was in the brain a quantum mechanical
field, then it could account for consciousness. But the problem is in making quantum mechanical
fields out of matter is hard. Normally, you have to have a very simple system, an atom or two in a
box cooled down to absolute zero as close as you can get to it in a vacuum on an optical table,
which will remove any vibrations or anything. And when you've got all this, you might retain a
quantum mechanical state. Those two or three atoms can behave as a single entity for
picoseconds or some very short length of time. But that's not going to happen in the brain.
So although I was convinced that consciousness is a field, I wasn't convinced that
it could be done by a matter field, quantum mechanical matter field. So I looked around for,
well, is there any other field in the brain? And of course, there is. It's the field that people
have been looking at for over a century, even then when I was first thinking about it, people knew
that the brain generates its own electromagnetic field. And that electromagnetic field is what
physicians measure when they put the electrodes on their skull to do an EEG. They've been measuring
it for 100 years or more. And mostly they've thought it's just there. It's just a consequence of
the brain's activity, but doesn't impact on the brain's activity in any way. It's often described
as the steam whistle of a steam train generates a whistle. We know about it. You can connect it
with the EEG electrodes, but it doesn't function in any way. But it occurred to me, well, if consciousness
isn't in the matter of the brain, but in the electromagnetic field generated by the brain's
activity, then it already has some very interesting properties. For example, it contains all of the
information in firing neurons. And that's kind of useful because we've got an awful lot of information
on conscious mind. It's distributed all over the brain. But in the brain's EM field is everywhere
within the brain's EM field. So that was kind of good. But it also has a very interesting
property. And that's to do with how fields interact. And this, to me, was the key to
thinking, wow, this could really be it. At that time, Francis Crick started to work on consciousness
in Nobel Prize winners for discovering the structure of DNA. Before Francis Crick worked on
consciousness, working on consciousness as a scientist was like working on fairies. I'm going
to study fairies from now on. It was a career destroying move, if you said you're going to
work on consciousness. Nobody worked on consciousness. It was considered only crackpots worked on
consciousness. But then this mega brain, Francis Crick, started to work on consciousness and
suddenly became respectable to think about consciousness. So he put a lot of gave conscious
the consciousness field a really big boost. What he said was the best way to get into studying
the brain is first of all, start with looking at the correlates of consciousness. What that means
is, when we, for example, I'm always losing my glasses on them. When I take them off, and I can't
find them, and they're somewhere on a very messy desktop, I'm looking at that desktop, and I can't
see my glasses, then suddenly I can see them. Now, what happens between the millisecond before
I saw them, when they were, I was looking at them, the image of them was on my retina,
but I still wasn't seeing them. And then suddenly, I can see them. What happens in that few milliseconds
between the image entering my retina, being in my brain, being processed, but I'm not seeing them.
And when you see, when you become consciously aware of my glasses, in this case, and what a
number of studies have demonstrated in the 1990s, mostly, and 2000s, is that the best
correlates of consciousness is not the neuron firing per se, but when neurons fire in sync.
So, I'll be there to the end of where we get to in a moment. But when they fire in sync,
you become conscious. Now, that's a bit of a puzzle, because neurons process information
in independent, you know, the shape of my glasses, the colors of my glasses,
all of those features will be processed in independent neurons. They're all firing,
but not in sync. And then they get in sync, and suddenly I'm aware of them. Why?
Informate, they're going through the same neural pathways, as we know.
But there's a feature of electromagnetic waves, which explains it. When electromagnetic waves,
like any wave, if they're waving in sync, then they have what's called constructive interference.
The signal is amplified, because all of the waves peak some troughs, match up, and you get a bigger
signal. It's like two waves in the sea. If they're waving in sync, then you're going to get a bigger
wave. Whereas if they're waving out of sync, then the wave will be destroyed. So if consciousness,
if it is the brain's electromagnetic field, then we would expect it to correlate with
synchronously firing neurons. And in the 1990s, that was demonstrated in monkeys and mice,
and later in humans. That is the best correlate of consciousness. So it just made sense to me that,
okay, all we need to do is switch from the matter of the brain to the electromagnetic field of the
brain, you solve the binding problem, all the information is stuck together, and it matches
up with the strongest correlate of consciousness, synchronous firing. And he explains why synchronous
firing is associated with consciousness. So that was a revelation to me. And then it all
made sense. And I thought, well, surely someone must have published about this idea before.
I searched around, and no one did. Well, I might as well put a paper or two in, and I did,
as Samantha had published a couple of papers on this idea. And that was more than 20 years ago now.
And mostly it's been not taken seriously for most of those two decades or so. But now it's
beginning to gain some momentum, partly because of all the other theories of consciousness,
I've kind of failed to really make progress in understanding a phenomenon of people saying,
well, we need something, something else. And I think that's what we need. The understanding,
the brains in field is where our conscious mindsets. So a very long explanation that gets us to the
beginning of the story. I mean, this is just the very beginning for, for all those who are not
familiar, let's, let's, let's define it. I mean, you call it the consciousness electromagnetic
information theory, field theory, sorry, so the semi field theory. Do you want to define that for
people? Yeah, so it's conscious information, because it's encodes information. And information,
I mean, information about the outside world. So this excludes EM fields that generated by toasters
and stuff like this, which are not really communicating anything useful about the outside
world. So it's information that is from our senses. And that gets from our memory and neurons,
they get transmitted into the brains in field. And what is interesting about the brains in field
was discovered more after my first papers on consciousness, is that it does influence
neural firing. Because if that's all that happened, if it was transmitted, the information is
transmitted into the brains in field, then who cares? It's there, it's a reflection of the
information in the brain, but it's not doing anything. But if, if the brains in field influences
neuron firing, then it can have a feedback. Your conscious mind can start pulling on the
levers of the neurons. And that's exactly what it does. Lots of studies, including some more
recently, my own lab have looked at the effect of EM fields on neurons. And neurons are both
transmitters of information into the brain's electromagnetic field. But they are also receivers
of that information. So it provides a loop of information from the neurons going into the
brain's electromagnetic field where it all gets joined up. And there you can start thinking,
because that's where your thinking is happening in your conscious mind. And then your thoughts can
influence your brain can pull on the levers of neurons to do the kind of actions that we call
our free will. That's the fascinating component of this is that you, you've taken this
complex subject of consciousness, and which is a very deep philosophical question in its own
right. And then you've also managed to now approach another topic that people often discuss in
various different debates, which is free will. You've managed to tie these two concepts together.
And it's interesting, because when you first spoke about this, when I first read about it
many years ago, I thought about the fact that people think about electromagnetic fields and
they talk about it, particularly scientists, in a very mystical manner. So like this is,
and this is especially true in medicine as a doctor, I see it when you talk to another
biologist or a doctor that when you start talking about anything regarding electromagnetic
fields, they start to think that you're going down some sort of spiritual, mystical,
non-physical realm. Has that been what's been occurring to you as well? Do you feel like your
theory is automatically placed in this group of mysticism? And that's not the case. Is it
still ultimately a physicalist theory, if I'm not mistaken? Yeah, I think that that is a problem.
And that's one of the reasons why it's taken a while for it to become at least partly accepted,
because it is grouped along with the wacky stuff, if you like. Yes, we have crystal therapists who
are putting crystals on your body and claiming there's some electromagnetic field coming in
and helping to heal you. And people talk about trees having these electromagnetic field
auras around them. So it kind of plays into all of that, but it shouldn't. Electromagnetism is
fundamentally scientific, since the work of Maxwell, who showed that light, the light that
we see is electromagnetism. It's a form of energy that comes from the sun. It's all
electromagnetism. In fact, all of the things that happen on our world pretty much apart from gravity
are all down to electromagnetism in one way or another. Chemistry is really all electromagnetism.
So pretty much everything that happens that we see is about electromagnetic interactions.
So it's not spooky at all, but it is not physical. And this is, I think, sorry,
it's not material. It's not material. And that's the key difference that makes people kind of
hesitant about it, because it's invisible. You can't see it. When you look at the brain,
you see a big lump of matter and say, well, that's it. That's the brain. That's all that's
happening. But it's actually, and the dead brain, it's not happening anymore, but a live brain
has an invisible electromagnetic field, which is just as rich in information as the brain's neurons.
But as I said, it has that extra property of all the information being joined up as joined up as
the information in a single photon or a single electron is completely physically
united within the brain's electromagnetic field, and thereby binds the information in our conscious
mind. So yes, it's not materialist theory, but it is a figure that physicalist theory. And that,
I think, is when people say they're materialist, often me, it shouldn't really be saying that
physicalists, because you can't explain our world with just material. You have to pretty much
everything that happens is an interaction between fields, our current understanding of what matter
is, what an atom is, and electron is. They are perturbations of fields of electromagnetic field,
gravitational fields, nuclear forces, they're all perturbations of fields. So ultimately,
everything is fields. So this isn't a wacky idea at all. It's no more wacky than a materialist.
Just because we can see matter doesn't make it not a field. It really is fundamentally
another kind of field. It reminds me of one of the things you want. I mean, you mentioned this
earlier as well, but the way you describe meat, and this just this lump of meat, I mean, when you
talk about that way, it sort of highlights this degree of absurdity. And it almost down and brings
your theory back into sort of a normal realm of debate and chat, which is an important way to
approach this. But I have noticed that other people also seem to have semi-field theories as well.
And some of those do tend to go into the spiritual realms. And I think that's also hindering your
own process and your own research. Yeah, I agree. I agree. There is a lovely story, actually, by a
short story. You can find it online. It's by Terry Bison called They're Made of Meat. It's a story of
aliens who discover in some far distant galaxy a intelligence and sentience. And they're all
excited about this. And then one of the aliens says, the strange thing about this sentience
is they're made of meat. And they're a gas. What? You mean that's stuck with by a butcher that we
eat and chop on and make steaks out of? That can't be sentient. That's just nonsense. And then you
go on and on and on. And essentially, they decide to suppress the idea. It's so bizarre that
consciousness could be made of meat. But that is what everyone else thinks. And it is far more
bizarre to think that meat can be conscious than it is to think that electromagnetic field can
be conscious. The latter is much more sensible and realistic and less wacky than the idea of
a lump of meat is conscious. But yes, you're right. The spiritual stuff, I try to be very
rigorous and not get into those deeply philosophical questions about meaning of life and things like
this and panpsychism and all those kind of things and try to keep to the nuts and bolts of the,
because I think there is a danger in many fields that they can get corrupted by sloppy thinking.
Sloppy kind of mystical thinking. And I'd like to keep it very scientific, scientific and grounded.
John, Joe, do you worry about the fact that even when people talk about materialist theories of
consciousness, so whether it's matter, some sort of neuronal firing, whether it's a global workspace,
whether it's integrated information, people are still going to be concerned that these
electromagnetic fields are still merely correlates. And do you think that's still
satisfies, so satisfies the thirst that some people have for a theory that does not have
this correlation issue? Because as we all know, correlation does not equal causation, the infamous
Absolutely. Essentially, we have to take a jump somewhere, but I think we have to make the jump
as small as possible. And ultimately, we have to, we have to come around to the idea that something
in our bodies is conscious. Okay, we know that we're conscious. So something is conscious. And
that's usually bizarre. I mean, as we said, we just made them out of meat and blood and bones
and all the rest of it. And some part of it is gone. If I told you that your bones were conscious,
you'd say, no, crazy, but it's no more crazy than believing the meat of your brain is conscious.
So somewhere, because we have our own introspective experience of being aware,
that's got to be a property of something in our brain. So we've got to pin it down somewhere.
If we pin it on the matter of the brain, we're stuck with the binding problem. How does it get
stuck together to give us our experience? If we put it in the brain's electromagnetic field,
then that solves that fundamental problem of consciousness. And a lot more, it makes sense
in lots of different ways that we haven't gone into yet. But it's got to go somewhere. And
somewhere we've got to take the wacky leap and say that, okay, this thing that we thought was
not aware, not conscious is conscious. Because otherwise, how are we talking at the moment?
Why are we arguing about it? Consciousness is a thing. Awareness is a thing. It's got to be pinned
on something. He unfilled it the best one.
John, some people have new theories of understanding the brain-body connection and sort of
there are these new concepts like embodied cognition. The fact that we have a brain-gut
axis, we've got relationships between our body and brain, there are separate entities almost
like having two brains in a sense. The fields you're talking about are consistent with the brain.
But what does that have to do with sort of serotonin receptors in the gut,
other areas of the body? Does this entwine into these?
I don't think it makes any difference from, if you believe consciousness is the matter of the brain
or consciousness is the field of the brain, then we still have, it doesn't differentiate between
the two theories in terms of whether there's a wider consciousness in, say, the gut or anywhere else.
I don't think you need to, I mean, I'm a donor, a kidney donor. I gave my kidney.
I don't think I passed any of my consciousness to her. She still doesn't like the things I like
to eat. She doesn't like the music. So I don't think, yes, there is nothing about the body
consciousness and things like that, which convinces me that anything outside the brain needs to be
conscious. Because all of those areas that we think we are embodied in the rest of our body
and in our gut axis and all the rest of it, they're all connected by neurons to the brain.
So the information is in the brain, you don't need to have a consciousness elsewhere.
And I think there's absolutely zero evidence for it. There's not any kidneys, there's hearts
and other organs that have been transferred from one person to another. And there's no evidence at
all that any consciousness is transferred in that operation. Tell me, John, do you know if any
sort of, are there any newspapers, aren't there, that sort of describe EM feels anywhere else in the
body? There's lots of them. Yeah. A heart, for example, we use ECG to detect heart arrhythmias.
Sorry, I think I didn't ask the question correctly. What I wanted to know is, do you know if there's
any sort of relationship between the EM feels that we do have in the body that link up to sort of the
EM feels generated by the brain? Yeah, I don't know if you've, I think you have. I think I looked
on your podcast, you've interviewed Mike Levine. Yes, yes, yes. Yeah, okay. We've actually done
a few times, yes. Yeah, yeah. Fascinating work, him and it's such amazing work.
I think it's the prehistory of consciousness, the kind of thing that he's looking at. It's that
he is already finding that the EM feels generated by the body have causal efficacy. They are doing
things to help in wound healing and development and some and those kind of things. That to me is
a prehistory of what's happening in our brain, that the EM feels that that were generated by the
brain started in evolutionary history to make a difference to how the brain works. And instead of
being instead of having an influence on wound healing or development, they had an influence on
our actions. And that's just seems to me a natural consequence of the kind of thing that Mike and
Wendy and other people have found in the role of EM feels in other parts of our body. Once you have
EM feels in the brain, then they are in the powerhouse, they're in the control room now. And
they can start doing all sorts of things like making you happy, sad, making you do actions,
preventing you from do actions. Suddenly, the EM feels are not just involved in development or
wound healing, they're involved in everything, every action that you do. Mike actually might
watch this episode because he just sent me an email the other day to say he watched a previous
episode. I want to almost speak for him in the sense by saying, I mean, what he's trying to
show at some point is that this bio electricity, I mean, this electricity, electrical signals
can communicate messages, which is something we never really thought was a thing. And this is
amazing work. I mean, he's showing how information can be transferred in ways that we could never
imagine. And the impact this has, do you think at some point, all of those bio electrical signals
could perhaps create an EM feel for the entire body that sort of communicates altogether?
Well, although the brain field is everywhere, obviously, we know that if you have a transmitter
very far away from you, it is less likely to be detected by your radio. I can detect the times
when it was all radio signals, you can detect London, say, but I couldn't detect Edinburgh,
and very occasionally you might detect somewhere like Moscow or something like that on your radio,
but very rarely. And that's because the strength of the signal decreases with the
cube or the distance is it? I don't remember my physics either square of cube or the difference
distance. So the strength of the signal drops. So yes, the information, there will be some bit
of information that say comes from your toe, that when it's injured, that will also impact
the brain. But most of what the brain is doing is going to be influenced by the nearby EM fields,
which are generated by neurons, particularly as neurons are the most electrically excitable,
are the biggest transmitters of signals, and the most effective
antennae for signals as well. So I would say yes, it's possible, but I think the
influences likely to go down the further and further away, the organ is from the brain.
And perhaps even the Mali nation might fall to that control, because that's much more common
really in the brain. Yeah, but I'd be interested in Mike's view on this. We're going to chat about it
soon. So when we have that other chat, I'm going to make a note to actually ask him about this.
Okay, okay. You touched on something just now and I have a note here, just let me just find it.
You said at some point, I mean, when someone's alive, they're going to have this field,
and then you said, well, unless they did, I mean, but sometimes when someone dies,
you sort of still see an electromagnetic field around them, there's still some sort of
information being carried. So what happens when someone really dies? Does the information store
some way within the field? Well, remember that the information is constantly changing in the brain.
It's not that it's not like a hard disk of a computer that would be laid down forever. We do
have memories that are in the Senate, or we believe memory is still one of the mysterious things
about how our brain works and we don't fully understand it. But most guesses are that it's
it's maintaining the synaptic connections of our brain. Those will be there still there when we die,
but they will start to disintegrate. So they won't last long.
There is another interesting way of thinking about it. I've not really, I've not really thought
this. This is now when, when I go into dangerous, wacky area, but it's fine. This is an open space.
This podcast is exactly what it is. But there is something that I think I wonder what that means.
But okay, information, according to quantum mechanics, information can't be created or
destroyed. It's just moved around. So there's conservation of information. It's a theorem,
or is that what they call it? The theorem, no one's proved it as far as I know,
but it's fundamentally quantum mechanics that information can't be destroyed.
Now the brain's information, what the CME field theory says is the brain's information
has the quality of awareness. Okay, that's what is aware. The information encoded in the brain's
field is aware. Okay, so then I have to say, I have to go on, look at that more deeply. I have
to say, okay, well, is all electromagnetic field information aware? I say, well, you know,
what's the electric, what can the electromagnetic field of a single electron know? What it knows
is itself. It doesn't carry information about the outside world. What is normal and interesting
about the brain is that the brain's young field carries this vast amount of information about
the outside world and the inner world of the person, their memories and everything else is
all encoded in the brain. So it's a much richer sourcing information. But it is information,
and it's never going to be destroyed according to quantum mechanics. So what happens? I don't
know. I mean, every thought that we make is transmitted into the brain's field and some
of that leaks into the universe. So what is that information? It's not connected in the same way,
you know, but it's still there. As I said, EM feels unified. There's only a single EM field
for the entire universe. The universe has a single EM field of which our brains,
our electromagnetic field is part of. So when we stop thinking, and our brain stops working,
do we become part of the universe's electromagnetic field? Do we get any awareness of that state?
I don't know. I will find out. Not for a while, I hope. I was just going to say, hopefully not too
soon. It is a kind of spooky, kind of interesting idea. The conservation of information is if
information, electromagnetic field information has the property of awareness, and that's
fundamental to semi-field theory. That's the only way we can account for consciousness.
Then that information that's gone off into the universe, every thought that we've had,
still has that property. What does that mean? I don't know. It's crazy because when I
remember when I first, this was years ago, when I came across your work and Jim Alcalilla, I watched
one of his, I think it was his, was it a TED talk, if I recall, talking about quantum biology,
and then I went down this rabbit hole, learning about it, reading about it, then came across your
work. I remember still back then being so fundamentally materialist that to me, it sounded
completely absurd. And since starting this podcast, the more I've learned about other theories and
understanding other people's perceptions, the way they work, it becomes a lot easier to empathize,
and sort of see the other person's viewpoint a lot clearer. But then, you also don't know
where to draw the line anymore, because at this point, as we're discussing this, it's easy to
see how we can tread down territories that are non-scientific. We can almost go into some sort
of bizarre phenomenon that, I mean, it's not a bad thing necessarily. This is still intriguing
things. And it's not clear that the work is wacky. It still is quite cool that you can go down these
routes, I think. Yeah, I think to me, the line is when it's no longer science. So when it becomes
no longer, when you can't actually prove what you're speculating about, it is no longer science.
So people ask me, well, how do we know that the radio isn't conscious? I would say,
how would you ever prove it wasn't conscious? And until someone comes up with a way of answering
that question, then I don't think there's any, that is part of science. We just have to say,
well, as far as we know, the radio or my car or whatever isn't conscious,
you know, maybe someday it will start talking to me and I'll be, I'll disprove that theory.
But until then, I'm going to take the default simplest way of accounting for the fact that
my car doesn't talk to me, that it is not conscious. And I think we have to take the ideas that I was
just saying about what happens to our consciousness after that. I don't think I'll ever be able to
test that. So I count that as non scientific speculation, which is perfectly okay, as long
as we don't think it's science. We can speculate. Philosophers have been doing it for centuries,
and they got away with it. Why shouldn't scientists occasionally get away with a bit of
speculation? I can just see the way someone could take this information and sort of a
patient maybe in a psych ward, listening to this conversation, now realizing that actually, no,
the radio really did say that to me. So I always have to put it in the podcast. I mean,
this is just for informational purposes only. This is not, I guess a doctor,
everyone patients to really go around to think, okay, this is fine. This is purely educational.
This is that just a disclaimer for everyone. But tell me the brain that the skull acts as
almost a Faraday cage holds in all these signals as much as possible, the fields at least. So
it can't go too far. I mean, you briefly touched on that fact. I mean, it's not like you and I
could step together side by side and sort of sort of do almost a telepathic communication with
each other. That's what you're saying either. No, I have a lot of people who ask me, and whenever
you've been talking to someone, always pops up and says, does it explain telepathy? And I say, no,
no, it doesn't. Because firstly, is telepathy a thing that can be explained by science?
No, because no scientific experiment that's actually demonstrated telepathy. So it's like
saying, does your theory explain aliens on the moon? No, because there's no need to explain them.
So there's no evidence for telepathy and all the scientific tests have shown
nothing's there. But and we want to expect it from my theory. You can see the headlines now,
semi-field and the Fermi paradox. Yes. And no, I don't think telepathy can't be explained by
semi-field theory. Because of that problem of the information is diluted as it goes further and
further away from you. And also, your brain has developed, it's like going back to my
Levine's work, your brain has developed to both make its own fields, own EM fields and decode
those fields. I doubt if any other brain is capable of decoding it. It's probably only
a few years ago. I think I'm I've lost you there.
Ask in the brain, there's no fundamental code that all brains use. They're going to be using
all different codes. So I think only your brain can decode the infield information inside your
head. Sorry, John, for a moment, I lost you, but you're back. Okay. As long as you're back, it's great.
Okay, it's an EM field. I could switch to another, I can see, I should
to prevent it happening again, I could switch to another router.
Give it a go. If it fails again, we'll then we'll switch over. Okay, we'll leave it as it is.
While we're on that topic, though, I mean, what are the chances of other sort of electromagnetic
fields interacting with ours anyway, not causing sort of telepathic communication,
but actually affecting my own EM field? Yeah, people have have concerns about this in terms of
whether, you know, electrical installations, telegraph wires and stuff like this could influence
how we think. It's feasible, I would say, if a very strong electromagnetic field
make a radio talk as it can, when we have a radio receiver, it could interfere with the brain,
but it's working on different frequencies. It's not going to be decodable. So by the brain, the
brain is is designed by evolution and development to decode its own information, not to decode the
stuff that comes in the radio waves. And as far as I know, no one has ever managed to
listen to a radio station just with their head. So we can't decode that information,
whether it can do any harm to us. I think the evidence is very slight, if any, that there is any
influence of power stations and stuff like that near us doing any harm. And so my guess is not,
but because there's been a lot of research and a lot of contradictory in this area of whether
external EM fields can cause ill effects in people, I prefer to stay agnostic about it,
as I don't really study the literature enough to be very clear in my own mind about it.
I think it's fascinating because you're discussing a theory that is so quote unquote
wacky, but it's not. And yet you simultaneously write a book that's like slightly simple and talk
about Occam's Razor, I mean, William of Occam, and you discuss how you approach science in a very
scientific manner because of the fact that you understand the difference between taking a leap
of faith and then being agnostic when agnosticism is needed. So I just want to put that out there for
you to sort of... Yeah, yeah, I think they, as you said in my recent book Life is Simple, I make
the case that what differentiates science from other forms of ways of making sense of the world
is the sciences committed to take the simplest solution to problems. To me, the simplest solution
to consciousness is the brain's electromagnetic field. It solves so many problems, such as why
synchronous firing should be correlated with consciousness. It gives us a way of understanding
one of the other big puzzles of the brain, why most of what the brain does is actually non-conscious.
And that's something we have to also explain because if the brain is just neural activity,
then why isn't most of what the brain does conscious? We do a lot of very complicated stuff. A lot of
people have argued, well, it's only the really difficult stuff that we do that we need our
conscious mind. No, we could be trying solving a really difficult equation and still on stand
at our toe and become highly aware of a very simple stimulus of someone standing on our toe.
So very simple stimuli can overwhelm our conscious mind. So complexity and consciousness are
necessarily related. And yet we have to explain how some parts of some of the things that we
our brain does is we're not aware of, like me waving my hands around when I talk,
I'm not aware of that. And lots of things that we do blinking and all this kind of stuff.
That's all done non-consciously. So we have to explain how the brain can work in two different
ways. One a conscious way and one a non-conscious way. As far as I'm aware, the only theory
consciousness theory really sorts this out is the Semifield theory, another E.M. Phil theories
of consciousness that says only the activity from synchronously firing neurons, because
the waves of the synchronously firing neurons fire together, only that gets transmitted into
the brain's electromagnetic field. If neurons fire asynchronously and mostly they do, that
information doesn't get transmitted into the brain's electromagnetic field because the wave,
the top of a wave of one neuron is cancelled out by the bottom of the wave of the other neurons.
So it explains why only some information is consciousness. It's only the synchronously
firing neurons and that's exactly what we find. The rest of what the brain does is going to be
non-conscious. So you get a conscious and a non-conscious mind. So all of those problems are
just disappear once you just move consciousness from the matter of the brain into the brain's E.M.
field. And I think it's a much simpler theory than others like IIT, which is integrated information
theory, which has to propose this massively difficult mathematical equation is what explains
consciousness and, you know, the level of consciousness can't solve this equation for
more than two or three neurons at most and I just can't see that it's needed. So it's a simplest
theory. And I admire that in science and science has been driven by simplicity right from those
early days, as you mentioned, William Rockham was the first modern person to make that claim
that science is all about simplicity and it has stood the test of time. The Higgs boson was
predicted on simplicity grounds that were more complex theories, but the simplest was
the Higgs theory that predicted the existence of the Higgs boson. And only one of them was
the simplest of many theories to predict. One of them, the only advantage of the one that predicted
only a single Higgs boson, well, it was simpler than the others and that's the way it turned out.
So science looks for simple solutions. Semi-field theory is, in my view, far simpler than any other
theory that attempts to account for consciousness. As of mid-2024, are there any sort of labs,
other people's work that you're looking to that are sort of showing support for this theory?
How's the evidence looking for this theory and anything new, any updates? Well, yeah, there was
work in, I have to, my brain is, my brain is useless, digging out names and particular studies,
but there was a, at least tell us about the studies, okay. Yeah, sure. And I can send you the
reference later if you want. There was a very fascinating study done by a group at MIT and
what they did was looked at the brain neurons in the brain of monkeys, I think it was,
that was recorded by multilateral recordings of the brain when they were keeping something
in memory, okay. And there's a lot of studies have done this and they've found that if the monkey
is thinking banana safe, okay, when it recalls banana, different sets of neurons were fire.
And there's a name for this and again, this has escaped me at the moment, it will come to me
sometime. It's that memories seem to not rely on particular neurons. A set of neurons will fire,
but it won't be the same set of neurons when a monkey thinks of the banana two or three times,
there'll be different neurons, there'll be five or six neurons say that will fire,
but it'll be different set of neurons. And that's very hard to explain in terms of memory,
when we think of memory in the synaptic idea of memory that I mentioned earlier that it's to do
with just the connections between neurons via synapses. A temporal drift, I think it is called,
that the encoding of a memory drift between different neurons. But what this study at MIT
showed is that what was preserved wasn't the neurons, but the electromagnetic field generated
by those neurons. So although the patterns of electromagnetic fields are similar.
Yeah, the electromagnetic field of the neurons was always similar. So in other words, the memory
of the banana was not encoded in neurons, it's encoded in the electromagnetic field
generated by neurons. And that was a very fascinating study that I think could be very
interesting. The other big area that I think, if anyone is listening who wants to try to make,
I think it would be fascinating to make. And I think someone's going to do it. And
I think it should be done despite people having fears about it. A conscious AI.
That's got to be the way that things are going. At the moment, we know that chat
GBT is fantastic. It does wonderful things. It's not conscious. We still haven't got, with
conventional computing power, we haven't got any closer to consciousness. There's no
inkling. There's not even the kind of consciousness that a little baby will have. As soon as it's
bought, that's not no little baby is starting to go, go, go, go, go, and be, oh, I'm pleased to see,
do spontaneous stuff like that. So despite the fact that modern computers are now competitive with
the power of the human brain, but there's no spark of consciousness there at all.
The reason for that, of course, according to the semi-field theory, is that
all the conventional computers do is simulate what the non-conscious brain is doing,
calculating and computing with the wires. That's what we've said that the non-conscious part of
our brain does. But then the conscious stuff, the information that goes through the brain's
electromagnetic field is where consciousness is, and that's where we do our conscious thinking,
and that's where our creative thinking, that's what we come out with great ideas. We don't come up
with them, oh, you rarely, sometimes we do, our non-conscious mind seems to be able to generate
good ideas, but mostly we use our conscious mind to think and to come up with good ideas.
That is lacking in computers because engineers, they call it electrical interference, EMF
interference. When they build computers, they engineer them to not be influenced by their own
electromagnetic fields. So they've engineered out consciousness in computers. That's happened
because that's the way all electrical devices work. They don't want them to be interfered with
by their own electrical activity. There's a fascinating experiment that was done over two
decades ago. When I was first writing it, yes, over two decades ago, by a chat called Andrew
Thompson at the COBS group, cognitive science group at the University of Sussex in Brighton.
This is, I think, one of the most fascinating experiments I've done, and no one's really
picked it up and gone forward with it. I've tried myself to get funding to do work on it, but not
take me forward. Andrew Thompson did an experiment of making an AI. This was a long time ago, more
than 20 years ago, but not designing it, evolving it. We took something called an FPGA chip, field
programmable gate array. What these are are a chip that can be reconfigured. The electrical
connections can be reconfigured endlessly, so you can make lots of different configurations.
We took a number of them, let's say 100 of them, and randomly set them to different configurations,
and then tested each one for their ability to solve a task. He gave it a simple task,
I think it was recognizing musical note. They're all rubbish at it, but maybe one or two were a
little bit good at it, could do it just slightly better than what would be expected from a random
guess. We took the best one and then cloned it across the entire 100, and then mutated them all
a bit. Then repeated the exercise, and then did it again and again and again for, I think,
about 100 generations until it got a chip that worked. It could now recognize musical note.
He had evolved in intelligence that could do this task rather than designing it, but it was weird.
There was one feature of it that was particularly puzzling. It didn't work all the time. Sometimes
it did, sometimes it didn't. They worked out eventually what was the factor. It only worked
when the radio was on in the lab. Why would that be? Because this was an off-piste experiment that
they weren't paid to work on. It was something they thought would be fun to do. They did it at
the end of the day when they finished the normal work as it goes into the evening and turned the
radio on to keep themselves company. They evolved the chip with the radio being on.
It was picking up radio waves and using them as part of its computation. They needed those radio
waves, EM fields, to actually do the computation. That was one weird thing. The other weird thing
about these chips were that there were some parts of the chip. It's a complex microchip. It's got
lots of little circuits and resistors and capacitors here and there. There were some parts of it
that were necessary for the computation. If they removed those completely, it didn't work.
But they weren't connected to either the inputs or the outputs. How do you explain that? The only
way to explain it is that they're communicating through EM fields. EM fields are within the chip
or communicating with each other with different parts of the circuit. Also, in that experience,
they actually were picking up signals from the radio as well for the computation.
The fascinating conclusion of that is if you evolve an electrical circuit to do a task rather
than design it, you evolve an EM field, sensitive computer, one that computes through fields as
well as through standard electrical, neural, standard electrical connections. I think that has
to be built on. We have to build an AI that does this. At what point were our EM fields
generating this sort of potential in terms of our evolutionary journey?
A very interesting question. Certainly, my guess is that the brain went through the same process
that Andrew Thompson's experiment did. At some point, it started communicating, first of all,
that neural communication was all non-conscious. All of the information was set down the wires.
But then as more and more neurons got packed into the brain, then it started generating,
many of them were often synchronously firing. It started to generate its own electromagnetic field.
And then those electromagnetic fields, and this has been demonstrated experimentally,
EM fields of the strength and structure of the brain's EM field. We've done experiments in our
lab. If you apply them to brain tissue, that brain tissue will twitch if you'd like. There is a
feedback onto neurons. Neurons are sensitive to the brain's electromagnetic field.
Now, once that happens, then the actions driven by that brain are going to be visible to natural
selection. So natural selection acting on a brain that's now got electrical interference will do
two things. If the electrical interference is bad for us, then it will insulate it. It will
insulate those things. It will dampen down those electromagnetic fields or make them
fire asynchronously or whatever, get rid of that interference. So part of the brain will evolve
in the direction of being non-conscious because things you don't want to interfere with your
conscious mind, like the heart beating or walking or breathing, all of that stuff needs to be
non-interferable. But if there was some capacity that was captured by electromagnetic field
interactions between neurons, then natural selection would kick in to develop that. And
my guess that has happened certainly by the time of primates, probably somewhere in the
mammalian evolution, maybe way back in vertebrate evolution, that that gradual takeover of electromagnetic
fields in terms of driving actions was selected by natural selection as being an efficient way
of dealing with complex situations by thinking rather than just automatically responding.
And certainly primates have it, my guess is higher mammals like dogs and cats also have it,
but those are all guesses. Until we really understand and can prove what consciousness is,
it will be speculative, but somewhere less than humans, I'm sure, has awareness and
consciousness like us, but it's a very, like us, but probably not very much like us. Can you think
of how you would think without language? That's a tricky thing, isn't it? How you would think
without language? Certainly we do, we kind of feelings and stuff, and that's what I guess
animals are thinking. They don't have language, so they think in terms of feelings, and those
can't be very complex calculations and ideas that they can have, I guess, they've seen food and say,
oh, I'd like to be over there and eat our food. And that's a feeling rather than in our mind,
where we can encapsulate the feelings in words as well and start to compute with them by starting
to think through problems that I don't think animals have that capability. It's funny that you
made that by just today, I think earlier I was reading a paper, I can't remember by who,
but it was on orcas and apparently there's this, they're starting to figure out a communication
system that seems to be very much structured. I'm not too sure on the diesel, I just briefly
came across this while I was at work reading, and that seems fascinating to me, because you're
right, linguistics, language, this triumph in evolution that sort of allows us to shape our
views, shape our thoughts and sort of give the synchronicity that's required to give
attention to certain things, changed the game for humans. This seems to be one of those
game changers, I think. So it would be fascinating to know, do these orcas speak
their specific type of language, because then this gives them a sort of different EM field in
that sense. Yeah, yeah, I think the experiments could be done once you commit yourself to the idea
that consciousness is the brain's EM field. The key question is, does the EM field generated by
a brain influence its own actions? And that's something that can be answered. You can start to,
you can imagine experiments that will then determine what percentage of brain activity in a
particular animal is influenced by the animal's brain's EM field. That will be a measure of
consciousness if we could do that kind of measurement. I don't know how we'd do it at the
moment, but I'm sure it will be possible to do that at some stage and find out how much animals
are thinking consciously. Would you say this would be taken further with regards to free will?
At what point are they making active decisions to either go like the right in terms of how much
that does, the other thing that semi-field theory provides is a theory of free will,
who provides it for free, because it divides the brain's activity into those which are
non-conscious and those which are conscious. We call our conscious decision making those
which aren't made by the automatic part of our brain. We call it free will when we make conscious
decisions to raise my hand or not raise my hand. All of those are driven by our conscious mind.
So I think everyone gets into a muddle with free will because of the word free. I think we have to
stick to the second word which is will. Will is when our conscious mind is willing our actions.
It's not necessarily free because it's all determinism ultimately in science, jumping out
determinism is very difficult. So it's still deterministic but our conscious actions are
those that are driven by our conscious mind rather than our non-conscious mind and that gives you a
nice simple explanation of free will. It doesn't require anything deep or philosophical. It's just
the stuff driven by our conscious mind, the freedom field rather than the neurons.
Yeah so it's sort of just a by-product of being conscious in itself. Just jumps along for the
right. Yeah yeah once once the brain becomes conscious by having an e.m. field then those
e.m. fields influence actions we call that free will. I mean if people say you know what as I said
the word free causes a lot of confusion here. Otherwise we think we don't if you think about
what we believe our minds are doing when we make purposeful actions we don't necessarily think
without a preceding thought when I think okay I'm going to phone my brother. It may be because I've
seen him put something on the TV that's reminding of him. I once think that that idea will just
pop into my head without any precedent and I think most of what we do we think hard about
every action that we do. It's preceded by some other thought. So I don't think determinism is
the problem of consciousness. It's never been and in the past people didn't think of it as being
non-deterministic. They talked about fate. That your actions will be driven by fate not by
and fate was something you had no control over. So the idea of determinant of being free will
being something or will be free something that isn't determined by anything that's happened before
comes out of later thought in philosophy and Christianity where you had to be punished for
your sins. So that's really the source of where the idea of free will comes from. But if we just
accept that there are some thoughts that we there's some of our actions are driven by our
own automatic brain and some are driven by conscious mind and that makes a lot of sense
and it's predicted by the semi-field theory and then you don't need to worry about the philosophy.
We touched on a species going from let's say a meaboo to humans and obviously maybe vertebrates
have this perhaps mammals have this. What about humans? What about when we start off as embryos
working our way upward into adulthood from childhood? When does this become active?
Your guess would be as good as mine. I don't really have any insight. The key thing is that
when the brains in field influences the activities that a person is performing
and I think that's when they become less than more than reactions. So blinking is a reaction
if a fly flies into your eye you blink and you've got no control over it. Then you can see a baby
this way and that way and it will do the kind of pause and look at things and
can be pretty sure there's some thinking going on in that baby's brain once they start toddling
around and moving around and they laugh and stuff like that. Funny enough hardly any animals laugh
people say that some monkeys laugh but so they can laugh at themselves and they can find things
amusing. All of those things are conscious things. We couldn't we wouldn't find anything
amusing non-consciously for example. So I think you have to ask the question what do we need our
conscious mind for and what can we do without our conscious mind? I can do all this moving around
in my hands non-consciously. I can drive a car pretty well non-consciously. I mean we know that
if we have an accident and everyone does that again and you think what was I doing a moment
before you're probably not going to have to remember because you have all the emotions that
you're doing are going on non-consciously. So there's lots of things that we do non-consciously
then there's stuff like you know like a long division we couldn't do non-consciously
and there's another interesting feature of consciousness that is you can only do one thing
at once really and that's strange because you can do lots of things non-consciously like me waving
my hands around I could be scratching my head and move my arms and all of these things are going on
but you can't say do a crossword and talk to someone at the same time could you? So your
conscious mind is this has been established outside of the semi field theory but your conscious mind
is what's called a serial computer it can only do one thing at a time whereas your non-conscious
mind is a parallel computer can solve lots of problems and be working on lots of problems
simultaneously so again you've got to account for that in the brain semi field theory does it
like that it's no problem there's only a single brain EM field unlike the neurons which are
distributed and there's lots of different circuits lots of different areas the brain's EM field
from its perspective is singular so it's always going to be only one thing at a time anything
else will start to cause interference so it's identifying the things that we do consciously
and certainly we couldn't imagine talking non-consciously you couldn't have a conversation
with someone non-consciously you couldn't do anything creative non-consciously so all of those
things that we require our conscious mind for when we see those happening in say babies or in
animals then we've got to admit that they will are very likely also conscious
John Jo where do you see the future of semi field theory going what what would you like to be done
in terms of other people who watch this podcast the thousands of people listening
where do you want some of these future scientists to take this and and perhaps yeah I think we have
to do we have to take the brains EM field seriously and find out how it functions to
as a conduit for information transfer in the brain that one's really done that I mean there's no
one's even worked out how you can calculate how the EM field generated by the brain will influence
neural firing patterns all of those things need to be calculated we need to do a lot more experiments
and how neurons can communicate through electromagnetic fields and we're doing some of
those experiments in our lab by applying external electromagnetic fields but it's
it's tiny the amount of work that's going on in this kind of area compared to what's going on
other areas of neurobiology and I think we need to try to use these principles to make a conscious
AI ultimately I think the only way that you'll prove a theory of consciousness is by applying
it to make a conscious AI and I you know the kind of work that was described in the earlier
gives you a route towards doing that there are lots of other theories which will also give
you a route towards doing that like IIT according to IIT computers are already conscious so
to me that's already disproved IIT global workspace has also been disproved because
computers can have global workspaces in the global workspace sense and none of them have
shown any signs of consciousness so we've got to wake up and kind of say okay well let's try to
design a conscious mind based on different principles on say IIT or global workspace or
semi-field theory and let's see which one talks back to us. So would the goal then be to create
this artificial intelligence to match our electromagnetic field? I think it's more than
artificial intelligence it's a conscious artificial intelligence and there are of course ethical
issues there and those have to be looked at as well but the ethical issues will make any conscious
being a person. Either way everyone's trying to do this I think it's it's an inevitability at this
point. Yeah there is an inevitability about it and every time we have a baby we make another
conscious being so why not make one? And that would have to be a murderer and still go around
and kill people so we can't predict what biological conscious beings will do but I think the advantage
of it would be that we would be able to understand consciousness better and you know going way into
the future we can think about the possibility of transferring our minds to AI that's much more durable
than these bodies are sadly decaying in not so many decades. So you know there are those
kind of sci-fi ways of preserving humanity and I think we will need them in the future.
That makes it quite exciting to know that I mean because yeah feels obviously throughout the universe
I mean we could in some way be completely other side of the universe if the tech becomes
absolutely if we can transfer our minds into AI then we could travel a lot easier to travel at
sub light speeds to really explore the universe and then the question of course you mentioned the
Fermi paradox why hasn't it why haven't we already met the aliens who have gone through this stage
and developed the very durable forms of themselves. I mean if if a consciousness is an electromagnetic
field could you transmit it that you only need a spaceship you could send a big beam of electromagnetic
information across the universe you know there are all sorts of sci-fi ideas that are so exciting
and interesting bizarre and speculative that we've got to go and find out what there is there and if
you take the idea that consciousness is an electromagnetic field then all sorts of interesting
stuff starts to emerge from the idea. It's completely fascinating and it's super exciting to see
so many different theories of consciousness people taking leaps people doing such great work thanks
to you any final words anything you want to say or add do you think there's anything about semi-field
theory that people might have misunderstood from this conversation or things you've always wanted
to point out I just think that I think that our mind is an electromagnetic field an invisible
form of energy in our brain is I think interesting fascinating and it feels better to me than to
think my mind is a lump of meat I think if everyone starts to think of themselves as this
this entity of energy that is driving their brain of electromagnetic energy pulling the
levers of the brain I think it just gives a different feel of what we think we are and it
makes so much sense and it gives us you know lots of speculative ideas that we can take forward in
terms of thinking about what happens after death and all that kind of stuff we're never going to
know until we get there but we can speculate nevertheless and speculation is exactly what
this podcast is about because although I call it mind-body solution I don't claim to have the
solution nor do I think we'll find it but hopefully one day it's possible absolutely you've got to
have a lot of times yeah how does it say you've got to have an open mind but not so much your
brain drops out yeah I'd say like be passionately curious but reasonably skeptical at the same
time absolutely you've got to be rigorous if you want to do science you've got to be rigorous you
can still speculate as long as you label it as speculation and this is we can't prove this or
that but speculation is fine because it can inspire people and to study science and inspire people to
do things that you know lots of speculations have turned out to be true so it's okay to speculate
as long as we know that's what they are I mean just look at how much science fiction has become
reality at this point exactly phenomenal exactly indeed any final words John Joe thank you so much
this has been such a well thank you for um thank you for talking to me um uh Tevin and uh yeah
yeah uh anyone who wants to get in touch with um um with me and um if you've got any great ideas
how to test me feel thoroughly and certainly if anyone wants to um make an artificial AI
and um as the resources to do it get in touch
