Hello. Hi, Jude. How are you? I'm fine, Terv. How are you doing? I'm great. I'm so excited
for this interview. I mean, I've been absorbing so much of your information over the past
couple of this past few days. And as last week, it's been, it's been amazing. Our husband
on your side? Yeah, no, it's, it's great here. I'm enjoying the summer. I'm sort of getting to
a point now with the end of this month. It's been so full on that I'm really looking forward to
taking an in-breath, hopefully for a couple of months, which means I, there's a lot I'm feeling
coming in. So I really want to be open and have the space to really, you know, appreciate that and
try and sort of have a sense of what it is all about. I mean, I can imagine your work is, is
absolutely fascinating. There's so many different topics we could discuss today. I can only imagine
the inundated emails you're probably receiving from so many people who are keen to hear about your
work. Bless you. Well, it's, well, it's very busy in a really good way, because I do feel
that we're so much flowing that, you know, now is the time. And people, you know, are really
needing to have some hope that's authentic, to have some sense of an underpinning and a framing
to a sort of a healed worldview, you know, not a fragmented perspective based on the old paradigm,
but the, but the evidence-based authenticity of something that can really, you know, empower us
to come together, you know, because that's the time, isn't it? And I know for sure. I mean, I'm
great. I'm grateful that you've started already, because I mean, I love to just get started. And
at this point, I think the question I want to ask you, you talk about this cosmic hologram jude
and governed by information. I think let's explore this idea. I mean, it's been around for many years.
It's been around for decades, millennia in fact. But only now do we see a growing body of evidence
that supports this idea. And I think it would be amazing for the listeners and viewers to
listen to this evidence and for you to express yourself in a nice open platform where the listeners
and viewers can appreciate it. And just by the way, the audience are generally very technical
for this podcast. So go into as much detail as you want. Don't shy away from the physics.
Yeah, just I'm curious, this cosmic hologram and everything about it. I'm looking forward to this.
Okay, well, there's probably a couple of convergent points to be making here. But let's
let's talk about the holographic principle to start with, because that really, as you say,
it's been around for a while now. And the sort of very early intimations of it really date back
to David Bohm. So we're talking about, you know, four, if not five decades, as a sense of what
this might mean. But of course, the big move forward came when researchers were looking into
the thermodynamics of black holes, and people like Gerrata Hooft and Leonard Suskin and Jacob
Beckenstein and others. And the question really was what happens to the information
that's actually, you know, making up a massive star, when at the end of its life, its nuclear
fuel runs out, and it collapses. And of course, the collapse is so gravitationally powerful
that it actually collapses within an event horizon. And therefore not even light can escape. I know
there's a nuance with that with the with Stephen Stephen Hawkins work. But essentially, you know,
not even light can escape. And so at the event horizon, you suddenly get this blackness
that we term a black hole. And of course, was the star collapses, a spherical star collapses
as a spherical black hole. So the idea was, well, the infant, first of all, is the information
lost, because if it was lost, that would blow quantum physics out the water, literally. So
there's a huge debate about firewalling and what's happening all of that. But as time has moved on,
that has more and more evidence has suggested that actually, no, the evidence, the information
is actually held at the event horizon. But then the big question was, well,
what is that information? And where calculations were done that related it to the thermodynamics
of the of the black hole, it was realized that the it was that the information was proportional
not to the spherical volume of the black hole, but the surface area of the event horizon. And
then a few light bulbs went off. Because that is very, you know, you know, reflective of what
happens when on on Earth, we create technologically create a hologram, you know, take a beam of light,
we split it into part of the beam is is focused on an object, it's bounced off the object, and it
collects information in that reflected light from the object. It then combines with the initial beam
to form a two dimensional pattern of information that actually looks like an oil slick. If you
actually look at one at that point in its process, it looks like an oil slick. But it's basically
a wonderful ability of our universe to be able to transform information into waveforms
and waveforms into information through Fourier transforms. And this is absolutely critical,
not just to our human made technological holograms, but also how the holographic
principle works at the universal level, which we can come on to. But so essentially, there was a
realization, you've got this two dimensional informational pattern. And when you throw another
beam of light through it, it projects what we call a hologram. And the point of the hologram
that it projects is that the whole is in every pixelation. So if we have a high definition
pixelation, then we, you know, all the wholeness, if it's an apple, for example,
you get minuscule apples throughout the whole hologram. But taking this now to our universe,
it was realized that from black holes, we could extend this, what became known as the
holographic principle to the whole universe. And we could go back into the evidence for this,
because there is compelling evidence now at, you know, all scales of existence and many different
fields of research. But the sense is that the appearance of our universe, the energy matter
and space time appearance of our universe is not its more fundamental nature. But the appearance
arises from this deeper realm of causation as meaningful in formation. And I always hyphenize
in formation to sort of really emphasize its meaningful nature. But that meaningful
information is actually accumulated on the boundary of what we call space time,
and then holographically manifested as the appearance of our universe. So if we go back
13.8 billion years to the very first moment of space time, not in a big bang,
we know it wasn't big. I mean, that was Fred Hall being very facetious. But, you know,
that the implication of a bang, it wasn't, it was incredibly fine tuned and ordered,
it began in its lowest informational state. So as time has flowed forward ever since,
because of that entropic flow began its lowest informational state. As time has flowed forward
and spaces expanded, that holographic principle allied to other laws of physics that we can come
on to has meant that our universe has been able to undertake this evolutionary arc from simplicity
to ever greater levels of complexity, experience, evolutionary potential, individuation,
self-awareness at those levels. You know, that's the story of our universe, because that first
moment, not of a big bang, but the first moment of a big breath and ongoing big breath. And the
reason that space has to expand is because that is where the accumulation of the emergent evolutionary
information is held. So space didn't expand. There could not be more and more and more and more
information able to be expressed in its evolutionary arc. And of course, what happens is the
pixelation of the holographic boundary of our universe as Jacob Beckenstein understood
is pixelated at Planck scale. So in that sense, our universe is the reality of our universe comes
into form at the Planck scale, which is a basic measures of space and time and energy
matter as a result and temperature. And so it all hangs together. But that pixelation scale,
that Planck scale pixelation, at a spatial level, is as small as to a nucleus of a hydrogen atom,
as a hydrogen nucleus is to the whole universe. It's 10 to the minus 35 meters. It's trillions
of times more minute than our best high definition of human holograms. And the point is that so
that is the way that is what we call the boundary of what we call space, the holographic boundary
is able to encode more and more cosmic and universal information. But the point is also
that the flow of time itself at every Planck scale temporal pixelation, which is 10 to the minus
44 seconds, get your head around that, you know, it's like every that every Planck scale time
is like adding another, you know, another movement of the whole universe's emergence.
So of course, it is so minute that it's rather like us watching a television screen.
You know, the pixelation is small to us. So we see the whole image, we don't see the pixels.
Well, this is the pixelation of the universe, our universe's reality. So that's a start anyway.
I mean, it's a brilliant start. And I love the way you articulate this because it makes it a lot
easier for people to understand when you're talking about the fact that it's obviously
expanding in the terms of the way while in the way that we used to express it. But now you're
talking about it as information rather than matter in the same way we usually discuss it.
People that I've seen a lot of people sort of mistake that for new content arising, whereas we
know that well, according to the laws of thermodynamics, matter is neither created nor
destroyed. So you talk about entropy rather than entropy. And I do, I do. And as a child,
this is really sad. When I was about seven or eight years old, I was always asking why are the
at the time it was mainly two laws of thermodynamics? Yeah. But there's a third law which is relating
to a closed system where the temperature of a closed system is inversely proportional
to its entropy. So my question for a long time was why are the two laws of thermodynamics? Because
I'm a great follower of one of my great heroes, Albert Einstein. And to paraphrase Einstein,
the universe as simple as it can be, but no simpler. And I add to fulfill its evolutionary
purpose. And that add on is really key. Because what I realized when I was writing the Cosmic
Hologram, and also more latterly, the story of Gaia, is we can actually restate those three
laws of thermodynamics to what I call three laws of info dynamics. So the first law,
if we go back to the initial, you know, the initial first or thermodynamics began, of course,
essentially with Boltzmann, saying, as you say, the energy of a closed system, the energy of a
closed system cannot be destroyed or created. It can change through time, but it cannot be
created or destroyed. So if we take the science going further than Boltzmann,
and bless him, I mean, Boltzmann was doing his work before even atoms had been validated.
So he was amazing, again, pioneer and great giant, for which I feel we should all be very,
very grateful. But taking that on, we now know that energy and matter are equivalent equals MC
squared. So that says that the energy matter of a closed system cannot be created or destroyed,
just changed through time. We also, for our laws of physics to work at all, and this is something
that really still some folks struggle with, but all the evidence is really showing us that our
entire universe is a is a content, I call containered system, because closed system has a very
specific topological perspective, and it can be confusing. So as a containered system with this
sort of holographic perspective, yeah, it means that the energy matter of our universe, from its
first moment to its last, and there is also now more and more evidence that it's a finite life
cycle can neither be created nor destroyed. It can change. Now that essentially is the first law
of thermodynamics applied to our universe. But when we also appreciate that in 2012 and since,
there have been experiments that have shown that information is every bit as real as any
thermodynamic measurements, so work, heat, etc. So we also now know that we can start to expand
that first law of thermodynamics to a first law of info dynamics, where information expressed
as quantized energy matter can neither be destroyed or created, but just changed through
the cycle of our universe. Now that's fine. Because that in its essence, which is quantum physics,
you know, because of course, energy matter is the domain of quantum physics in description terms.
That's all great, but it has no notion of space or time. So it's the seed, it's the framing
for how our universe can exist. But this then the second law begins to answer my seven-year-old
question, why do you need more than one law of thermodynamics? Because the second law,
which you say quite rightly, is about originally the notion of entropy.
The notion of entropy. So the idea is that the entropy of a closed, I'm going to say
container now just for consistency, a container system, you know, it has to increase over time.
And there's been a lot of misunderstanding about this, because a lot of folks think of
entropy as order to disorder. But what Boltzmann was really talking about was the micro, the energetic
microstates of such a system. And when you think about it, I sometimes use an analogy of a pack of
cards. If you take a pack of cards out of its sort of box, they're very ordered. Yeah, you throw them
up in the air, they land all over the place and you come together and they're not in that initial
order. But rather than order to disorder, you're just increasing the number of states through
time. So every time you throw them up and they land, more and more states are formed. So it's
this progress through time of increasing micro energetic states. But of course,
we now also know that we can see information. And again, we can go into a lot more detail
of the evidence for this, as also being expressed, not just as energy matter in its quantized form,
but in a complementary way, a space time, that's where the holographic perspective comes in.
So that second law then, when applied to our universe, can be restated and in informational
terms, that first of all, the entropy, because I'm now talking about information, whereas entropy
is about energetic microstates, I move from entropy to entropy. It just makes it easier.
But the equation that describes the informational content of a container system and the entropy,
the energetic microstates of a container system is the same equation, originally defined by
Boltzmann. So we're on to something here. And so now if we look at the second law of
infodynamics, it says that the, and of course, let me go back to the first law for a second,
because I want to bring in space and time here, because this is vital.
So the second law of thermodynamics says that the entropy of a container system
can only increase through time. Okay. And we're talking about container system here.
So now we move into 20th century physics, and we now know the equivalence of space and time.
So relative space and relative time, lovely that they are, have to be conjoined as invariant
space time, if we're going to have a universe that hangs together. Yeah. And we can actually
talk about the universe that hangs together and the laws of physics and all the rest of it.
So we can then expand that first second law of thermodynamics from the entropy of a container
system only increasing through space time to the entropy of a container system, as it's
in formation content only increasing in our universe's case through space and time.
So literary space expands and time moves forward. The information content gets bigger and bigger
and bigger. And that's the entropy. Okay. Third law is this is cool. I love this because this really
came to me quite late on because I was thinking gosh, why is there a third law? Where does temperature
come into this? But the third law of thermodynamics, as I mentioned, says that the temperature
of a container system and its entropy now entropy are inversely proportionate. So we now know
that our universe began in its highest temperature form at the plank temperature 10 to the 32 degrees
Kelvin and its lowest entropy. So as time's flowed and space has expanded, the temperature has
dropped. That drop in temperature is allied inversely to the increase in informational
content entropy. It is so simple to have. I mean, it all hangs together in this glorious way.
And then the final cherry on top of it is essentially that I talk about meaningful
information. Yeah. So the wholeness of our universe as meaningfully informed and holographically
manifested, it's framing can be can be done. It can be brought together with these three
laws of infodynamic. The first law is the most simple statement of quantum physics. The second
is simplest form of relativity physics. But together they combine within these three laws
of infodynamics, which with a hyphen are three laws that bring together our universe that
meaningfully exists and purposefully evolves. I think it's incredible because this is what
we've been searching for for such a long time. People have been looking for a unifying theory
of this universe. I mean, it's been the goal when you think about Stephen Hawken and I know you guys
when you were the youngest participant and you won the award. I can't remember exactly where,
but you obviously met Stephen Hawken at that time many years ago. How old were you 19 at the time?
I was 19. And my my mental was Dennis Sharma, who was Stephen's doctoral supervisor when they're
at Cambridge. And then Dennis came over to Oxford and I was doing my physics at Oxford.
And Dennis, bless him, he just took me under his wing. And after Stephen and Roger Penrose,
who got the Nobel a couple of years ago, came together to present to the postgraduate
department. And Dennis invited me along, even though I was an undergraduate, I was the youngest
first in the room. I think I was the only woman in the room. And then afterwards, Dennis said,
why? Because it was all black holes. They were like, woof, this is coming forward. And Dennis said,
why don't you enter this essay competition? And I said, sure. And he said, why don't you write
about black holes? I went, sure. So I did. And I won the prize. Was it 25 quid? It was 25 quid.
In those days, this was the early 70s. That was beer money for a term.
The reason why I bring that up is, I mean, of course, we think of Stephen Hawking,
we think of theories of everything. I mean, there's unification of
quantum mechanics and space time general relativity. How do we combine these concepts?
But also when you think of Stephen Hawking, you think of black holes, event horizons.
I know it's come forward. It's come full circle. It's quite extraordinary.
And I want to go into that. I mean, unless you want to address the evidence first,
how would you like to approach it? Would you like to go into black holes now,
first talk about the holographic principle and how we've gathered more evidence over time
and certain experiments that have helped to solidify this?
Yeah, I'd be happy to. And I think the other thing that's really key in all of this
is that our universe exists and evolves in this way, meaningfully exists, purposefully evolves
in manifested holographically and meaningful information.
But the other key aspect of it is our universe does so as a non-locally unified entity.
And this, of course, if we can take a couple of minutes just to nail this one down, I think,
this is something that came out right in the early days of quantum physics.
And many of the quantum physicists were, of course, scientists, mystics, you know,
and some of them went to India and started really appreciating the Vedic tradition
of ancient India, the Rishis, the Bhagavad Gita, the Upanishads were basically telling the same
story that they were realising. And what became clear is that for quantum physics, quantum mechanics
to work at all, essentially our universe had to be non-locally unified in its entirety.
And of course, you know, Bell came out with his, you know, sometimes called a theory,
sometimes called an inequality. But nonetheless, it was a test bed for this. And at the time,
it was a theoretical perspective. And it was only many, many decades afterwards,
you know, to the 70s, 80s onwards, that researchers were able to start to experimentally test this
at greater than quantum scales, because it was clear it was happening at a quantum scale,
but was it able to be expanded to a universal level? So you had researchers coming along and
progressively increasing the scale well beyond any quantum levels to show entanglement.
And in 2017, then 2018, a group of, I think, it might have been four or five universities,
one of which I think the lead was MIT. And what they were able to do was non-locally entangle
photons of light in their laboratory with starlight from 600 light years away, but also triggered
by light from a quasar, a very active galactic center, two quasars actually, one I think was
7.8 billion, the other was 12.2 billion light years away. And that was a triggering that actually
created a level of entanglement that exceeded the inequality test, you know, the thresholds of Bell.
But beyond that, in late last year, the Nobel Prize for Physics were given to three researchers
who've been working on this for decades. Anton Zellinga, who was also part of that MIT collaboration,
Alan Aspect and John Clouser. And the Nobel Prize is only given for subtle physics. I often say
Einstein didn't get it for relativity, because it was seen as being quite contentious. He got
it for the photoelectric effect. So the fact that we have now the Nobel, we've got this experimentation
at cosmological scales. You know, we have all of the theoretical framing now to support this and
the evidence across many fields of research that also play into this. You know, it's amazing and
exciting time, not just for scientists, because as we'll go on, I'm sure, to explore this is important,
this is vital for everyone. A lot of implications. There's so many practical implications.
Exactly. I mean, when you think about it, as you said, Nobel Prizes are only given to
subtle science. And I mean, he got it for the photoelectric effect. He didn't get it for what
he's best known for. And that's pretty incredible, because at the time, of course, I mean, he called
it spooky action at a distance. And we know that he wasn't comfortable with this concept. I mean,
he wouldn't be now because I'm convinced he would be now because, of course, you know, he was, he
and the quantum physicists were working decades before the neutron was discovered. I mean,
let alone the hologram, let alone the cosmological understanding we have, let alone, you know,
the sort of leaps and bounds we've had to understand the significance, the fundamental
significance of information and meaningful information, which means, of course, the slippery
slope, yes, please, of consciousness. You know, we have to bring this front and center. Of course,
what he did feel very uncomfortable about, as did Planck and others, is that whereas quantum
physics and what they're all come to really gave us the clues that mind and consciousness aren't
something we have, they're literally what we in the whole world are, that was literally pushed
to the side. And so it's taken almost another century and an ability
with the old framing to reconcile quantum physics and relativity physics, because
they're at the appearance level of our universe of energy, matter, space, time,
we've needed to understand this deeper level of causation, which is meaningfully
informationally driven, and then being able to show how information expresses itself in
these complementary ways as the appearance of energy matter, quantized energy matter and
entropic space time, brought in the holographic principle, you know, I think he'd be jumping
up and down and going, yay, because he was one of the folks who was saying, you know, mind and
consciousness are what we are, what the whole world is. I mean, so Jude, I mean, for the listeners
and the viewers, I mean, I was introduced to your work by Don, Don Hoffman, and he told me it would
be, it would be a very fascinating conversation, and I clearly already is, but I remember when Don
and I were talking about it, he was telling me about your work, and I find it very intriguing,
because I mean, Don has such amazing work being done, they're currently doing the new test to
experiment whether physics arises from consciousness, and I think they just released it yesterday,
I think it was, yeah, 26th of June. So when you talk about consciousness from an idealism
perspective, because this is fundamentally what the view entails from a philosophical
perspective, it's an idealist view of consciousness. Consciousness is what we are, and everything that
there is technically in a sense. How do you work around this concept of consciousness? How do you
define it? How do you explain it to people? Because obviously this podcast is called Mindbody
Problem. I mean, Mindbody Solution for a reason. Absolutely. Well, you know, the very terminology,
what's consciousness, you know, you'll get five answers from four people, and I have a very broad
church of consciousness, and a friend of mine, Professor Max Velmans, differentiates mind and
consciousness and talks about consciousness as a level of awareness, whereas mind is fundamental,
you know, we can talk about mind as being cosmic mind, as Einstein would have called it,
the ground of all being, you know, and so in that regard, our universe is mindful.
And, you know, the way I'm working with this, and my next book will dive deeper into the,
you know, the ground of all being and the rest of it, but both for the cosmic hologram and for
the story of Gaia, I really wanted to show how what I would also refer to as cosmic mind,
an eternal and infinite mind has thoughts, a thought, thoughts that, you know, we turn
our universe, which is very much, you know, pervading universal wisdom teachings. And in my own
explorations, you know, as a noetic experiencer, all my life is very much the way I've experienced
realities. But by being able to articulate it is as cosmic consciousness, cosmic mind,
expressing itself as the appearance of our universe through the articulation of digitized,
meaningful information, you know, I mean, we're almost predisposed to this now because our
communications technologies, you know, take the image of me, gather it all the information,
the meaningful information about me, translate it into digitized ones and zeros, squirt it down a
cable off a satellite to your computer, you know, recombine it as an image, does the same
vice versa, you know, this goes back to the incredible attributes of Fourier transforms,
the way our universe can, you know, make this beautiful play of information, waveforms,
it all hangs together. But it hangs together with the evidence showing that it has innate meaning.
This is the key, I think, this is not random data, just as our composite, well, I don't know,
some people may say it's random data, but hopefully our conversation is meaningful.
But of course, the meaningful nature of our universe is not dependent in any way on human
sentience. It's a universe that is itself living in that sense, mindful, informational,
where everything in it from, you know, atoms and molecules to planets and plants and people have
a part of that meaning and essential purpose. So it's a broad church,
but it's innately the same fundamental stuff, the nature of reality.
Jude, how, what are your thoughts on Don's work?
I, well, when I first, it was so lovely because Don and I met at the Science and Nonduality
Conference in California before the pandemic and had lunch together and really enjoyed
being together and have had a number of conversations since. And I love his work.
He's coming, I'm coming from this primarily as a cosmologist and as an evolutionary biologist
and a systems person. And you could argue a philosopher, but many, many different hats.
And because I'm so curious, I like to join the dots and see where they lead.
Don comes from it more from human consciousness and how our human consciousness relates to this
wider consciousness. And his book is very provocative because of course, from the human
consciousness perspective, our senses are not direct in, in direct touch points with
universal consciousness. We moderate, we mitigate, yeah, our sense of self through a number of ways
of forming meaning. But when we met, I realized that he wasn't in any way
decrying or not acknowledging universal reality. He was only really exploring the ways in which we
relate to that larger understanding of reality. So, you know, as microcosmic co creators, as I
call us, of our universal living intelligence, he and I are very close. So, you know, I mean,
we agree very much. And what I really love as well is he's working with a number of quantum
physicists in a sort of more specified way of how this works. But what I would say is the work
that I've done offers us the underpinning and framing through these three laws of infodynamics.
And I'm happy to sort of say to Don and the other guys, I'm really excited about what you're going
to come forward in this, because it's going to come, I just feel it's all convergent. It's all
the same direction of travel. I'm glad you brought up quite a quantum physicist, because I mean,
another theory of consciousness that circulates is that of Penrose. When you think of Stuart
Hammerhoff and Penrose, they talk about quantum consciousness and the microtubules of cells.
Your thoughts on that? Well, I'll write about this a little bit. Well, I'll write about quantum
biology in the story of Gaia, because whereas the cosmic hologram was bringing the evidence and
this underpinning and framing of these laws of infodynamics and the cosmology and all the
rest of it. That was back in 2017 in last year with the story of Gaia. I wanted to tell the
evolutionary story, not just of our planetary home, but our entire universe, because the story
of our universe, as my friend Brian Schwimmer and I both talk about, is a story of us.
You know, the hydrogen in our bodies is as old as the universe. We're not just stardust,
even though we are. We go back way back. We're all 13.8 billion years old.
We're all 13.8 billion years old. So in that sense, the evolutionary story is extraordinary.
And what you see throughout it and really came to me ever more strongly as I wrote the book,
or the book wrote me, I feel, is a sense of evolutionary purpose. Because what you have,
you know, all the way through is this almost preparatory processes that things were in place
that could then be assembled when the conditions were right. You know, if we go back before that
our planetary home came into being about five billion years ago, around five and a half billion
years ago, the harbingers are on the nutrients that would create our sun and our planetary system.
We're all there gestating in interstellar clouds of gas and dust, including complex molecules.
And we start to get the sense of that quantized nature of potential playing out there,
where even within those complex molecules, we were starting to get enzymes coming into being.
And enzymes, you know, are vital to the speed in which proteins come together and build
biological organisms, because the enzymes speed those those processes up dramatically
without in themselves changing. And the view very much is that that involves quantum tunneling.
And so when Stuart and Roger have been bringing these ideas of microtubules forward,
I don't think it's the most fundamental aspect of how this is playing out. But I think it's an
important contribution to the conversation. And other people such as Jim and Khalili,
Al Khalili has also written on quantum biology. You know, there is a view that some of them have
expressed that photosynthesis is quantized in nature. I personally haven't seen the evidence
that's convinced me of that. I think there are other processes that are at play that don't actually
need that aspect. But there are others where, as I say, in zomatic action and others,
there are other ways in which the DNA double helix is formed and molecules such as
oposna molecules, and the way that that works, that can really hold memory for a very long time,
likely because of quantum resonance. Yes, I write about all of this in in the story of Guy,
because it's very important. And it's very much an emergent field of study.
Yeah. So I would definitely be putting links to your books below and to the website, of course,
I remember while reading, I was thinking to myself, there were two specific experiments I
wanted to ask you about while reading. It came to my mind immediately, and I thought of the
observer effect and the double slit experiment. And I wanted to just know your general thoughts on
that. So I have one more question. But I think before I get to the second one, just what are
your general views on that? Because when I interviewed Don, I remember talking about,
when we talk about consciousness being fundamental and the entirety of our reality.
And I labelled with the podcast a new experiment to test whether consciousness,
whether physics arises from consciousness, and someone commented saying,
have you ever heard of the observer effect as a joke? So I think with you, let's address that,
how that supports this info dynamic. I really want to, though, expand this perception
that the universe is the universe, whether we're here or not. Yes. Yes, I think that's really
important because so much perspectives about consciousness is human centred. And I'm not
suggesting that's problematic. I'm saying it's both and. Yes. And the way that we as microcosms
of our universe is macrocosmic, consciousness, sentience, livingness, mind, you know, because
I think we can get caught up in the languaging a little bit. And I want to sort of get a more
sort of generic sense of this. But yes, so going back to remind me, I think I'm losing the thread
here. So when we. Observer effect. Observer effect. Yeah. Okay. That is the point is we're
embedded within a conscious universe that cannot not be. Observer effect, because we're both observer
and observed, we are naturally embodied, we're inseparable. We are literally inseparable. But
I think the important point there is that the unity and unified nature of non locally unified
nature of our universe has two aspects. First of all, it means that although our universe exists
and evolves as a non locally unified entity, within space time, light is the cosmic speed cop.
Signals cannot go fast on the speed of light within space time, which means that we can
have this journey of 13.8 billion years, we can have a flow of time, we can have a causality.
And this is important when we start to explore super normal phenomena.
Because although this both and enable super, you know, naturalize a super normal phenomena,
naturalizes our intuitive insights, naturalizes synchronicities, it's a both and so there is
this causality playing through. So, you know, I was in a panel with Dean Raiden and the ions folks
a couple of days ago, and Don was being given a prize there, which is wonderful for his work.
But essentially, because it's it's it's a both and we are both observer and observed,
we are inseparable, but that unity is differentiated. It's unity and diversity,
it's unit in radical diversity. So yes, we're always we're informational beings within an
informational universe, whether we know it or not, we're in continuous dialogue, multi log.
Yes, with all around us, we are, you know, we talk a whole world view of act local feel
global think cosmic, because we are all and we are uniquely, our universe is breathing through us,
each of us uniquely. So let's apply this law of infodynamics, let's apply
infodynamics to different systems so people can get a better understanding or a better picture
of this. So let's think of it from, maybe let's take into account a biological scale or something
like DNA, and apply to something like human civilization, take it to economics, and maybe
continue from there, just maybe start off from a from an atomic scale, perhaps, and then let's work
our way up. Okay, let's do that, because what we're finding is that the informational patterns,
the relational dynamic informational patterns, many of whom we call fractals, but all the
relationships are fractal per se, we have other relationships that we can come to, for example,
power laws, but we find the fractal relationships which are essentially geometric. When Beckenstein
was doing the holographic work on information, and the pixelation at the boundary of what we call
space time, that plant scale pixelation on that two dimensional boundary of space time is triangular.
Okay, because then it can tile without a break. It's the ideal geometry that doesn't overlap.
So within each plank scale, yes, pixelation, there is essentially one bit of information,
and it's at such a minute level that when we scale it up to atoms or quarks or neutrinos or
and beyond, it has a lot of information already at that accumulated scale. But what we find is
that, for example, when an element is going through a phase transition, for example, between an
insulator and a metal, it's electrons cluster fractally. Yeah, so from that scale, we start
into because of course the plank scale is much tinier, that pixelation scale is much tinier.
So we're out of atomic scale. We also find fractals running through from that scale upwards. So for
example, on a planetary scale, clouds are fractal, in that sense, weather patterns are
fractally based, river systems are fractal. But the key thing here, and let me just go up to
cosmic scale, and then I want to come back, because there's a key point here. We find that at a
planetary scale, but also when we look at a solar system scale, the solar wind is fractal.
Some of the ways in which the resonances of planetary orbits and the planetary system as a
whole have fractal relationships. We go into the galaxy, we see fractal patterns here, we go to
clusters of galaxies, we see fractal patterns. And in 2017, Afshordi and Skanderis and a group of
folks looked at the cosmic microwave background, which as you know, is the relic radiation left
over from what's often called the recombination era, around 380,000 years after the beginning of
the big breath, where space had expanded enough and temperature cooled down enough to become
transparent, because before that, space was transparent to acoustic signaling, but not to
light. When that happened, again, there was like a phase transition, where space became
transparent. And then for those relic radiation that filled the whole of space at that time.
And because of the temperature that was in play at that time, we think that it would have had an
orange glow, which I quite like the idea of really. Anyway, that filled the whole of space.
As spaces continue to expand ever since, those wavelengths have sort of lengthened to microwave
microwaves now. And so we call it the cosmic microwave background, and it fills the whole of
space. In 2017, an analysis from the W map, the Wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe map,
was able to show fractal patterns in the minute temperature differences throughout the whole
of the cosmic microwave background. So we have fractals all the way up and all the way back.
But going back to us, we find that the same fractal patterns that underpin, for example,
complex systems such as ecosystems, is the same fractal patterns that underpin the nodes and the
networking points of the internet. Yeah, we find, for example, moving beyond fractals. So let's look
at power laws. Let's look at the incidence, for example, of earthquakes. We know that when we plot
the incidence of earthquakes against their destructive power on a logarithmic scale, the
Richter scale, that they form a straight line. So in other words, there's no such thing as an
average earthquake. If you apply all the earthquakes big to small on that, you know, that frequency
and then logarithmic destruction, they form a straight line. It's called a power law, which
says there's only one relationship for all of them, that an earthquake that is twice as powerful
logarithmically is four times less frequent. That's it. So there's no such thing as an average,
no Gaussian curve there. But at the end of the Second World War, a researcher called Lewis
Richardson, and then subsequently to that a researcher at Miami University, a gentleman
whose surname is Johnson, but his first name eludes me, looked at human conflicts at all scales
and measured them in terms of their frequency against their destructive power in terms of
human fatalities, and found the same relationship, slightly different pitch, but nonetheless the
same relationship as for earthquakes. Because what we're realizing going back to what we're
saying throughout this is the appearance of our universe emerges from deeper levels of
meaningfully in formation. And that applies to our human behaviors, our human consciousness,
as well as universal consciousness and planetary sentience that brings forward these same
relationships at all scales. But the key here is if we have the collective awareness
to make choices of conflict, then we can evolve our collective awareness to make choices of peace.
And this is, I think, one of the most fundamental conversations of our time, because this is what
this new understanding and this, you know, this unitive narrative that can, you know, there's
underpinned and framed by the evidence, but also can underpin and frame our choices and
therefore our behaviors. Exactly. And that's why I mean, when I labeled this podcast, I said that
this podcast explores the nature of reality, consciousness, free will, but morality is a
big part of it, because whatever belief you have regarding the nature of reality or consciousness
will determine how you perceive your ethics, your morals, your values. There's, yeah. And with your
I see such a deep, caring, healing nature towards it all. And I am definitely going to touch on
these practical implications. But before we do, I just want to definitely make sure that we touch
on as much of this, the science behind what you're talking about, because it's so amazing. It's so
intriguing. One thing I did want to touch on before that was, I mean, there was the big breath,
it all started slow outbreath. You often talk about Vedic traditions and the Brahman and how
they started this concept. What happens as we go along all the way to the end?
Well, the evidence we've got now is, is suggesting that this has continued outbreath.
You know, for a long time there was, is it going to be, is it going to do on that? Or is it going
to bounce back? Or what's going to happen? And we find that, you know, the acceleration, very
surprisingly for a lot of people, that the accelerate, that the expansion of our universe
began to accelerate again, about five billion years ago. So it started with an acceleration,
the first time, you know, the first epoch of the big breath, it then slowed down because the balance
of gravity and dark energy and all the rest of it, one out, one in. But then a space that expanded
to the point of about five billion years ago, the acceleration began again. And it looks as though
that there's nothing to, there's no way in which that, that is likely to stop. And, and when I bring
the third law of infodynamics into the piece, of course, the temperature continues to drop
as the information continues to increase, you can see that there's a sort of a cycle here.
Because the temperature of our universe, I said, began at the Planck scale,
at the first moment of the big breath, 10 to the 32 K, it's now down at just over 2.7 K.
So we're looking to see that this, this life cycle, rather like a bubble,
yeah, comes to a completion at some point. The other thing is, there was some really good
work done by I think Dennis Sabral, a few years ago that I referenced in the Cosmic
Hologram, showing that the sort of the, the, the, the epochs of stellar formation and a big,
big acceleration about nine billion years ago, then another, but progressively less and less
fewer of you, because the hydrogen to create new stars is being used up. So the view is that
probably something like 98% of all stars that could form have already formed. Many of them have come
to the end of their lives. And again, as I write in the story of Guy, there's this incredible
evolutionary arc of massive stars at the beginning that form black holes and supermassive black holes
and galaxies. And then it's just a beautiful, beautiful journey, journey forward. So my
perspective, again, with the evidence, I'll follow, I hopefully follow the evidence wherever it leads,
but this is where it seems to be leading us, that our universe is finite in form. It's a,
it's a great thought form, but a finite thought form in that sense, in the mind of the cosmos.
And we're probably closer to the end than we are to the beginning in that regard.
And I mean, it does work. So a lot of people seem to, well, from what I've gathered,
seem to think that you're not, you're, you're talking about something completely different,
but you're not, you're actually taking the current work we have and you're framing it in a
different perspective. And I think that's important to note is that it's not that you're making new
claims in a sense, you're more just changing it and adjusting it in a way that completely shifts
mindsets altogether. How do you feel this has impacted the scientific community? Because you
know how scientists can be. I'm pretty sure you've been, because anytime someone talks about anything
that goes outside of the status quo in science, you complete, you're labeled as so many different
things that, uh, how has it been on your receiving end? It's, it's been extraordinary. Actually,
it's been rather wonderful because in a way, because as you say, I'm, I'm actually working
with the evidence and I'm working with the evidence of tens of thousands of researchers.
I guess what I can bring is an ability to see patterns and an ability to join up the dots,
because so many scientists are working in this incredibly depth of, of work, but they're not
seeing what so and so is doing or so and so is doing in a different field of study. And what I
can do because of, you know, my breadth of interests is I can see the bigger picture of what it's all
coming with and the direction of travel. And, you know, also as a cosmologist, you know,
we're getting folks like Professor Brian Cox, who wrote a book with Jeff Forshaw last autumn,
last fall, um, basically on black holes, but coming at the end of that book to say
more and more, it's looking that the appearance of our universe is not its deeper reality.
I don't know what that means, he says, but that's the point that cosmologists are coming to,
because that is where the evidence is leading us. Now, you're right. I think, you know, I'm also a
student of the history of science. And I can see how certainly over the last, certainly until the
20th century, there was a perspective very much of this separation of science and spirituality.
And I can absolutely, you know, I've studied all the reasons for this and get it.
But we're coming full circle or full spiral now, because the leading edge discoveries, and they
really are only in the last few years, the holographic principle, the understanding of
information, you know, my, my redefinition of the laws of thermodynamics to infodynamics,
it's, it's simple. Anybody could have come up with that. The reason I did it is because I
saw it with new eyes, as you say, and I wasn't caught with the old perspective.
And so in that sense, and that's what Marcel Proust, of course, said,
that the journey of discovery is not discovering new lands, it's seeing with new eyes.
And so I think it almost is a situation where once somebody is willing to see with new eyes,
it all fits into place. And it's not in any way dishonoring everything that's come before.
We've needed to take every step, it seems to me. So I'm not into blame and shame on any way.
But we do have a paradigm. Yes, that's actually not even 20th century science. It's 19th century
science of a mechanical, mechanistic, materialistic, separatist universe. And that has been turned on
its head. And when we bring consciousness in, it's not, it's, it's, how can I put it? It's for
all faiths and non, it's human. It's who are we? It's remembering who are we? And not sort of making
any labels or anything else. But this is where the evidence is inviting us to remember.
But you, before I go on to the next portion, where I'm going to talk about the practical
implications as well as the Eastern philosophical aspects of how you came to your views at some
point. The last thing I want to ask you is, is there anything you want to clarify in terms of
the way you approach infodynamics, cosmic hologram, all of this, anything that you feel
has always been misunderstood, that you've been itching to kind of just get out there and let
people know this is actually what I meant. Not misunderstood, but I feel that there's still
a misperception of people who work with entropy. And seeing it as this order to disorder I was
mentioning earlier, rather than as initially an increase in energetic microstates and now an
increase in informational content, and now an information, an increase in meaningful,
informational content, is this perspective that came through with people like David Bowman,
Prigga Joan, and others, realizing that in what's called a dissipative system, such as our planet
and a person, that there seems to be a sort of a switch around of entropy. So entropy order,
it's not order to disorder, it's somehow disorders become order. And so what I've been able to share
and more and more people are now getting it, is it's the old concept or the misperceived concept
of entropy as order to disorder, rather than from increased energetic states and now information.
Because then what you realize in dissipative systems, let's talk about our planetary home,
okay, a dissipative system. Actually, energy comes in, energy flows through, what's not needed to
support the homeostasis of that system is then dissipated. Okay. If you think of that as
information coming in expresses energy, information therefore used as a coherence
to, you know, to support the coherence of that system, and what is not utilized gets dissipated.
So again, that then correlates with this perception, both of, both of the meaningful
information, not just as underpinning, but the very stuff of that system, that that throughput
enables its coherence through its lifetime, whether it's a human lifetime or a planetary lifetime.
But also it shows that then going back to that third law, that temperature difference
is a measure of the entropic potential. Yeah. So that so that in a planetary, you know,
if we have a planet where that dissipative process stops, the temperature difference
between that planet and ambient space will will will reduce, reduce, reduce, reduce. Yeah.
When we come to the end of our life cycle, our temperature when we die when our physical
bodies die, our temperature then correlates with our ambience. So the ability by maintaining a
temperature difference in a dissipative system is a measure of its continuing entropic potential.
I see. Yeah. Yeah, I get that. It's it's that's the that's the one thing that I think people have
quite a lot of because you know, terms like neg entropy and syntropy and all sorts of
stuff's coming, they're not needed. When you understand it in these terms, you can appreciate
it rather like the epicycles of medieval astronomy, pre-Copernican astronomy,
you don't need it. And what you get is a much simpler understanding when you're seeing it
with new eyes. So you know, the Copernican, putting soul in the middle of our solar system,
suddenly you don't need epicycles and all that complications. And you don't need the
complications of neg entropy and syntropy, which of themselves, you know, violate this
universal continuing increase in entropy. I think I think it's very apparent. I mean,
if you if you have a hammer, you look for nails and science, it's very objective. So you're
constantly looking from an objective standpoint. I mean, it's very difficult to get step out of
that. And I know I'm the same in that regard, because when I started this podcast, my views
and consciousness were very fixed and firm. And the more it's gone on, the more it's continuously
changed and nonstop. I mean, at this point, I questioned reality all the time, but it's
something I've always done. But I mean, that fixed belief is no longer there. It's something that's
I'm open to, to exploring these new ideas. I don't think that the child in me would have
explored concepts like this with so much just openness. I love it. I love it. I mean, I love it.
Yeah, me too. I mean, it's all it's all a work in progress. It's all a work in progress. I mean,
for me, what's exciting is having had my first direct experience of of a, you know, multi
dimensional realities, you know, noetic experiences from the edge of fall. I've also it's both
and I've also really, really, really valued, you know, science as a process, as long as as Francis
Bacon, who is the father of the empirical method, you know, follow the evidence wherever it leads.
And I do feel he's been given a quite a bad rap, which I would disagree with, because as a friend
of mine, another friend of mine, Peter Dawkins, who's a wonderful Baconian scholar, you really
has guided, you know, like you, you've been my guidance with this is that, you know, 400 years
ago, when Bacon in 1623, when they published Day Augmentum Sientarium, which was the beginning
of the empirical method, you know, Bacon's philosophical, deeply philosophical perspectives,
it seems to me, were that it wasn't going to peripheralize the divine, as he would have called
it, but to reveal the divine through its empiricism, because of course, he was living in a time of
Queen Elizabeth II, and then James, the first of England, Sixth of Scotland, where superstition,
you know, ruled the rule the waves in that sense, and the church's authority. So it's almost come
this full journey now, where leading edge science is is revealing that universality in those wisdom
teachings, and the wholeness and the divinity within everything. Exactly. And I think just
to put it all together, because now, as we reached the end, well, the end of this podcast,
at least for now, maybe we'll do around two. But let's talk about, I mean, unity and non-locality
is the basis of all of this. And at some point, it all comes together for us to understand and
realize that everything is interconnected. There is no separation. This thought of separating
things needs to slowly dissipate. And this does have practical implications. I think as we get
into that, let's start from the Eastern philosophy that's inspired this and taken because we've spoken
a lot about Western science at this point. And I'm curious for you to apply the Eastern philosophy
into how we should approach the practical and ethical implications moving forward with this theory.
Yeah, absolutely. Well, first of all, as you said, I mean, you know, our worldview is our mindset,
our narrative, our underpinning narrative is the way we see the world and therefore the choices
we make. And we've had a Western secular worldview of, as I say, based on 19th century science.
And all the structures that came from that, because in the 19th century, with that mechanistic,
separatist, materialistic perspective, you know, our structures became hierarchical.
You know, whether it's our education, whether it's our organizations, our governance or whatever,
whatever, whatever, whatever. And now that's completely been turned on its head and converging
much more with universal wisdom teachings and very much those of the Eastern traditions and the
indigenous traditions. And so, you know, for example, the Chinese Yi Qing talks about in the
beginning is the one not was is the one becomes two, the two becomes three, and from the three
10,000 things are born. You know, the Yin Yang symbol, we haven't even touched on the feminine
masculine and all of that, but that's so important. But you know, the Yin Yang symbol has, you know,
the Yang with the Yin coming out and the Yin with the Yang coming out. But the wave in that symbol
is often not mentioned. But the wave is that creativity of what this all means. And yeah,
I talk a lot about trinities, philosophically trinities, you know, the masculine, the feminine
and the child. And in that resolution, and that's again, seen through many, many traditions.
We talk about the Vedic tradition, as we have before, Indra's Net. You know, the tradition
talks of Indra's Net as an analogy of the reality where every reality made up of beautiful gems
of many, many different colors and all different facets and each facet reflecting others and
linked by golden threads. Well, that is a millennia old description in my perspective of the cosmic
holograms. In South Africa, we, because I'm Indian of Hindu origin and descent. And
but I was born and raised in South Africa. And the South African culture, there's this word,
it's called Ubuntu. I love that word. I love that. I am because you are. And that's exactly what she's
saying. Yeah, it's exactly that. And Ubuntu is so beautifully inviting in. Because the other thing
is that I love about Ubuntu, many things I love about Ubuntu. But I talk about, you know, often
we're now describing unity and diversity. But for a number of years now, I've said, let's take that
a step further, beyond even unity in inclusion to unity in belonging. Because this is showing us
that we all belong. And that is the very heart of Ubuntu. Ubuntu is so fundamental because you
don't have to be invited into that relationship. You are inherently fundamentally part of that
relationship. And this is what we're discovering. And so altogether, I mean, this unification, this
tell me about the overall goal for us as a society, how would you like this
infodynamics and everything you've spoken about today to be applied somehow into it all?
Well, again, these things, have you ever heard of somebody called Mr. Magoo? He's very much in
America. Yeah. And he always backs into things and then looks around and goes, oh, that's the story
of my life, I think. So a couple of years ago, with all of this and writing the Cosmic
Hologram at the time and then the story of Gara, sorry, writing the story of Gara at the time,
Cosmic Hologram come out. I came together with a number of change makers and folks who'd been
involved with United Nations for decades, and involved with the Sustainable Development Goals
and what's called Agenda 2030. And we're getting more and more frustrated because this realization
that they were coming not necessarily from the people who were trying to negotiate them,
but certainly in the way they were articulated and then led out very much from this siloed
perspective, 17 goals and lots of measurements, but the goals themselves. And the realization
from these 150 or so change makers that they could never be implemented with that sort of
mindset. I mean, Einstein said, you can't solve a problem from the same mindset that created it.
Well, we have a problem because of an illusion of separation, a dis-ease of separation.
We cannot solve it from that same mindset. So all that I'm sharing and all that the evidence
is pointing to is overturning that perspective and bringing in this realization and understanding
of wholeness. So what these folks were really wanting to say is how can, because they were
coming from this perspective, how can we bring this perspective of wholeness into the SDGs
and Agenda 2030? And one of the things that came forward was the need for a narrative
that could share this, because we're a narrative species, we're storytelling species,
you know, we sit, we sat round, you know, from the very beginning sharing stories and sharing
perspectives, who we are? And what are we? Who are we in the world? Where do we come from?
Who are we? Where are we going? And, you know, in that sense, making meaning of our existence.
So we now have the evidence that is converging, the scientific evidence that's converging with
universal wisdom teachings to offer as a unitive narrative, to underpin and frame us to be able
to come together and serve potentiality for transformational change. So I got involved with
this group of folks and I put my hand up and volunteered. That's my mum. My mum always said
volunteer, volunteer. You may not know what you're volunteering for, but volunteer. So I did. And I
was, I was one of the co-authors of a unitive narrative that these folks took on board and
adopted and the evolutionary leader circle of whom I remember also adopted and others.
But what that's now doing that came forward just over a year ago. What that's done in the
meantime is that late last year, the United Nations for the first time in its 70 year history,
adopted a group of NGOs and organizations founded on the unitive narrative, this unitive narrative.
And so this unitive cluster now has a voice, has voices in all of the things that United
Nations are doing. But that's just one thing because the other thing it's now underpinning
is bringing together folks who are really wanting to transform economics and finance system from a
unitive perspective. Folks will look at regenerative economics, donut economics,
living systems economics, but all of it underpinned and framed by a unitive narrative that then
deepens it still further into unitive principles that serves the health, the whole being of our
planetary home and our people. Unitive education. How do we share this story with folks of all ages
and in so many different ways? And how do we share this in ways through arts and culture?
Because this is what this is about. This is the many, many stories that can arise and be shared
from this underpinning of a unitive narrative. So that's what I'm doing pretty much most of my
time now and sharing this understanding, but it's vital that it moves beyond understanding.
Yes. It has to be experienced to be embodied. Well, I hope this podcast helps to get that
message out, Jude. I know you're time sensitive and we've sort of reached the end of this
conversation, but I just want to say thank you so much. And to quote, I mean, your work and
obviously Ubuntu, I am a Cosmico creator because you are a Cosmic Creator and thank you so much for
being part of this creation with me and a part of this experience.
Bless you, Tev. And it's folks like you. I mean, I've done so many podcasts now and I'm in awe
of each and every one of you as hosts because your passion, your clarity, your service is so,
so important because the folks you will reach in their own way will share this in their own way.
We don't know where this ripples, but we know it does because as you say, Ubuntu,
we are inseparable. We are each unique and we are inseparable. You know, this offers us
authentic hope. I hope empowers us and inspires us. And this for me seems that this is the invitation
of the universe and our planetary home guy. You know, they're saying, come on,
items to this adventure. This has to be one of the most inspirational. Well, I'm feeling well
inspired. One of the most inspirational talks I've had so far on this podcast. So thanks.
I'm liking it so far because there may be others who are even more inspirational to come.
Yeah, no, I've enjoyed it tremendously. Thank you so much, Jude. I wish you all the best. And
yeah, I'm looking forward to chatting to you again sometime. I'd love that, Tev. Anytime. I'd love
that. So much. Take care, Jude. And yeah, we'll keep you in touch. I'm looking forward to this
year. Cheers. Thanks.
