I've been reading your work for many years and you are someone who's managed to incorporate
so many different fields together. At this point, your free energy principle can be discussed
in fields of mathematics, physics, biology. It seems you've managed to cross all these
borders and I think it's perfect for this show. One thing I want to start off with is
when you think of the topic of the mind-body problem, you think of Rene Descartes and he
often said, I think therefore I am and you've now become synonymous with I am therefore
I think. I think let's start off with that because I think it's beautifully poetic considering
this podcast is called Mind-Body Solution.
Yes, I do like that homage to Descartes. So the cheekiness of the reversal is based upon
the free energy principle read as a physicist and effectively this is a description, a principle
that will be applied to anything that exists and the maths tells you that if something
exists in a certain sense, then it can be read or interpreted as making inferences.
So if you allow me to equate inferring with thinking, that means to exist is to infer.
So if I am, therefore I think. So that's the genesis. It's one of those, Dan, that it's
strange inversions. Speaking to the slightly sort of deflationary aspect of the free energy
principle, it's a slightly tautological aspect.
I think at that point it would be a perfect opportunity to let's play with definitions.
Let's talk about free energy principle, a Bayesian brain and perhaps active inference.
Let's play around with these definitions before we move to a formalism of the free energy
principle.
Right. So they're all very closely related. So defining the free energy principle, first
of all, what is it? It's just a principle of the kind that you would remember at school
in physics, like Hamilton's Principle of Least Action. And as such, it is effectively
a mathematical method. It's a method or a tool that you would apply to a particular
situation. And when applied to things like you and me, or in fact, many other animate
things and biotic things, one gets an interpretation of the behavior of such things in terms of
active inference. The inference part is just a statement of sense making and representation
on the inside of the thing, where the thing in question can be a person or a particle,
we could be you or me. And that sense making speaks to making sense, representing, explaining,
inferring the causes of sensory impressions from everything else from the outside world.
And the best or the most, if you like, inclusive way of understanding that kind of inference
and sense making when applied to the brain would be the Bayesian brain hypothesis. So
the Bayesian brain hypothesis is the notion that we can understand our sense making. And
to a certain extent, with one commits to neuronal process, there is the underlying neurophysiology
neuronal dynamics in terms of Bayesian belief updating, basically changing our physical
by physical states, binary aerodynamics to represent probabilistic beliefs, Bayesian
subpersonal beliefs, probabilistic beliefs about the causes of sensations. So that's
inference, inference loosely described under the Bayesian brain. Active inference is the
simple move that you acknowledge that the sensations upon which you're basing your
inference are actively sampled. You are in charge of the data that is subtending your
inference. And that sort of closes the loop between you as an inference machine, a statistical
organ for your brain, at least as a statistical organ, and the world supplying that sensory
evidence of those sensations. And that story, that sort of closing the loop, an action perception
kind of cycle, a description of sentient behavior, appealing to the notions of active sensing
and active learning is one way of reading what comes out of the free energy principle. So
that's, in my mind, how those things are, how you triangulate amongst those three notions.
When we think about, I mean, obviously, as you said, they're all very linked. When you think
about the free energy principle, the formalism of it, you think of energy minus entropy. And then
you obviously go into different aspects, surprise, divergence, then you discuss, obviously, your
internal states, hidden states, action perception, talk to us about how this formula actually works
and how you, because a lot of people have noticed when they question you about this theory,
everyone comes from a specific field. So someone often tends to attack you from a psychological
perspective. Someone tends to talk to you from a biological perspective. How do you navigate all
these territories? And I think with that, I'd like to say that you one of the few people that I've
noticed, who seems to be a genuine polymath in that regard, because you're always able to answer
these questions succinctly with a lot of definitions. And just beautifully, how do you
manage to do this?
I have a lot of naughty and inquisitive students, so you get used to answering questions after a
while. Again, very gracious of you to say that. But it's not, I don't think it's my wisdom. I think
that ability to jump from different disciplines or just take different perspective or views on what
is probably the most important thing to all of us, which is how do we work and why are we here?
Is the gift of things like the free energy principle, and the free energy principle, I'm not
claiming that, but the free energy principle is just the current formulation of millennia of
thinking and physics and psychology and philosophy, and probably nearly every other field, including
behaviorism, economics and the like. So the whole point of the free energy principle is that it is
there to try and unify and to try and encompass and thereby endorse all the various perspectives you
could take upon scented behavior or choice, the imperatives underwrite our decisions, you're
right through where do I look next in the next few hundred milliseconds through to which school
should I send my children to. And so the eclectic aspect that is brought to the table by the free
energy principle is just due to its fundamental nature. It's a first principle account. And by
definition, if it is a first principle account, if it is applicable, then it should be applicable
widely to various phenomena read or looked at through the lens of an economist or a psychologist
or a physicist or a philosopher. It's interesting you say, oh, I talk about things like surprise
information theory and entropy and intrinsic value. You didn't actually say that, but I do talk
about that affordances. And the whole charm of having a first principle account that is
sufficiently simple to write down mathematically is that you can see that the same mathematical
quantities mean different things to different people, but they're all the same thing. So perhaps
you're just to give you a couple of examples of that underneath all of this is just basically a
description of the states that I exist in those states that are characteristic of me. So how would
I express that mathematically? Well, I could just write down the a function of any particular state
that reflected how characteristic it was of me. And that would be most commonly written down as a
log probability of me being in this state. Now any log probability is basically a potential.
And if it's a potential, you can now read it in by analogy to thermodynamics.
That log probability of being in the particular state via me can also be read as a statistician
and you can call that model evidence or in statistics marginal likelihood. If your information
theory would be called self information and the average of self information is entropy.
And if you were an economist, it would basically be the states that I aspire to,
it would be description of my attracting set, written as if you were
a theorist dealing with other dynamical systems. So now the same quantity now becomes an expression
of utility or value. If you were ET James, you would call it a constraint on the imperative
to maximize the entropy and so on and so forth. So the key thing is that everybody's talking about
exactly the same thing. It's just that they've got different words from it. So the joy of
sort of seeing that central quantity under the hood being able to make sense to lots of
different people just is an expression of the explanatory scope of this kind of first principles
account. So everybody's right. They've just been using different words. I think you're absolutely
right. I think when people try to develop any theory or hypothesis, it's always very important to
sort of realize that we don't exist in a vacuum. There's so many different fields of study that
are studying the same things, but just defining them differently, discussing them very differently,
but they all come together at some point and any good theory needs to be able to explain these
various expertise as well. There needs to be some sort of a full explanatory version of all of these
and there shouldn't be a gap and you manage to bring these all together. When you talk about
hierarchal Bayesian inference, it plays a very central role in your work. And I remember when I
was reading about this and doing computational psychiatry as part of the blocks during my
masters, I remember coming across your work and thinking, this is so beautiful. This is the way
you've managed to sort of incorporate this into psychopathology is even more intriguing. Because
I remember the first time I read about it and you spoke about posterior and priors and the way
it will dictate how someone experiences hallucinations, delusions, and just general
differences in their field of vision, etc. How did that come to you at some point? At what point
did you manage to realise that this theory has a very active role to play in mental health?
Well, the answer is another strange inversion, I'm afraid. I started as a psychiatrist and
what used to be called a sort of mathematical psychologist or what I wanted to be a mathematical
psychologist. I think a clinical version of that is exactly as you say, a computational
psychiatrist. That phrase introduced by my friends, Reed Montague and Peter Diane,
has only been around for about half a decade. But now we're all computational psychiatrists.
So as a young man, I aspire to be a computational psychiatrist. So the free energy principle
is the denouement of that formalisation. But I think it's a really important point you bring
to the table there. And I think there are two moves you have to make to appreciate
the potential applicability of things like the Bayesian brain of the free energy principle
to the suffering of patients that you might see in the health patients. The first move is to have
a physics of beliefs, a physics of inference, a physics of sense making, if you like, a physics
of basic sentience that is inactive. So it has to be sentient behaviour. So it's all about choices
and decisions and how I move and indeed how I control my autonomic reflexes, you know, respond
to my gut feelings and exert some sub personal control over my physiology and internal nerve.
So that's the first thing that you have to have. You have to have a physics of sentience. You have
to have a mathematics that connects the foundations of our dynamics in a physical world to the world of
beliefs and inference and sense making and representation in this inactive sense. So that's
the first thing. Then once you've done that, you can then say, well, okay, under what circumstances
or what would it look like if this inference went awry, was in some sense not fit for purpose
with a particular world or eco niche or environment or direct interpersonal relationship,
that this person was having to infer and to learn and to actively navigate to deploy
her active inference, for example. And then you get, I think, to computational psychiatry.
But that does depend upon committing to a view of all psychopathology
as intrinsically some kind of false inference. But it's a very natural view that if you just
think about hallucinations and delusions, for example, I mean, what are they? They are effectively
inferring something is there when it's not. So if you were a statistician, you say, oh,
yes, that's a type one error. That's just bad inference, because you've got something wrong
with your standard error. And of course, you know that the standard error corresponds to the precision
in say predicted coding variants of the Bayesian brain hypothesis, which itself then relates to
synaptic gain and neuromodulation and certain the action of certain drugs. Similarly, all neglect
syndromes or in the old days would be called dissociative or hysterical syndromes.
You know, again, read as false inference would simply mean I'm inferring something is not there
when it is this type two error. And if you think about all the different disorders and ways of
suffering that people present with in psychiatry, and indeed quite a lot of neurology as well,
they can all be cast to some kind of false inference, you know, dysmorphophobias,
say, anorexia nervosa having, you know, false inferences about my body. And even simple things
like parking not simple, but awful things. But, you know, simple in the sense that they're more
motor and neurologically oriented conditions like Parkinson's disease, you could think of a failure
to infer and to realize my inferred intentions that I am now about to move.
So you were made tumors. First of all, we've linked physics to belief updating and inference.
And then we've taken psychiatry as instances of a kind of aberrance or a kind of failure
of that inference and belief updating process. But I repeat, put it in an inactive context.
You couldn't explain Parkinson's disease unless you talked about
panning as inference, you know, treating movement and an active engagement with the world
as the realization of inferred plans, things that I am likely to do next in this moment,
or indeed, again, choosing which school to send my children to.
I still remember there was one specific line that I quoted from one of your papers. I can't
remember the name of the paper, but you actually spoke about that phenomenon way.
Someone who's acutely psychotic, schizophrenic, when you look at these patients and you
show them visual illusions, you're able, they're able for some reason to see the
reality of the situation, whereas we fall for this trick. So in those cases, people often
say that they're seeing the real reality, the vertical truth, and we're not. Talk to me about
this phenomenon, because I think it's quite intriguing that they don't fall for it, but you,
with the free energy principle, with your theory, you're able to explain this,
or with the background as well.
Yeah, I know. It's a fascinating area. So there are rare instances where
psychopathology or any pathology can actually improve certain performance.
Of course, one has to qualify what one means by improved performance,
but the particular example you're talking about, I think is absolutely fascinating.
And it's a resistance,
characteristically shown with certain people, either people on the spectrum or people with
schizophrenia or schizo-type approaches to life, that renders them uniquely resistant to the kind
of illusions that we all experience. And it's just worth noting, well, what's an illusion?
Well, it's a false inference, but why is it false? It's perfectly good from the point of view
of the person having the inference and having the presumed percept and qualitative experience.
However, the experimenter, the naughty experimenter who's deliberately crafted this stimulus
in a way which is so unlikely that they can now say, no, no, this is a false percept because
I know how it was caused. And the subject, for example, have completely the wrong idea,
the wrong inference about how it was caused. So it is a wonderful tool for people in psychophysics
to actually test how our inferences can fail in relation to the actual causes of our sensations.
But to put that another way around, what it does, it's a beautiful pro
of the prior beliefs that we bring to the table. So, you know, going back to the notion of the
Bayesian brain, read simply that means that we have at hand a number of hypotheses that can
explain the causes of this pattern of sensory, for example, visual information. And we generate
these hypotheses actively, say predictions in predictive coding. And then we look at the
adequacy of these predictions in explaining the sensory data. So we're effectively little
scientists. We are testing hypotheses against sensory data. And if they're not good hypotheses,
we will reject them and revise our hypotheses. And this is the Bayesian belief updating that we
were referring to previously. But that adjudication and that updating rests upon
your prior beliefs before you see some sensory data relative to the precision of those data
that are going to move your prior beliefs to make them into posterior beliefs after seeing the data.
So we come back again to this notion, or a key notion of the precision afforded
your prior beliefs, the way that you think the world works, or the way that these particular
sensory, panther sensory stimulation are generated, relative to the evidence at hand
through that you're accessing through your sensations. So when people, well, certainly
when people like me and you talk about this resistance to illusions in people separate
from schizophrenia, what we are effectively saying is that they have less precise or imprecise prior
beliefs that they're more sensitive to any sensory evidence at hand. So if illusions are the things
that reveal our prior beliefs, and people with schizophrenia are resistant to illusions,
that means they don't have very precise prior beliefs. And that tells you an enormous amount
about the message passing the dynamics and the sense making in people who are resistant to illusions,
particularly in relation to how we think the brain encodes that precision, because you have to
estimate the precision, it doesn't come for free. It's very much like a statistician computing
the standard error, which is the inverse of the component of precision. It has to be evaluated,
and if you get that wrong, you can produce your type one, your type two errors, all that false
inference and the rights and hallucinations and delusions. And in this instance, a resistance to
a particular kind of, not a pseudo hallucination, but a particular kind of illusory person.
I think I'm glad we're touching on this because this leads me into my next question, which is
surrounding illusionism as a theory of consciousness. When you think of an illusion as a misinterpretation
of a sensory stimulus that does exist, and you think of the theory of illusionism, Keith Frankish,
Daniel Dennett, Susan Blackmore, lots of people working. And to an extent, when you take into
account certain things that someone like Anil Seth says with perceptions being active hallucinations,
you sort of come to this conclusion that, okay, the sensory stimulus we're receiving sort of
gives us an idea, a posterior belief at some point that we have what is known as a conscious
experience, a phenomenal first person subjective experience. Sorry, I'm going to head into
philosophy at this point and then we'll try to get back into the neuroscience and the physics, etc.
So when you think of Dennett and all these philosophers who discuss illusionism as a theory
of consciousness, the basic premise is that we are experiencing something. However, because
let's say someone like you or Donald Hoffman who takes fitness payoffs over reality, the fact is
we are never really perceiving what is actually happening. We're just perceiving what is meant to
allow us to survive long enough, perhaps to breed, do whatever we have to do. And in this case,
consciousness, believing we have some sort of an entity, something similar to an Ian Vitale.
The fact that we believe this allows us to go through life and successfully
reproduce and continue to thrive. Do you think this has a lot of value? And do you think that these
theories of illusionism as a theory of consciousness has value using your theory of free energy
principle and the Bayesian brain to back it up? Well, in the way that you articulated them,
absolutely, yes. Okay. Do you have any rebuttals against that?
No, lots of ever. No, I think you phrase that in a compelling way. And it fits exactly with the view
of a Bayesian brain and more generally, the free energy principle. Control hallucination
is just an expression of the way that sensory impressions somehow control our sense making
on the inside and the degree to which we let them control depends upon the precision that we afford
these sensory impressions. By definition, we'll never actually know what's going on on the outside.
So the whole point of inferring is you don't know the answer. You're just left with the best belief,
the best probabilistic guess as to what's going on out there. There will never be any
true access to the causes of that. And in a sort of complementary fashion, I will never know
what you are thinking. I can never know. So I'm on the outside looking at you.
So you're all including the free energy principle. But as applied to your brain,
this is just a hypothesis. It's just a belief. There is a fundamental divide that in the physics
application, the free energy principle rests upon something called a Markov blanket.
But there's a fundamental divide, an informational barrier, or probably, you know,
beyond information, an existential barrier between the inside and the outside of any
thinking thing, which means that the question is what is reality? Is there a metaphysics?
Is unanswerable? All you can do is, I think any of us expresses as
inference to the best prediction as opposed to explanation. But I think inference to the
best explanation is perfectly okay in terms of explaining the world to yourself as you
sampled it and as you sense it. So I'm not a philosopher. So that's the one area that I
am very naive in. However, I did want to make a philosophical point here that we, you use the
phrase that we believe in some aspect of ourselves, including the fact that we believe that we have
experiences. There is an argument that this is just another illusion. It's just another hypothesis
that in fact, selfhood in and of itself is just another hypothesis that these are sort
of illusions that we bring to the table to make parsimonious sense of the fact that there is,
there appears to be some coherence in mind-bodied interaction with the world.
But it's not a necessary belief for living and surviving and adapting. And I'm sure if viruses
could tell you they would deny having a sense of self. So one might argue that consciousness,
either the kind of self-consciousness that you refer to, or just the notion that I am having a
qualitative experience, the kind of experience that people like Thomas Mixinger would associate with
opacity or phenomenal opacity, these in and of themselves are still just hypotheses. They're
just ways of explaining my sense-making and this instance on the inside, as opposed to
explaining what caused my external sensory states. Does that make sense? But all of this,
I think, is entirely consistent with the views that you expressed.
I think it's, sorry, were you contidical?
Well, no, you asked for a pushback. The only pushback I can think of, and again,
forgive me if I'm using the wrong words, but the free energy principle inherits from
the theory of sparsely coupled random dynamical systems and the special case that
emerges when you have a particular kind of sparse coupling between something and everything else.
If that is true, it does have, if you like, a metaphysical commitment that there has to be
something else out there. So there is a sense that you can be a complete skeptic and that there
is no reality from the point of view of applying the free energy principle to my sense-making or
indeed applying it to your sense-making, your sentience. But the free energy principle in
of itself starts from a very metaphysical position that there is an outside and there is an inside.
What we are looking at is quite simply a generalized synchronization between the
dynamics on the inside and the outside. That can be read as inference and belief update.
That's a pushback I can think of. I think that's exactly where someone like Daniel
Dennett would break away from someone like Donald Hoffman, exactly what you're talking about.
Where Dennett would suppose that there is a reality, there is an external reality. However,
there's still no such thing as phenomenal experience or conscious experiences because
we are crafting this as we're going along or interpreting it that way. And that might not
be the best way to say it anyway. Whereas Donald Hoffman then goes to the assumption that
all conscious experience is the reality we're talking about. And that might take it a bit
further because now there is no external reality. We're sort of creating reality from conscious
experience. But yeah, he takes a different physical route. Just called briefly what I wanted to say
was, I mean, I've got tons of notes here. Just want to show you a lot of different things. I've
got a bunch of equations here. The main goal was because I've seen so many different talks
of yours and so many different interviews, I've noticed how people tend to, as I said,
ask you questions based on their expertise or their field of expertise. And I didn't want that to
happen because for the most part, I'm so on board with your view. And I love the theory so much that
I used it in my own master's dissertation to defend illusionism. So the dissertation is called
psychiatry's defense for illusionism as a theory of consciousness. And a huge chunk of that actually
incorporated your work, yourself, Chris Frith, many others. But I was worried that when I get
into this interview, I'm going to start defending it even more. And I did not want that to happen.
So I made very specific notes to sidetrack me off that path. But before I do leave that part,
the last thing I do want to say is, if someone does ask you what consciousness is,
how do you actually go about answering that question? Do you find that you go down a
philosophical route? Or do you stick to a neuroscientific slash psychiatric route?
Well, I think very much like you. It would depend upon who I'm talking to and who is listening.
It would be very context sensitive. Yeah.
Yeah. If you're talking to
people who are in a more physics-y world, and they are interested in the naturalization
of consciousness, I would appeal to this. Well, go right back to the Cartesian dualism.
How do you repair that? Or should you repair that? There is actually an argument I've heard
recently from very valued colleagues that there is a neo-Cartesianism that emerges from, specifically,
the free energy principle on the one hand, and quantum information theoretic formulations on
the other hand. This is due to things like the inner screen hypothesis by Chris Fields,
which is a fascinating resurrection of the Cartesian theater of a particular sort.
But if I was talking to somebody who wanted to naturalize in relation to the laws of physics,
writ as usually differential equations, or in quantum information theoretic terms,
I would be looking to answer their question in terms of how do you bridge these two?
How do you arrive at some kind of dual aspect monism that still preserved the duality but
explained it? And I would be talking about the difference between a posterior belief,
a Bayesian belief that is encoded by the states of a brain, for example,
and the probability distributions that are entailed by the states of those brains. So you've
got on the one hand an intrinsic information geometry that inherits from the probability
distributions that somebody in thermodynamics as a physicist would understand, the kind that
we use in brain imaging, for example, to look at brain activations through the expenditure of
thermodynamic energy in order to support neural dynamics. But exactly the same by physical states
are those that parameterize another kind of information geometry, which is the information
geometry of beliefs, the space in which I do my belief updating, moving one belief from this
point to this point. And of course, that moment is important because most of the
much of the arguments that I would engage with in terms of consciousness would frame
consciousness as a process. I think you mentioned that explicitly. What does that mean from the
point of view of trying to naturalize a conscious process that was quintessentially
belief-based? It's its movement on statistical manifold. So you do get that for free from the
free energy principle. So that's why I and a number of at least close friends and collaborators
use the phrase, you know, a physics of sentience. Sometimes if you don't want to be quite so bold,
sometimes you get told off using the word sentience. But at least you can talk about a physics of
information. And it is that sort of link between the information theoretic, the belief, the statistical
aspect of neural dynamics and the thermodynamics that underwrite that, which does, I think, provide
that link between the Cartesian dual aspects of certain things like the brain. If I was talking to
people in philosophy who are more interested in, you know, phenomenology, I think you have to address
some hard questions about, you know, what would be the necessary properties of a self-organizing,
self-evidence free energy minimizing system that could possibly support
a qualitative experience or qualia as, and then you have to ask other questions about
when would there be some self-awareness of this and, you know, issues of self-modelling of the
kind, again, addressed by people like Thomas Metzinga. Those kinds of conversations would
take a slightly different route and would focus on the phenomenology. And interesting, they come back
to the precision we were talking about before. If you remember, we were talking about having to
estimate the precision, which means that you've got, well, for those kinds of systems or creatures
or particles that have the capacity to estimate the precision of their implicit beliefs and the
sensory evidence that is updating those beliefs, that the very act of deploying those estimates
of precision and inferring that precision becomes a kind of mental action. So now you've got a way
of linking mental action, read as people like Jakob Nynowski and Thomas Metzinga and that kind of
philosophizing with the psychological reading of this mental action, which is just attention.
It's just basically deploying or affording more attention to this level of representation in a
hierarchical context or this sensory stream, thereby selecting that for belief updating, giving
those sources of evidence privilege access to your deeper, higher level belief updating.
So now you're in the world of building bridges between attention, mental action and phenomenology.
Then you have to, then you start to talk to people who like to think about selfhood and self-modeling
and self-awareness and you start to think about, well, you know, how do these things unpack in
terms of the kind of generative models that are necessary to define model evidence,
marginal likelihood, variational free energy? What kind of models would you need? And you
normally get to your very, very deep models, hierarchical models, where we normally have in
mind a sort of heterarchy or a centrifugal hierarchy. So your deeper is usually sort of more abstract
and slower. And, you know, what normally starts to think about, well, what kind of depth would we
require for me to have a sense of self? Well, first of all, I have to be an agent. To be an agent,
I have to have a generative model that entertains the consequences of my action,
otherwise I can't plan. So immediately we're talking about generative models entailed by certain
creatures or people that escapes the moment simply now because I've got a generative model of the
future. Unlike a thermostat or a virus, I've now got a very deep generative model of a particular
sort, which goes into the future. It's future pointing. But crucially, it's my future. It's
not your future or anything else. It's just my future. What will happen if I do that? So that
makes me to an agent. So immediately you're talking about a very special class of
self-organization, self-evidencing. And then you have to ask the question, well,
what point do I recognize that it is me that is actually doing the planning? And why? If you
want to apply the free energy principle, you have to ask the question, well, what licenses this kind
of deep generative modeling? And that's a pressing question because I've used the phrase self-evidencing,
I should just very quickly qualify that, which is a philosophical term, which I know nothing
about in philosophy. But I do know that Jacob Hoey, my friend in Melbourne is a philosopher,
thinks it's quite apt to use as a description of the Bayesian brain minimizing its free energy.
Because if you remember, the free energy is synonymous with technically a lower bound on
surprise, surprise is self-information. But it's also the negative model evidence or log
model evidence. So as you're doing optimal inference, you are implicitly trying to maximize
the evidence for your models of your nipped world, so your self-evidencing. So the interesting twist
here is that you can easily show, literally, on the back of a matchbox, that the log evidence
is equal to accuracy minus complexity, which means that every move I make and every
aspect of my brain that is engendered during neurodevelopmental and need evolution,
that's to pay a price for every more accurate explanation, illusion that it deploys,
and that price is the complexity cost. So it means you're trying to minimize the complexity. So
why on earth would, say, evolution equip you and me with this really deep generative model,
where I've got all this extra complexity that I can be in this state of mind, or that state of mind,
I can be anxious, I can be in that, I can be frightened, I can be embarrassed.
Why would it do that? Well, of course, if it provides a parsimonious explanation
of my sense-making and my active engagement with the world, then it pays its way in terms of the
increase in accuracy of the kind of things I can explain and engage with,
pays its way or compensates sufficiently for the increased complexity. And then you ask yourself,
what kind of worlds would potentially justify this kind of modelling, this kind of very
sophisticated hierarchy, deep modelling? And usually one ends up, and now I'm talking to people
in your ethology and social neuroscience, you end up with, well, the only kind of worlds in which
I need to infer I am me and I am in this dispositional state is in a world in which there
are lots of other things that are exactly like me that have certain dispositional, intentional
states in relation to me. Otherwise, I don't need this. It would be an overly complicated model.
So you argue yourself into a situation where this kind of consciousness, it can only be present,
or is any licensed under the free energy principle, in a world full of conspecifics and creatures,
and usually in an incultured ego niche that depends upon lots of other people.
So that now becomes a slightly relational aspect to this kind of consciousness. So I haven't talked
about the inner screen hypothesis, but there is another quantum physics version of this. So
there's lots of different stories you can tell depending upon what people want to hear.
Carl, you touched on so many different ones there. I love the last one because
it reminds me of Chris Fritz's work, and he loves to talk about this social and relational
aspect of consciousness. You guys have written many papers together, and someone else you've
written with is a colleague of mine from South Africa, a very good friend, Mark Solms.
You guys have also written together, and I know Mark takes us down to a more basic level of
existence in terms of conscious experiences coming from more basic parts of the brain.
What got you guys to write together, and how did you guys sort of get together and do this?
These beautiful papers together. Right, well, I just mentioned both Chris and Mark in that.
So interestingly, when I, as a young psychiatrist, got into brain imaging,
it was exactly at the same time that Chris was, Chris Fritz,
came from basically clinical psychology and neuropsychology. It was one of the worlds,
certainly the UK's experts in schizophrenia research. He came to join us at the MRC
Psychotron Unit, the very first brain imaging, also an emission tomography
studies of people with schizophrenia. So he's been my mentor and friend since the
inception of my academic career, and he's still meant to be writing the last paragraph of the
last paper that I'm trying to submit at the moment. Mark, but there's an interesting connection
and comparison between Mark and Chris. Mark, I met later in life at international conferences,
and we're very impressed with, in those days, his encyclopedic and very embracing knowledge of
Freudian ideas in relation to psychoanalysis, but also neuropsychology. So he's one of those
polymaths who can transcend different fields. He can write volumes on Freud and yet bring
the most informative and puzzling neuropsychological cases to the fore to evince some
very deep questions about how we experience our world and how that can be expressed via things
like neuropsychanalysis. So the interesting thing is that Chris really hates Freud, whereas Mark
loves Freud, but they're both committed to understanding the brain as an organ, as a social
organ. But as you rightly say, Mark is much more on the sort of, it predicates his work on the
neuropsychology and the neurobiology, whereas Chris is much more in terms of the dyadic and the
social neuroscience aspects that underwrite sense making where it matters. But both of them,
at the end of the day, are trying to understand the patients they saw as young men, and perhaps
Mark is still seeing patients. I don't know. So that's how I got involved. Mark's ideas,
you know, I think you're absolutely right. They are more grounded in the wetware that would
endorse certain psychoanalytic, psychotherapeutic, neuropsychological and psychiatric readings.
And interestingly, he's happened upon exactly the same focus that I suspect to your computational
psychiatry thesis focused on. So again, we come back to this key notion of precision and uncertainty.
And of course, you know, if you want a, you know, to naturalize psychopathology, it's all about
beliefs. And if you want to, what is definitive of a belief? Well, it has clearly, when thought of,
or when read as a probability distribution, it has an attribute of content in terms of the
location parameters. But more importantly, it's got an attribute of uncertainty of dispersion.
That's the whole point about a belief as opposed to a point estimate. So if we are creatures that
deal in beliefs, then the, you know, the challenge that we face is basically evaluating and knowing
and representing our own uncertainty, either personally or subpersonally, you know, and indeed
you can see this throughout, say, in economics, you know, the markets of lost confidence,
there's in, you know, things that matter, I usually knows the confidence and the uncertainty
that I hold my beliefs with. So that, I keep using the word uncertainty because there's a lovely
little phrase that Mark has celebrated in his most recent book that you know, The Hidden Spring and
Subsequence and Academic Publications, which is the notion of felt uncertainty. So he thinks that
feelings are all about the estimation of and deployment of precision and uncertainty in exactly
the same way that we ended up trying to naturalize the resistance to illusions in people with
schizophrenia. It's all the same thing. So he puts a very heavy weight on that. To the extent,
he gets very cross when people become cortical centric, you know, they think he's all in the
frontal lobes. He's literally deep in the hierarchy, literally deep in the cells of origin
of these really powerful neurotransmitter systems that do the attentional game,
they do the neuromodulation, they set the precision, they balanced and coordinate our belief
updating. And of course, that fits very comfortably with what we've talked about before, which is a
mental action read as attention, being able to get some control over those dynamics and belief
updating processes, that Bayesian mechanics that's going on inside our head. So I mean,
you guys, both of your papers, I remember you, you all sort of culminate and get together with
this idea that this Bayesian brain, this is fundamental to what we do. When you think about
perceptive experiences, we realize that at some point, my red sunset and your red sunset are not
the same, is a very two different experiences, both comprised of different neural neural factors,
different social factors, different experiences in the past. So even time plays a big role.
This comes along well when you think of Markov blankets, because you think of these different
internal states, different active states, perhaps for each person who's thinking, how do you find
Markov blankets play? Let's first talk about how Markov blankets to play a central role in the
free energy principle, and how this sort of navigates across different areas from physics to
chemistry to biology to psychology. Let's go to economics, etc. Right. I thought you were going
to talk about synchronization across Markov blankets and communication. I wasn't going to get
that at some point. Excuse me. So yeah, as you say, the Markov blanket plays a foundational role
in the physics reading of the free energy principle, where you have to, before you can
start to talk about anything, you have to be able to demarcate and define what you mean by something.
And the first move is to individuate that thing from everything else. How do you do that? Well,
you simply identify those states that intervene between everything else and the thing in question.
They separate the internal states, dynamics, paths, narratives. Technically,
you know, these would be states in a state space, from the point of view of, say,
a long-run equation or some kind of statistical physics. And what transpires is that if you want
to individuate the state's internal to something, from the state's external to something,
then one way of doing that, and one could argue the only way of doing that,
is to demonstrate that they are conditionally independent. If you want to be able to separate,
there has to be some kind of probabilistic separability. There has to be some kind of
independence, but it's conditioned upon the Markov blanket. So what does that mean? Well,
it basically means that you and I, or more specifically, your brain and my brain,
are not closed systems. We are open systems, and our systems are open to our niche, our environment,
or our heat bath, if you were a physicist. But that kind of openness is a kind that
preserves that conditional independence between me on the inside and everything else on the outside,
and that's where the Markov blanket comes in. And then you can, for most things,
partition the Markov blanket into two sets of states, the active states and the sensory states.
The semantics are rather obvious in the sense that it's just making a distinction between those
states that mediate the exposure of the inside to the outside, the vicarious influences of the
outside on the inside, and those are the sensory states. And then to complete the circle, to induce
the necessary kind of circular causality we need for the synchronization we're going to talk about,
you have to have the other side of the street, which is the active states that mediate the influence
of the internal states on the external states. So you've got this rather delicate, fundamental
sparsity structure where the sparsity is read in terms of the influence that one state has on
another state, but foregrounds a special set of states that are called blanket states that can
be divided into active and sensory states that intervene between the external and internal states.
The inner screen hypothesis we were talking about before inherits from a quantum information
theoretic formulation of this notion where you can look at this blanket as a screen onto which I can
write, say the environment or the world out there writes onto this blanket, writes onto this holographic
screen, and those become my sensations and I can then read those sensations from the holographic
screen on the inside, and then I can couple back so that the environment senses me through my actions.
So there's a, if you like, one level of perfect symmetry between the two, and that symmetry
is just, sorry, that symmetry is evinced by the minimization of free energy in the sense that
if I can predict what's going on out there, and what's going on out there is at the same time in
some sense trying to predict what's going on inside my head, the ultimate free energy minimizing
solution, the most likely solution just brings us back to being in characteristic states for the
environment and the need. So we're talking just about a description of a generalized synchronization
or a synchronization of chaos between two sparsely coupled dynamical systems with a special
sparsely structure that allows me to preserve my conditional independence. So in a sense the
illusionist perspective we were talking about before is a must, it can't be any other way
if you define existence as conditional independence from the world in which you are immersed,
but of course there has to be a world in which you are immersed, so you can't take that too far
in terms of a skeptical position. When you think of Markov blankets, in the context of,
let's say, neural networks, how could the concept of Markov blankets be used to
better understand flow of information or computations within a neural network? Is this
applicable and are there any specific applications we could utilize this concept to enhance our
understanding of consciousness, neural connections etc? Yeah, I think there are, it's interesting
that you should ask that and what you should do is get Maxwell Ramstead and Chris Field and possibly
even Mark and then Mark, Mark Somes has also been involved in these conversations and another
other people I'm sure they will also suggest. So this group have been thinking for a year or two
and are currently submitting papers to things like the general consciousness studies and elsewhere
that rest explicitly on arving the internal dynamics of a brain in terms of nested Markov
blankets and trying to ask the question, is there something unique about a Markov blanket
on the inside in your brain which you're maybe physically very distributed but statistically
well defined that could possibly support consciousness? So this is the inner screen
hypothesis that I mentioned before. So your question, and perhaps you've actually seen a
pre-print. Oh well it's a very pressing to dispute question then because this is exactly what people
are like Maxwell and Mark and Ken and David and everybody else would love, Chris would have loved
to have been asked. Yeah so that's the whole premise that well first of all it's a stand-back
so you're right to ask, are Markov blankets useful? I think that they are foundational and
they're used implicitly everywhere. I mean not only are they foundational in the sense that they
define your existence and my existence and anything that we engage with or we think we engage with
but they are implicitly used whenever you start to simulate or reproduce or emulate any kind of
sense-making or intelligence, artificial or natural. Whether you're playing with neurons,
neural cultures in a dish, the cell membrane is a Markov blanket that defines the cell,
the connectivity of the neurons defines another scale of Markov blanket or another scale which
says that this is a network and exactly the same maths applies to neural networks in machine
learning and artificial intelligence research and the operation of your iPhone or Google search
machines. So these things become practically really important in defining the network of the thing
that's doing the computations or the information processing in a pragmatic sense and indeed you
can read these active and sensory states as the inputs and outputs to anything that is doing some
kind of computing. So they are essential in defining things like say, well human architectures,
you and I don't use a Vancouver architecture but you can still use Markov blankets to define them
but even if you look at the kind of architectures that we use for sense-making in the hierarchal
Bayesian brain or hierarchal predictive coding story, then the message passing that is required
to do the belief updating becomes tremendously efficient due to the presence of these
carefully self-maintained, self-evidencing Markov blanket structures. So remember the
Markov blanket rests upon a sparsity structure, it's what the connections and the influences
that are not there. So that means that you can now do local computations if you can define the
Markov blanket of you. You may be just an element of your dendrite, dendritic tree, you may be a
synapse, you may be an entire dendritic tree, you may be a cell, you may be a brain region,
you may be a campus, you may be an entire brain, you may be an entire person or you may be a family,
you may be a species, you may be an institution, you may be a biosphere and every scale the same
rules apply, whereby you get the efficiency from the sparsity where the sparsity underwrites
the very structure and the ability to actually dissect every scale and the system at hand.
So that leads to, I repeat, that's practically really important when you're designing neural
networks or chips, you need to keep all your computations as local as possible and you do
that by using your Markov blanket. If you wanted to, if we return to the implications for belief
updating in a brain, then just saying the phrase hierarchical predictive processing or hierarchical
Bayesian inference immediately connects you to a certain class of Markov blankets, because
the hierarchy is just defined in terms of the connections that are not there. So each
hierarchical level possesses a Markov blanket that separates its superordinate level from its
subordinate level. So just talking about hierarchical structures is just one special case of a particular
kind of nested Markov blanket and then we get to, is there a special Markov blanket? So now this is
the crux of the paper that you haven't read that I thought you had. Well, I'll send you,
well I asked, you know, if you email Maxwell Ramstead in Montreal, he'll send you, he'll send
you, I've only got a copy with all the authors redacted, so I'm not quite sure who the authors are.
I'll take a bit off, I'll take a bit off, I'll definitely do that. No, you'll be delighted.
And so, you know, the idea of one of the key ideas that fits very comfortably with
the ideas from Chris Field and people like Jim Laysbrook and Mike Plevin,
which is this inner screen hypothesis, is that there is one irreducible Markov blanket.
There is one that you can't get inside and find any hierarchical structure or any partition.
So what would that mean if there was one or more possibly, but there was certainly at least one
irreducible Markov blanket in my brain? It would have some quite profound implications.
It would mean that it could never see itself other than acting on the outside, which is the
rest of the brain. So the only way you can solve evidence is by engaging in mental action.
And now you ask, well, what kind of mental action would it engage? What are the executive
systems, the active states of this particular minimal Markov blanket? They are precisely
the cells of origin of the neurotransmitters that implement precision control and attention.
So we're right back with Mark Soames again, but we're in a very comfortable position because
not only are we friends with Mark Soames, but we're also friends with everybody who talks about
things like higher order thought theory. So predicate the entire argument on this hierarchical
structure, which means that at some level, and usually it's the higher level or the deeper level,
do interesting metacognitive things start to happen that you could associate with
conscious processing. But this is exactly what the minimal Markov blanket, irreducible Markov
blanket would say. It is something that is deep within a hierarchy that there is no higher or
deeper level. Because if there was, you'd be able to partition the internal states within that minimal
Markov blanket. It also fits very comfortably things like the global neuronal workspace theory.
I mean, what is global? And what is a workspace? Well, it's something where you can share stuff.
So you can't further subdivide it and it's global because it sees everything.
So it has, it has a lot of constant validity in relation to again, where we started,
everybody's right, but they've just got their own way of expressing it.
But in this instance, we are, or one is expressing it explicitly in terms of
individuation, separability, read through the lens of the free energy principle in terms of
Markov blankets. Crucially, in a scale applied a particular scale, and this scale is the scale
of brains. So this wouldn't work when you're trying to describe the weather or evolution.
It wouldn't work when you're trying to describe things at a quantum level or indeed
at the level of a single neuron or neural population. This argument is scale,
is tied to a particular scale, but it has, if you like, a scale free aspect in the hierarchical
partitioning that induces the notion of a non partitionable or irreducible Markov blanket.
So, funnily enough, that notion of the irreducible Markov blanket being the inner screen is exactly
the new Cartesian theater that we're talking about.
That's very fascinating. I mean, I'm scheduled to chat to Mike Levin soon, and I had no idea.
I think I should send him an email to chat about this. You said it was Mike Levin,
Mark Somes, Chris Fields, who else was there? There was one more name you mentioned.
The inner screen hypothesis that if you like provides a call of stone for this more collective,
inclusive effort to try and get at what Vanier Weiss would call a minimal unifying model of
consciousness. That includes people like Mark Somes and David Rudolf and lots of people.
Organized by Maxwell Ramstead and Chris Fields is a really important player in that.
But the inner screen hypothesis in and of itself is indeed due to Chris Fields and his friends,
particularly Mike Levin and people like Jim Glacebrook. So, that formulation is another,
if you like, access, which you'll have some great conversations with both Chris and Mike.
So, they come at this from the point of view of sort of basal cognition, the notion that
everything is effectively, can be cast, possibly even is, just a process of information.
It's this information processing and self-organization just is
the processes that evolve that effectively do believe updating or process information,
usually classical information, when it comes to kind of biotic self-organization
that Mike Levin deals with. So, he's famous for Zen and Boston on sorts of
really insightful takes, new takes on cellular and biological self-organization.
You know, some of my favorite ideas are, you know, if you'd, you might like, is that, you know,
when you appreciate that sort of, you know, physics, and this is the Chris Fields quote,
there is no bright line between sort of physics, biology and psychology. They're all the same
things, just using different words. And Mike takes this to his extreme, what he used to,
he's got more sophisticated in the past few years, but several years ago he had this notion that
cancer was a delusion, a delusion that arose from a pathology of basal cognition, which I think is
much, you know, cells are failing to infer, know their place, they're failing to infer that, no,
I shouldn't be growing in this context. They've got this delusion, oh, I should keep on growing.
And of course, he's absolutely right. So you can even get a computational psychiatry of cancer
out of this, but it does require a commitment to think about all self-organization as basically
a process that can be read as an inference process, sort of a belief of basic dating process,
the right kind of processing and bounding self-information and entropy read from the
point of view of information theory. Chris Fields' particular take comes from his skills with Jim
Glacebrook in quantum information theory. So that's where the information theoretic aspects come,
and then you can start to talk about the relationship between the principles of unitarity and entanglement
and the like, and what that means when read, or what it means in terms of a quantum formulation
of the classical reading of the free energy principle that doesn't normally deal with quantum,
you know, it usually starts with, you know, classical mechanics with all kind of formulation.
I know, I just, I love so much about what you just said, because
when I talk about it, I often think about the same thing. I often call ourselves
receiving persons organized by organelles, crafted by cells, designed by DNA, manufactured by molecules,
assembled by atoms, forged by fusion over, forged by fusion via stellar supernovae. So this is a
saying, because I think if you don't incorporate all these things together, you're just, you're
missing out an opportunity not to reduce things to the nothing but aspects, but rather to grow the
complexity of what we're talking about. You just increase the scope of the conversation so much
more by discussing every realm of reality. And I think you get that, and you seem to be working
from that perspective as well. Absolutely. I think that's a lovely way that you actually expressed
it. You should definitely get Chris Fields on your podcast, because his big thing is that scale
freeness, that scale invariance. And in fact, I was on a call literally about two hours ago,
where he made, I thought, a delightful point, that because the free energy principle is by
construction scale free, it cannot be reductious at the same time. So it is quintessentially
anti-reductionist. So what you just expressed, I think, covered all those scales. And I think
that's part of the saying, your formalism has to be scale free. It has to be deployed
for me, mathematically, in the spirit of the renormalization group. It has to be deployed
time and time and time again. And as soon as you realize that, then you start to ask deep questions
about bottom up and top down causation between scales. So as soon as you've got a scale free
theory that can apply either to gamma oscillations in your hippocampus, or it can apply to natural
selection, led as Bayesian model selection, and then you start to ask big questions, well,
how does this very slow self-evidencing process contextualize and be informed by this very fast
self-evidencing process or information processing in a way that is emergent from just having these
same kinds of processes unfolding with a separation in this instance, temporal scales.
So Chris would wax lyrical for a long time about this. So perhaps you could get Chris and Mike
together. I think that's a great idea. I think I should start doing that. I know the last, I think
you Kurt and Mike, I think, spoke together as well, if I recall correctly, I can't remember.
Carl, I wanted to ask you, when you think about this project that everyone's talking about,
and Markov blankets, do you think that because some systems are so complex, do you think there
will be any sort of indirect or hidden causal relationships that might hinder this from happening?
What sort of applications or techniques should be employed to effectively identify Markov blankets
within complex systems? Ah, right. Yeah, so this is a very sort of practical
issue, and it would be very nice to be able to sort of parcelate the brain, for example, or
parcelate an institution or an economy, to be able to identify the different Markov blankets
given some empirical data. There is a worked example of this, which is little known,
because it's just so complicated. It's almost impossible to read, but I wrote it and I'm quite
proud of it. I think it was in network science, but it was exactly the challenge of taking brain
imaging data with thousands, hundreds of thousands of measurements of activity over time,
and then parcelating it at different scales. So it was exactly what we're just talking about.
It was creating Markov blankets and Markov blankets and Markov blankets,
and doing it in a way that was empirically constrained by measuring the connectivity
and its sparsity to imply where the Markov blankets were. And then once you've got a Markov blanket,
those now constitute the Intel states of a bigger Markov blanket, and then you can sort of carve up
the entire brain at successively course from course spatial scales. And what was really interesting
is a phenomena that is, I was going to say, emergent, but in fact it's actually baked into
the renormalization group that you would access mathematically, or you would use to access the
scale-free behavior, or at least formalize or naturalize it, that things get slower as they get
bigger. So we could actually estimate the time constants of the neuronal fluctuations and implicit
belief updating associated with different spatial scales ranging from a cubic centimeter or millimeter
or so of the brain through to entire frontal lobes. And then we can extrapolate out to very,
very big things, and very, very small things. And look at the characteristic time scales,
it was just implicit by scanning through the time scales by having lots and lots,
literally hundreds of thousands, well at least a thousand, a thousand little Markov blankets,
all jostling together, partitioned, and then moving to say a hundred of them, and then to 10.
And it's by extrapolating you can then think about sort of collections of brains, pen brains,
or a tenth of a cubic centimeter of the brain, right the way down to the quantum scale.
And let's look at the different time constants that were engaged. So that was a really interesting
academic exercise, but it did rest as you say, being able to identify Markov blankets.
What you're asking though is a key issue in terms of complex system analysis and modeling,
being able to carve the system in the right kind of way in order to usually to simulate it
in a way that allows you to do forecasting or scenario modeling and the like, or projecting
a response to a therapeutic intervention in say clinical neuroscience or psychiatry
through to weather forecasting. Getting the right coarse-graining, the right Markov blankets
in play is absolutely essential. There are lots of people working on that at the moment.
One email exchange I've had this week is from a gentleman called Jeff Beck,
who's taken on the very deep challenge of considering Markov blankets that wander around.
So one interesting aspect of a simple definition of a Markov blanket is that it depends upon
a probability distribution that exists over a non-trivial amount of time.
But if you think of something like a candle flame that is moving, and furthermore the
constituents, the molecules and the ions that constitute the plasma that is the surface of the
flame, is it fair to say that the flame has a Markov blanket given all its constituent molecules,
i.e. other small-scale Markov blankets, and continually be exchanged and moving, wandering
around. So he's taken on the challenge of taking Markov blankets into this sort of
more liberal domain and dynamic domain, and seeing if one can still apply the free energy principle
in a practical way. But to do that, he has to have at least simulations on numerical studies
that allow him to actually identify Markov blankets that move like waves in certain media.
So that's still, I think, an outstanding problem which a lot of people, when I say a lot,
a few key post-colleges are looking at, and I think it's a very useful ability of inquiry.
That's quite fascinating. It's great to see that so many different people are working on this at
this point, because when you look online and you look at the amount of citations, I mean you are
one of the most cited neuroscientists on the planet, and it's great to see that a lot of people
are taking these concepts seriously and trying to roll with it, looking ahead to the future.
What directions or advancements do you anticipate in the study of Markov blankets, for example,
except for the one you just mentioned? Where do you think the free energy principle is going from here?
I think there are probably three directions of travel, and we've implicitly already covered
the most important ones in our conversation. The first one is indeed computational psychiatry
and computational neurology. In a sense, all the work that Chris Frith and I and many other
colleagues put in decades ago into understanding functional brain architectures via brain imaging
was in the service of ultimately asking questions about neurology and psychiatry,
and much of the theorising that led to active inference and the free energy principle inherited
from the data analytic and modelling that we were applying to make sense of brain imaging data,
and realised that exactly the same principles could be applied to the brain, or when I say realised
we're told by people like Geoffrey Hinton, you can apply the same principles to the brain,
the Helmholtz machine. That's one direction of travel, I think. Again, I use the word naturalising.
I recently learnt what it means. I think it's a useful phrase to naturalise psychopathology
in a way that you can write down the laws and the maths, and you can start to create in silica
patients and digital twins and intervene on them without actually giving drugs or psychotherapeutic
interventions to patients until you've shown. To a certain extent, that style of approach is
already starting to bite, not in the context of the free energy principle explicitly, but certainly
in the modelling of things like epilepsy. Having naturalised apathophysiology, say the
transmission of epileptic discharges and seizure activity in the brain. To the extent you can
actually put it in the computer and start to do weather forecasting of this particular person's
brain and what might happen if we did this and that. I think that's one very exciting way forward.
Another complement of that sort of applied application of the free energy principle
would be the ability to phenotype people. There's a phrase computational phenotyping,
which I quite like, which basically means being able to characterize this person or this cohort
in terms of the parameters of their generative models that they use to explain their world.
That provides a really powerful and efficient summary on this person and in terms of their
beliefs and their belief updating and their prior commitments. Being able to be able to
measure and quantify somebody in that kind of way can be very, very useful, not only in terms of
tracking the responses to therapy, but also just getting the right nozologies, the right way of
carving up various psychiatric conditions and their etiologies, because now you've got a naturalised
process theory under the hood. That's one kind of thing. The other direction of travel I think
in artificial intelligence, just actually building, see practically what the free energy
principle brings to the table is not really a pretty first principles account of existence
and sentient behaviour, but practically another strange inversion, another denit strange inversion.
Instead of having to, instead of having to understand the system in terms of its dynamics,
as you would with the complex system modelling, you're trying to understand the underlying mechanics
by saying, well, these dynamics, this set of, say, differential equations, looks as if it's
performing a gradient flow on this light who not functional, this Lagrangian. I'm going to try and
estimate what this underlying potential function is that causes my dynamics,
and it's best a simple explanation for the complex system I want to understand.
For me, of course, that's always going to be this surprise or the log marginal likelihood
or the free energy bounds on that. But what you can do is if you know the dynamics of your
complex system can always be expressed as a gradient flow on a free energy functional
of a gerative model, where the gerative model just scores or articulates characteristics states of
being that you want to emulate, then what you can do is you can just write down the free energy
functional of your preferred states of being and then just integrate the system to reproduce
the sentient behaviour that you would have seen if this thing existed and had these,
was attracted to these characteristics states. So it's a really powerful way of building machines
that look as if they exist in a particular way. Of course, that's the aspiration of machine learning
and artificial intelligence. So certainly in principle, you could deploy the free energy
principle in the context of building artifacts that do the right kind of belief updating by the
right kind. Of course, I mean being able to model their world where their world is basically the
world of users, basically you and me, which brings us to the third direction of travel, which is
the kind that Chris Fifth would like, which is the explicit acknowledgement that what is really
interesting here is this scale free application of the energy principle where you've got lots of
different free energy minimising self-evidencing Markov blankets, all living in Markov blankets
of a different scale in institutions, in theologies, in their ideologies, in your ethnic
bounds and all that. So how does that unfold and how do you get the right kinds of ecosystems
that have this joint free energy minimising behaviours that does not incur upon or require
certain Markov blankets to be vitiated or destroyed. So what we're talking about now
is a physics of an ecology that has sustainability at its heart or at its core, because the whole
point of the free energy principle, it's a description of systems that have an attracting set
and how they sustain themselves within that attracting set. So I would imagine that the
free energy principle will be useful and indeed pursuing this with colleagues versus AI,
so my colleagues in industry. This is one application of the free energy principle in the
service of underwriting in a principled way the aspirations of all right-minded people engaged
in designing the next version of the World Wide Web or artificial intelligence or information
services that speak not to growth but speak to sustainability that you're a biomimetic take
on sustainable ecosystems but in this instance ecosystems of intelligence. So that was a bit
hand wavy but it really is a fascinating game when you start to talk to people who are actually
in charge of engineering the next web. There really is so much potential. There's something
I wanted to ask and I forgot about it earlier but I was thinking about Markov blankets and how
they play this role to sort of just differentiate between let's say it can sort of play a role
between differentiating between a self and an other in a sense. Does it have any role or impact
when it comes to free will? How do you incorporate these ideas together?
Well, let me just join again. So, my self versus others.
Sorry, colleagues. Check the sound there. Is my sound good on your side?
My sound is good on your side. Your sound is good on mine.
Okay, good.
Do you hear me?
Yeah, I can.
Okay, thank you so much. I think you've got two good ideas now to return to that question.
So let's self and services of it. I don't know if that's a question we involved
but I don't know if that's a question. It was a second part of the question.
Sorry, Colin. Just having an issue with your audio.
Okay, are you okay?
Are you okay?
No, no, sorry. I was having an issue with your audio.
I couldn't hear you for a moment.
It's back. It's back.
Sorry, what did you do?
I was just having a problem with the second part of the question.
Okay, so what I mean is when you think of Markov blankets, they
end up in differentiating between themselves and another.
How is this possible? Is this the trade off the free energy principle and Markov blanket?
And what role does this have when it comes to
Right, yes. Thank you.
So self-care is very important.
You respected the free energy issue.
And that's what we did. We haven't covered any of our conversations.
It is the principle of review of people in a developed account.
And so you're feeling about early development and self-evidence.
Think of a new born child as to engage in the work out behind the world.
And of course, the first thing that we need to recognize when we're at work
is that another is not part of itself.
Who shall it say to be in the right sense?
Maybe it has to do with the big muscle.
It has to start with the nature of its choice.
I mean, you know, in terms of the nature of it,
well, I think what you're talking about is that there's no interaction as with Markov blankets.
So I think that we now, to that end of self-care,
that's the best that's going on in the rest of the world.
And you know, the notion of other things is a very special kind of product.
It is a mother now.
And so I think that's quite the notion of just having more than models of others.
I feel like it's really in the sense for an aspect of having a model of development.
Building estimations and illusions about all of the world and what's behind your model of development.
When you look at the world, that's what it seems like you know, not your mother.
So I would, I know that you know, and I think that's something else that you're going to do
when I was introducing you to Markov.
There are a lot of that with my toys.
So obviously, you know, you've got a lot of mental attention on the side of this, you know,
it's a hundred years from your side.
So I think it's certainly an exercise for the audience of that.
And of course, you know, given you as a master's, as soon as I assume,
I'm going to show you what my orders are.
Because I think it's going to be a lot of work there between modern and modern.
The world of model building.
I think it's the world of models.
So I'm just going to jump in a little bit.
And as part of this self-advocacy, I have access to everything,
everything, everything, including your children.
How the space needs to go in and out will work the world.
I think it's a great experience for me.
It's just a nice, cost-effective life.
I was interested in doing that.
I think that's a really important point.
And I think that was in terms of how you're going to do this on your side.
It's kind of like, you've got an additional structure and so on and so forth.
And I think it was interesting to know, because it's so much work we're talking about,
you know, in order to, you know, in order to have, you know,
in a sort of psychology sense, I have to be able to select oneself.
So what are the things that I'm going to select from?
Well, under the energy person, or at least under active influence,
only those things that have to go to models or their current and future,
can select on those kind of natural future.
And that's under their control.
So books and paper, which have that sound,
are only going to have to go to models and then contain
and cause circumstances in their plans and policies.
And in a position position, I think this is what I'm going to select.
So this is just, the statisticians are not going to be interested.
This is basically what I'm going to select.
But it's going to be applied in the context of selecting the right features.
For me, that's a nice use of the words, in the real world.
In the real world, employment, you know, in the real world,
is a kind of sense of what you're saying.
But notice it's only going to rise to age.
It's only going to rise to patients.
And that's how we're going to inject a model of that future.
So in order to survive this virus,
in order to make some thermostat,
I mean, it wouldn't try to be thicker.
And I think that would be kind of an experience.
So we don't know if there are some ways of using this in the basic level,
in terms of, you know, in terms of, you know,
I think what's more interesting, you know,
is the ability of the same agency and the self-governing
and the kind of science of, you know, the models and their work
and the bodies of people, you know,
looking at the system, that's what it's going to be.
I think that sort of brings me to something I wanted to ask you
from the very beginning.
With the free energy principle in mind,
what do you call is the meaning or purpose of life?
As well, as a physicist that doesn't really have too much of a,
that question has no meaning.
So from the point of view of physicists observing the universe
that was comprised of things,
all of the free energy principle is saying is that
if this universe is settling onto an attracting set,
and if they are all like a tractor,
then it must be the case that it is, on average,
maximizing the geo-being on its attracting of characteristic states.
It's just like rolling to the bottom of a hole.
That's it.
What way of reading that rolling to the bottom of the hole
that converges to the attractive set,
this in terms of a minimization of thermodynamic free energy?
The special claim that's brought to the table by the free energy principle
is the assertion of a Markov blanket.
Now you can read the minimization of thermodynamic free energy
in terms of a minimization of certain beliefs,
infants, where the beliefs are held by internal states,
but they are about external states.
So this is important to note.
I phrase it like that because of your purpose on the medium.
So the free energy principle gives you what people like a lamster costume
and an extra lamster for the core, a lazy mechanics,
which is exactly the same as physical mechanics.
Exactly the same as physical mechanics.
Exactly the same as quantum mechanics.
The only difference is that you've got a Markov blanket in the partition inside the outside.
So in this and only this situation,
when you talk about beliefs having a meaning about something else,
there is no something else unless you have a Markov blanket.
You can't get meaningful information in statistical mechanics.
It's just the probability of being in a state
whereas in the free energy principle, it actually requires beating now.
So this particular physical state has a meaning in the relation that represents
it is explaining its hypothesis about,
it is a model of this external state about something else,
this illusion of what might be out there.
So I think that the meaning of life,
if there is life in the sense of there being a Markov blanket,
there is emergent meaning and that means
internal dynamics of life.
And its meaning is established in the relation sense of the relation
of the internal sense making the measurement of your quantum physicist
of whatever is causing these donations and the sensations
that you are using to do your measurement.
So this is a model to follow the levy and the election quantum information theory
which I'm completely subscribed to.
And so that will be one way to do it,
because slightly more popular answers to the question would be,
well, what's the meaning in my life,
where I am one of these unique systems that has this capacity for agency
in the sense that I have very precise dynamics
and that I have the ability to model the consequences of my action.
In this very particular case where I can now infer what I am going to do in the future,
there is something called expected reality that gets eliminated.
So you can compute the probability of a particular narrative action trajectory
into the future as basically a softmax function of the expected free energy.
So the path into the future that has the lowest expected free energy
is the most likely path that I will follow.
And it will select very well.
I will select the path that has the lowest expected free energy.
What does that mean in expected free energy?
In the same way that you can express log evidence as equal to accuracy minus complexity,
you can express the expected free energy as the expected information
being minus the expected cost.
Where the cost is, it supplies the negative self-evidence
that scores a characteristic state.
So if you're in a very uncharacteristic or very poor or dead dissipating,
then that will be very surprising, highly costly.
So you've now got two like affordances or imperatives of amps that you will select,
which is what I am reading, the meaning of life to be.
What is my life meaning?
What is its purpose?
What is my purpose?
Well, it is the imperatives of the life, the things I choose to do.
What do I choose to do?
I choose those things that minimise my expected free energy.
What does that mean?
It means I will try to choose those things and maximise the expected information
of minimising the expected cost.
The excessive information gain is just curiosity.
So the meaning of life for me, assuming that I'm avoiding the most costly states of being,
is like, you know, don't put myself in danger of going out very much to control my life,
then the majority of I mean is the curiosity.
It's basically being a scientist.
I think that's a beautiful way to put it, Carl.
There's so many things I want to ask you about, but something I often love to ask my guess is,
and I think it's because this gives us an idea of how you were crafted as a thinker
and how you really developed as a thinker over time.
If you had to give us a Mount Rushmore of your favourite philosophers or scientists,
who comes to mind instantly?
Who are these people who really guided your thoughts growing up and made you the man you are today?
Because I'm pretty sure when people look at your work today,
from the time when time moves on, we're going to be talking about you have a feeling
the same way we talk about some of the greats.
And I think it would be great to know who inspires Carl Friston.
Right. Yeah.
Always a tricky question to answer.
One reason it's tricky is my hero is Sherlock Holmes, but Sherlock Holmes is not a real person.
I can't because he's my hero too.
I think that's a great option.
But I think the two people, when I read or reference with warm feelings and a tinge of
excitement, especially when I find their quotes, are Helmholtz and Feynman.
Look, the Helmholtz reference, that makes sense.
When you think of unconscious inference and all your work, it makes a lot of sense.
What about these guys really get you going?
Well, very much what probably gets you going about people like Mark Soames and possibly me.
He was a clear polymath.
If you just think about every move you make, or certainly every move I make in my little one,
in trying to naturalise psychology and psychopathology, and more generally,
what makes us tick, you come across some foundational idea or principle or decomposition
that he has brought to the table.
So you've mentioned the notion of unconscious inference.
I mean, that's just basically the Bayesian brain, as beautifully articulated by Peter
Diane and Geoffrey Hinton's Helmholtz machine in the early 90s.
So that's certainly one thing, but it doesn't stop there.
You look at his work in perception generally.
He had all the one aspect of illusionist thinking, at least, down to a fine art,
and anything that was worth saying at some point, even if you said it.
But more than that, of course, the Helmholtz notion of free energy and the contribution
to thermodynamics is also pretty central to what I'm the kinds of things I talk about.
Interestingly, right down to something called the Helmholtz decomposition,
which I suspect you probably won't know about if you're more interested in computational
psychology. So this is an expression of the fundamental theme of, what is it,
vector calculus? No, variation, I can't remember my part is.
Anyway, the Helmholtz decomposition just means that what you can do is describe any dynamics
in terms of two effectively orthogonal parts.
One part is dissipative and it climbs hills or climbs down hills, like the ball rolling down
the hill. This is the thing that generates energy. It's a thing that does basing belief
updating in an information theoretical energy principle context.
And the other part is called the conservative part, also in a solenoidal flow. And this part,
if you like, circulates upon isocontos or potentials or probability distributions.
So this is, if you like, can be read in many, many different ways. If you're an engineer,
it's a decomposition of procedures that you would use to simulate data or estimate
unobservable states to do inference as an engineer when using, say, a Kalman filter.
And you would have a prediction. So given my beliefs about states, the prior prediction about
what I'm going to sample next. And that will be the conservative solenoidal part. And then
you would have your update, which is basically a prediction error weighted by its precision,
which changes my prediction, my prior belief. And that's the, if you like, the, the
dissipative part. That's my engagement in the world. That's that was, that's what takes energy
and does the belief updating. But that is written down mathematically very beautifully
by the Helmholtz decomposition. And what it tells you is that if you've got this,
if by appeal to the Helmholtz decomposition, you've got this solenoidal flow, then you are
necessarily breaking something called detailed balance of the kind that you see in open systems
and non-equilibrium systems. So there's a direct mathematical mapping between the Helmholtz
decomposition and the class of systems that physicists use and study, which largely in
the past few centuries has been sort of systems, closed systems, equilibrium. In this century,
it's now all about non-equilibrium systems. And that non-equilibrium aspect is just due
to the conservative part of the Helmholtz decomposition. Also, it is exactly the thing
that makes us lifelike. It's what equips us with life cycles, with biorhythms,
with oscillations in the brain at every scale, on gammas, oscillations in our favorite hippocampal
dendrite through to our beating heart and respiration, through to our sleep wake,
diurnal cycles, through to our life cycles, through to the orbit of the heavenly bodies.
All of these, that's not quite a biological aspect, but certainly for biological systems that break
detailed bounds and have this particular kind of itinerancy, while still maintaining their integrity
and a free energy principle. Then you've got a description of biotic self-organization that
foregrounds oscillations and rhythms and recurrences, returning to the states I was once in,
which of course is part of this sort of keeping yourself within the characteristic states.
So I've gone on a little bit there about Helmholtz.
That's fine. You can see why you're such a fan of Helmholtz. I mean, it's clear.
You can see the joy in your face when you're talking about this, and it's very fascinating work
as well. It makes sense why this really gets you going. And Feynman, what about Feynman, really?
Because Feynman, I'm a huge fan of Feynman's work. Sometimes even for fun, I end up watching
Feynman lectures just to keep me calm at night. Yeah, it's the one sign, so to
that I can enjoy. My wife watches as well. My wife is a nurse and not into the physics.
But yeah, he's a very alluring personality. But if you didn't know this, it's possibly
worthwhile just saying out loud. I mean, the variational free energy was his invention.
So he was trying to, well, one reading of the history is that it was his invention.
You could have good arguments with Russian mathematicians that can get at compression
and free energy minimization from the point of view of algorithmic complexity via things like
soft induction and the like. And certainly there is a school of thought that really celebrates
that sort of compression view that is described by free energy minimization. But the Feynman view
is much closer to my academic training and inheritance. So what he was trying to do was to
solve exactly the impossible marginalization problem that people would try to solve if they
wanted to engage in exact base and inference, exact sense making, the exact statistics to
actually get a grip of the very best explanation of this metaphysical world, of course, doesn't exist.
But that's intractable in the same sense that he couldn't possibly integrate over all the paths of
small particles, say an electron would take in quantum electrodynamics. He couldn't possibly
normalize that probability distribution by integrating all the universe of paths an electron
could take. So what he did was to dissolve that problem by converting this inference
marginalization integration problem into an optimization problem. And he did it by creating
this band on the quantity he wanted to optimize, namely the log marginal likelihood, which is the
variational free energy. So that's all of the Feynman principle. It's greatest debt, I think,
but that's not quite fair on health health and everybody else runs through from a count through to
Bayes, all the way through.
Everybody, yeah, there's certainly people you couldn't mention, but anyway, certainly from
a technical point of view, that, you know, that, that, that, that ethical formulation is so beautiful.
And, you know, it is leveraged directly, certainly in my personal work and the way that I would
formalize the free energy principles, not the only way to, you know, you could read the free
energy principles as dual to James's maximum entropy principle. But in the, you know, when
read or written as a, you know, in its pathological form, that is really a homage to Feynman's original
conceptions. But as you say, he's such a delightful person to watch as well. And unlike me, he was
a committed smoker. So you love your cigars. I know that. I often think about that video of Feynman
where he's talking about a red flower, I think it was. And, and he says he's friend,
he's artist friend, looks at this, looks at this flower and then tells him, you as a scientist,
you're obviously going to break this down and ruin it. And he's like, no, no, no, it's actually
because I'm a scientist, I'm going to look at the cells beneath the flowers. I'm going to look at
every single flow of each atom. He's going to look at every single aspect of this flower in so much
great detail that it only increases in its complexity and beauty. And to him, the flowers far
more beautiful because of this. And that goes back to what we were talking about earlier. And I think
that's something that you guys have in common. Yeah. And with you, apparently with you.
It's beautiful because Feynman has that perfect way of blending the science with the art. And
that brings me to this question. I wanted to ask you, when are you going to make or write a book?
Because your work is so complex, to a point where most people really don't know how to approach it
when it comes to whether it's a neuroscientist, psychologist, physicist, if they don't understand
the work, they're going to find it very difficult. Have you ever thought of writing a book that is
a bit more for the layman out there? Yeah. No, I'm notoriously bad at writing accessible
photos of the kind I think would be required for a book. And so I'm probably not going to.
What I've found tends to work best is to have the next generation of people who are much more
fluent, usually either because they're sort of in a person facing kind of science like psychology
or medicine, or they've had a philosophical training. So I find these these people are much
better than I am at articulating in prose and narrative form and the ideas so they can write
the books. I did try once. So for the book called Robert Pryor, Robert Pryor, MIT Press,
who has been asking me for at least three decades, when I go into write the free energy
principle book, and he thinks he's got precedence because his surname is Pryor. So he thinks
any book that appeals to me especially the free energy principle has to be commissioned by him.
And he was absolutely right. But the problem is, the only stuff I can write is so
tortuous. And I have to say that, you know, as with the free energy principle itself,
with its emphasis on complexity minimization, namely providing a parsimonious explanation,
the free energy principle becomes simpler and simpler, the longer it marinates, certainly in
my head. So I've taken now every year now I write a paper describing how a simpler version and a
simpler version, that process will go on. At some point, it may be sufficiently simple to be
attractive to Robert Pryor or any other editor who invites me or asks me the question that you've
just been asking. My suspicion is I will probably be retired or die before that was derived.
So, you know, but there are some wonderful renditions of the free energy pro and con.
But certainly, most recently, the active inference book by Thomas Parr and Giovanna Pazzullo.
You know, I actually said there that, you know, I was allowed to write the forward but nothing else.
Yeah, that's okay. I was just about to ask you what are some of the reading recommendations. I
think that's definitely one. That's on top. That's actually a book that I want to read desperately.
And I cannot wait. If you had to recommend us any other books, what type of books
would you recommend to either increase our knowledge with regards to the free energy
principle or active inference in general, or just books that you find help a scientist,
philosopher in general to grow in this field? I'm afraid I'm not going to give you a very
good answer for that. There's a reason for that. There are two reasons. One, I don't have time to
read books. When you get to my age, you tend to be you get asked to write blurb for books.
So I have to speed read certain chapters of books, but I don't actually have time in my
working life to read books. I can only review papers and scientific proposals. That's even
working seven days a week. Any papers that come to mind? Oh, there are lots of papers. Yeah,
but I'm not going to tell you what they are because the people I don't mention will be very,
very upset. So I'm not very good at sort of reading books nor recommending books. So what I'm
going to do is what my father is. So he sometimes sends me books to read, which he thinks are good
for me. So I'm just going to mention the last one that I read, literally a couple of weeks ago,
which is Hel-Go-Land by Carlo Rovelli. I really like that. So that would I would certainly
recommend that. And I think that had Carlo written that last year, as opposed to I think
2014, there would have been more emphasis because the free-edged bridge is just that,
you know, that viewpoint, I think articulated slightly more in a classical setting, in particular
the pathogen formulation of Richard Feynman. And so I really enjoyed that. But otherwise,
if people are generally interested, there are lots of wonderful papers usually by philosophers,
usually by again, people like Andy Clark, Jacob Howe, and Maxwell Ramstead,
when he's wearing his philosophy hat. But there are also lots of really wonderful other.
But you can just go to a repository. So Baron Leitch has got a nice repository and GitHub
of his favorite FEP papers. There's something called the Active Imprints Institute run by Daniel
Friedman, that is dedicated to trying to organize the material in a pedagogical way.
They're actually writing now, I think, another Active Imprints book, which is an explainer
for Thomas's and Giovanni's Active Imprints book. So if you're interested, I think you go to the
people actually know how to teach them and articulate these ideas.
It's funny because one of the last people, well, this was actually a year ago now that I think
about it, who talks about hierarchical Bayesian brains and active inference. It was Lisa Feldman.
And one of the books, yes, exactly. And the book she recommended was Halkeland. And this was
just when the book came out. So it's funny that you both basically talk around the same topic
and recommend the same book. So it clearly is an impactful book in general.
Well, she's also written some very influential stuff in the emotional sphere. And there's now
quite a key player in the Active Imprints, certainly the emotional inference and
intercepted inference field, along with Anil Seth and Colin.
Just to close off, Carl, any theories of consciousness, the brain, that you feel
sort of go against the free energy principle? Anything that stands out that Cantor argues
this principle in a way that does sort of get you get your shield up?
No, I'm afraid not. But I think that probably affects the fact that I don't have a philosophical
training. So I don't, you know, I'm not used to adversarial progression, adversarial argumentative
approaches. Now, I don't, you know, the whole point of the free energy principle is it has to
explain everything or it explains nothing. So if there is a viable theory of consciousness out
there, there has to be some way of, if you like, reframing it or substantiating that right theory
by naturalizing it using the free energy principle. Remember, free energy principle can
never be wrong. So it doesn't need to defend itself. It's just a method or a tool, very much like
Hamilton's principle at least. I mean, inherently, unfalsifiable.
Yeah. Yeah. And I think just I'd like to say thank you so much for all your work. I
clearly supported in the fact that I quoted you a couple of times, referenced you numerous times.
So to me, it is replicable. It is work that a lot of us are using out there. So from my side,
I just want to say thank you so much, Carl. It's a pleasure. It's an absolute honor to actually
chat to you. And I really enjoyed this conversation. Well, so am I. You've asked some really
excellent questions. You've kept me on my toes, but also kept me smiling. Thank you very much.
