Mark, tell me, why is it that there is something it is like to be me?
Why is it that there is something it is like to be you?
How is this possible?
Well, there are two questions there.
The one is why there is something it is like to be me or to be you and the other is how is that
possible? The why question, I believe, has everything to do with the fact that the fundamental,
and I'll say fact and I'll have to substantiate that later, but it has everything to do with the
fact that the fundamental form of consciousness is feeling. In other words, affect. And affect arises
from a monitoring of our homeostatic imperatives. We living things have to remain within certain
viable bounds and simpler creatures have reflexive mechanisms which maintain them within those
bounds, but obviously reflexes have a limited generalizability. There are many situations
that living things find themselves in which are unpredicted by their evolutionary past.
And so they can't navigate uncertain or novel situations. And so most of them expire in those
situations, but a lucky few survive because they just happen by chance to do the right thing.
And then they have progeny. And so that contributes to the evolution of those reflexes.
There's therefore an enormous advantage, an enormous adaptive advantage for creatures to be able to
experience how they're doing. Is this going well or is this going badly? When acting voluntarily,
in other words, not reflexively, not automatically, they now can, by trial and error,
try different things out. And if it's going well, then they feel it. This feels like a relief.
And if things are going badly, the opposite applies. And so they avoid what feels bad and
they approach what feels good. And in this way, as I said a moment ago, they have the enormous
advantage of being able to navigate unknown, unpredicted, novel, uncertain situations.
And then to learn from the experience during life, rather than for it to require generations of
phylogenetic learning, in other words, learning by natural selection or rather adaptation by
natural selection. So I believe I, with others, it's not my own idea. This is a building on the
work, first of all, of Jack Panksepp, and secondly, of Antonio de Marzio and others. We believe
that that affects or an extent or feeling is an extended form of homeostasis.
There, you can see in what I've just said, there's an intrinsic value system. The value system of
all living things, the value system, which simply underwrites the whole of evolutionary
biology, is that it is good to survive and bad not to. So good feelings predict your
likely survival and bad feelings predict your likely demise. So that's the valence,
as we call it, the valence of effort, the unpleasant pleasure dimension. It is intrinsically
valenced, doing well and doing badly in order to make choices. And remember, that's what I'm
speaking about, the animal having now the capacity to make choices. In other words, to not behave
compulsively according to reflex. That capacity has to be rooted in a value system, because how
else do you make a choice? Something has to be better than something else. So there has to be
some value system which determines what's good and what's bad, and that's what I've just
explicated. Now, on top of that, we have multiple needs. We complex creatures have multiple needs,
but actually, you don't need to be that complex a creature to have multiple needs.
Like, for example, to have energy balance needs and thermoregulation needs and hydration needs
and oxygenation needs. There you have four. And each of these has to be met in their own right.
So you can't reduce them to a common denominator. You can't say, I have eight out of 10
need for sleep and a two out of 10 need for nutrition. Therefore, I have a 10 out of 20
total need. So all I need to do is sleep and I'll reduce the number and never eat.
You have to do them both. So why I'm emphasizing that is that this is something in addition to
valence. We also have categories of need. So valence is a continuous variable.
You can say from minus 50 to plus 50, that's the range of badness to goodness.
But the categorical variables that represent our different needs are by definition because
they're categorical variables. They are qualitatively distinguished from each other.
So this is why feelings have both a goodness and a badness and a particular quality so that
sleepiness feels different from hunger and from thirst and from respiratory distress and so on.
So when you said why is there something it is like to be me or to be you,
I believe in the most basic form of consciousness, that's why. It enables us to know how we're doing,
to have to evaluate how we're doing and it is necessarily qualified. In other words,
qualia arise from the fact that we have multiple such needs. Then there's the second step,
which is obviously the simple creatures that first evolve. When I say simple, I don't want to
be derogatory. They're not that simple as I think. But the first creatures that evolved
feeling, they weren't verbal so they wouldn't have been able to say what I'm now going to say.
But it's as if their feelings say I feel like this, it tells you how you're doing.
And then secondarily, it's a matter of I feel like this about that and so feeling gets extended
onto perception and cognition. So because you have to develop policies about what you're going to do
and so affect is the fundamental form of consciousness, which then gets extended onto
cognitive and perceptual consciousness, which gives rise to the forms that dominate our
conscious experience. Because our capacity to plan and think about what we're going to do is so
highly developed. The second part of your question about how does this happen? Well,
I've partly described the mechanisms of how it happens. But if you're asking about the hard
problem, in other words, how does physiological processes of the kind that I've just described,
how do they turn into? How do they somehow transform into subjective experiences?
That's another story. So you'll have to tell me if you want me to go into that.
Look, okay, there's so much to touch on. I mean, first of all, I just want to list this off for
the viewers. We're both in South Africa. This is quite cool because it's the first time I'm
actually chatting to someone in the same time zone. We're both in Cape Town. And just for everyone
who's wondering why the screens are dark on your side, it's because in South Africa, we have what's
called low chatting. Our country just does not give us electricity every now and then. So Mark's
on unfortunately on the one side of it right now, just for some context for the viewers.
But okay, Mark, let's go to the hard problem. I mean, I've read The Hidden Spring. I mean,
I've read The Neuropsychology of Dreams. Your writing is very fascinating. I like the way you're
sort of blending neuropsychology, neuropsychoanalysis into neurobiology and trying to link these fields
together. So you're definitely working at that interface between mind and body. So let's discuss
the hard problem. What are your thoughts on this hard problem of consciousness? Is there a problem?
I mean, this podcast is called Mind Body Solution because the aim is to find a solution to this
problem. Do you think we're able to find it using what your theory sort of claims?
Well, I don't claim to have solved the hard problem, but I do claim to have given us a
hint as to what direction we need to go in in order to be able to do so. So let me unpack that story.
I could do it in two ways. Let me preface it with the first way, and then I'll come to the
second way, which I'll tell you in more detail. I think that the hard problem arose because
we focused on visual perception as our model example of consciousness. In fact, I might go
further and say we focused on human visual perception as our model example of consciousness.
And of course, conscious vision has everything to do with cortex. So you have to start somewhere.
So let's start with Francis Crick's famous book from 1994. It was called The
The Astonishing Hypothesis, and the subtitle was The Scientific Search for the Soul.
And there he explicated a methodological program as to how we might go about
sort of saving the problem of consciousness from philosophy, rescuing it and bringing it into
international science. And he proposed this concept of the neural correlate of consciousness.
He said, all we need to do, consciousness is nothing special. It's just another biological
function. All we need to do is find the anatomical and physiological substrate of this function.
In other words, we need to identify its neural correlate. Once we've isolated that correlate,
we can start seeing, okay, well, how does this thing work? Because this must somehow explain
why there is something it's like to be you and me. That's a sort of reasonable,
commonsensical reductionist strategy. But the unfortunate choice, as I just said,
is that he focused on human vision. And I say it's unfortunate, but it's not difficult to understand
why. I mean, human consciousness is dominated by visual perception. And also, more cortex is
given over to visual perception than any other form. And we understand it rather well. So it seemed
like a reasonable place to start. Why I think it was an unfortunate place to start is, first of
all, you shouldn't start with human beings, the most complex form of consciousness. And cortex
is many, this is more fundamental point. The function of visual perception does not
require consciousness. You can have visual perception without consciousness.
So, when the very next year, after Crick's book was published, came David Chalmers' famous paper
in the Journal of Consciousness Studies, where he said, well, you know, why doesn't all this
information processing go on in the dark and etc. I don't need to tell you what he said.
But I think it was a reasonable question from Charles, precisely because visual information
processing can go on in the dark. So it is mysterious. Why does it have to feel like
anything at all? We know that not only the superior colliculae can see unconsciously,
but the visual cortex can see unconsciously and it can discriminate things like pretty elaborate
things like color. You know, you can discriminate color unconsciously. So why does it have to
be something it is like to experience red versus blue if you can discriminate them without
experiencing? Now that I do not believe applies to feelings. You can't have a feeling without
feeling it. And I've just explained to you why we feel our feelings. It is a necessarily
subjective monitoring of my own state with existential consequences for me. And it has
to have this goodness and badness, has to have value, and it has to have a categorical qualitative
differences. So had we started there, had we started with affects which are not
generated cortically, and that's another big story, they are generated in the
midbrain for the most part, but certainly they are generated subcortically in general.
Had we started with those much more ancient, much simpler structures, I think that the hard
problem would never really have arisen. I think it's to say, why must you feel pain?
Why must you feel hunger? This is mysterious. Why don't you unconsciously navigate uncertainty
and make choices of existential consequences within qualitatively distinctive variables?
And it just is when you describe that function, you're just describing a feeling. And feelings,
as I said, feelings have to feel like something, unlike visual perception, which does not have to.
So that's the first, I said I'm going to tell the story in two parts. That's the first part.
But let me now move from neuroscience to a more sort of philosophical perspective on this thing.
I said the question, the hard problem put in its most basic form,
as Searle put it, how does the brain get over the hump from electrochemistry to feeling?
How do electrochemical processes turn into feelings? Literally turn into them. What kind
of weird metaphysical transaction occurs there? And here I think the problem is that the physiological
processes do not turn into experiences. I think this is, remember I'm saying this is a philosophical
perspective. I think it's a matter of observational perspective on point of view. So if you look
at the processes going on in my brain, when I am feeling, let us say, excitedly motivated,
you will see activation of mesocortical mesolambic dopamine circuitry. And you literally will see
it. If you, for example, put me in a positron emission scanner, you will see that circuitry
lighting up. And you can use all sorts of methods to drill down into what exactly is going on
physiologically there. But that's looking at me from the outside. I mean, you are now looking
at me in the dark from the outside and you're seeing a body. And you can then start scanning
this body and you can see in more granular detail what's going on within it. But the crucial issue
is you're taking an external observational perspective on me. I, on the other hand, have
another observational perspective on me, that is being me. I am me. So I have another perspective
which is the subjective. Mark Psalms as a subject, as opposed to Mark Psalms as an object. So I can
look at myself in the mirror and I recognize, oh, that guy's me, it's Mark Psalms. But I could also,
when I first wake up in the morning before I've even opened my eyes, I can have this
dawning subjective experience of being me. And that's can only be described as my mind.
Then I stagger over to the bathroom, look at myself in the mirror, and that's my body. But
both of them are me. So, you know, they're not two of them. There's only one of them.
There's only one Mark Psalms. It's just that we're observing him from two different perspectives.
So to say how does my subjective experience of being me
produce the physical, or I should rather put it the other way around, how does the physiological
embodied version of me produce the subjective experience of me is like asking, you know,
how does something objective produce something subjective? Objectivity doesn't produce
subjectivity. They're two different perspectives. Now, if we are one and the same thing, you know,
then it's like, actually, let me use another analogy, lightning and thunder. You know, with
your ears, you hear a clap of thunder with your eyes, you see a flash of lightning.
They're two different things, you know, they're utterly different perceptions,
but they're not actually two different things. They're two different manifests. It depends what
perceptual perspective you take on it. Is it an auditory perspective, or is it a visual perspective?
We don't ask, it would be unreasonable to ask, how does lightning turn into thunder?
We realize these are two different ways of perceiving the same underlying process.
And then we ask, what is that underlying process? And then we start going into physics,
and we start speaking about, you know, geo-electrical potential differences in the atmosphere,
and that's the ultimate description of what's going on. The ultimate description is of the
causal mechanisms that we infer from the observable data. And that's how we come up with
the basic theory, a basic fundamental science of lightning and thunder, which is the theory of
electricity. And I think that that's what we need in neuroscience or neuropsychology. If we're going
to bridge the divide between the psychological and the neurological, between the subjective
and the objective perspectives on the being of a creature, then we need to find a more
fundamental language which explains both sets of phenomena. We don't want to ask,
how does the one set of phenomena cause the other set of phenomena, because they don't.
So what I'm saying in essence is that the hard problem is made a lot harder than it has to be
if we conceptualize it that way. If we ask the question, how does the brain get over the
hump from electrochemistry to feeling? It's a question that can't be answered because it's
wrongly framed. But if we ask, you know, what is it that produces both the electrochemistry and what
explains the behavior of the electrochemistry and the behavior of the feeling, then we have a
mechanistic theory. And I think that the prospects of finding such a mechanistic theory
are greatly increased by shifting our focus away from these very complicated visual
perceptual processes, which as I've already said, these cortical processes are way down the
evolutionary line. They're much later developments. They're a secondary application
of what feeling is for and what feeling does, and focus instead on the primary form of feeling
in the brain stem, which is, as I've also already said, an extended form of homeostasis.
Then we say, okay, so we have a fairly good clue as to what the mechanism is that we're looking
for. It's homeostasis with some version of homeostasis. And I think from that starting point,
obviously, there's a lot more that could be said about, okay, so then how do we do it? How does
homeostasis mechanistically, how does it explain the behavior of the predictive brain,
and how does it explain the experience of being an intentional being with calls and
aims and purposes and so on? I think that from that starting point, it can be done.
And my own efforts in this area have been along those lines, trying to begin to
sketch what this monist mechanistic causal explanatory process might be whereby
we have the particular physiology of consciousness and the particular phenomenology of it.
I'm glad you just mentioned monist. I was thinking, I mean, we spoke about some of the history of
philosophy. We spoke about David Chalmers and his 1995 paper. I mean, do you think Descartes,
René Descartes, when he started this question of this mind-body problem, when he started with
this dualistic approach, do you think that also had a big impact on the way we perceived this
problem in the first place? Very much so. And David Chalmers makes little
secret of his admiration for Descartes. I think, I mean, I wholly concur with the title of
De Marzio's famous book, Descartes' Error. It was a horrendous error. So the philosophy
that I find myself much more sympathetic with is that of Baruch Spinoza.
That, I think, is a great advance over Descartes. I'm actually going to chat to De Marzio about
in a couple of days. So I'm looking forward to that. But Mark-
They've been my best wishes. I'll definitely do so. I like him very much.
Yeah, so I'm looking forward to discussing Descartes' area in quite a bit of detail.
When you're looking at this brain stem, you're looking at this mid-brain, you're talking about
ancient consciousness. I know sometimes, because the main goal of this podcast is for me to provide
you, someone who has an excellent new thought process on this problem, to explain their view,
express themselves openly, and to also address any objections people might have to their theory.
But when you talk about the ancient brain, do you feel that's giving people a sort of a misconception
on what you mean by ancient consciousness? Because I feel like I've read blogs, I've read
a couple of things where people think you're taking it too far. I've talked to some scientists about it,
some philosophers, and they think you're taking it too low. But yet you're explaining exactly why
the cortical versions of this are not the same. Do you think that they're mistaking consciousness
with intelligence? I do very much so think that, although I don't deny that
very simple creatures like a bacterium has an intelligence. It's obviously, it's nothing like
our intelligence. And it's a perfectly understandable state of affairs
that we start with human consciousness. Well, we are human for one thing. For another thing,
the problem of other minds dictates that the only form of consciousness we can ever observe
directly is our own. So it's not an unreasonable place to start. It's not hard to understand
why we began there. But it's quite a different thing to say that therefore human consciousness
is the definitional form, that anything which doesn't conform to our type of consciousness
isn't really consciousness. You started this podcast by asking me the question,
why is there something it is like to be me? That is, of course, Chalmers' definition,
building upon Tom Nagel's definition from 1974. It's notoriously difficult to get
a neuroscientist or, for that matter, anyone to agree on a definition of consciousness.
But I think if there's one definition that has more or less united us, it is that it is something,
it is likeness. It is qualia. That's what we mean by consciousness. And so there's nothing
complicated about that. It doesn't have anything more in common with Descartes thinking
than it does in common with the raw feel of pain. There is something it is like to feel pain.
So when you say I'm going too far, philosophically speaking, all I'm saying is I want to define
consciousness as something it is like to be in that state. There is something it is like to be
in that state. And that's not a controversial definition of consciousness. And then I'm saying,
well, there is something it is like to be in pre-verbal, non-verbal states of raw ethic,
like pain. I find it very hard to imagine how anyone could argue against that.
There is something it is like to be hungry. There is something it is like to be thirsty. There's
something it is like to be in pain. There's something it is like to experience separation
distress with which all mammals experience and display. There's something it is like to feel
fear. And you don't need to be able to reflect upon the source of your pain. It's a very,
very great advantage to be able to. But you don't have to have any theory of pain or any
explanation of pain or any knowledge of pain as mechanisms, etc. Or even just know anything about
what caused me to feel this. All you just need to know is I feel it. That is, I think,
very defendable position. That's what we mean fundamentally by a conscious state.
I grant, of course, that these higher forms of consciousness add all kinds of bells and whistles.
And I'm very grateful to be the proud possessor of all of those bells and whistles. And I don't
want to forego them. So therefore, I'm well aware that they add a hell of a lot more.
But I don't think it's the right place to start if you're wanting to understand the basic mechanism
whereby something it is likeness appeared on this planet. How and why it evolved,
that creatures started to quote Tom Nagel. He said that something like, I'm paraphrasing, but he said
an organism is only conscious if there is something it is like to be the organism,
something it is like for the organism. That's a compelling definition for me of what consciousness
is. I mean, in terms of everything else we do in biology, we take an evolutionary
perspective. We try and understand how this thing evolved, why this thing evolved,
what does it add? What does it do? That's why once it evolves, it gets conserved because it
continues to perform that function. And that function bestows such enormous additional
survival potential that it just hangs around. Now, you've got to look at the arguments.
So I've just given you in principle arguments about why I think that's a fine place to start.
In fact, to me, the obvious place to start, although I can understand why we started in
another place, I think that it was a mistake in retrospect. And now we can correct that
mistake and start in a better place. But it's not just a matter of principles. It's also an
empirical matter. When you start looking scientifically at what is the minimal architecture
for consciousness, and you can start with human beings even. If you produce
not deliberately, so let me rather say, if it so happens that you suffer a lesion in the
reticular activating system, that lesion can be as small as two millimeters cubed. In other words,
the size of a match head, if it's in the parabrakeal complex, the right part of the parabrakeal
complex, that will produce a coma. In any and in every human being, fish's analysis of all of the
scans of stroke, trying to identify what is the common denominator, what area is always lesion
in patients in coma. It's a small two cubic millimeter area of the parabrakeal complex.
So that wipes out something it is likeness, reliably. I mean, my prediction is
lesion that area, the animal will go into a coma, bingo, it always happens. The prediction is
confirmed each and every time. Now, by contrast, what about the cerebral cortex?
The cerebral cortex, in fact, since the 1880s, has been removed in experimental animals with gay
abandon. And even in the 1880s, it was already observed that goats, for example, did it in dogs.
The dogs didn't go into a coma. They became what goats described as idiotish. In other words,
they became stupid. They lost their knowledge, their understanding of the world.
But they still behaved purposefully. And I'm telling you about goats. But since then,
for decades, decortication has been performed on innumerable mammal species. And if it's done
neonately, the observation is always the same, that they play, they show fear, they get enraged
in situationally appropriate ways. They copulate with each other. They rear little
pups to maturity. I mean, not perfectly, but they do. They play, they hang from bars, they swing
around. In fact, Yark Panksyth used to, he performed a little sort of experiment. It's not really an
experiment, but each of his new cohort of graduate students, he would show them two groups of rats
in two different cages. The one group had been decorticated. And the other group had had a sham
decortication. In other words, they had the little bandage on their heads, but they hadn't had the
operation. And he asked them which of these two groups has no cortex. And every year, he had the
same result, that the students identified the animals that were intact as being the decorticate
ones. And he said, why? And they said, because the other ones are more lively. In other words,
in reality, the decorticate rodents are more lively. They're more emotionally expressive.
That's because they don't have the cortical modulation. But now we're talking about rodents
and dogs and whatnot. What about human beings? If the cortex was the seat of consciousness,
then there's an easy prediction, which is that we don't do neonatal decortication in human beings,
but sadly, they are neonates who are born with no cortex. And this is a condition known as
hydranencephaly. And the prediction would be, if the cortex was the seat of consciousness,
that these kids should be in a coma. They got no cortex. At the very least,
they should be in a persistent vegetative state. But that's not what you observe.
They are not vegetative. The vegetative state is also called non-responsive wakefulness.
Non-responsive wakefulness. These kids are utterly responsive. And just as I described for the
for the animal studies, they are responsive. They are emotionally responsive in situationally
appropriate ways. In other words, you tickle the child that she laughs. You frustrate the child,
she arches her back and complains. You give the child a fright and she startles. And they show
behavioral initiative. They approach things that they like and they avoid things that they don't
like. Anybody who has studied these children seriously, they come to this conclusion. People,
philosophers who are all skeptical about this, I really invite them to just interact with these
kids. It's very, very difficult to sustain the argument. So I was saying it's very hard to sustain
the argument that these kids are not conscious if you actually interact with them. But it is
ultimately because of the problem of other minds, it's ultimately a matter of inference.
And what my colleagues say, I mean, when I say colleagues here, I'm not only referring to
philosophers, there are many neuroscientists who are very skeptical about the claim.
The claim, I hasten to add, not only me, a good many of us who actually have interacted with
these kids find it very hard to believe that they're not conscious. They are feeling creatures
who behave in every way like feeling creatures. The argument that is made against this is we
cannot know for sure that they are not just reflexes. Well, remember what I said about reflexes
at the beginning of our discussion. In reflexes, there's an entirely predictable response. There's
no variation. There's no trial and error. There's no intentionality. This is not what you see in
these kids. It's also not what you see in the deco ticket animals. So anyone who knows anything
about how the reflexes of the nervous system work know that what you see here ain't reflexes
or instincts. They are not reducible. I mean, they are dominated by instincts. That's true.
These kids are not like you and me, but they show goal directed intentional
purpose and voluntary behavior. If you read the descriptions by the pediatric neurologists,
you've studied these kids and the neuroscientists who've studied these kids, you see the detailed
evidence for that. But you can't be sure, say my colleagues. Let me just hasten to add,
you can't be sure that your pet dog is conscious. You can't be sure that your pet cat is conscious.
You can't be sure that anyone other than you yourself are conscious. And then the argument
is given, well, reportability gets us out of that problem. It's true that our dogs and cats
can't report their conscious state. So there's room for skepticism there. But
Tevin Naidu and Mark Solms can say, there's something that is like to be me. Let me tell
you what I'm experiencing right now. I'm experiencing X, Y and Z. I don't know why that's
considered such wonderful evidence, because a robot can do that. A robot can report its states.
You can write a very simple program. Just say, whenever you're in this, that or the other mode,
say, I'm experiencing it. But how do you know it really is experiencing it? So I don't think
reportability is, I mean, by the way, on the reportability thing, we're saying not only that
our dogs and cats aren't conscious, we're saying that our preverbal kids aren't conscious, humans.
Exactly. So we need better ways of deciding the question. When you go on the internet and you're
trying to access something and it wants to know that you're not a robot, it doesn't say, please
tell me, please declare you're not a robot. It gives you an ambiguous situation, a problem,
and you have to navigate some uncertainty there and solve the problem. Why is that the case?
Declaring your states was such a wonderful method for determining the presence of consciousness.
Yes, because that does seem to be the case. Sorry, did you want to add to that?
Well, sadly, I have a lot to add to it. So let me rather let you get a word in
edge of this. You can continue. I'm enjoying listening. So what I do, what I say to my
colleagues is, okay, well, let's take, you guys don't claim that the whole of cortex is the seat
of consciousness. The general view is that there's all this information processing going on there,
which is then accessed by some sort of overarching global workspace or
something of the kind. And where is this thing located? Well, the standard argument is
prefrontal cortex. The other well known or widely held position, which is I think
probably a better one, is that it's insular cortex. I say better because insular cortex
has to do with feelings, which I've already told you is the basic, in my view, form of consciousness.
But if the prefrontal cortex were that and many people say this, I mean, my dear colleague and
friend Joe the dude says that that all of this stuff, you know, he's an expert on
sub cortical affective circuitry, specifically fear circuitry, and specifically the amygdala.
And he says all of that stuff going on the amygdala is unconscious until it is
read out by the cortex. Literally, he uses the word label. In other words, until you can have this
concept, I am feeling fear, you're not feeling fear. So what happens if you remove, again, we
don't do it experimentally, but it happens in nature that there are patients with no prefrontal
cortex. In fact, I'll tell you, it's not unusual to have patients with large prefrontal cortical
lesions. On Joe the dude's view, they should be less affective, they should be less emotional
consciousness. But there's more. I mean, since since Phineas gauge, we've known frontal patients
have too much emotion. But I have a patient case W, who has no prefrontal cortex whatsoever.
And he not only is he like all such patients or frontal patients, you know, he's hyper emotional.
He's very overwhelmed by his feelings. Not only that, but you know, he he answers questions that
I put to him about what is it like to be you. I asked him to imagine a scene in his mind,
which had to do with, I said, imagine you have two dogs and one chicken. Can you picture them?
He says, yes, I said, now tell me, can you count their legs and tell me what the total number of
legs are? And the answer, of course, is 10, two dogs and one chicken. So to my great disappointment,
because I was trying to prove this is there's somebody home, you know, he's there with mental
imagery and you can and you can experience it. To my great disappointment, he said eight. The answer
was eight. I said eight. He said, yes, the dogs at the chicken. So, you know, no prefrontal cortex,
there's a sentient being there. And Domazio reported a case, patient B, who had absolutely
no insular cortex. And the same thing. Domazio interviewed him about, you know, and the patient
keeps on referring to me and I and I, yes, of course, I have a mind and yes, I'm experiencing this.
And Domazio's patient also had heightened affective feelings, not a reduction in affect,
which is what but Craig's theory, but Craig is the guy who said, you know, the insular is the
is the is the seat of the fundamental form of consciousness. Well, Domazio showed that with
no insular cortex, you still have feeling. I showed with no prefrontal cortex, you still have
feeling and you have sentient being reportable conscious states. So then my colleagues say,
well, it's due to the remaining cortex. So you see, I can't win because they say,
the case with no cortex, they can't declare this. So therefore, we don't know. So I say, well,
let's take this with no prefrontal cortex, say, well, maybe it's posterior cortex take one with
no posterior cortex, maybe it's anterior cortex. So that's now now I'm near the end of my argument,
which is that so let's look at other methods other than lesion methods. So if if the feelings are
actually generated in the subcortical structures, I mean, literally in other words, they're not
being read out by cortex, because everybody knows, of course, these affective mechanisms are
subcortical, but the idea is they're not conscious until they read out by cortex. So
if that were the case, then if you if you take, for example, positron emission,
tomographic images of human beings who are in intense affective states, which they can report.
So they say, I am feeling really sad. I am feeling absolutely joyous. I am feeling
trepidatiously fearful or I am feeling really angry. Each of those four states. And I'm not
just saying I am feeling I mean, people who really are in the grip of intense affects,
if you scan them with pet imaging, what is the prediction? If it if it's if it's the if it's
the brainstem and the and this limbic circuitry arising from it, that is responsible for those
affects, then that's where you should see the highest rate of metabolic activity. That's
that's what we that that seems to be an acceptable method for everything else in neuroscience. So
you know, so yeah, we're saying if the if the greatest if the if the hot spots are in the
brainstem, then that's where the state is being generated. And that's exactly what you find.
If you if you image people in intense affective states, you see intense arousal of brain upper
brainstem structures and the circuits, the limbic circuitry, but not cortex. You know,
now what about another method? So in other words, the prediction is confirmed. Yes. Now what about
another method deep brain stimulation? The prediction is if the if the affects are generated
in the brainstem, you know, then if you generate if you stimulate those structures that you are
saying are generating the affects, in other words, reticular activating system, the prediction is
you will stimulate you will generate artificially and intense affect and and conversely, you won't
if you stimulate cortex. And that's what happens. You know, you stimulate cortex, you get just about
no affects. And when you do, it's they really thought they're not affects, they kind of remembering
this time that I was a bit down. But you stimulate this, when I speak about a bit down, stimulates
substantial I grew you produce within five seconds, depression, clinical depression,
like suicidal depression. You know, and you switch off the stimulator, 90 seconds later,
the person is out of the depression. And I'm talking about reticular activating system,
but it's not only reticular activating system, it's periaqueductal gray, periaqueductal gray,
which is which is in the mid brain use is a greater variety of affects generated by stimulating
the periaqueductal gray than any other brain structure, and the greater intensity of affects.
So that's a third method. So the lesion method, you know, you added to the functional imaging
method, you added to the to the deep brain stimulation method, then there's also pharmacological
probes. If you, it's no accident that the major psychiatric drugs, the psychopharmacological
agents that form the main stay of clinical practice these days, they are like like antidepressants,
SSRIs, what are they doing? They are increasing serotonin. Where is serotonin sourced? It's
sourced in the reticular activating system, in the RAF nuclei. Where is dopamine, you know,
anti-psychotics, blocked dopamine, where is that sourced? Apart from the substantia nigra,
which I mentioned earlier, the type that's important for psychosis is sourced in the
ventral tegmental area, which is part of the reticular activating system. Noradrenaline sourced
in the locus serudius complex, you know, you modulate noradrenaline, or you block noradrenaline
to block anxiety. So if these nuclei, you know, are the targets, or at least the source cells
of the neurons, the cell bodies of the neurons that are targeted by all of these psychopharmacological
agents, they're all in the reticular activating system, this tells us something. So I'm saying,
I'm sorry, I'm speaking so much, Devon, let me just come back to my main argument, which is that
it's not when people say moxomes is going too far to say, well, you know, these brainstem structures
and simple effects are the model example of consciousness. I told you in principle why I
think effects are the right model example. And then I said, and empirically, you know, you look at
all of the evidence, all of the evidence speaks to speaks for the conclusion that actually effects
are generated there, where in the part of the brain that we've known since 1949 is the is the
basic prerequisite for all other forms of consciousness. The only problem is in when
Magun and Maruzzi discovered that, and nobody disputes it, that it is prerequisite, you can't
have a conscious cortex unless it's activated by the reticular activating system. When they
discovered that they said, yes, but the reticular activating system produces around produces,
what did they call it, the level of consciousness, quantitative sort of like volume of consciousness,
but it hasn't got any phenomenal content. And that's what I've just shown you isn't true.
It has phenomenal content, the content I grant you is not cognitive, but it is affected.
There's something it is like to be in those states that I've just described. Therefore,
they are qualitative states, they're not just quantitative states, and they have content,
the content is the feeling of pain versus the feeling of hunger versus the feeling of
sleepiness. That's the content, that's what those states are about. So if the upper brainstem was
only about some quantitative dimension, the level of consciousness, it would only be of interest to
and anesthetists. It's the characteristics of tinkering with those circuits.
So there you have it. In essence, we've used this clinical
differentiation between contents of consciousness versus the level of consciousness,
but you're clearly showing that in essence, they're both very much linked. I mean,
they're one and the same, in a sense. Whether your level of consciousness is slightly lower in
terms of, let's say, a GCS scale doesn't necessarily mean that the person doesn't have
effective qualitative experiences. I find it's a totally artificial distinction.
There is no such thing as, I mean, how can you have blank consciousness? What is a blank
consciousness? So you can't be conscious without being conscious of something. I mean, we've known
that since Brent Arno. So I think that that distinction drawn by Maguna and Maruti all those
decades ago was because they were so completely flabbergasted by their finding, which remember,
they weren't in any way expecting that if you disconnect the cat cortex from the cat
reticular activating system, there is no more conscious cat. The cortical consciousness
cannot just disappear without reticular arousal. And so it was a way, because everybody knew that
the cortex was the seat of consciousness, they had to explain this somehow. And so they came up
with this totally artificial distinction between this waking state, which is contentless,
and then the phenomenal qualities and contents that the cortex had.
That's what I like about your book as well, is that you do do that. You show different methods
of how you can prove this and predict what your theory claims. Because ideally, that's what we
want in a scientific theory of anything you want. So you want different ways of proving the same thing,
which is what you've basically shown in many ways. What I find very fascinating Mark is that
other neuroscientists, like let's say, for example, Michael Graziano, he also pays a lot of attention
to the tecton optic tecton, which we call the superior colliculus. But then they draw completely
different conclusions. They regarding, I mean, he uses this as the attention schema theory,
where we're building models of attention, but we're not really aware in the sense that we have
qualia. We rather introspectively conclude that we have this. So I still find it quite fascinating
that some people are using similar brain regions and brain structures and drawing different conclusions.
What are your thoughts on that? Yeah, but let me clarify there. I don't disagree with that.
The optic tecton or superior colliculi, they are receiving information from the sensory end organs,
sensory motor end organs. But that doesn't mean that that information is conscious.
I mean, the famous example is blind sight with the cortically blind cases,
who nevertheless can navigate an obstacle course. They are completely unaware that they're seeing
anything, and yet they can avoid things that are in their way. And the most widely accepted
explanation for that is, it's because the optic tecton is processing the information
unconsciously. I'm fine with that. It's unconscious. And it also receives auditory information and
somatosensory information and so on. So these kids, for example, the hydran and cephalic kids,
the reason they're able to respond to their environments is because they're receiving
information about the environment from their sensory epithelium. But it is unconscious.
Then it evokes a feeling in them. All they know, all they experience on the evidence available
to me, it leads me to the conclusion that I don't think I can claim that they experience
anything more than just a feeling. They don't have to know what the feeling is about, where it came
from, what made me feel this, what is the thing out there in the world. It's not necessary.
So I'm saying, because remember the superior colliculi, well, the whole of the tecton,
the superior and inferior colliculi, the whole of the tecton is absolutely adjacent
to the periaqueductal grade. So all of the, well, not smell, but all of the other
senses of projecting unconscious visual auditory somatosensory information to the tecton.
And that in turn is coupled with all of the homeostatic mechanisms that we've mentioned
at the beginning of our discussion. All of the homeostatic mechanisms, the affect mechanisms,
including the emotions, because they are bodily affects and their emotional affects,
they all send their residual error signals to the periaqueductal grade immediately adjacent
to the tecton. So it's something like where things stand now in the outside world,
which is not consciously registered, and where things stand now from the
endogenous perspective of the organism. And then the feeling is about those things,
but the feeling is all that the creature experiences. You then need higher
structures, the thalamocortical structures make it possible for that feeling to be applied to
a stabilized, because the tecton is just like a sort of salience map. It's an attentional,
I agree with that description of it, but the cortex has the stabilized, detailed mappings.
It's not only that they detail the mappings of the outside world,
filtered through a lifetime of experience of it, because cortex is memory space,
but it's also that it can be held in mind in working memory. So you can actually,
okay, I feel like this about that. So what am I going to do about it? That's what the cortical
consciousness adds. And perhaps even more important than that is that you can then manipulate
those representations virtually. In other words, you don't only have to feel your way through
the world here and now by trial and error, bearing in mind that trial and error involves
errors which are costly. So thinking where you have virtual representations of if I were to do
that, what would happen? And if I were to do the other thing, what would happen then? And feeling
you feel your way through these virtuals and all of this is what cortex adds. And I keep on saying,
I'm very grateful to have that. And I recognize that that is a way more complex form of consciousness
than the elementary form. But for all the reasons I've already said, I think that the elementary form
nevertheless is the right place to start and the elementary form nevertheless qualifies as
consciousness defined as there being something it is like to have it. What I really like is that at
some point, I mean, when you're talking about homeostasis, you're talking about how we're trying
to figure this out and quantify a lot of these qualitative experiences, your work then somehow
links with a lot of Karl Frister's work. And I mean, Karl Frister is definitely one of the
I mean, he's the most cited neuroscientist on the planet, I think. And your work seems to coincide
quite well. Do you want to touch on that? Because I find that very intriguing, the way you guys have
linked up, I read the paper that you guys did together as well. And I even used a part of my
dissertation that you were very generous to help me with. But let's touch on that a bit.
So, I said earlier that I'm a dual aspect monist. In other words, I think we have two different
ways of observing the mental instrument. You can look at it from the outside as an organ.
You can look at it from the inside as a phenomenal state of mind. But these two things are
reducible to one causal mechanism. And that is something you infer from the data of observation.
And I said that if you accept that the elementary form of consciousness is feeling,
and that feeling is an extended form of homeostasis, then you have a rather simple mechanism.
You have a good place, a tractable place to start, because homeostasis is not difficult to
understand. And so, Carl Friston published a paper in 2013 in one of the journals of the Royal
Society. It's called Royal Society Interface. And the paper was titled Life as We Know It,
and which is a wonderful title. And in that paper, he basically explicated in ordinary
physical terms, by which I mean physical mechanics. How does homeostasis work?
And so I said to him, upon reading that paper, the mechanism of homeostasis, which you so beautifully
reduced to equations in that paper, if consciousness is an extended form of homeostasis,
and by the way, all those brainstem nuclei are not all of them, but I mean the fundamental
homeostats of the human body are sort of like hypothalamus and midbrain. And I said it should
be possible to extend then these mechanistic accounts that you provide of homeostasis
count of feeling. So that's what the paper that I wrote with him was about. So that's background
to move a little bit further forward. So as everyone knows, so I'm not going to
go into this chapter in verse. Friston has the flag that he's tied to, his mast is the
free energy principle, which is basically a statement of that self-organizing systems,
systems which persist, which continue to exist, they have to do something to continue to exist.
This is what distinguishes, I'm not saying all self-organizing systems are living systems,
but all living systems are self-organizing systems. And what distinguishes living systems
from non-living ones is that they oppose the second law of thermodynamics. In other words,
they don't just dissipate, they have preferred states, and they work to stay in those states,
and that's how they stay alive. In the end, the second law wins. We don't stay alive forever,
but the whole essential feature of living systems is that they are acting on their
environments in such a way as to increase their chances of carrying on existing as systems.
So the free energy principle is just a formal understanding of the mechanisms whereby that
work, how self-organizing systems resist entropy. And by the way, when I said not all
self-organizing systems are living systems, that's a good thing because living systems
evolve from non-living systems. So the fact that we can have a physics that explains this basic
type of system, which then became the living system, is a necessary thing. We have to be able
to explain life in terms of things that were around before life came into existence. And by the
way, the same applies to consciousness. Life evolved long before consciousness evolved. So
there must be something, it must have been constructed out of ingredients that were already
there. And I'm saying self-organizing systems provide us with those ingredients. So the free
energy principle explains that how self-organizing, it formalizes the mechanisms whereby
self-organizing systems in order to continue it to exist, they have to minimize their free energy,
which is basically the same thing as to say they have to have a model of the world,
because how else can you act in that world to maximize your chances of surviving? So it's a
predictive model. It's a model that if I were to do that in the world, this would be the sensory
consequences. That's how I maintain homeostasis. So if my sensory state is I'm moving out of my
homeostatic bounds, I'm getting too hot, I'm getting too thirsty, then I must do that. I must
get out of the kitchen or I must drink some water. That will bring me back into my viable bounds.
So that's the basic and the free energy principle says to the extent that what you predicted will
happen in consequence of your actions, to the extent that it does not happen, that's called
surprise. The average surprise basically is free energy. In other words, you must be using your
energy, you must bind your energy into actions which lead to the outcomes that you require in
order to survive. Free energy, in other words, energy that is not being efficiently used,
must therefore be minimized. In other words, the gap between what you expect to flow from your
actions and what actually flows from your actions, that gap must be minimized. So that's the whole
of Friston's work basically just boils down to that. I mean, I don't want to diminish it. It's
absolutely genius, you know, but that principle explains homeostasis and it explains the goal
directed behaviors, the allostatic imperative, you know, in order to maintain within my homeostatic,
remain within my homeostatic bounds, I have to do things in the outside world and I have to have a
good understanding of how the outside world works in order for me to know what things to do.
And while I'm busy learning that, I make lots of mistakes and I slowly improve my predictive model
in order to minimize those mistakes, that's what the whole of cognition is for.
And what is cognition therefore doing? It is serving the free energy principle. In other
words, it's minimizing homeostatic errors. It means that in other words, it is reversing negative
effects and turning them into positive effects. So affect, which is the demand for mental work,
is a demand for predictive work. And the predictive work is what our cognition is all about.
So I've given you a very broad brush stroke sketch there, but that's what we worked out
together in that first paper that we wrote together, which I then expanded into my book.
It's showing that, you know, I said, I don't believe that we've solved the hard problem,
but I believe we've given a good clue as to which direction we should be going in.
That is a monistic account. It's a tractable, quantifiable, statistical, mechanical account
of the machinery of the mind and brain, which is an information processing machinery in the service
of minimizing free energy in order to maintain the organisms within their viable bounds
so that they can survive. That's it. So you're taking a physicalist,
monist account of this. What are your thoughts on then other theories of consciousness?
In terms of philosophical theories, let's take panpsychism, for example, or idealism. What are
your thoughts on those types of theories? I think panpsychism is a little easier to deal with than
idealism. So let's start with the problem of other minds, which is the big problem when it
comes to consciousness science. It really is. Because conscious states just are subjective states,
you can only ever know your own. So we start there. This might be considered a really simplistic
argument against panpsychism, but it's the one that I start with. I can't know whether computers
are conscious and tables are conscious and walls are conscious and rocks are conscious.
I do know I'm conscious. So now am I conscious of everything that's going on inside of me?
No, I'm only conscious of things that are going inside of my brain. The brain states are only
conscious of other bodily states to the extent that those other bodily organs are represented
in the brain. So the brain, and this is not just a common sensical argument, it's an
empirical demonstrable fact. You never lose consciousness by removing any part of the body
other than removing the brain. If you lose consciousness by removing the heart, it's because
the heart is no longer perfusing the brain, etc. So it's like clearly the case that consciousness
is in the brain. And so all of the other bodily processes are not conscious.
Empirically, I can tell you that in my own case. There's the only way I get to know about,
and there's a hell of a lot of processes which never become conscious, like blood pressure
regulation, for example. It's going on all the time. Thank God for that. But there's no
conscious. Why is there no consciousness involved in that, by the way? It's because it's entirely
predictable. You can't leave that to reflexes. There's no novel situations there that you have
to feel your way through. So panpsychism, if you take as your starting point, well, the only thing
I can know empirically is what I'm conscious of. Well, I know even in my own case, there's a hell of
a lot going on within the outer surface of this thing called marxons that marxons is not conscious
of. So you could start then saying, well, of course, it is possible that your muscles are
conscious of themselves and they're not reporting it to you. And then you should start getting into
into Never Never Land because, yeah, that's possible. I mean, anything's possible. It's
possible that pigs can fly, but I've never seen one. And so that's my argument against panpsychism.
Now, I'll take, that's a very simplistic argument because it's, and I start with that one because
it's an empirical one. It's the only empirical one because you have to start in your own case,
even within the brain, Tevin, there's a hell of a lot of brain activity,
brain structures, which the activity of which we never become conscious of.
So consciousness seems to be something quite special, limited to very particular kinds of
structures. And so then that's another argument, another way of tackling the problem of panpsychism
is you say, well, let's look at the mechanism, what these parts of the brain
that we know are generating conscious states like these homeostatic brain stem mechanisms.
Let's look at what, you know, what they're doing. There's a very particular kind of
functionality there, a very specific mechanism, which is not, you know, you don't find it in
everything. There are many things which exist, which are not displaying active inference. In
other words, they're not, they're not trying to model their environments in order to, in order
to persist. And, you know, if that is the mechanism of the one and only knowable form of consciousness,
which is ours, you know, we know that the brain stem mechanisms that generate our
consciousness, they seem to be doing this kind of thing, we can then look to every other creature
that has similar mechanisms, which by the way is all vertebrates, and we can make testable
predictions. We can say, I predict if I stimulate dorsal periaqueductal gray in a zebrafish,
you know, it won't like it. It will avoid the stimulus. If I stimulate the ventral periaqueductal
gray in a zebrafish, it will like it, and it will approach the stimulus, and the prediction is
confirmed. So, you know, that's, that's, that's, and that happens every time in every creature that
has the same architecture as us, that we know generates affective basic feeling states in us.
All the evidence suggests that they're doing the same thing in these other creatures,
and also that they can make choices, you know, that the behavior of the animals is consistent
with our understanding. And then there are other creatures which don't have the same
architecture, like cephalopods and insects and so on. There, I'm less sure that they're conscious.
You know, I'm not saying they're not, I'm just less sure. And I use the criterion of, well,
can they make choices? Can they feel their way through a novel situation and survive it? And
they can. So, you know, well, possibly they're conscious too. But there are many creatures,
simpler creatures, like bacteria, whose behavior is completely predictable. There's, you see,
no new ideas coming from a bacterium, you know, the only way that they, that they advance is,
is through over generations, through, through natural selection. There's, there's, there's no,
there's no new problem solving, you know. So I'm saying that even in living things, Tevin,
starting with myself, there are lots of my own bodily processes that I know from my own case
are not conscious. And then I know which parts are generative of consciousness. I know what those do,
roughly speaking, I know what their functionality is. When I test in other animals,
the prediction arising from the, the inference that those structures and that mechanism is what
gives rise to, to feelings, the predictions are always confirmed, where those are not present
in living creatures, that those structures and those functions, the prediction again,
is always confirmed that they don't show the functionality that, that, that seems to
underpin consciousness in us. Then, you know, that's so, so compelling. And then, you know, to go from
that to non-living things, I mean, to claim that non-living things are conscious, it's, you just
outside of the, the, not only the bounds of testability, you're outside of the bounds of
reasonableness. It's just like, why would you say that? And, you know, starting from the observables,
that's where, that's the conclusion you just have to arrive at. If you start from first
principles and you say, well, it's possible that there's something it is like to be anything,
then, well, yeah, it's possible. But anything's possible. I don't see any reason why one would
hold that view unless one starts from the assumption that consciousness is a fundamental
property of the universe. Which I have to say is not, not, not different from the idea of God.
At the time of the Big Bang, there was a consciousness. Maybe, but that's outside of science,
you know, to those kinds of claims. That, if you think about it, that's something that people
like Julia Tononi and Christoph Cockt have done, fundamentally taking consciousness as
phi, they can't see it as far as fundamental and doing a lot of, but I think they did it in a
different way. So, so like, let's take Tononi's case, as you've just said, the, the, the idea that
consciousness can be, can be, can be objectified as, as a quantity of, of integrated information
processing. If you hold that theory, then it leads you down some, some rabbit holes that you then
have to go down, you know, because if you say, well, okay, the amount of integration in the
information processing is what determines the degree of consciousness, then you have to say, well,
there's no, there's no, you know, as long as there's any amount of information processing,
there must be some degree of consciousness. And conversely, you have to say anything that has
the requisite, you know, number must be conscious. Therefore, any highly integrated information
processing system like the internet, you know, my theory, me, if I'm Tononi, my theory requires
me to say, yep, the internet's conscious. So it's fundamentally information at this point,
which is how a lot of people are seeing it. Then in essence, everything has a level of fire.
Yes, everything has that, you know, what's, what's, what's a curious little historical
fact is that traumas, I'll tell you something else, which is another curious fact.
Many people who bang on about the hard problem of consciousness have never, never read Charmes's
paper. And if you actually read Charmes's paper, there's this thing that I'm going to tell you
now. There's another thing which I'll tell you as an aside. At the end of the paper, Charmes says,
the hard problem is hard, but there's no reason to believe that it will forever remain insoluble.
And he then say, he's saying it is soluble. And, and, and he even goes so far as to then
present a possible solution. And this is the thing I was going to say. His possible solution is that
all information has a subjective aspect. And that is consciousness. And it has an objective
aspect, which is this mechanistic thing that we see, you know, depends what kind of substrate
you're using. But like our computers, there they are, they're processing information. But the
being of the computer says Charmes, you know, because it's an information processing device,
that there is some small amount of consciousness associated with it, because the, the internal
aspect of information is consciousness. Therefore, because information processing has been going on
since forever, consciousness has been around since forever. And it's a fundamental property
of the universe. So I don't want to lose sight of the aside I've made there. Please note Charmes
says the hard problem can be solved. He said it himself in 1995. So all these people who
revere this problem has been completely insoluble, that it's a metaphysical problem which can never
be solved by physical science. That's not what Charmes said. But he then proposes his own theory,
which is a panpsychist theory, which is when it's something approaching a panpsychist theory,
he doesn't say everything is conscious, he says, all information is conscious.
Which is a, which is a reasonable place to start, because what we know about the brain and the mind,
what they have in common is that they're processing information, you know, and not everything in the
universe is processing information. So, you know, that's why it's approaches or heads in the direction
of, but now here's the rub for me. If you read, so information in Shannon's sense,
which is the sense in which Charmes uses the word, he actually says so in that paper.
So Shannon's paper, which brought information into the concept of information into into physics,
into the idea that there's a quantifiable thing called information, and that it has causal property,
does stuff, you know, in the physical world, that for that realization and conceptualization
of it, we have to thank Claude Shannon. And you read his paper, which was published in,
if I remember correctly, 1948. It's called the title says it all, it says a mathematical theory
of communication. It's not a theory of information, it's a theory of communication, because why?
Information has to have a source and a receiver. It's information doesn't just exist. Information,
something is only informative to a receiver of that information. So information, and I'm speaking
pure Shannon here, information is an answer to a question. You know, it's, is the coin toss heads
or tails? You know, is it heads? Yes or no? That's one or zero, you know, that is the binary digit,
that is the bit, that is the quantity, how we quantify information. So how many questions I
have to ask determines how much information I receive from, from my interaction with,
with my environment. So this information exchange is a question asking and answering exercise.
And the crucial point is that the information is subjective. It's received by me, who asked the
question. The system doesn't, a system doesn't contain an objective amount of information.
It depends on what question you're asking of the system. So, you know, so the very same, I mean,
for example, there's a bag of, of balls. And we, you and I both know that the yellow, red and blue
ones in there. And we know that they're 30 balls. I know that 10 of them are red. You don't know
that that bag contains more information for you than it does for me. So it depends on, it depends
on how, so information is a measure of, of uncertainty. The more, the more unpredictable
is the outcome of an event, the more information it carries for the observer of the event. And
you and I might have more or less prior knowledge so that it will be more or less predictable or
unpredictable to us. So, so why this is also important is that when you speak about information,
whether you're charmers or you're to know me, you have to ask yourself the question of, well,
who is the recipient of this information? And so you're back to the question of, well,
where's the subject? We're like in the internet, where's the subject? The conscious subject of
all of this information processing is integrated, you know, for what? It's, so it's just like a
very weird way of thinking about, I think to say that information in and of itself, you know, is,
is or the integration of that information in some objective arm's length sense, you know, is,
is the mechanism of consciousness. I think misses the point. So, so my way of thinking about it,
which I tried in a very brief and rough and ready way a few minutes ago when I spoke about
Carl Friston and my work on this problem. Our starting point was, well, an infam, a self-organizing
system, which has to predict the behavior of the world has to ask questions of the world.
You know, is if I were to do this, what would happen? If I were to do this, what would happen to
my free energy is basically the question that every, every biological self-organizing system has to
constantly ask. So the information processing that gives rise to feeling, in my view, is that kind
of information. It's not all information. It's infam. It's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's,
it's the answering of questions by systems that give a damn about that. They need to ask questions
and they give them about the answers. That is, I think, the kind of system that is the information
processing within which can, can, can, can, can feasibly or plausibly rather be, be, be conceptualized
as a, as a sentient system. I must like, for example, Mark, on when I came into this podcast,
when I first started thinking about consciousness, I'm very much on a similar page as you, I think,
I think we're both very monist, physicalist, we're trying to reduce it, trying to figure out a nice
biological approach to it. But I must say someone who came very close to really changing that
my mind on that a little bit was Donald Hoffman. I don't know if you're familiar with his work.
Yes. I'm not in detail, but yes, I know the basic ideas.
Yeah. So it's pretty fascinating to see that a lot of physicists nowadays are starting to show
that space time itself is not a concept that we can actually understand or really even perceive in
any real way. And, and therefore, well, when he takes it further, but obviously making his own
conclusion that conscious agents must be fundamental, we're, so that's a separate story.
But what is a bit strange is the fact that physicists are not showing us that the reality
that we're trying to reduce is not a reality that is possibly reducible, because we see,
we have absolutely no access to this reality. What do you think about that?
Well, so if you, if you, you or any of our viewers read my book in, in, in, in the penultimate
chapter, I, it's titled Back to the Cortex. And there I speak about, so the most of the book
is about effort. It's about, you know, this fundamental form of consciousness and how it
is generated and what that, what the implication, oh, sorry, it's not the penultimate chapter,
it's the third last chapter. The second last chapter is on Thomas and the hard problem.
The last chapter is on artificial consciousness. The third last chapter is on this, this, this,
this question of, of cognitive and perceptual consciousness, you know, the type of consciousness
that, that we have for, for the most part focused on. And there I make the argument,
which is again, not, not a novel argument. It's, it's, it's very similar to Hoffman's,
although I don't cite him because actually, I'm embarrassed to admit, I didn't yet know his work
at the time that I was writing that book. But I was aware of other people in the predictive
processing tradition, you know, like, like Andy Clark and, and, and Jacob Huey speaking about,
you know, perception as controlled hallucination. And that, you know, the, the, the reality and,
and Dan Dennett, you know, the, the, this whole thing of the, the use illusion and so on.
And I find, yeah.
And Neil Seth, I mean, that whole group of him.
And Neil Seth is in that same tradition. Neil Seth extends it from the extra receptive
domain to the inter receptive domain in very interesting ways. Actually, if we have time,
I will come back to that because I think that the, that the, that affect is not the same as
interception. You know, I have a little, a little quibble about that, but I don't think
it's important for our present purposes. So what I'm saying is that in that tradition,
although Hoffman doesn't come from a predictive processing background, I think it's, it's, it's,
it's entirely compatible, you know, the idea that the reality that we are, that we are acting in
is a representation of the, of, of something in my language beyond the mark of blankets.
All I can know is my blanket states. And that is a, that is a statistical generative model,
you know, of, of, of the, of reality minutes. You could even say Kant, it's a Kantian view,
you know, I have no problem with that whatsoever. So, but, you know, I don't think it's a,
there's anything spooky about that. And, and I don't think that it requires us, I mean,
all you need to say is the retina, the retinal ronson cones, light waves in binge on the retinae,
and the, those cells transduced those light waves into nerve impulses. So what we,
you know, you never actually are, you're not, you're not receiving light waves,
you are representing them as spike trains, you know, that, that, that's enough for me.
It's, you can see there's nothing spooky there, you know, and those spike trains, all they are
are ones and zeros. So from that, I then have to infer the causes of these, of these sensations,
in other words, of these signals. And I, and I model it, you know, I'm perfectly fine with that.
So I, but, but, you know, I don't see why that leads to all kinds of spooky conclusions. That's,
that's, there are few steps beyond that that I don't think follow.
And I spoke to Donald when I asked him about it, because I mean, a lot of us in biology,
in neuroscience, we know that we don't see reality ever radical sort of truth. We sort of
represent something, but he's physics and he's worked with a couple of the mathematicians show
that space time is fundamentally completely different. So we're not even seeing a mild
representation or like something similar to reality or close, it's completely different.
But he does eventually say that, however, his conclusion that consciousness must be fundamental
is something he's willing to accept might be wrong. He's just trying to figure out a different
solution. So he actually doesn't take it to that point where he, he claims that consciousness is
fundamental, just trying to find some relative because reality is the problem. In essence,
we don't, we know a lot about mind, but we know almost nothing about matter pretty much.
Yeah, I wouldn't. But by the way, as you can see, my lights came on. So, so, hallelujah.
The, the load shedding has ended for a moment.
I hope mine doesn't.
Let's see what happens.
Yes, let's hope there's not a reciprocal interaction between where you are and where I am.
But look, there's, there's much that I could say about, about quantum physics and that the
seriously strange nature of reality and how utterly different it is from the,
from the high level average states that we are able to represent, and so on. You know,
and those things all interest me very much. I will just say about that, that the approach
that Carl Friston and I take, which is the free energy principle approach, it's called
variational free energy. This is, this is, you know, there's, there's thermodynamic free energy,
and there's chemical free energy, and then there's informational free energy, and,
and some people no less than chains, for example, thinks the informational
free energy is, is the fundamental explanation of, of, of the thing.
The, the, the, all of those are probabilistic. It's a probabilistic theory.
The variational free energy has to do with statistical mechanics. It has to do with
probabilities. When I was speaking earlier about, you know, your uncertainty and, and,
and the palpating of your uncertainty and all of that, we're talking about probabilities.
And so I think that there's a very deep link is that there's a, I think that the, the whole
free energy principle inherits from the traditions that, that have replaced Newtonian
physics. So there's, there's, that in all of that interests me very much. But I, in the time
remaining to us, I would rather, because I'm aware we have limited time remaining, I would
rather start with this observation, which is, which is more concrete. You know, I'm, I'm a
clinician. I work with neurological and, and neurosurgical patients every day. And so I witness,
you know, what happens if a piece of your brain is missing. And I've been around for a sufficient
number of years to have seen many, many, many patients with the same piece of their brain missing.
And the curious, or the interesting fact is that they all misperceive reality in the same way.
You know, that's, that's, for example, an excellent example is right parietal low patients
they paralyzed on the left side, and they believe they're not. And it's patently obvious that they
are, you know, but they say, no, I'm not. And so, you know, you see one and another and another,
and eventually you realize, hang, you know, if you haven't got a right parietal low, you just,
there's a piece of reality that you just don't get and never can get why, because you got a piece of
your brain missing that you need in order to be able to get that. So you can, from that observation,
you can, you can extrapolate that, well, all of us have a piece of our brains missing in the sense
that, you know, we, we only have this, what if we were to all have an additional lobe or an additional
hemisphere, how much more would we be able to, to register and compute and comprehend, you know,
than we currently do. So, so all I'm saying there is that I, again, on the basis of my own
empirical clinical experience, you know, I'm totally ready to believe that we have a horribly
limited conception and perception of reality. I'm totally sympathetic with that. However,
you know, we are where we are. So you can either say, okay, I'm going to become a mystic, you know,
because I don't know anything, I'm just going to believe everything or, you know, it's all you,
or you say, well, you know, given, given the limited nature of my instruments, you know,
I must do the best I can to, to, to expand its bounds, to test my hypotheses, and, you know,
be ready to find that my predictions were wrong, and I must update my predictive model and so on.
I didn't see what else we can do. So, so, so although I am totally aware of the limits of the,
of the human brain, just obvious from what I've just said, and of the limits of science,
because it's a method. It's a, it's a method. Ultimately, you have to have, we were talking
about idealism and never got back to it. But, you know, ultimately, you have to have faith,
and I use that word advised me, that there is some reality beyond what I'm perceiving that I'm
probing. And that, you know, I, that, that the, the, the inferences that I draw, and the models
that I build, each time are less bad, you know, that, that they, they, they, they, of course,
they're not reality. Of course, they are a pathetic, you know, scrap, scrap of what we are
capable of grasping of the nature of the universe really. But it's, but we're making progress,
each of us in our own lives. And as a species over generations, we, we, we have less bad models,
less, less bad understandings. And, but it is all based on faith, you know, that, that this method
is a reasonable way of, of, of proceeding. It is a matter, you know, you really can say, well,
because it's so limited, because it's so, so unknowable reality in itself and all of that,
I'm just going to give up that that's another approach that, but I would rather take the
scientific approach. I just think we need to have humility as scientists and recognize how,
how little we know, but the very physics that Hoffman
cites as evidence for how little we know is the product of that method, you know, that it has
led us to know that reality is weird. And it is very different from, from how we perceive it.
But, but, you know, Hoffman couldn't have, couldn't have come to that view if it wasn't for the
application of the scientific method to arrive at that physics in the first place.
When Hoffman, when Hoffman apparently did the calculations and he, and he asked like,
what are the probabilities of that perception of reality would give us an accurate representation
of reality based on natural selection and fitness and actually evolving and surviving.
And when you, when you, when you noticed that the probability came to zero, apparently had to
take a seat because he's very much a scientist and he loves the scientific method, natural
selection, all of it. So you had to take a seat because it like messed him up with his fundamental
perception of reality because he was very much a materialistic thinker in terms of
consciousness. And so it's, on that note, if, what are you, you spoke about faith there, Mark,
I mean, part of this podcast also is for the people questioning these big topics,
often are trying to also find meaning and purpose while not understanding what's
really going on. What are your religious or spiritual beliefs?
First of all, I want to come back one step in our conversation to this materialist, the idea
of materialist and mind versus matter and so on. You know, I, to me, mind and matter are the same
as what I was saying earlier when I said that there's a, there's a dual aspect to our monistic
essence. Matter for me is an aspect. In other words, I don't think matter is a fundamental
property. I think matter is a way of representing things. And that's entirely consistent also with
the recent physics that we were talking about earlier. Matter is not a fundamental
property of the universe. And the, so I'm not a materialist. This segues into your question now.
You know, I am not a materialist. I'm a dual aspect monist who says that the material
and the ideal, that these are two different ways of knowing, of perceiving something which is
ultimately unknowable. And that's what you and I have just been talking about, the limits of
science, the humility that scientists have to have in the face, you know, of the, of the, of the
massive uncertainties in the universe. So, so my spiritual position arises from that. In other
words, it's one of humility. I'm sorry, maybe you've got the impression of me as a kind of a
pompous or noisy guy. I don't know. It might be hard for you to, to equate my, my personality
with humility. But really, it is as a scientist and as, as a spiritual being, my, not only is it
my belief that I even find solace in it, Tevin, I find solace in what I don't know. I don't know.
I don't know. These things are way beyond my can. Questions like what happens after I die,
they're not empirical questions. I can't, any prediction I come up with, I can't test it until
I'm dead, you know. So, so, and I accept that. And I say again, I take, I take comfort in it.
Is there a God? Is there an afterlife? What does it all mean? You know, I genuinely don't know.
And, and, and so it's a kind of an agnostic position, but it is not a materialist and not
an atheist position. Yes. But, but within that, within those parameters, and I'm sorry, I'm sort
of repeating myself, I then have to say, okay, given those limitations, what is to be done?
And I say, well, you've got to do the best you can with what you've got. And so, you know,
so the best I've been able to come up with is science. You know, I've read, okay, which of these
things, you know, which of these things gives me the greatest confidence that, well, yeah,
I might find answers, or at least I might find less ignorance. That's, that's the approach that,
that, that I take, fully, fully aware of the limits of the, you know, the limits of the
conclusions that I can come to. Now, within that frame of reference, and this is probably
the last thing that we'll talk about, I, in other words, using a scientific methodology,
scientific epistemology, to, to try to address these questions. I think that our values,
you know, I was talking much earlier in our conversation about the fundamental value
system of living things is that it's good to survive, and bad not to. That, that built upon
those fundamental values, or other, also phenotypic values, you know, like it's, like it's,
it's bad to be in danger, that's fear, you know, it's, it's, it's irritating and frustrating to
have an impeding things preventing you from, that's, that's rage, you know, that it's bad to
separate a little dependent creature from its caregiver, you know, that, that's got to do
with attachment bonds and so on. I think that these evolved endophenotypes is, is, is a word
that's sometimes used for them, that they are, they are basic values that we have just because
we're living things and that they are then more elaborated values that we have just because we
are mammals. And I think that these provide, and you know, it's famously said that you can't
derive an orc from an is, but I think that from these is, we can derive some orcs like I've just
done, bad to separate, bad to, bad to injure people or injure living things. It's bad to,
it's bad to, for sentient things rather, it's bad to, to separate mammals from their caregivers,
it's, it's bad to, to, to, to, you know, unnecessarily frustrated and being sentient
beings and so on. I think that our much more elaborated human value systems, which of course
have evolved also to, to, to manage much more artificial environments for which we were not
evolutionarily prepared like, like, like, like, you know, agricultural and permanent settlements
and, and everything that flowed from that in a private property and all of that.
There's a lot more that's, that's the values that we've built on top of those phenotypic values,
but I think those phenotypic values and biological values are the starting point of all of our
values, all of our values. They're not, they're not the values of the universe. They are our,
the values of us living things who have skin in the game.
I look, I love that Mark. I mean, look, you didn't come across as pompous or arrogant in any way
and neither does you. I'm relieved. I loved reading it. I enjoyed it so much. I mean,
there's something Raymond Tellis once said, I like this term. He says, he's ontologically
agnostic, but I mean epistemologically we trust science the most is what, what you're basically
trying to say. That's right. That's right. Mark, thank you so much for this conversation. I really
enjoyed myself. Thank you. More words from your side. Well, thank you very much and apologies
again. As you can see, I've lost my, this is, this is how unpredictable and uncertain the world is,
but I'm, I'm, I'm very glad to be speaking to you as a fellow South African and I'm glad that we
are both here. These are the problems that belong to me and I'm, I'm, I'm very happy to be grappling
with them and, and proud to know that, that, that, that you're a South African. Your podcast is just
great. Thanks. Thanks, Steven, for inviting me.
