No, the last time we stopped talking at Free Will, we spoke about a lot of things.
We spoke about consciousness, the mind-body problem.
Why materialism is actually not as succinct and fully defined as we really think it is.
I think let's just start off where we left off. What is Free Will to you?
I want you to go through each view, perhaps. Compatibilism, incompatibilism, determinism,
let's say libertarianism, and why your views differ from whatever they are
and which view you most likely consider to be your own.
You left out one, my favorite, common sense.
Let's forget the fancy talk and just have a look at what we all know.
Every person acts as though they believe in freedom of the will.
That includes the people who deny that they have freedom of the will.
They act as if they believe it. That's why they present arguments to try to show that there's no
Free Will, no point in preventing arguments if there isn't any. If we're just automata,
what's the point of presenting arguments? It's just like two thermostats intercommunicating.
They all act 100% of the time as if they believe they have Free Will,
give reasons, and so on. That's point number one.
Second question is, does science have anything to tell us about this? Answer, no, nothing.
Science can tell us we can deal with determinism. We can deal with randomness, but that's it.
That was true in the 17th century. It's true today. Two points. Everyone acts 100% of the time
as if they believe we have Free Will. It can't turn to science because it tells
you nothing about it except that we can't handle it. That leaves two possibilities.
One is we're all 100% deluded. We're acting in contrary to the facts 100% of the time.
Second possibility is there's something missing in human science.
Okay, take your choice. Actually, if you believe there isn't any choice, then you can't take it.
But the way everyone acts, they can act as if they have a choice between those alternatives.
It doesn't matter much what the sophisticated theories tell us. This is essentially what we're
left with. In fact, if you look at the scientists who do study
voluntary motion, they don't talk about Free Will. They talk about trivial things like,
can I decide to lift my finger or something? Their conclusion, I think maybe we've discussed this,
I don't remember. But if you go to people like Emilio Pizzi, Robert of Jamie, and the
major scientists who deal with this, they have a state-of-the-art review in the
Journal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in which they go through what's been
learned about controlling the minimal activities, eye blink, lifting your finger, and then they say
they say, as they put it, we'll put this fancifully. And what they say fancifully is we've come to
understand something about the puppet and the strings, but we have nothing to say about the
puppet deer. It's just a total mystery. That's where we're left.
I mean, it often gets me thinking about, I remember very young, not to call you old in any way,
but when I was very young, I remember watching a video of you and Michel Foucault. Perhaps my
French is not too great, but I remember your discussion with him, and you guys were talking
about morality and so many deep topics that I remember watching this video, enjoying it so much
because it's something you don't often see online. I mean, you mostly see
politics that are badly influenced by bias and fallacies of thought, etc. You guys were talking
about a lot of topics, and Foucault often talks about things like addiction, putting people into
prison, etc. The topic of free will cannot escape morality. So when you talk about free will, let's
say libertarianism, compatibilism, and maybe a hard incompatibilism. How do these approaches
navigate morality? This is such an important topic, I think, as part of this niche.
To distinguish the questions of free will from the questions of moral responsibility,
those are different topics. I mean, they're related, but distinct. The philosophical
tendencies that you just mentioned almost entirely are concerned with questions of moral
responsibility. They're not concerned with a question of, can I decide to lift my finger?
That's the question of freedom of will. There are concerns about if there is no freedom of will,
how do we assign moral responsibility? Well, that's a question you can ask, but
it's only a meaningful question for those who think there's no free will. In my opinion, nobody
has that opinion. They may say they have it, but they act as if they don't believe it. I don't
really care. I don't think it's interesting what people think they believe. I think what's
interesting is what they do believe, and what they do believe you can determine from their actions.
Again, it's a very striking fact that 100% of our actions, including those of people who claim
they don't have free will, 100% of their actions reflect a belief, an unacknowledged belief that
they do have free will. Since that's 100% of human behavior, it's an interesting question
why people deny what they believe, but it's a separate question. These questions of moral
responsibility do arise if you acknowledge that you have freedom of choice, but that's not the
domain in which the tendencies that you describe function. It seems to me odd in congruity. If we
do believe that we have free will, then these questions can arise quite seriously. If we claim
hypothetically that there's no free will, then you get into complicated philosophical questions,
but I don't personally see much point in exploring them because they're based on a
hypothetical assumption which doesn't apply. I think the most difficult part about discussing
free will for me is that there are two domains. One is the metaphysics of whether or not we do
have free will or not, and then you also get the moral responsibility aspect. Now, there are a group
of philosophers today, Dirk Pierboom, Greg Caruso. I mean, directly, Greg Caruso and Daniel Dennett
have a book called Just Desserts, primarily based on the fact that free will has such an
important aspect when it comes to how we interact with each other and what we do. What are your
thoughts on that? Do you think this is relevant? Why are we talking about this?
It's an amusing discussion in your free time. If you have nothing else to devote yourself to,
I don't find it very interesting. I mean, there is an interesting, if you like,
metaphysical question. Do we have free will? Well, again, we're left with what I said before.
We always act everyone as if we have free will. Science tells us nothing about it. Then
we can make a choice. Maybe human science just has its limits, which I think there's every
reason to believe. I think we are organisms. We're not angels. If we're organisms, we are like other
organisms. Every single one has scope and limits. That's true for all of our capacities as well.
People question that only for our mental capacities. I don't see why those should be
different from any other capacities. In the case of every other organism,
their cognitive capacities has scope and limits. In the case of humans, metaphorically speaking,
below the neck, meaning everyone agrees, yes, we have scope and limits. There are those who claim,
in fact, it's a huge number, maybe most philosophers, that up here, something escapes
the natural world. It's a kind of methodological dualism, which I see no reason to accept.
It seems to be much more pernicious than traditional metaphysical dualism, which was,
in fact, normal science. Take a look at Descartes. It was simply normal science. He said he could
try to argue that everything in the world has a mechanical explanation, including most things
about human beings. But then he noticed correctly, in fact, that there are certain aspects of
ordinary human life which don't have a mechanical interpretation. For me, particularly interesting
is that one of the main ones in the discourse is just what you and I are now doing, the ability to
carry out normal conversation with others, creative, making up new expressions, new thoughts, maybe
never occurred in the history of the world, and able to allow others to comprehend the inner
workings of our minds by means of verbal communication. He argued that that's beyond the bounds of
mechanical explanation, and therefore, like any good scientist, postulated a new principle
in his metaphysics, a new substance, based on the terms. Well, it turned out he was wrong.
Turns out there isn't a mechanical explanation for anything. So, in particular, not for
normal verbal interaction. Well, that left us, that's Newton basically, showed there's no
mechanical explanations for anything in the world. He regarded that as a complete absurdity,
but he was stuck with it. Then, very quickly, within a couple of years, in fact, came John Locke,
who said, yes, Mr. Newton has demonstrated to us that what we call the material world as properties
we can't comprehend, we're just a fact. So, maybe organized matter, whatever matter turns out to be,
has the property of generating thought. Yeah, that's, I think, the answer to the question.
Don't think it's been improved on since. So, that's what we're left with. We have scope and limits,
like everything else in the organic world. And it may be that the explanation for the
freedom of will that all of us act as if we believe we have, maybe it's just beyond
human cognitive capacities. If so, it wouldn't be unique.
Now, if you had to define free will versus, let's say, agency or choice as a, as a linguist, I mean,
one of the most influential linguists on the planet, how would you differentiate these three
words, free agency, free will, and freedom of choice, I guess.
I think they're the same. Free will means free agency. Free agency means free will.
I don't see a difference between them. I have so many questions for you. What I'm going to do is,
because the first podcast got so much engagement, I've got a lot of questions for you from the,
from the viewers and the listeners. So, let me start with the first one. The one is from Dean.
He says, Professor Chomsky, in 2012, you once had an interview with Peter Hallward. And
would Professor Chomsky comment on Spinoza's philosophy of mind? And what did he mean
by saying to Peter Hallward? And I quote, putting aside considerations of Spinoza's subtle ideas,
question mark, end quote. Is Spinoza's work still relevant and of any value today? And was Spinoza
then going into the right direction? Let's say closer to the truth per se.
Spinoza was a brilliant, innovative thinker. It's very intriguing to try to understand what
he was saying. My own personal opinion is that the arguments he presented, well,
challenging and intriguing don't hold up. So if you run through the quasi-axiomatic system and the
ethics stay, it's kind of interesting to see how his mind is working. But I don't think the arguments
hold up. Let's go, let's move on to the next one. Right. This is about intellectual freedom. Please
ask why does Professor Chomsky believe, oh wait, sorry. The question is, why do so many linguists
disagree with Chomsky? And why is behaviorism so popular? First of all, I don't agree with that
most linguists disagree with you, but I'm just going with the questions.
No, I think it's correct. My own conception of what the study of language is about is
shared by very few others, including the department that I help found and have taught in most of my
life. I do give talks there, people listen with interest, but they don't look at linguistics
this way. That's actually true all my life. It's always been a small minority. Okay, that's the way
it is. I just see the field differently. On the other hand, if you look at the tradition, which
goes back 2,500 years, I pretty much fall within the tradition up until the 20th century from
classical Greece, classical India, up through the early 20th century.
Language was understood as basically the same as thought. In fact, language was described by
simply audible thought. We know audible is too narrow. It could be visual, any sensory
motor system, but the basic idea was that language is the generator of thought and thought is what
is generated by language. That was a standard view for millennia. Early 20th century changed.
Early 20th century came the behaviorist, structuralist period, which broke quite
sharply from my own work beginning in the 20th century, which could take a major step forward
thanks to developments in mathematics, the development of the mathematical theory of
computation, Alan Turing, Kurt Girdel others. That made it possible for the first time
to make a clear and sharp distinction between something that Aristotle had brought up that
nobody knew what to do with. That is the distinction between possession of knowledge
and use of knowledge. If you look at the whole tradition, say Descartes or Galileo, others who
puzzled about this, they were always talking about production. How do we produce thought?
Always. No discussion of what is thought because that requires the distinction between
generation and production, which are two quite different things. Possession of knowledge in
Aristotle's sense is generation of an infinite number of thoughts. Here's the
array of thoughts that are possible for human beings. Production is a much more complex thing.
It means selecting something. When I speak to you, I am somehow selecting something
out of that infinite array and then going through the procedure of implementing.
The first part, we're back in a total mystery, the mystery of how you make choices. Nobody has
anything to say about that, but at least we can now make the distinction and we can study the
generation and the nature of thoughts. Here are the thoughts. Then we can turn to the question of
production. There are two questions. How do I select something out of that array,
total mystery? How do I implement what I've selected? Yes, we can study that. That's the
problem of implementation of production. It's kind of an input-output problem. We can deal with it
just as we can deal with perception. It's an input-output question. You hear a sound, you
carry out mechanical manipulations and it leads to one of the thoughts. Those are topics we can
deal with, but there's a big mystery right in the middle. How do we go from the generation of
thoughts which we can study and learn a lot about? What's the nature of thought? A lot of progress on
that, but the move from that to how we select on what I'm doing, what you're doing, that remains
total mystery, as much of a mystery as lifting my finger. That's where we now stand. Well, that's
a view of linguistics that very few linguists accept. They're interested in production and
perception. I'm interested in the tradition of two millennia, two and a half millennia,
and I think it was on the right track. The gap that they couldn't deal with,
generation of thought, we now can deal with. We can learn quite a lot about it, about the
nature of thought and the nature of language. I think we found a lot about that, but it's just
not the main interest of most linguists or cognitive scientists or philosophers. A philosopher
totally refused to look at it. You take the leading philosophers of the 20th century,
philosophers of language, say Quine, probably the most influential, the one I knew quite well,
studying with him. We never agreed on this. For him, language is, as he put it, a complex of
dispositions to respond, period. Leonard Bloomfield, the great theoretician of modern structure
linguistics. Language is a matter, as he put it, of habit and training. That's all, training by
some sort of reinforcement procedure. It's totally untenable. It's nothing like that.
De Socerre basically said nothing about it, said language is a social contract of some kind.
European structuralism doesn't discuss the question, but notice that in the long sweep of
history, there's a gap. The gap is early 20th century, behaviorism and structuralism, which
just put these questions aside. Picking up in mid 20th century, now informed by the mathematical
theory of computation, we can look at the gap in the tradition and reconstitute the tradition
in modern terms while recognizing that there is a gap that we don't know how to fulfill,
namely how to choose out of the infinite set. I mean, that's not something,
it's something familiar in other areas. So take mathematics. I suppose you have a formalized
theory of arithmetic, say, Peano's formalization of arithmetic. The formalization is generative.
It says, here is the infinite number of possible proofs. Peano's axioms can be regarded as a
generative system, which generates the infinitely many possible proofs. Each proof is a kind of a
geometrical object, if you look at it formally. What does a mathematician do who's trying to
approve something, doesn't run through the axiom system? How he does it is totally mysterious.
No mathematician can tell you. It's just some creative act. Well, that's what we're doing every
moment of the day, instantaneously. We're instantaneously picking something out of the array
of possible thoughts and implementing it. Galileo was quite right in being, regarding this as
one of the most amazing things in the world. He couldn't go much beyond that, but he was
right to be amazed by it. Descartes was right in postulating some new substance to try to deal with
it. But it remains as much of a mystery as it was for Galileo and the scientists of the early
17th century, scientific revolution, who were deeply puzzled by this. Galileo himself regarded
the alphabet as the most spectacular of human inventions, because he was able somehow to
represent this, not answer the question, but at least to represent it. This astonishing mystery
of hell with a finite number of symbols, which is all we have, maybe large, but finite, we are
somehow able to construct infinitely many thoughts, and even to convey to others the inner workings
of our mind, though they don't have access to it. He regarded this as an invention,
the unique in human history, but it's as much a mystery to us as it was to the
scientists of the early 17th century. No, you mentioned Quine, and I think it's important,
Quine once mentioned, I'm going to paraphrase, but he mentioned that we've spent so much time
studying the typical, yet if we had spent more time studying the atypical, let's say madness
in quotes, we could learn a lot more about the human mind. So Quine once said something along
these lines. I can't remember the exact quote, it was part of my textbook with my masters,
and it's a while back, but along those lines, there's people like J.L. Austin from Oxford.
If you think about the way their philosophy works, and you talk about language and words,
the choice of words we use, because I am fascinated by mental health and how we construct
diagnoses, how the ICD or the DSM form, what are your thoughts on these? I mean, the fact that we
now give terms or terminologies to certain scopes of experience, because clearly, well,
from my perspective, there's a spectrum, and yet we somehow find ways to give definitions along the
line. What are your thoughts on that? J.L. Austin, I mean, he describes it very well with his Oxford
philosophy, but yeah, what are your thoughts on that? Well, John Austin, I happened to know
pretty well in the 1950s. He visited Harvard repeatedly, and we got to be quite friendly.
Started when I was a graduate student there and continued, actually almost until his death, and
met him weeks before he died. He was working at the time on a theory of language, detailed theory
of language, which in my opinion was on the wrong track, but it was interesting. He was a very smart
guy. I don't think he left anything published about this, and his literary executors seem to
have left it out as far as I can see, but he was developing a theory of language based essentially
on sound symbol correlation. So he was a very learned philologist. Philology was one of his
main interests, and he was interested in questions like, for example, if you take the English words
glamour, J.L., and grammar, J.L., they have the same origin, but they went in different directions,
and he wanted to relate this to the sound symbolism. He pointed out, it's well known that
if you look at the English vocabulary, J.L. appears in lots of words that have some vague kind of
semantic similarity, like glare, glimmer, gleam, and so on. A lot of them have. He thought that was
quite significant. Most others think it's kind of an accident, but he wanted to try to develop a
theory based essentially on this primitive observation and expanding. Personally, I don't
think that would have gotten very far, but everything Boston did was quite interesting.
I have a very intriguing mind. Well, as far as I know, this has been left out of his
posthumous public record. I haven't seen any reference to it, even though he was teaching
courses on this in his last semester at Oxford, seems to be gone, but he was one of the people
I could talk to about these things. He didn't agree, but we could discuss it with the philosophers
at Harvard and impossible, with the linguists. Yeah. Along that line, I mean, because J.L.
Austin, he spoke a lot about, for example, I remember, I think it was the Oxford Handbook
of Philosophy and Psychiatry, or the Oxford Textbook of Philosophy and Psychiatry. I apologize
if I'm wrong to anyone who's listening, but he mentions a chair, for example. When you ask
someone what is a chair, people define it very differently. Some people think of it as something
a gisteron. Some people think of something with four legs or something with a backrest.
And so when you ask someone what is depression, it's very difficult for you to now try and
vocabularize and experience that's so diverse. What are your thoughts on mental illness and
the way we describe these things or these terms? Well, I happen to be a very simple-minded person.
I like to pay attention to the simple things, like what's a chair? What's mental depression?
I don't think we can say anything about that. But if we ask what's a chair, it turns out to open
very interesting questions. Like what you just said, some people say it's something with a back,
something with legs. Notice that gets back to a point that Aristotle raised,
a very significant point, which has been mostly forgotten. His example was house,
but could have been chair. He said, if we want to define a house, incidentally, he was talking
in metaphysical terms, what is a house? But you can easily translate that into cognitive terms,
which for him were about the same because he saw basically no difference between
the thing and the word for the thing. The word for the thing is just a reflection of the thing,
so they're about the same. So let's talk about the meaning of house, not what is a house. Well,
Aristotle pointed out that it has two components in his metaphysics. It was form and matter.
So the matter of a house is the bricks, the timbers, and so on that a physicist could
identify. The form of a house is the intention of the designer, the characteristic use,
and I think the mental things, something a physicist couldn't find looking at a house.
And I think he's quite right. So something could look exactly like a house, but not be a house
because it was intended for some other purpose, maybe a library, a stable for horses,
maybe something else. Well, that tells us something very same with chair. You can look at
for us, for people, a chair is something that is characterized by the fact that we use it in
certain ways. The Wittgenstein pointed out once that if a chair started to speak, we wouldn't
know what it is because a chair has to have certain formal properties in Aristotle's sense.
That's a very significant fact because it raises the question, how does an infant know this?
How does an infant know all of this very complex set of properties and it does become
very complex when you begin to explore? How does an infant know that? Well, we now have
experimental work, mainly by Lila Gleitman, late cognitive scientist, which showed that
children acquire the meaning of a word with very few presentations, two or three presentations,
they know the whole meaning of the word. How do they know? I mean, you ask Quine, Wittgenstein,
others as its association can't be. No associations could give you the fact that Aristotle noticed
that the nature of an object and the meaning of a word is something that can't be detected
from its physical properties. No possible learning theory can get you then. So it's another one of
those mysteries. It's something about how we're designed. Humans are somehow designed so that
our concepts, all of them, the simplest ones like chair, are very intricate constructions
based on properties that cannot be identified in the physical object. Well, one thing that means is
that contrary to widespread belief, there is no notion of reference in human language.
The things that we do carry out the actions of referring, as John Austin pointed out, Peter
Strauss and other Oxford ordinary language philosophers in the 1950s, we do carry out
actions of referring, but it doesn't follow that the language has a relation of reference.
It doesn't. There are no extra mental objects that the words of our language refer to.
There are internal mental objects which we use in the action of referring. It's something different.
That means language has no semantics in the sense of Frigga, Tarski,
Karnat, Kwan, and others just doesn't have semantics. Incidentally, that wouldn't have
bothered Frigga or Tarski or Kainat because they didn't see any point in studying language anyway.
It's just maybe a useful way of getting examples of Karnat who I knew pretty well.
Just didn't even understand why people speak ordinary language. Why don't they speak formal
languages where everything's well-defined? This conclusion wouldn't have bothered them,
but it should bother all the people who think that language has a relation, or that it has a
notion of first, or that you can do model theoretic semantics, or all of those people
should be concerned with this. That's practically all of philosophy of language and all of what's
called formal semantics. It doesn't bother them because they're not really interested in these
issues. They're just practical concerns of let's make it work better. Well, as I said,
that's a departure from 2,500 years of tradition. In my view, regression of structuralism and
behaviorism. You asked before why everyone is attracted by this. There's an interesting study
which may provide the answer. There's a very good cognitive scientist at Northeastern University in
Boston. Iris Barant, B-E-R-E-N-T. She's done very interesting studies on many topics. One of them
leads to the conclusion that we are sort of innately behaviorist. That is, if you just look
at people's common sense attitudes, they tend to give empiricists, she said, tend to give radical
empiricist answers. It's kind of like a natural intuition, just like infants are automatically
accept the mechanical philosophy. This is done 60 years ago by Michaud. If you give infants a
presentation like this, two things moving in a fixed relationship, they'll automatically assume
that there's an invisible barrier connecting them because otherwise it couldn't happen. Well,
that's the mechanical philosophy which was disproven by Newton. But it's part of our intuition,
which is probably why it was fixed upon in the first place. And empiricism seems to be the
same. They kind of automatically try to give empiricist answers. When they're refuted, you
sometimes hang on to them anyway. That's, I think, a disease of philosophy and linguistics.
I should say that Austin, Strossen, and others were not subject to this. They broke out of it.
They didn't recognize, Austin famously, that words, language generally are something you do,
you do things with. That's the production side. It's not the internal side, which he was interested
in, but had nothing to say about.
When, just, there's so many things to touch on there that I actually have to think about,
which part I actually really want to go down. But as someone who's intrigued by the mental
health aspect of this topic, do you think we, look, this is not a political podcast. And I try
my best to avoid politics as much as I want this to be philosophical, very metaphysical,
as much as possible as well. But do you think that the way social media, the way we chat nowadays,
our lack of the use of the English language, because we obviously have shortened many terms,
many words, do you think all of this plays a role into the way we are medicalizing
mental illness? Or do you think mental illness is rising, or are we just medicalizing human experiences?
Well, we certainly, I think that this is not an area that I know very well, I should say,
but it's an interesting one. I've certainly been interested, looked into it. Psychiatry
has moved extensively towards treatment by pharmaceutical means and others.
That probably makes reasonably good sense in many areas. There are
significant advances made in treating many Parkinson's, for example, by medical means.
I mean, at my age, I have the few friends that are still alive. And in their last years,
many did have mental diseases like Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and so on. And they
were treated effectively, especially Parkinson's medically. It did maintain their lives, productive,
happy lives will be beyond, would have been possible 50 years earlier. So I don't disparage
this at all. I think lots of good can be done. Probably there is over medicalization.
There's a natural tendency. If you have a, you know, if you have a hammer or you look for nails,
famous idiom, you have pharmaceutical means, you try to apply them. It's probably also true of
surgery. And there's good evidence that surgery is overused. That many,
just tell you a personal thing back of it. I mean, in medicine, we often say ourselves,
I mean, surgeons cut. That's just what they do. They see something, they cut it. That's
what I mean. They skip the personal part, but it's common. It's well known in the medical profession.
So cardiologists that there's pressures in the hospitals to do, to treat things surgically
for several reasons. One, it's because we know how to do another. It's very lucrative for the
hospitals. They make a lot of money on it. If you can treat a heart disease by medication or by
telling people to change their lifestyles, they're not going to make any money.
So there's a lot of pressure on cardiologists to go for the knife. For several reasons, some good,
some not good. I personally haven't have been benefited from this. I might say that 40 years
ago when I was, I mean, I'm presently 94. So when I was in my 50s, I started having a heart problem.
I hope when I'm 94, I'm as cognitively as engaged as you because it's amazing.
A cardiologist who is a personal friend and a fact, a leading figure in the field
who was kind of isolated in the field because he believed in putting off
surgical intrusion until the very end if there was no other possibility. And
some cardiologists did suggest surgical treatment and I went to talk to him and said,
don't bother with it. We can handle it just by mild medication and some obvious lifestyle
changes. It doesn't work perfectly. Never had any medical intervention, still taking a lot of pills.
That's easy. Anyhow, I think that's pretty common. And you can see the reasons. And I think the same
is true of psychiatric treatment. It has successes. If it's used intelligently,
it can be effective. I've seen personal cases rid of others, but it can ease this temptation to
overuse it to treat everything with drugs where other things are necessary. Partly this is something
here we're getting into politics, I'm afraid. But the whole medical system has been subjected
to the neoliberal assault on human beings, turn everything into
market-based commercial applications. I mean, I can tell you cases that I know very well,
and there are many others, where somebody goes to a doctor and it has to be done in 15 minutes.
If it takes more than 15 minutes, the supervisor comes in and tells the doctor,
sorry, you've got to stop. Because we have to be maximally efficient. We have to meet market
conditions. The worst possible medication means the doctor can't get to know you,
to figure out what your life is like, what your problems are. Think about the way a traditional
doctor used to do. A doctor was kind of like a personal friend, got to know you and so on.
Can't do that. Have to do it in 15 minutes because that's the way you're efficient. A lot of life
has been marketized that way. And it's very, it's very destructive. We see it in all sorts of things.
Turn to another domain. Suppose you got a bank statement, and it looks wrong. It looks like
there's an error in it. So you want to get in touch with a bank to see if they can fix it.
Well, you know what happens. You call the bank, you get a recorded message, which says,
we love you. Just stay on the line. And then some music starts playing. And every once in a while,
you get a recorded voice. And after you've spent 45 minutes, finally, something, a recorded voice
comes along and says, do you want to speak to a person? And you say, yes, I'd like to speak to
a person. And finally, you get to speak to a person. They say, oh, sorry, this is the wrong
number. Call that number. And then you go on. Well, economists tell you that's very efficient.
But economists measures, it's efficient. It means the company doesn't spend any money,
doesn't cost them anything, costs you something. But economists don't count that. That's not part
of economic theory. If you waste two hours, your problem, we don't count that. So it's very efficient,
but very destructive of life. If the bank would hire a few more people, you could have saved 45
minutes, they would have had an extra person to pay. Well, according to economic theory,
that's not efficient. Because economic theory and its political implementation and neoliberalism
just makes our lives harsher, more brutal, same in the medical profession, but it saves money.
So therefore, it's fine. That's why the rich are getting super rich and everyone else is staying
poor. I'm sorry, we're getting into politics, but politics is pervasive. That's affecting the
medical profession as well. It's very difficult not to get into politics when you have a philosophy
podcast. So I don't think there's a need to apologize. But on that topic, exactly what you're
talking about, I think it aligns well. While we spoke about free will, and now we're talking about
the way people use the internet, social media, et cetera, how are people's free wills being
challenged or controlled because of the way economists, businessmen,
social media enthusiasts and marketers and marketing people control us. Because clearly,
that's a way to control free will in a way, is we don't have as much control as we used to be.
What are your thoughts on that?
No, we can go back to my favorite philosopher, David Hume.
I love David Hume.
50 years ago, he wrote the first major work in what we now call political science or political
philosophy. It was called Hearst Principles of Government. If you open in the first paragraph,
says something like this, he says it more eloquently, but this is basically, he said,
he said, I'm amazed by the easiness with which the many submit themselves to the few.
Power is in the hands of the governed, those who are governed, but they don't use it.
They submit themselves to the power of the few. And he says, how can this miracle come about?
He says, well, it has to be what we now call manufacturer of consent in position of consent.
Somehow people are induced to consent to rule by the masters, though they don't have to be.
They could take power themselves. So the main principle of government is how to control people
so that they don't use the power that they have. Well, I think that's right on target.
That's how the few manage to keep control and to master us. And there are massive industries
devoted to this. They are so common, we don't pay attention to them, like take the advertising
industry. Hundreds of billions of dollars are spent every year to try to induce you to do things
which are harmful to you and destructive to the world, namely to become a mad dog consumer.
Literally hundreds of billions of dollars a year are spent to do this from infancy.
There are no now fields of applied psychology, literally, which study how to get children to
nag their parents. Literally 50 years ago, the advertising industry realized that there's a
big group of people who they aren't targeting children. And they said, we've ignored them
because children don't have money. But we've overlooked the fact that children can nag their
parents and get them to get things from them. That was a big insight. So now if you watch
television with your children, me, my great-grandchildren, if you watch television with them,
two-year-olds, full of advertising, here's something you have to have, a $400 talking dog
or something. So get your mother to buy it for you. That starts from infancy. The mother gets
irritated, buys it, and the kid looks at it and throws it away and gets the next thing. Well,
that's very profitable. It's destructive of their lives, destructive of the environment,
but it's a way to make money. That's David Hume led to a huge effort. I mean,
give you a personal anecdote again. First time I went to a baseball game was in 1937.
And kids were interested in the baseball players, what was happening and so on. I didn't go for many
years until one of my grandchildren wanted me to take into a baseball game. I took him advertising
everywhere. The walls were covered with advertising, the baseball uniforms, the players of ads on the
back. The game has to stop every once in a while for advertising for television. I mean,
every aspect of life has been overwhelmed by the effort to make you a totally irrational consumer.
It's hard to get away from it. By now, people just regard it as like the area of breathe,
you don't ask about it, but it's a message technique of controlling you and it covers
everything else up to the media and teaching and all sorts of things. It's part of the,
it's become in the last 40 years, the neoliberal years, when economists have had a big impact
and aligned very closely with the needs of the business world. It's been overwhelming.
The effect on the public has been devastating. What it's led to is a mood of anger, disillusionment,
discrepant contempt for institutions, which is all over the place, very destructive,
basically leading to a kind of neo-fascist tendencies in government. So it's no small matter
that David Tim basically had it right. Exactly. I mean, manufacturing consent was one of the
first books of yours that I did read. I've read dozens afterwards. I mean, you are an excellent
writer, but I'll never forget the feeling I had when I read manufacturing consent. It changed the
way I perceived everything. You get almost this, it's almost like reading 1984. It's got this big
brother feel to it where you're like, you're being controlled. For good reasons. Yeah, exactly. My
question to you is, how then do you believe that we have sort of a free will when clearly we can't
control this when it is controlled by others? How are we able to navigate this dichotomy?
For us, it's quite easy. If you and I were living in Russia or China, wouldn't it be easy
if we were herring out this conversation in Russia? Let's say you could expect the secret
police to come in and drag us off to a concentration camp. Same in China, not here, not for you,
not for me. So we live in highly controlled societies, but we have a lot of freedom. It didn't
come by magic. You can tell where you live, what a struggle it was to attain it. Not that
significant much here in the United States, but pretty hard people. About a century ago,
Eugene Debs was tossed into jail for daring to say the kinds of things that I say now about
what war is, that war is the health of the state. That's the United States. It's been a battle here
too, but nothing like other places. But it's been when a lot of freedoms have been won, which means
we have the opportunity to terrorside the very thin veil of propaganda control. We can do it
and break through. You read the newspapers, a lot of what they say is quite valuable and important.
You have to know how to navigate your way through the means of control and marginalization that are
built in for institutional reasons, but it's not that difficult. It's not quantum physics.
You can do it pretty easily. Help other people do it. You mentioned social media.
That's been a, it could be something liberating, ways for people to explore,
learn, interact. Unfortunately, it hasn't been that way. Most of what it does is isolate people
in small, self-reinforcing bubbles. You hear, you kind of naturally gravitate towards
things that you approve of and where you get approved, and then attitudes get solidified.
You don't hear alternatives. You get, you lose empathy, the ability to think openly. It's been
destructive. I mean, it doesn't have to be like that. Can't break out of that, but it takes
exercise of the free will that fortunately we have.
No, I have so many more questions for you. My question for you is,
there are still some questions from the audience that I have for you. Do you have time
to answer a few of them? Let's go along a little bit longer.
Let's go for some of them. Let's see. The one says, this is quite a long one. It says,
hello, Professor Chomsky. I've been confused about Professor Chomsky's insistence about
Newton's destruction of the mechanical philosophy, which if I understand correctly,
is based on a reintroduction of an occult force, namely gravity, to explain the motion of bodies.
I thought that Einstein's theory of relativity explained this by supposing bodies move according
to the easiest geometry in their region of space time, conceptually similar to a ball on an incline
except non-Euclidean, not because of an action at a distance. So if this is true, if this is true,
then why totally abandon the traditional Cartesian dualism, if maybe like gravity,
things can be explained mechanically after some time. That's quite a long one. I'm sorry about that.
That's a very common error, including leading physicists who don't understand what the issue
was about the mechanical philosophy. Newton showed that the mechanical philosophy didn't work.
There is no material world that conforms to the mechanical philosophy. Newton regarded this in
absurdity, so did Leibniz, Huygens, the other great physicists of the day. And in fact, they were
correct. What happened is that the idea, the hope to develop an intelligible world disappeared.
Science changed its goals, lowered them, didn't care anymore about whether you have an intelligible
world, just whether you have intelligible theories of the world. That's a big difference.
So Newton's theories were perfectly intelligible. Leibniz could understand them perfectly well.
Newton understood them, but they weren't what Newton called a physical theory, one that explained
the world in intelligible terms. Einstein's theory is intelligible, the theory, but not the world
it describes. It's in a total abandonment of the mechanical, of any notion of intelligibility,
the world, given it all. So it's like Newton's theory. Yes, the theory is intelligible,
but it doesn't bear on the questions that the great scientists who founded modern science were
concerned with. We've given that up. Nobody tries anymore. In fact, when you get to say Bertrand
Russell, who knew the science as well, he said, the search for intelligibility is ridiculous,
put it aside. It took a long time for this to settle in, but now it's just become
scientific common sense. We just abandon the goals of the scientific revolution,
Galileo, Newton, Leibniz, other great figures. We abandon their hopes. We just lower our sights
to try to develop intelligible theories. Newton's was intelligible, but not quite right.
Einstein's is intelligible, does a little better, but it all abandons the aspirations
that led to modern science, given all those up. There's no longer anybody mind problem,
because there's nobody. We don't care. All we need is an intelligible, like Locke pointed out,
let's try to, in the wake of Newton, let's try to find a intelligible theory of how
mental actions take place. We've abandoned any hope of trying to find out what matter is.
Newton himself said, we know so little about matter that, for all we know, all matter is alive.
Arthur Eddington a century ago went beyond that. He said, we know so little about matter that,
for all we know, all matter is conscious, like atoms. We don't know that they're not conscious,
because we don't know anything about matter. Well, same with Einstein's theory. Yes, the theory is
quite intelligible. You can teach it to students, they understand it, but it has abandoned the hopes
and the aspirations that animated modern science. Those have been given up. This was actually
understood by 19th century historians of science, like Friedrich Lange. Take a look at his great
book on materialism. He points out that modern materialists have simply abandoned traditional
materialism. They're willing to accept notions like force and field and so on, which they understand,
but have no material basis. We've given that up. Well, that was the mid 19th century. We should
be able to understand it today. Science just abandoned the goals of the scientific revolution.
Very important moment in the history of science took some time to sink in. So if you take a look at
Newton, he himself said, look, I can't give a physical explanation for anything.
His famous comment, I do not make hypotheses was in that context. Said, I'm sorry. I have no
hypothesis about science. That's why his major work is called mathematical principles. It's not
called principles of philosophy. Philosophy and science in those days. It took a long time. Even
at Cambridge University, Zohn University, they didn't teach Newton's theories for about, I think,
50 years because they weren't physical theories. They were just mathematics and so it's not science.
Finally, science just abandoned hope. Said, we're not interested in this anymore. We have
lower goals. Okay, probably the right move. But there's no longer any dualism because there's
no body, no matter. The same is true of consciousness. The discussion of consciousness is
very misleading. It's a fine philosopher, young philosopher, Galen Strausson, Peter Strausson
who's written extensively about this. And I think he's right. He's pointed out that
the whole contemporary discussion about consciousness is completely backwards.
It's not, there's no problem with consciousness. Consciousness, we understand better than anything
else. We have a perfect understanding of consciousness. I can describe in detail what my
consciousness is. So can you? What we don't understand is matter. So we don't understand
the relation between consciousness and matter because we don't know what matter is.
As Arthur Reddington put it, for all we know, all matter is a lie. It's conscious. Actually,
Strausson himself pursues this as to develop the panpsychism. I don't agree with him in that,
but I think his basic observation is correct. Bertrand Russell said the same thing century
ago. He said, what we know best is consciousness better than anything else. That's what we're
most confident about, what we know most about. The rest of our intellectual explorations
are attempts to ground this in something. And there we run into trouble because we don't know
what matter is. And that's basically correct, I think.
I was chatting to Galen. We're going to chat very soon about the mind-body problem, consciousness,
et cetera, and Philip Goff possibly, I think next week I have an interview with him. So the
panpsychism debate is going to start. We're going to chat about that in quite a bit detail.
Before we get there, as we conclude, this is the final question from one of the last listeners.
They want to know from you. What are your secular metaphysics in terms of teleology?
What do you really believe is the point of all of this? Why are we here? What is the purpose of
all of this? This is one of the questions, the last one I have for you, from the listeners.
The purpose of life, the meaning of life, is what we give to it, period. Other than that,
it has no purpose. There's a life of no more purpose than the lives of the trees in my backyard.
We have the opportunity, which the trees don't have, to make something of our lives.
That will be the remaining in purpose. What we choose to do with this opportunity to have
a number of years on earth, what do we do with it? That's the meaning of life. You're not going to
find it anywhere else. I love that. This is something I always do. I didn't get the chance
the last time. We had a lot of technical errors and a lot of difficulties, but who, if you had to,
give me your Mount Rushmore of philosophy or science, combine them, perhaps give us five,
at least. Who are the people you suggest we read? Try to get a deeper understanding of,
not only philosophy, but the nature of reality, science, and the universe. If you had to give us
five people, you'd recommend, and these are the people that inspired you most. Who would they be?
Actually, the people I've found most inspiring over the years, like Russell or Jim,
are people who worked out pretty clearly or articulated pretty clearly things I had mostly
pretty much figured out by myself. We bring to philosophy our own understanding, our questions,
our confusions. Sometimes people help us clear them up, but there's no list you can point to.
Could be anyone. Could be Heraclitus. He asked a profound question, how can we cross the same
river twice? It's a very profound question. When you stop to think of it, raises all kinds of
questions. Well, that was pre-socratic, so we can start there, or we can look at the Delphic Oracle,
know thyself. It's a good advice. Try to figure out what kind of person are you, what kind of
creatures are we, and so on. Let's start with that. You get from philosophy what you bring to it.
What are the kinds of questions and concerns that you have tried to think about for yourself come to
some conclusions, maybe wrong, maybe incoherent, maybe you can find someone who, as Wittgenstein
put it, can help the fly out of the fly bottle. That's what you should be looking for.
If you had to name your Andrashma philosophy, who would there be? I know it's a tough question,
it's putting you on the spot, but I know Hume's definitely up there. If you had to add three
more people to that list, who would there be? Too many people. In fact, some of them would be people
you never heard of, people who barely even went to school. Literally, I mean one of the most
influential people in my life personally, happened to be an uncle who never went past fourth grade,
but was one of the best educated people I've ever met in my life. Actually, it was a lay analyst,
a profound insight into people, political world, science, other things, literally never went past
fourth grade. That's what you find difficult. What is his name? I mean, I'd love to know his name.
His name was Milton Kraus, died many years ago. Kraus is one of the people who made Novosibirsk
the man he is today. It's great to know that. Two more names, at least. David, look, personally,
David Hume is one of my favorite of all time. David Hume is one of my favorites. He realized in
one of the most tragic submissions in the history of philosophy. At the end of his life, he did
publish a kind of an afterword to a new publication of the treatise in which he said
everything he had tried to do all of his life was a failure. Actually, Galileo said the same thing
at the near the end of his life. He said, I was hoping to show that the world is intelligible.
It's a total failure. He said, I cannot find an intelligible explanation of
the tides, which was true. You can't in the mechanical philosophy. In fact, I think
you find other moments in the history of philosophy and science where people have asked
hard, serious questions. At the end, he said, it all failed.
But they left us with insights and questions, as I've mentioned.
I mean, the podcast is called Mind Body Solution, obviously,
searching for the answer to the mind body problem. Your final words on the mind body
problem and what you think we should do about it? Should we care about it? How can we go about
solving this problem? How should we end this? The first step we should take is asking,
is there a mind body problem? You have to ask that question before you try to solve it.
And the answer to that question is no. There is no mind body problem. There has been none
since Isaac Newton, as John Locke recognized, because we do not have a concept of body,
body, matter, physical, and so on. It's just whatever there is. If you look at modern physics,
they don't know. In fact, I just recently did read a debate in a quantum physics journal
that a friend sent me, which is half a dozen leading quantum physicists debating the question,
what is a particle? They don't know. A number of different answers and speculations.
Nobody knows. We don't know what matters. So there's no mind body problem. So therefore,
there's no solution to it. The nearest you can come to a solution is Locke's suggestion.
Repeated, he put it in his theological framework, but we can drop the theology.
And the way he put it, he said, right after about a year or so after Newton's
Principia appeared, he said something like this, just as the incomparable Mr. Newton has shown
that God assigned to matter properties that we cannot comprehend. So God might have super-added
to matter the property of thought, meaning some organized forms of matter, whatever matter is
yield thought. Right through the 18th century, that was pursued seriously by Hume, many others,
Demetri, finally Joseph Prishley, a scientist philosopher who worked on it extensively,
finds its way into Darwin's early notebooks and pretty much forgotten,
re-invented in the late 20th century, as what Francis Crick called the
Nostalgic Hypothesis, what the Churchlands call the radical new idea in history of philosophy,
that basically just repeating Locke's suggestion in the same words, often repeating Prishley.
I mean, it's useful to study the history of philosophy. There are a lot of insights which
have been forgotten. I mentioned the millennia old history of linguistics, which was forgotten in
the structuralist behaviorist period, but should be revived. But you don't find answers, you find
questions that need answers, and that inspire us to look into them. But with a mind-body problem,
there's not going to be a solution, because there's no problem in the first place.
Noam, as we end this off, I remember one of the comments in our last conversation was,
great to see Noam no longer chatting about politics and Ukraine. Look, I believe it's
very important that you should be, and I'm glad you are doing that. But the comment followed on by
saying, it's so great to see him talking about philosophy, metaphysics, etc. So my last question
to you is, why should we be doing this? Why is philosophy important? Why should people be asking
the deeper questions about the reality of nature, the world, or the mind?
Go back to the Delphic Oracle 2,500 years ago. First question we should be asking is,
know thyself, move on to Socrates a couple of years later, and unexamined life is not worth living.
Once we get that far, we can say that every infant wants to understand how the world works.
Any parent knows that children are annoying because they keep asking why. I want to understand that
a lot of education, treatment of children is designed to beat that curiosity out of their heads.
So let's recover the infancy and try to understand thyselfs, try to understand the world.
There's nothing that we can think of that's more important, including its applications.
So I think the question has easy answers.
Thank you so much, Noam. I honestly enjoy and relish this time with you. I hope we get to do it
again sometime. How are you feeling? Any final words from your side? Nothing more.
I really appreciate your time. Thanks so much, Noam, for joining me one more time.
Very good to be with you. I'm joy talking to you.
