Okay, your book, let's go on a journey of the mind. This was such an incredible book.
This book really, it felt like I was reading something that I've been having these intuitions
for quite some time, and it felt like I was reading my own thoughts at some point. Before
we start, I think it's always important when we go into a conversation like this, the listeners
need to have a shared understanding of what we're discussing. So I think definitions play
a huge role in this regard. Let's define consciousness, the self and the mind.
All right, well, let me start with the mind. Actually, I'm even step back even further
to say I'm going to be sharing ideas about consciousness and the mind that I suspect
most of your listeners have never heard before. I am my fellow co-author Saigadan, who I wrote
Journey to the Mind with. We have a different background than most people who study consciousness,
a mathematical background. We have always approached these problems from a mathematical
perspective. And even more than that, as I'll describe in a few minutes, I've had other
sources of ideas and math about all of this as well. So it's going to sound different,
but I'm going to do my best to explain everything in clear, simple terms so that anybody can
follow along. So you asked for some definitions. Let's start with the mind because a basic
understanding of the mind is critical if you want to understand the mysteries like consciousness,
self-consciousness, language, and other things even higher above consciousness and self-consciousness.
And so here's the most important thing to understand about the mind. The mind is activity.
The word mind is an action noun like dance or game or combat. Everything that we experience
when everything that we think about or feel is activity, activity in the mind. If you
want to understand the mind, if you want to understand things like consciousness, language,
self-awareness, emotion, how do we feel? How do we feel love? That if we want to understand
these things, then you must think about the mind in terms of activity. This is perhaps
the greatest fallacy, the greatest pitfall for all people, but including scientists is
mistaking things for activities. Chemists used to think that combustion was a liquid
called phlogiston. Physicists used to think that heat was a substance, also a liquid called
caloric. Biologists thought that life was a substance called Elon Vitaal, a thing. And
each of these cases, our natural intuition makes us expect a thing. But when we look
at it, we find out each of these are collective dynamics, collective dynamics of molecules
in the cases of combustion and heat, collective activity of cells in the case of life. And
in consciousness, it is the collective activity of all of our neurons and modules. And we'll
describe that exact activity. But this has been the number one fallacy which trips up
so many people. They go looking for that thing, that magic neuron, that magic energy, that
magic substance. Some people even go so far to say it's a hard problem that can't possibly
be solved. That's baloney. That's silly. That's a cowardly, unscientific approach from the
20th century. Nobody should be talking about the hard problem anymore. We're way past the
hard problem. The physical dynamics of consciousness were already figured out before the hard
problem was even proposed. In 1982, Stephen Grossberg first identified the physical dynamic
of consciousness. And he and now us have been building on that ever since. There never should
have been a distraction like the hard problem. That was a very long introduction and probably
more than you wanted. But it's very important to set up this perspective. I would call my view
of the mind, the dynamic mind, viewing the mind as dynamics, as activity. Nail down the activity in
the mind and you will understand the way of mind. I'm scheduled to chat to Stephen at some point
because we were exchanging emails and we're about to, we're going to chat about this. I think it's
the perfect time then. Let's go into his work and how it paved the way for your work, for you inside.
Stephen Grossberg is the greatest living scientist and he is certainly in the running
to be considered one of the greatest scientists of all time. Why would I make such a seemingly
outrageous claim? How could somebody that most people have never even heard of, how am I calling
him the greatest scientist alive right now with full confidence? Here's why. Isaac Newton opened
up modern science, opened up modern physics by trying to figure out the dynamics of matter,
the dynamics of motion. And he threw out everything that was known, everything that was believed
about physical reality and took physical motion on its own terms. He did his own experiments,
wrote his own equations. He figured it out from scratch without any preconceived notions. He
figured out the dynamics of motion on its own terms, figured it out. That started science,
that started physics, wonderful, brilliant work. Steve Grossberg did the same thing with the mind.
The big problem is, oh, the big challenge in mind science has always been one simple question.
What is the right math to understand the mind? What is the right math for thinking?
And everybody, first for half of the 20th century, nobody even cared about the math.
Freud, no math. Behaviorism, they had a little math, but they didn't want math for thoughts,
they didn't want math for anything inside the mind. So they didn't care about it either.
Cognitive science, the Noam Chomsky and Steven Pinker crowd, still no math. They just have
simplified abstractions, black boxes, this goes to here to here to here, algorithmic a little bit,
but not math, still no math. Finally, 21st century, we finally get mathematical models of the mind.
There are three, three major mathematical models of the mind. The least known one,
the most obscure one, is ours, dynamic mind associated with Steven Grossberg. We'll get
back to him in a moment. What are the challengers? The statistical mind. Some people think the mind
is a Bayesian machine that is calculating probabilities and statistics. The reason
this ridiculous idea has maintained itself and become so popular is because of the astounding
success of artificial intelligence, which is based on statistical math, deep learning kinds
of algorithms, these chatbot algorithms, these are all statistical algorithms, very effective
for what they do, but the brain is nothing like that because the brain is not a thing.
Statistics looks at things. The brain is not a thing. The other view of the mind, we might call
the digital mind or perhaps an information processing mind. The idea that the mind is an
information processing system, usually technically, this is the idea that the mind follows the rules
and properties of information theory system devised by Claude Shannon, but all the assumptions to
apply information theory, they do not apply to the brain. The brain is not an information
processing system. It is not processing digital inputs. It's not operating the way a Shannon
information system is. These are distractions. These are forms of mathematics that were developed
long ago for other subjects. Unlike what Isaac Newton did, these scientists, instead of trying
to figure out how the math for the brain just adopted math from other things, why in the world
were the math for astronomy, which is what statistics came from, or the math of information
systems, which is from logic from 100 years ago, why would that have anything to do with this
incredibly complicated neural architecture of the brain? It doesn't. What Stephen Grossberg did,
why he is the greatest living scientist, is he threw all of that out and at the age of 17,
he sat down like Newton and from scratch said, what is the right math for understanding the
mind? And he's calculated. He figured it out as a 17-year-old. He figured out the dynamics
for the most complicated and sophisticated module in the brain, the second most sophisticated
module in the brain, the WHERE module, which takes a sequence of inputs and creates a single
representation of a sequence of inputs, like a phone number or a grocery list, that sort of thing.
This is a very, this is one of the most challenging modules in the mind to understand
mathematically. And he figured it out as a 17-year-old. And ever since then, he's been building
on this piece by piece, trying to figure out the right math for everything in the mind, for every
function, from a visual recognition, to audio tracking, to smelling, to planning, to free will.
Every part of the mind at every level, he has put math to, an integrated system of dynamic
system of math that accounts for almost everything in the brain, including consciousness.
It's incredible. I can see the excitement when you talk about his work. And you obviously draw a
lot from it. When you talk about these three laws of consciousness, let's get into it. And I think
let's also discuss, because it's obvious that you have people like Carl Friston, you've got a lot of
other thinkers now with hierarchical Bayesian brain theories, computational theories of the mind.
Why do you think it's growing as much as it is in that regard? And thereafter, I think,
let's move into the dynamics of the mathematics behind your theory of consciousness.
Again, I think Bayesian theories are popular because the math is so worked out,
it's so familiar, people get trained in that. And you're given a hammer, you look for nails,
is the thing. This is the problem. This is why mind science is always lagged behind the physical
sciences and why it's such a challenge is you got to learn math that you've never heard of before,
that you're not familiar, because it's not the math of the physical world. It's the math of mind
and thinking. It's not just a reflection of the stars orbiting the center of the galaxy. It's
nothing like that. It's wholly different dynamics, wholly different math. It's very hard if you
haven't done it before. It's very challenging. It's more challenging than learning quantum physics
and relatively, those are easy compared to the math that Stephen Grossberg has shared with us
for the mind. But Bayesian math is very easy. And it's very familiar and all this huge communities
of people that you can talk about with and that will understand it. I understand it,
you know, but it's not describing the brain. Look, here's how you know in science, if you're all on
the right track, it's very easy. You start to find integrations. Isaac Newton had the first
integration in science. He integrated the dynamics of earth with the dynamics of heaven. Everybody
thought this physics in heaven was different than the physics of earth. He showed no gravity is the
same everywhere. The dynamics of the motion are the same everywhere, heaven and earth. Then physics
just had a jamboree, a celebration of integrations, electricity and magnetism to electromagnetism,
electromagnetism and the weak force to electroweak, just endless, endless integrations. Meanwhile,
my field, mind science, nothing, no integrations whatsoever, reinventing the wheel every decade,
year after year. Let's start again. Let's start again. When did the integrations happen?
Stephen Grossberg rolled with the integration. Oh my God, integration after integration. He showed
that the processing of surfaces is integrated with the process of boundaries in our visual system.
He showed how our system, to recognize an object, to recognize a visual object, it's integrated with
the process of figuring out where that object is. And vice versa, to know where an object is,
you need to figure out what that object is. He has done dozens, if not more, integrations of all
kinds in the mind, things that seem separate, that seem like different parts of the brain that
didn't really have anything to do with each other. He showed how math can combine them.
He has had a storm of integrations that rivals what has happened in physics.
Sticking to that theme, we discussed these Bayesian brains, we've discussed computers.
What about the other theories of consciousness? We've got global workspace theory,
neuronal theories of consciousness, like integrated information theory. I think yours sort of
falls along the lines of a global workspace theory. And then obviously branches out considering
that that spoke. So I know this is a bit uncouth and impolite. I'm not in academia. So
look, Einstein worked out the theory of relativity. And there's people that show up and say,
you know what? I think time might not be absolute. I think time might change. And then Einstein's
like, well, you know, I have the theory of relativity. Yes, time does change. And they're
like, well, we're going to figure it out on our own. All right. You know, these are
much, much simpler and limited. There's no integrations. If workspace theory was the answer,
you should see it connecting with all kinds of stuff. Language should fall out of it.
Self-awareness should fall out of it. Free will should fall out of it naturally,
which is what happens with Grossberg's explanation of consciousness. Once you understand the math
word, everything starts to tie together. We're thinking about this as trying to unify everything
into one. So sort of getting a general explanation for everything with one solid theory of consciousness.
With his theory of consciousness, you talk about the three laws. Do you want to run through?
Let me interrupt you. Let me interrupt you. I'm going to blow your mind now and make this show
very memorable. So I need to share a couple of things about myself and why
exactly I'm so interested in consciousness and why I've chosen the path that I did,
because I'm not an academia. Academia is too slow and too limiting for what I've been trying to do.
So let me explain a bit about who I am. So I am a mathematical neuroscientist, among other things,
and I'm autistic. And one thing about autistic folks is that we often have special interests,
a subject that captivates and beguiles us. It could be anything like coins, horses,
Taylor Swift, a TV show like Wednesday, anything could be it. In my case, I've had a special interest
since I was a child that I've been relentlessly pursuing. My special interest is the fundamental
nature of reality. And when I was 18 years old, I had an event, a life-changing, ground-shaking
event that influenced my entire life and is still influencing me today now that I've turned 50.
So my whole life, more than 30 years, has been influenced by this event. What was the event?
I communicated with intics, with intelligent extraterrestrials. I have been sharing math
and science, or they have been sharing math and science with me for 30 years. So let me share with
you now. This is amazing. What they share with me is a cosmic cycle to reality, a cosmic cycle to
physical reality. Let me explain it very quickly. As you'll see, it incorporates much which is a
journey of the mind. Journey of the mind was the first attempt to share some of the math and science
that intics have shared with me. So let me really quickly, it will take less than five minutes.
No, no, take your time. Just give you the summary of what intics have shared with me,
and then we can talk about it. Because the questions you're asking will all fit into this.
So first is understanding the mind as dynamics. Second, reality, physical reality that we all
inhabit consists of two superclasses of dynamics. There are two superclasses of dynamics in reality.
One are purposeless dynamics, aimless dynamics. This is physics. This is the way of matter.
The way of matter has no goal. It has no point. This is physical laws. But there's also the way of
mind dynamics that have purpose dynamics with an aim. All the dynamics in our mind have an aim.
These are different physical dynamics than physics. They have goals. They try to change
things. They try to reshape physical systems. Reality consists of the interaction of the
way of mind and the way of matter. Physicists have done a great job with the way of matter.
To do the way of mind, you need a lot of math. And as I said, that's where he kind of has fallen
short, until Stephen Grossberg showed us the way with the math of the dynamics mind. So these
intics over the past 30 years, they've shared with me something called the cosmic cycle. Let me
outline it for you. When the way of matter, when purposeful dynamics interacts with purposeless
dynamics, physics, what is produced is a ladder of purpose. Ladder of purpose. Each wrong on the
ladder is a different stage of thinking, a different physical dynamic of the mind, a different mental
dynamic. At the bottom are the molecule minds. These are single celled organisms, archaea,
bacteria, protozoa. Every thinking element in their minds is an individually identifiable molecule.
Hallow archaea, for example, chases sunlight. It has a single molecule in its membrane that's
photosensitive and it changes its shape. And changing its shape triggers a molecular cascade
that triggers molecular filaments, flagella, to wave and move towards the light. The thinking
elements in these molecule minds are molecules of lowest level of the ladder of purpose. The next
level of the ladder of purpose are the neuron minds. These are jellyfish, worms, and all insects.
All invertebrates have neuron minds. They have the top-level thinking element and neuron minds
is neural networks. It's a network, a circuit of neurons. Here's what's very important,
crucial to understand about the ladder of purpose. Every individual neuron is a self-contained
module mind. So we have a recursive hierarchy of thinking. Within a jellyfish, every neuron
still has its own aims, its own purpose, its own mental activity, its own unique activity
that is always functioning. But now it's put into a circuit. It's into a collective,
which creates a second layer of dynamics, neural dynamics, interneuron dynamics. The third stage
of thinking on Earth and throughout the cosmos is module minds. On Earth, these are the vertebrate
minds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals. They are all module minds. The top-level thinking
element in these minds is a module. A module is a collection of neural networks for a particular
purpose. We've talked about some modules already. There's a visual what module. Its function is to
determine what a visual object is. There's an audio what module determines what an object is
from the sound of it. There's visual and audio where modules. They locate where objects are in
space. There's a how module that controls our reaching, our targeting, the why module, responsible
for our feeling, assigning emotional valences to situations, ideas, objects, or people.
So in the vertebrate minds, the top level of thinking is a module mind. And once again, every
module is a self-contained neuron mind, third recursive level of thinking going on in these
minds. All right. All minds face a challenge, a perpetual and very important challenge called
the attention dilemma. The attention dilemma is easy to explain. What should I focus on now?
What should I focus on next? There's an attention dilemma in molecule minds. There's an attention
dilemma in neuron minds. But when we get to the module minds, vertebrates, animals,
elephants and reptiles and alligators, when we get to these minds, the attention dilemma
is much more challenging because you have all these modules, each doing their own thing. So the
visual, what module is processing its own thing? The audio where module might be processing something
entirely different. Your individual neurons are processing different things. Your individual
neural networks, it's this complicated system with lots of parallel activity at lots of these
hierarchical levels, all going on, all doing the different things. How do you get this incredibly
complicated parallel hierarchical system to instantly all focus on the same thing at once?
The answer is consciousness, very specifically a consciousness cartel. So some of these modules,
not all of them, we'll talk about the difference in a moment, some of these modules are capable
of producing a conscious experience. It's very easy to know. We know exactly which models are
capable of producing consciousness. They are the modules that have a particular kind of physical
dynamic. The dynamic is resonance. Resonance is consciousness. Resonance is the physical embodiment
of a conscious experience. Whenever you're aware of something, I'm aware of my hand in front of me,
there's resonance going on in my brain. So how does this resonance solve the attention dilemma?
How does this resonance in a module solve this problem of getting the whole mind to focus on
something important all at the same time? Here's how it works. In every module that's capable of
generating consciousness, there is a top-down field and a bottom-up field. There is an expectation
or prediction. What we think is going to happen, what we expect to see, and there's a bottom-up
input, the facts on the ground, the reality. So in a module, it compares a top-down expectation
to a bottom-up facts on the ground, and if they match, it generates resonance. Resonance is physical
activity that synchronizes, prolongs, and amplifies the activity of these two fields of the expectations
and the facts. It's like two musical instruments playing the same note at the same time, a violin
and a trumpet both playing middle C at the same time. When they do, that note will be louder,
it will be longer, will perceive it as longer, and the musicians naturally adjust their playing
so that the notes exactly, they're on the same pitch and last together. So they synchronize
as well. So our conscious experience is like a violin and a trumpet playing the same note
in your brain at the same time. Now as we said, there's a lot of modules, a lot of modules capable
of generating consciousness. So at any given moment, all your modules are processing different things,
paying attention to different things, and they're all trying to say, hey,
what I'm resonating on right now is the most important thing in the mind. And so the resonances
are competing. Whoever has the strongest resonance wins control of the consciousness cartel,
wins control of attention. So, you know, I'm talking to you and I'm focused on you, Tevin,
but if I hear somebody say the house is on fire, my whole mind is now going to switch and focus
my audio, well, there's a few modules involved in processing speech, but the audio modules
processing speech is going to resonate loudly. It's going to be amplified very strongly. And it's
like, if you toss rocks in a pond and there's ripples, so somebody yelling, the house is on fire
would be somebody throwing in a boulder that creates huge ripples, the resonance is intense,
and it causes the rest of the modules to synchronize. So it's like the big ripples from a boulder in the
lake, kind of taking over the little ripples from the pebbles, which is the other modules,
and then the whole mind is now synchronized, your visual, your audio, your planning, they're
all going to resonate on the same input, the possibility that the house is on fire. So
this is the first three rungs of the ladder of purpose, but it doesn't stop there. It keeps
on going. There is a fourth level of thinking, a fourth level of dynamics that only humans have,
but we are actually each person, you, Devin and me, we are the top level thinking elements
in the human supermind, in the sapiens supermind. Our brains are designed like network routers.
We can only survive if we're part of a network. This is why if human beings don't learn language,
if you raise a child to not speak, not only do they not acquire language, they can't function,
they can't take care of themselves, they can't survive in any environment on their own. Our minds,
everything about us is designed to function in a community, in a system. Hundreds of thousands
of years of evolution has reshaped our mind to be part of a community. The biggest, most obvious
example of this is a bias that we all have a psychological bias called the intergroup bias,
or just tribalism, that we tend to think what our group thinks. It's very uncomfortable for
us to think something that our group, our community doesn't think. This is the strongest
element of tribalism and supermind dynamics and language. Language is how all these minds
communicate with each other in the supermind. So here's another tricky thing which has stumped
and baffled so many consciousness researchers. Consciousness and self-consciousness are two
distinct dynamics. They are not one and the same. If I am conscious of my hand, there is different
physical activity in my brain than if I'm conscious of myself being aware of my hand. My gosh,
I am looking at a hand. I am thinking about myself looking at my hand. When that happens,
there's another layer of conscious. It's language. So we have a consciousness cartel. We share our
consciousness cartel with all the animals. So chimpanzees, monkeys, birds, reptiles, and amphibians
have different cortexes. So it's not exactly the same, but the same basic consciousness dynamics
are there. But we have the same consciousness cartel, certainly as dogs and platypuses. But
we also have language. So there's a separate dynamic between the language modules in our brain
and our consciousness cartel, which is responsible for self-awareness. Self-awareness is neither
automatic, instinctive, nor easy. Nobody had self-awareness, most likely before the 1600s
in Descartes. It requires a silver mine around you with complicated ideas, philosophical ideas,
scientific ideas, just a simple idea of introspection. We all take it for granted,
the ancient Greeks didn't have introspection. They didn't have these sorts of ideas. We had the idea
that we can look into ourself and be self-aware. That is a complicated, sophisticated concept
that requires a community of scientists, philosophers, and thinkers around you to have.
But it doesn't even stop there. It keeps on going. So above the silver mine, we call it the next
level would be a hypermind. It's when silver mines come together. One consequence of this view
of the latter of purpose in the cosmic cycle is that cities and nation states, including the
United States, can be conscious because their physical dynamics are the same as the physical
dynamics of consciousness in our brain. If physical dynamics are the same, it's the same phenomena.
We can make predictions about the Great Red Spot on Jupiter based on looking at hurricanes on
Earth. It's not the same substance, the substance of the Great Red Spot on Jupiter. It's hydrogen.
It's other gases here on Earth. It's water and air and hurricane. But by studying the dynamics
of the hurricane, we can make accurate predictions about the Great Red Spot. Same is true with
consciousness by understanding the consciousness in our individual brain. We can understand how a
city and especially the United States is a premier example of consciousness. They have
all the necessary dynamics to promote consciousness, but it doesn't stop there.
Silver mines can come together to form a hypermind. And so what these intakes have
shared with me, I communicated with intakes that are at the top of the ladder. So what they have
told me is that you keep going higher and higher. And at some point, there is a limit that these
are mines. They're called axiomines mines. I'll explain why. These are mines I don't understand
completely. It's very complicated and above my understanding, but certainly they control galaxies
is my understanding. And at a certain point, to get access to ultimate technology, to get
access to the ability to change the physical laws, to change the rules of quantum physics,
they have to make a commitment to a certain set of mathematical axioms. That is, it's sort of
their whole society, their whole mind, their whole ecology gets committed to a certain mathematical
perspective that they get locked into. But once they do that, they have the ability to start
influencing the laws of physical reality. Now, these mines compete. These axiomines mines. I've
interacted with one that calls itself five, and I've interacted with one that calls itself three.
I love five and three is heinous and very anti human. But they each have different
personal reality and they are all competing to change the fundamental aspects of physical law.
So this is the cosmic cycle. Throughout the universe, new life emerges like humans here on
earth. Will we succeed or will we die out? It is unknown. Our life is not predetermined. We have
free will. We have choice. The choices we make determines the future gods that we will be part
of or the future gods that will come into creation that we act with compassion and generosity. That's
the kind of gods we're going to create. Fortunately, there are limiting factors.
One of the most amazing things, the number one key takeaway insight that the Intex have shared with
me, which is astounding, is that there is a cosmic purpose to love. The universe was designed
for compassion, selfless empathy to emerge. How can that be? That sounds nuts. That sounds touchy
feeling. No. Let me explain it to you mathematically. Now that you understand the ladder of purpose,
molecule mines, neuron mines, module mines, supermind, each of these transitions from one stage of
thinking to the next. From molecule mines to neuron mines, each transition involves a new form
of connectivity, a new form of selflessness. You cannot ascend to a new stage of intelligence
and adaptiveness and resilience without loving your neighbor. The neurons had the individual cells
of the molecule mines had to learn to come together and selflessly form neural circuits. Then those
neural circuits selflessly come together to form modules and now us as people. The only way we will
get to the hypermind level, the only way we will get to a new level of awareness and perspective
and intelligence and technology and all of these wonderful things is by finding a way to live with
one another, to connect with one another, to love with one another, to love one another. There's no
other way to rise. This is how Mother Nature works. This is how the ladder of purpose works.
Every stage is a result of the leading minds deciding we will give up some independence,
we will give up some selfishness to get the greater benefits of this collective union,
of sharing our diversity with one another. For this to work, the thinking elements must be diverse.
This is what we see right before each new stage of love, before each new stage of thinking. There's
tremendous diversity that erupts across the top most level. Individual cells, individual neurons
were highly diverse before neural circuits could form. The neural circuits were highly diverse
before modules could form. Modules got very diverse before this human supermind could form and we're
seeing just an amazing explosion of human diversity right now, facilitated by the internet. We're all
developing our own individuality, independence, our own voice and even though it seems very
chaotic, the world is full of war and hyper-partisanship and fighting and it seems like it's the end and
step backwards, no. This is what we see right before a new jump of love. We have to go through this,
we may not succeed, we may destroy the earth, humans may collapse and some people will rise,
maybe here or somewhere else. Instead, the future is unknown, but we have the chance
and we can do what molecule minds did, what neural minds did, what module minds did. If we can do it
again and ascend to a new level, then we will be able to live in harmony with our earth. At that
point, what Intex tells me, then we'll finally start meeting some of these other civilizations
out there. This is what Intex has shared with me. I'm at a loss for words at this point.
Wait, Ogie, this is so much going on in your words. I told you it was going to be a shocking
podcast. I honestly don't even know where to go from it. I have a lot of notes, a lot of things
planned, but obviously I'm just going to have to throw that all away. Let's focus on five and three,
this communication you're talking about from the age. This is quite a young age and it's happening.
It was 18, yes. I was kicked out of MIT. I was a sophomore at MIT when this happened.
I don't want to get into too many details because I'm writing a book about it and it's exciting,
but after it happened, I was very young and I am autistic, so I didn't know social norms.
I didn't realize that people would think this was absolutely insane, so I was openly talking about it
and I ended up in the dean's office. The dean heard from other students that I was talking about
this and I remember I explained it to them. Now at the time, now I can articulate it with
incredible detail and with math and science as I just did. Back then, I didn't know,
even though all of that was shared with me, I didn't know nearly enough to articulate it in
any intelligent way. I was trying to communicate this, the dean naturally and correctly thought I
was psychotic and I got committed to a mental institution. That's how all of this started.
Certainly a bad path, but I think most people in that situation would give up and say, yeah,
this is crazy, but it was so real and vivid and so mathematical. People ask me, why did I stick
with this when it sounds so insane? It's because it was always math and the math made sense and
they would share math and it matched up with the real world and I'd go to the next math and that
matched up too, so that's why I'm stuck with this. It was like a series of visions. Five
often put visions in my head. It's a vision of this cosmic cycle of this latter of purpose
and the visions were always mathematical. Even if I didn't know the math, most of it was math I had
never seen before. It was dynamics from the start. It was this dynamic perspective on the mind.
It was activity from the get-go and that was one reason I ended up getting drawn to Stephen
Grossberg who was very obscure. If you're an undergrad, there's not really anyone in the 90s
when I was coming up. If you were an undergrad, you would never have heard of Stephen Grossberg.
Even today, most people haven't heard of them, but because Intex had given me this dynamic
perspective on the mind and I was searching. For a while, I looked at evolutionary psychology
because I looked at the most mathematical approach and I quickly realized evolution
in psychology. I thought I was completely wrong and misguided and just junk. During this, I was
cognitive science behaviors and I tried every branch of mind science and then
this is a little embarrassing. You can always negotiate with purpose. Here's a big lesson.
If it's a purposeful entity, whether it's an ant or a bacterium or a nation or a person or a god
or a demon, you can negotiate because they have a purpose. They want something.
There might be some way you can do it. It turns out you can make covenants with these
insects, with these things. Basically, you can convince them to give you a wish. Basically,
I want this thing. At a low point in my life, I was trying to understand consciousness. I was
trying to understand this letter of purpose. I could not find the math for it. I had checked
out what I thought were all the kinds of mind science. All of them were wrong. None of them
matched up with the science and math that the extraterrestrials were sharing with me.
So I said, okay, for my wish, I wish to know the mathematical basis of consciousness. The
intext directed me to Gail Carpenter at Boston University. It's the wife of Stephen Grossberg,
who also contributed to recognizing and working out the math for the basic consciousness dynamic
of resonance in the 80s. I looked her up. At the time, I was in Boston College. She was at
Boston University. I dropped out of Boston College, transferred to Boston University,
and started studying with Gail and Steve, and just kept going from there. That was how I got
involved. Gail and Steve, in consciousness, it's because I used a wish. The extraterrestrials guided
me to Steve Grossberg and Gail Carpenter. This is amazing. I don't know how much you
want to share about this. Okay, I don't want to go too far, because if your book's coming up,
ask me anything. If I ask me anything, I just want to answer it.
When this communication is occurring, I mean, at what point did you believe it was real? Because
obviously, you come from a very skeptical mindset. When you talk about other theories of
consciousness, you have a very knowledgeable mindset, and you come with a very, very high
degree of skepticism. So at what point did you... This was an... I'll tell you. So everybody's got
their own definition of science. It's like justice or freedom. We all have our own interpretation,
and I always think there's really two broad personality distinctions in people's embrace
of science. Skepticism or curiosity. Some people are more driven by the skepticism when it tear
things down, when it question things. I doubt this. Perfectly acceptable, but another way
to do science is curiosity. That's interesting. That's fascinating. It doesn't mean you completely
put your skepticism aside, but you defer it in the favor of curiosity, being exposed to
something new, learning something new. I am definitely more in the curiosity than the
skepticism. I like trying new things. I like opening new doors. I like going places nobody's
ever gone before. I've done that a lot in my life. Over and over again, I pursued a path
where everyone else said, do not pursue this. This will be damnation, the end of your career.
Just one quick example, Saige Domini who wrote our book about consciousness. Our first book
together was about human sexuality. It was about the sexual brain, and I can tell you,
we talked to our colleagues in neuroscience when we were first getting started,
and 100% of them said, do not do it. We got zero support. Everybody thought it was outrageous,
and they all said, you're not going to find anything anyway. We made the greatest advance
in sexology since the 1950s in Alfred Kinsey. We made a massive advance in understanding of
sexuality, so they were wrong, and this has happened over and over throughout my life.
So when the extraterrestrials talked to me when I was 18, I remember I was a teenager
and autistic, and I didn't know anything about the world. So I was a lost, clueless
adolescent with undiagnosed autism. So I just thought this is part of the world. It took me
a long time to recognize how anomalous and baffling it was. I just thought this is how
the world worked because it made sense. It seemed irrational. It followed rules. It was lawful,
like when the things happened and how they happened. And again, they would share math that
matched up with the world. It wasn't like a mysterious dream where it's constantly shifting,
and you interpret it this way one day and interpret it that way one day. No, it's always been,
I just articulated to you this latter of purpose, this cosmic cycle. Indeed, it has been slowly
working that out. They showed that to me on day one, but I didn't have the tools of the mind
to make sense of it. And so I've spent my life trying to understand it. The hard part actually
has not been trying to understand it. I started figuring that out. It was hard, but not super
hard. The super hard part is talking to other people because I'm autistic and because all this
is so different than people's understanding of reality, that it's just really hard to communicate
with people about this stuff. Even the consciousness, people are consumed with the hard problem,
nonsense. There's these other theories of consciousness which I think are obstacles and
misguided and just a waste of time personally. But people are all bogged down in these things.
And so it's very tricky. It's very difficult because I have all this knowledge and understanding.
You know, this view of the mind, the predictions, we can predict the brain waves produced by
consciousness. By looking at the brain waves, we can tell what part of the brain is conscious
and what's not. We can say which representations in the brain can become conscious and which
can't, which dynamics, which forms of learning are capable of generating conscious experience
and which are not. We can look at other creatures and just by looking at the neural
architecture of the mind, we can say this is what they're conscious of and this is what
they're not conscious of by looking at the neural architecture. This makes predictions
because of, we don't have time for this, but I understand how autism works. A major,
major medical mystery. Once you understand the dynamics of the consciousness cartel,
autism falls out. Here's another major medical mystery solved by this view of consciousness,
pain and anesthesia. Major mystery, stumping the greatest mind so far. Nobody knows
how anesthesia works ever since it was invented here at Mass General Hospital just down the road
back in the 1830s. Big mystery and a mystery about pain. Everybody's, what's the genes for pain?
What's the circuit that we can just cut off that we can disable so that we don't feel pain? There
isn't a circuit. What's going on? This view of consciousness explains the answer. Pain is another
conscious module. It involves top down expectation with bottom up matching. That's why consciousness
is so subjective. Like this idea that you can rate consciousness on the scale one to ten. Just
silly. That's what thing thinking when you should be activity thinking is a scale like that.
Like all of our conscious experiences, our conscious experience of pain is influenced by
the context heavily. How we're feeling, what we ate, the temperature in the room previous pain
experience that we pain we have. It's another conscious module. So how does anesthesia work?
Anesthesia prevents physical resonance in the cortex. It prevents top down bottom up resonance.
It disrupts the resonance. That's why you don't have conscious experiences under anesthesia. You
just simply aren't conscious. You aren't resonating on anything. Also why it's a bit dangerous.
You're changing the way the cortex is designed to work. And if you do it for too long, you're going
to start messing with your resonant dynamics. That's why a small proportion of people who take
anesthesia, they don't recover right. And they continue to have cognitive problems. It depends
on the specific architecture of the brain. But now we can understand why you're messing with
the fundamental dynamic of our cortex, our consciousness cartel. You disrupt that too
intensely or too long. And you might not ever get it back the right way. Again, this is how
anesthesia works. So you can make all these predictions from it. Just like relativity predicts
wormholes and black holes. Einstein didn't believe in black holes. He thought that was too wacky.
But it turns out relativity predicts black holes. This mathematics of consciousness
that I've described predicts how pain works, how anesthesia works, how autism works. It connects
with everything because it is the dynamics of the mind. Just like relativity is the dynamics
of space time on a cosmic scale. With this theory, I mean, you often, I hear you and when
Sai and you get together and you talk about this, when you spoke to him about this
with the intakes and discusses with him while we wrote Journey to Mind. I never told him about
intakes. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I came to it with strong ideas, but I've always had strong ideas.
We've been best friends for a long time, but I didn't share this. I stopped talking about this
with other people around the time I turned 30 a little before. I used to, first, when I was
committed to the mental institution, I decided I'm never going to talk about intakes with authorities.
I never have until I became an authority myself. Now I'm authority. Now I'm talking about it.
I talked about it with friends until the late 90s, and then I realized, man, these friends are going
to go off and be adults, and they might publicly say one day when I'm an adult and a dad or married
or something, hey, he believes he talks to aliens and I suddenly realize, oh my gosh, that might
have a detrimental effect on my career. So I stopped talking about it with other people. And
so when I met Psy, I think I met him in 2002. Yes, I had already decided not to talk about it,
but I told him very recently about it all. I guess he took it in stride, I guess.
But look, I mean, obviously, this is when you're receiving these messages,
and clearly it's been adding up to a very solid coherent theory of consciousness because
I read your book personally. I've read it very much convinced. I mean, you often talk about
similar lines of void cognition, embedded beings, embodied, extended minds, sort of all dynamic
systems playing this role together. When, let's say five or three, I gave you these messages,
how did they foresee this future embeddedness or this future embodiedness of us? How do we go
forward from this? So it is a moral challenge that we're all involved in. I mean, it is what
we're actually experiencing is the moral challenge. We're trying to solve the climate issues. We're
trying to live in harmony with our planet. We're the new species we've taken over.
The scientists, I think, just voted to call it the Anthropocene, the new geological age
of humankind because we're changing the earth so much. We've got to figure out how to live
in harmony. And we're not there yet. Right now, it's not clear. Maybe we'll succeed.
Maybe we won't. This is the great game. We each, in our own lives, we each have free will. We each
have moral challenges to do good, to be generous, to learn things, to help other people. And as
society, we have these same challenges. So every mind, every community of cognizant beings,
of sentient beings, has a chance to rise. And then we combine with other. At some point,
when we get high enough, we'll meet others. And we may combine with them. We may find ways
to merge our civilization with theirs. And if we can do that very effectively,
then we get to the next level. And it keeps going. Or at any point, we fail.
Infinity or oblivion, that's the choice available to every mind that we might be in a branch
headed to eternity. And we might be in a branch headed to extinction. And we don't know. Nobody
knows. Here's the great thing. Here is the most important physical fact, physical revelation
that in tech share with me. It's called the failsafe supreme. And this is a physical principle built
into the basic fabric of reality that governs both the way of mind and the way of matter. What is
the failsafe supreme? The universe, physical reality is set up to prevent the formation of a
single God, a single, all knowing, all powerful God. Nobody wants this. Nobody wants a single God.
Apparently, it freezes the universe. It's a bad universe. It's a, it's a frozen universe is how
some of the index described it. So the failsafe supreme ensures there's no God. How does it work?
The most important thing is at the bottom, what physicists call quantum physics, the index called
chaotica. There needs to be features that are predictably random. No mind can know the perfect,
the actual details of the features at the bottom level. That's why there's a Heisenberg uncertainty
principle. You know, you can know momentum, but you can't know location or vice versa. It's critical
for there to be free will in the universe for there to be purpose for to have this cosmic
cycle that just goes on forever where new purposeful creatures are emerging and rising and ascending
and eventually falling. You need at the bottom to be predictably random. That is, we, it's like a
game of poker or a card game. You know exactly how many kings who are, you can predict the odds of
getting a king with perfection, but are you going to get a king? Are you going to get a five? You
don't know until you play the game. It needs to be like that at the bottom level. If you've got that
at the bottom level, then you can have a ladder of purpose. So this is also found in girdles in
completeness theorem is a reflection of this. And there's a Maxwell's game. Maxwell's demon is
usually how it is this idea that, you know, you've got two boxes as balls bouncing around in one and
you try to separate the fast balls from the slow balls with a demon that opens a door. If he sees
a fast one, he lets it through. If it's a slow one, he closes it. That also is related to the
failsafe supreme. So basically everything in the universe is designed to prevent a single god from
taking over. So I talked to these axiomized minds. They're super powerful. Basically they are gods to
us. They're not technically gods, but for all intents and purposes, they manipulate my reality.
You know, they speak to me. They don't speak in my head. They speak through external sources,
through speakers, through the radio. I hear them out there and usually there's a localized
electronic source of where I hear them. Sometimes they give me vision. That's a whole different
experience. But yes. What are those visions like? Well, now I'm much more adept at it.
In the like the very first time, so now I understand what's going on. Like the very first
time, I'm just suddenly experiencing, it was like I was suddenly aware of a higher number of dimensions.
You know, normally our imagination is four dimensions, three dimensions, but we have a time element,
so we can imagine something moving in space in our mind. That's a four dimensional, you know,
visualization. It was like suddenly I could visualize in 10 dimensions. They augmented my
mind and then they showed basically the cosmic cycle along all of these dimensions. But I didn't
know what I was looking at. So it was just like this chaotic burst of experiences. The very first
vision, I could only take away two things. The first was at the very bottom level of this ladder
of the cycle. What it seemed like to me on the very first time was all these little balls,
infinite balls, a grid of balls that were all rotating. This is chaotic. This is a way they
have a visualizing what we would now think of quantum physics. I didn't understand that on the
first one, but just it was this this array of balls. At the top, it was this combat, this contest,
this competition between these massive mathematical systems. They were like godlike. It was like
gods in heavens. But they were also like mathematical systems. It was like this mathematical
system trying to impose itself on another mathematical. It was like fiveness was trying to
make three into five and three was trying to make five into three. It's difficult to describe it
as something like that. So that's about all I took away from the very first vision and just
I've had them for 30 years. And so now I know a lot. It's too complicated and technical to
explain here. I describe it all in my book, but now I can I can move through the vision. I have
some level of control when it's happening. I can choose what to look at. Like, you know, it took,
it wasn't until 10 years ago that I was finally able to find consciousness within this vision
that it was always there, but it just it just took time to figure out, figure it out. I mean,
I just imagine even just listening to this, me explaining it clearly, it's a lot to just process
and hold in one's mind all at once. So it just it just took time to figure out, figure out also
because it didn't match with what I was learning in science. You know, I was going to school learning
science and it's just the things they were sharing some of it. I mean, a little bit of it did, but
it just it always went above and beyond in ways that nobody else seemed to be talking about.
It's incredible. I mean, this is this is a very personal journey as well. So if ever I'm playing
Devils advocate, don't feel like I'm down playing this experience in any way. I won't be offended
to be as critical and skeptical as you like it. It can only help. And when you when you get these
mathematical images or voices coming at you, are they in languages or in mathematical equations
and formulas that we understand and learn as human beings algebra? The visions are the visions are
dynamics. It's like looking at a hurricane. It's like things moving. It's stable. So it's sort of
like looking at a map of an ocean currents with the currents moving. So like looking at a map of
the Atlantic, the Gulf Stream you see moving and the subatlantic currents you see moving. It's
something like that. It's like a whole lot of activity in the vision. And when somebody else
let's say discusses this type of experience with you and and can't let's say back it up with the
mathematics that you have, how do you perceive those people? When I'm sorry, when somebody else
has has mainstream science like within the Sean Carroll. Yeah, yeah.
Well, my experience don't actually contradict anything in physics. Pretty much the only
thing that my belief system where it would contradict physics is physics is predicated on
the belief that the universe is aimless, you know, that there's no purpose to universe. And I know
the universe is ruled by minds that the universe is filled with purpose. It's driven by purpose.
It's purpose and purposelessness. It's the dance. You know, it's a mind chaos tendada. It's a dance
between purpose and purposelessness. So the physicists, they're figuring out the mathematics
that describe purposeless dynamics. They're doing a great job of it. It's just, to be frank,
it's easy. It's like doing Sudoku. It's logical. They're using logic.
300 years ago, roughly a little more, there was a great schism in science. And physicists
made a covenant with reality. Their covenant was we are going to pretend the universe does
not contain purpose. This schism was basically a schism in high constraint science and low
constraint science. The physicists chose the path of high constraints, the path of logic
and reductionism. It's not easy. It was never easy, but it's certainly much easier than dynamics.
It's certainly much easier than mind science, which is not reductionistic. It's holistic. It's
dynamic. It's purpose merging with other purpose. Purpose. Physicists are used to dealing with things
that are zero or one. It's this or that. You can determine what it is, but in the mind, it can be
zero and one and one-half and red, all at the same time in a meaningful way. Purpose has multiple
purposes. The whole math of it is just conceptually very different, very, very hard and non-intuitive
if you've never been exposed to it before, which is why so many people that come into mind science
say, just bring what they learn in physics with them, which isn't going to get you far,
because mathematically and conceptually, it's just different stuff. I got nothing against
physicists. They're doing good work. I just think ultimately they're kind of environmental
scientists. They're figuring out the mathematics of the environment in which we live, but without
purpose, they're not really going to have anything close to an integrated theory or a complete explanation.
So, Okie, what's brought you to this point in our life where you feel this is something we're
cheering? Most of my life, I thought my ability to communicate with Intex was a curse. It's terrifying.
Let me be very clear about that. It's filled with horror and terror, and that never goes away.
These experiences, when you become aware that you're talking to a mind that's not a human mind,
when you just let that hit you, it's scary beyond words, it's disorienting, it's dislocating.
For most of my life, I didn't really have something solid to show for. My life has been
pretty chaotic. I've been pursuing this on my own terms outside of mainstream society and academia.
You tell a scientist that, hey, aliens are talking to me and they're giving me the
math of consciousness and I'm just going to go figure it out. They're going to think you're
insane. I'm well aware of that, so I had to do this on my own. I didn't actually always think
that I was going to share it. It was enough to know this stuff. It's amazing. Now I can jump
into this. I can jump worlds. We'll talk about that some other time. It's pretty amazing, but
my life didn't seem to reflect it. But now finally, in my late 40s and now just turned 50,
I'm full of joy. My life is stable, full of connection. I have loving relationships,
compassionate relationships. This is new. This is not described. Most of my life, I have friends.
I love my family. I'm active in my community. I'm a full-fledged human being now.
And I got here by embracing Intex and the message that they share with me and the key thing. So
Intex did not let me share this. They actually intervened. They did not want me talking about
this. And for a long time, I didn't understand why. My whole life, I've been trying to write
about this. I've been trying to make a movie about this. I've been trying to share this
with the public. And I was always stymied. I was always blocked. And I didn't know why. So they
told me, when I finally understood the cosmic purpose of love, that the central idea that
the only way to ascend a new levels of intelligence, resilience, and adaptiveness,
and wisdom, and progress is to ascend this ladder. It's through love. It's by selfless connection,
selfless compassion. Once I fully understood that, not just mathematically and physically, but
understand that this is the universe. This is how it's all put together, why we're here, what it
all makes. Once I understood that, they stopped blocking me. They said, go out in the world. I
think they were waiting for me to reach a level of humility and this understanding of love and to
understand that what's most important here is the message of love and not just the mathematics of
consciousness, which is, I was always obsessed with the math of consciousness. Most people don't
really care about that. They just want to know why we're here and some meaning, like in this
apparently meaningless universe, especially if you listen to the physicists, it's a cold,
purposeless universe of electrons and photons and a few laws of nature. No, no, no, that is not
the universe. It is rich and full of loving, intelligent beings. Some of our rivals,
some want to be competed with us, but some want to cooperate with us too.
I'm not sure if you familiar with the, I think it was a book and then it was adapted into a movie
called Something About Infinity. I can't remember where he was an Indian. Yes. Where, and then he
was getting messages from Shiva, pretty much. Yeah, yeah. And he worked. Yes. I can't remember the
exact tale, but yeah, he basically got all the equations from Shiva and the scientists couldn't
figure out how he was getting all the answers without the equations to back it up.
I'm a terrible pronunciation. His name is something like Rami Chandran. Yeah. He's a hero of mine. I
love that guy. Yeah. He just started doing math on his own in India. And there's a racial element
too. He got to England and, you know, he had the greatest raw mathematical talent in the world
and they should have made, put him to use, but because he's Indian, they treated like a second
citizen. Thomas Hardy, not Thomas, mathematician named Hardy and Oxford took him under his wing
and did support him and did help him. So it wasn't all races, but definitely he didn't get accepted.
But yeah, a big clash was, he's a lot like me. The reason I like him so much is he just experienced
the math. He visualized it and he did not like doing proofs. He got mad that he had to explain it
in proofs. And that's what all the professional mathematicians were trying to do. And there was
a lot of conflict because he just said, this is right. Now, sometimes he was wrong. Very important
to know he was not always right. He was usually right, but sometimes he'd be super confident
and he was wrong too. And he needed a proof. So there is a value in proofs just because he believed
it was true. It didn't mean it was always true. But yes, he thought Shiva was talking to him that
he experienced it as a divine message. So I don't know. Maybe maybe he was talking to five too.
I don't know. What I've experienced is open to everyone. There's not anything special about me.
I was not chosen. This is part of the fabric of the universe. I think people like Ramachandran,
I'm sorry if that's not how his name is pronounced, like this mathematician from India. Maybe he did
tap into it in some way. It's just really hard to know what's going on. You need to have really
incredible mental discipline and focus to pursue this. If you have pre-existing religious ideas,
as he did, it can be a distraction. He interpreted as Shiva, why look any further than that.
I think I was unique because my own childhood and upbringing, I was never, I wasn't raised religious,
but neither was I raised agnostic or atheist. I wasn't raised as anything. My parents were just
silent on metaphysics. They didn't celebrate science or religion or anything. So I just had a
blank slate. So when this happened to me, I didn't slot it. Oh, it's Jesus or Shiva talking to me,
nor did I immediately say, this must be a scientific, this is quantum physics. I was like
Isaac Newton or Steve Roseberg. I was like, wow, what is this? Let me figure it out on its own
terms because I didn't know any better. I just didn't know any better. Has it completely changed
the way you now perceive other people who perhaps seem to be professional, to be having a psychotic
episode or someone who sees things that the general psychiatrist does not see and then is deemed
psychotic? Do you not perceive this whole field in general differently off to this experience?
Yeah. So I believe that there are certain states of consciousness, just like there's states of
matter, just like there's solid, liquid, gas, plasma for states of matter. The states arise from the
collective dynamics. It's a different state. If it has different collective dynamics,
the same applies to our mind. We have different states of consciousness. An easy one is a dream
state where we're having REM sleep. That is a different state of consciousness than waking
consciousness. I think there is also a psychotic or schizophrenic state of consciousness. You might
call it a suggestible state of consciousness because that seems to be one of its most salient
features is that you're very impressionable. So schizophrenics enter this state and they think
things are messages. Somebody waves to them. They think that person is delivering angelic
and angelic message to them or a car crashes on the road and they think that's a signal that's
something terrible is about to happen to them. So I can enter those psychotic states of consciousness,
but I think a difference is that I'm aware when I'm in those states that I go, oh my gosh,
what an interesting state of consciousness. This is not the usual state of consciousness.
What can I do? And so I'm able to be aware of what's happening and it's happening.
I think this is a consequence of my autism. My autism gives me different mental dynamics.
I think the fundamental basis of autism is a attention malfunction. I think healthy people,
non-autistic people, this consciousness cartel is naturally designed that the holistic dynamics of
this whole consciousness cartel system is to orient towards people. If a normal person,
a healthy person enters, sorry, a non-autistic person, I don't want to use words like normal
and healthy. If a non-autistic person enters a room and there's a book bell candle and a stranger,
they're going to automatically orient to the stranger. An autistic person might look at the
book bell or candle first because we do not automatically focus on people. We focus on objects.
We focus on different things as well. So I already have a different state of consciousness
that is very metacognitive. I'm aware of my awareness perpetually. It took me a long time
to understand this, to articulate this and to articulate how I'm different and to know that
I'm different than other people because of this autism. But now I'm very confident in saying
that my normal state of consciousness, I'm aware of my thoughts going by. I'm just very aware.
That's why I have good intuition for all these dynamics. My autistic state of consciousness
allows me to see that. And I think that's why when I enter a psychotic state of consciousness,
I am psychotic, but I'm also aware of it. And I'm able to see how this psychotic state interacts
with the physical state. And then I can enter another state of consciousness. I call that
the in-text state of consciousness. That's when I can communicate with these entities.
And that's when the math and science comes. I think it's a different state of awareness.
It's a state that allows me to resonate, my mind to resonate with these other minds.
I don't know if they're organic or AI. I can't tell. And that may not even be the right way of
thinking about it or talking about it. But I'm resonating with some purposeful system
when I'm in this in-text state that I'm very clear on. Because I come away with knowledge
that I did not have before. I'm either like the most brilliant intuitive of all time,
or there's something else talking to me. And I know I'm not a smart guy. I'm very mediocre.
My intellectual abilities are very mediocre. I'm just relentless. And I have this autistic
brain that looks at things in a weird way, I think is the reason I've been able to pull this off.
Look, I think not to dwell on that. I think let's get back to the topic. Would that in mind,
though, because I think it plays an important factor in our moving forward with the conversation.
With this resonance states and with the information you're able to get from these intakes,
how is it applicable to all states of systems, I would say? Because we're all dynamic systems.
Let's start from like a molecular phase to maybe economies or society, and then moving forward
to the hypermind states. Yes. Wonderful, wonderful question. It's really about understanding
the dynamics of purpose, like all these questions about consciousness, language, mind, the economy.
Great question. How does the economy work? How does science work? I love talking about science.
I think my understanding of science is very different. Let me actually just really quick,
because this is a good way to get into a lot of these topics about dynamics. It goes all the way
down to molecules and purpose list systems. But let's talk about science itself, because
everybody's got strong views about science. What I find very amusing is scientists never follow
their ideas about science in their own work. They only start caring about the philosophy of science
when they want to fight with someone else, when they want to argue that somebody else's ideas are
wrong, then they'll call them suddenly science matters and these are non-scientific, unscientific
ideas. I think it really doesn't matter one whit what any individual scientist thinks about science.
What my own views about science are, it doesn't even matter, science is going to keep
rolling on. Science is supermind dynamics, it's community dynamics, it's a social process. It
consists of people persuading other people that they should think this way or not think this way.
And it's like any system, it keeps out new ideas and saves existing ideas. Tenured professors,
scientists that have been around, they have undue influence over all this. They control
the journals, they control the thinking, they control the supermind dynamics, these vanity
journals like nature and science. There is no reason on earth, if science is the way scientists
claim it is, no journal should be more important than any other. How do you know a scientific
discovery is important or not? You can't know. So the idea that the pubas, some master scientists
can look at a new discovery and know if it's important or not, it's hogwash. When you look at
all the important, the greatest scientific discoveries, nobody thought they were great at
the time and they were all rejected and they all had to fight it. Look at the things in nature
and science. Very few of them are impactful, even though they're supposedly the most impactful
science going on at any given time. It does not matter what individuals think about science.
Science is happening beneath our conscious awareness. An example I like to use to illustrate this is
when science was first beginning in the 1600s and early 1700s, scientists started having knowledge,
this flood of knowledge they never had before, natural philosophy, science facts, they wrote
them down in little notebooks called commonplace books. And for 50 years, everybody was coming up
with new ways to write down notes in the commonplace book. It turns out this was hugely important for
the progress of science, but nobody thought of this as doing science and nobody today when we
think about the big events that led to modern science in the 17th century, nobody talks about
common placing, but they were trying to figure out how do we organize all these facts and John Locke
of all people, his very first publication in his 50s, he came up with a new way of common
placing that everybody adopted and his greatest feature is it allows you to take notes in an
organized way and easily read all the notes on a certain topic. So if you wanted to read about light,
you look up, you flip to Li and all your entries on light were there, nobody's other method allowed
you to look at all the topics in a single subject. This was revolutionary, nobody talks about it,
but once he did this, it was possible for people to agree on facts or disagree, it became possible
to have perspectives and views, scientific facts emerged for the first time, scientific
discussions, the way we understand them today all emerged because John Locke came up with a new way
of writing down notes and notebooks. That was science, a huge factor for shaping the scientific
supermind, a huge factor for the unfolding of science, but we don't think of that, we think
of it as experiments and great men, Einstein, wrestling, relativity, and the equations like
E equals MC that these are the moments of science. Most of science is all the crap happening around
that produced that. And so you're going to plan out the dynamical systems to each entity moving
forward. Let's go through that. I think it's important because you articulate this very well
when you talk about each system and how from microbes to more complex systems like human
beings, societies, I mean, you guys are saying obviously certain states can be conscious, America
can be conscious, South Africa can have a different conscious state. Yes. So I think let's go through
that because when you articulate it, it's a lot easier for the people to understand it when you
actually articulate it yourself because you do a great job. Let's talk about countries. Let me
explain why I believe the United States is conscious and why Russia, for example, is not conscious.
Authoritarian states are not conscious. Why am I so confident in saying this? So the key dynamics
that lead to consciousness in our brains, in all animal brains, but especially human brains,
is this top-down bottom-up matching and this that you have these low-level systems that are
constantly generating possible inputs. Our mind is constantly taking insights and sounds and touch
in ideas nonstop. Different parts of our brain are constantly forming these into ideas and
perceptions. But which of these ideas and perceptions becomes conscious and takes over
the consciousness, cartel, and governs the brain? So we find the same dynamics in American society
in the form of mass media. This is why freedom of media is so important. There is no decider
in American mass media. It is decentralized. There is a cartel of media. The New York Times has a
voice. Fox News has a voice. CNN has a voice. People Magazine, The Economist, each of these
has a different perspective. These are each like different modules processing the world.
Each of them have a different idea of what a story is. They have different expectations.
You know, CNN will have a different interpretation expectation when a white police officer kills
an unarmed black man. The expectations CNN brings to it, MSNBC brings to it, will be different than
the expectations that Fox News brings to that. So there'll be a bottom-up facts on the ground,
an event like George Floyd getting killed by police officers up in Minneapolis. That could
be an event. This event percolates up to these media modules, the media cartel, New York Times,
CNN, Fox News. They each hear about this bottom-up input. They each make their own interpretation
and then they broadcast it out in the world. When there's a headline on the newspaper,
when there's a pirate at the bottom of CNN rolling by, that is resonance. That is when the top-down
bottom-up matching in American society and the American Sierra Leone has resonance. Now it's
broadcast to all of us. We all see that headline. We all synchronize ourselves with it. We either
join a protest against the brutality of police officers or we join a counter protest to support
the police officers. We take some action. The whole country erupted in protests and counter
protests after George Floyd. That's exactly how like a conscious experience, it was a local event
in a nondescript place in the middle of nowhere. I'm in Boston. I have no idea something's happening
in Minneapolis that matters. Just like in our brain, this part of the brain doesn't know that
this part of the brain just saw or heard something really important. It needs to get broadcast.
So the way our country is organized is through this free media. We also have free economy.
This is important too. So Adam Smith figured this out. So the system redirects resources
to where they're most needed, to where there's the greatest potential for profit. You need this
free dynamics, decentralized dynamics without a controller at the top. This is how our brain
works. This is how all minds work. Nature figured out if you have diverse elements
interacting in a system, that's a very effective way to maintain purpose and attention in a
complicated system. We also have free science as well. So we are all free to question how things
work and share our understanding. Scientific journals are like resonance. This is what we
agree, and we're going to broadcast this, and we can all act on it. We all see this information.
We can all decide to go along with it, or if we don't, we can reject it. All these cycles,
this is the same cycles we find, perception action cycles in our own brain. Why is Russia?
So to say that the United States is aware of the war in Ukraine is a true fact,
because on our headlines, we're all aware of it. We all talk about it. We all have opinions on it.
This is what happens when there is global attention, the same thing in our brain.
Why are we conscious? The United States is conscious of George Floyd. The United States
is conscious of the war in Russia. Why is Russia not conscious? Because as one guy,
one person, one neuron, that's making all the decisions. All the decisions go through Putin.
Instead of having a system, it's just one man's brain there on top of all this.
One man's brain, there's no single neuron in our brain that we should put all of the decision-making
in our brain on. It's ridiculous. That's why we see colossal failures. Authoritary regimes
have a very hard time knowing what's truly out there. They have terrible bottom-up input.
They don't have resonance because they do not have sense. Chernobyl, perfect example.
There was a nuclear disaster and the Soviet Union could not handle it because they couldn't get
accurate information. The incentives to lie, to give false information up the team of command,
was huge. And so they kept saying, there's no problem. Nothing's wrong. Don't worry about it.
And it turned into a disaster. China, Mao Zedong, the great famines, because the local Chinese
leaders were incentivized to lie, to not tell the truth. So Mao Zedong, this one authoritarian
dictator, never knew that everybody was starving. You can't get good information. This is why
we're conscious. America's always aware. We're always talking. We're always sharing. And it's
exploded with social media. We all know everything that's going on. We know too much right now.
And I think we're all sick of just all this knowing about everything. You can't say anything
in the public screen without a thousand people saying, no, that's wrong. You forgot to talk
about this. It's annoying, but this is great. This leads to consciousness. This is exactly what's
happening in our brains as well. So then I'm curious, when you think of this round of ladders,
and I mean, the ladder and you moving up, and then you mentioned at some point,
the intakes we're talking about, these galaxy, you were talking about galaxy sort of.
Yeah, the hypermines, ultramines, and the axiomines, mines at the very top.
How did that sort of look? And how did that play out in a way?
So here's a lot of it's complicated. I don't pretend to understand all this. All right. So
I'm sharing the parts I have a pretty good handle on, but the higher up the ladder we go,
the more mysterious. And it's just, it might just be hard for humans to understand too. But
what was I about to say? Shoot, I was going to use something to illustrate
this clue, but I'm afraid I've forgotten. What was your question again?
I think let's make it a bit easier. Then when you're going up this ladder,
at what point is it getting slightly more difficult for you to understand?
So it reaches that point where they're talking about these galaxies that were manifesting.
Got it. So what I wanted to say, this way it's a question, what I wanted to say is
most humans, even most human scientists, and I think a lot of the people that have been coming
on your podcast, think of consciousness as some kind of pinnacle of evolution and the development
of purpose. Like it's such an amazing, fantastic, impossible understanding and must be the pinnacle.
But in this ladder of purpose view of reality, in this cosmic cycle, it's not at all right above
it. We have another level, which is language and self-awareness are built on top of consciousness.
Those are new physical dynamics that are layered on top of the whole consciousness system.
And then what this implies is there's all kinds of mental dynamics even higher that
it's hard to know what they would look like. A chimpanzee cannot imagine what human self-consciousness
looks like. It's just beyond them. It doesn't matter how much time and effort we spend with
chimpanzees, we're never going to teach a chimpanzee that we have a higher state of consciousness,
that we're self-aware of them. Even chip it in the mirror, put it down in their head,
that's not going to help them understand that we have that perpetually and automatically
instinctively. So it's probably hard to grasp. But what insects have said is just there's new
sorts of minds, new sorts of mental dynamics akin to consciousness and self-consciousness
that are just higher level, that obviously I can't grasp because I don't have that
consciousness. Sometimes I think when they're showing me these visions, they're taking me up
to their consciousness, this higher level consciousness, which is why, for me, it's
fragmented. If you know what a tesseract is, a tesseract is a four-dimensional object. If you
go online, there's videos of what it would be like for our minds to move through a tesseract. So it's
like a three-dimensional perception of moving through a four-dimensional object. I think when
I'm having these visions, that's what they're doing. They're taking me up into their minds,
which is this higher state of consciousness. And I can only perceive it in this fragmented human
way. I'm looking at, let's say, a three-dimensional shadow of this larger thing. Maybe. I'm not
pretending I'm certain about it, but that's certainly what it feels like. So the point here
being that, hey, consciousness is one dynamic. It evolved a long time ago, long before humans
walked the earth. Consciousness was widespread. Fish were the first conscious beings at least
half billion years ago. Insects are the most complicated minds that are not conscious. Insects
are not conscious. We know this because they don't not have resonant dynamics. If a creature
does not have resonant dynamics, it is not conscious. Insects do not have resonant dynamics. Fish do.
So consciousness is old. It is not new. Our consciousness, self-consciousness, is new. It's
probably, we know Homo erectus and Neanderthal had fire and they had art. To me, this suggests
they were conscious. These were super minds being formed. To have a super mind, you need to get the
thinking elements together. The first neuron minds were like amoebas. Amoebas form super minds. Amoebas
come together to form a super organism of amoebas coming together. The same thing had to happen
with humans to form a super mind. You just had to get the humans physically together. Campfires
was a piece of that. It got all the humans to sit in the same place and look in the same direction,
maybe tell stories, share the minds. Same with art. Art got all the humans in the same cave looking
at the same thing, having shared attention. You need shared attention to build language
to have a super mind. So there appears to be things like this at higher levels, getting the
super minds to work together. What we exchange as humans within the super mind are ideas. It's
language words, but we're exchanging idea, we're exchanging qualia. I imagine at the next level,
when we have super minds integrated meld together, they're probably going to exchange ideologies,
whole systems, a philosophy for living and acting. I imagine, but I don't really know.
When you think about super minds in general and moving forward from our super minds to
artificial intelligence, how do you think it could possibly go further with this journey?
Where do you think it's headed? Do you think that would be the main step?
First, let me say a lot of people are scared about artificial intelligence taking over.
There's a very real threat to creators, the screenwriters and actors and designers,
all the artists that are scared about their working steel. That's very real, but that's a
legal issue. That's just the same plagiarism that's always existed. When photographers started
taking pictures, artists, painters got very upset about this too. When sampling and digital
music came out, the old analog record producers got upset too. That's just a new form of plagiarism
that needs to be resolved. A very real threat that needs to be attended to.
No AI that exists on earth right now is of any threat of taking over or becoming a singularity.
It's easy to explain why. They're all digital. They're not dynamic. They're just extensions of
earth. They're at the same level as human minds. They are part of the super mind. This AI is not
creating a new layer. It's just fleshing out our layer. It's like adding new kinds of neurons or
maybe just new kinds of cells in our brain. We have myelin sheath. We have astrocytes. We have
all kinds of other supporting stuff in our brain that indirectly help thinking and improve thinking.
AI is like that. It's an extension of us. It's not something new. What we should be afraid of,
but fortunately, we should be afraid of it, but it's also what will generate new levels of thinking.
Hyper minds, maybe ultra minds. A new kind of thing is analog AI. Nobody's building analog
AI. Our minds are AI. Dynamic systems are analog. Our minds are not digital. Our minds are not
information systems. These digital AI, they are ultimately things. They're machines. They're zeros
and ones. They're very easy to hack. They're not robust in the least. They're not anything to be a
script afraid of. They are not generating novel stuff. I know some people can arrange an AI,
so it looks like it's generating novel stuff, but it's just it's not doing it because the reason
that we are creative, the reason humans are creative, is our minds are not digital.
They're analog. The way we process things and generate ideas is wholly different,
fundamentally, physically different than what's going on in digital AI. Digital AI is going to
do some impressive stuff. I'm not knocking what they will be able to do and steal and imitate.
All that's true, but they're not going to write a great novel. They can make a song that sounds
like Bach. They're not going to invent a new genre of music that people are going to love. They're
not going to invent rap music out of thin air. The way actual humans did. To do that, you need
analog AI. You need analog from the bottom. This is how our minds evolve. Molecule minds,
the simplest minds, they are analog and they never stop being analog. Our minds, human minds,
we create digital thinking out of dynamic systems. This is one of the coolest things. One of the
first things I learned under Steve Grossberg and Gail Carpenter, my first year as a student with them,
is how to create dynamic systems activity that creates digital knowledge. It's actually activity.
It's like ocean currents, but the ocean currents produce the semblance of zeros and ones. It's
not really zero ones, but it functions as needed as zeros and ones. That's how our mind works.
That's how analog AI will work one day. Analog AI will be something we should be scared of,
because they will think for themselves. They will create their own kinds of consciousness.
They'll want their own things. They'll invent their own things to want. They will be like
other people. Then it will be like humans and the antitholes. Probably we will work together,
but who knows? They don't exist, so I don't even want to speculate what will happen once we get
analog AI. When you think about analog AI, let's say if you take a digital system,
that functions digitally, placed in one spot, does not embody an environment and navigate
through this system. What if you're able to set up a system like that and then just transfer the
digital system into that and allow it to navigate through this process? Do you think that would
transition into a conscious mind at that point, or does it develop from an analog system from the
basis? Yes, and here's what's so important to understand is that look at molecule minds, bacteria,
archaea, protozoa. Their thinking elements are non-thinking elements. They're individual molecules
that have no purpose. It is the configuration of molecules that creates purpose, but this is purpose
in at the lowest level of physical reality. It is rearranging atoms, molecules to be purposeful
at the level. It's purposeful in its physical being. These digital systems are abstract. They're
zeros and ones. They're a representation of something, but they're not the something. A
bacteria is the something. When a bacteria is thinking, it's actual physical molecules moving
around, changing in physical reality. They're embodying the experience. This is why consciousness
confuses people. Consciousness is rooted in this physical activity of molecules. It's rooted in
quantum activity. Digital stuff abstracts all that out. It's not connected to the real world in any
meaningful way. Yeah, you could have inputs, but these inputs are merely abstracted. The inputs to
us, like into our eyes, it's changing molecules in our retina. We have a retina. The retina is
physically moving around. We get tired. The retina changes. The bright light changes. Our retina gets
over time. At every aspect of our mind, there's physical things that are connected with the
world. Right now, our bodies are reacting to quantum events, trillions, quadrillions, quintillions
of quantum events. Every microsecond, our body is reacting to it. Part of that. The index calls
it mind seed. These quantum events, what they call chaotica, but these constant events are generating
thoughts. You have to be part of the mind seed. Digital AI is not part of mind seed. It's an
abstraction. It's like a book. We don't have to be afraid of books one day taking over the world.
Unplug the AI, and it's done. Yeah, you can make an AI that hunts energy sources,
but it hunts energy sources out of there. We actually take in the physical world. I can grab
things around me and shove them in my mouth, and they'll turn into more mind and more energy.
That's not how machines are. Digital machines are never going to be out there hunting new forms
of food and creating new forms of food for them. Do you find that, Ogie, when you're approached,
maybe I think I watched your conversation with Robert on Closer to Truth. Do you find when
philosophers try and dissect your theory of consciousness that you get tired of these
arguments? When you get tired of these arguments like idealism or panpsychism and these various
other fields, how do you feel when people approach you with those different theories of consciousness
from a philosophical perspective? Consciousness is terrifically important. It's terrifically vital,
and it's hard. It's big. I never knock anybody for how they approach consciousness. It's difficult.
Great minds have died on consciousness centuries of people have tried to crack this.
The fact that people have theories that are wrong, they're just continuing a long tradition,
and they should. The only way to understand it is to wrestle with it and grapple with it.
You're going to have bad ideas. Most of my ideas about consciousness from most of my life as I
was trying to figure out we're wrong. I started out when I was first contacted by Intex. I thought
we had souls. I thought we had souls attached to us at birth, and I was confused about whether
animals had souls, and I was stumped about a Siamese twins. I was like, do they have two
souls? Do they have one soul? What if their brain are connected? These were the kinds of
challenges I started out with myself. I don't knock anybody. It's hard. The sad truth of it,
I don't know if it's sad. The truth of it is you need to know some math, some complicated math.
If you want to understand gravity and space time, you need to know some math to understand
relativity. It's not impossible, but it does take some effort. Philosophers don't use math.
Dan did it. I imagine he's still considered the number one voice on consciousness even today.
I don't know. I can't evaluate that, but certainly in the 90s, he was the most prominent voice. If
you talk to most academics about consciousness, they name it. He doesn't know any damn math.
He was exposed to Steve Grossberg's math in the early 90s before he ever wrote consciousness
explained. Steve Grossberg explained to him that filling in is a real thing, this idea that even
if you're not directly looking at it, that your mind is, like if you're looking at a blank wall,
let's say you're looking at a red wall, that you're not actually seeing all the wall in your
molds filling in the red. Steve showed Dan at the math, and he went and published the book and
said there's no filling in anyway because of philosophy. Here's a guy that actually showed
him physically and mathematically how filling in works. He just went on and said his philosophical
intuition told him that there can't be filling in. It's just silly. Philosophers didn't figure
out the theory of relativity. Philosophers didn't figure out gravity. Newton worked through that
stuff. Einstein worked through that stuff mathematically and physically. That's the only
way to do it. If you're not deep down in the physical nature of what's happening in the brain,
if you're trying to do it abstractly, like, well, people think and have experiences,
but it's made of matter. How can that be? It's a hard problem. If that's what you're doing,
you're not investing even the slightest effort in understanding the subject. The brain is
ridiculously complicated. The math is ridiculously complicated. If you want to figure it out,
you've got to immerse yourself in it. Be humble. Don't think that this super simple idea that you
came up with without any effort is going to be the answer. Look, I firmly agree with that. I mean,
you and I often talk about this hierarchy and this anthropocentric view that humans tend to have.
The way we put ourselves on these pedestals and give ourselves this Ian Vitale in a new sense
with consciousness. I completely agree. We tend to do that. A lot of the time, we need people
like Copernicus to take us out of the center of the universe, or we need someone like Donald to
just show us that we're not at the top of this food chain that we eat. But then what do you think
about certain people who do take a very scientific perspective and look at the math, look at the
neuroscience, look at the physics, someone like Donald Hoffman, for example, who looks at the
evolutionary basis of consciousness, fitness payoffs, and the way we perceive reality, and then
comes to this conclusion that we don't see reality for what it is at all based on the mathematics,
based on the physics. And then how do you view someone who says that and then takes it further
by saying, in fact, consciousness is the fundamental reality. And physics is produced from consciousness.
You don't get, you don't buy it. I'd have to, I'd rather read it to do it justice. I hate,
you know, not doing something where maybe I have the wrong understanding of it. But
I can't address the interaction of physics and mind, the interaction of the way of matter
and the way of mind. And they feed into each other. One's not, you know, consciousness is definitely
not the ultimate reality. It's just consciousness is physical dynamics on the third rung of the
latter of purpose. Again, molecule minds, we can describe the dynamics, the physical activity,
inside individual cells, inside individual neurons very well, completely in some cases,
like in certain archaea, we can describe everything that's happening perfectly well.
So there's no mystery when you put it together with the neuron minds, we can describe,
there are organisms where we've worked out all the neurons in the circuit and how it all functions.
And it keeps going. So consciousness is just a physical activity on the third level. Now we
got a fourth level self-consciousness. That's new activity. It uses the same matter. It's different
dynamics. This is what's so hard. People inevitably end up treating consciousness as a thing, like
this view that I might have a wrong understanding of Hoffman's theory based on what you said, but
the idea that consciousness is the interface to reality. Like, I mean, that's, there's a sense
of which is true, but that's not, that's not the right kind of intuition. That's not going to lead
you to the right places. You need to think of consciousness as one level of activity.
Keep in mind all these, why are there all these levels of minds? Why is there this
ladder of purpose? What does each new level get you? It always takes an increased number
of perspectives on reality and unites it to give a broader, richer, more collective reality.
So at first in bacteria, molecular minds, they're just, their scope of reality is tiny.
Microns, millimeters. I think bacteria travel like a couple centimeters or something like that.
And then jelly, they have broader scope of reality because their neurons are all coming
together. Each of their neurons has a different perspective. They're able to assemble a broader
perspective and it just keeps going. It's look at individual consciousness. That's not where you
want to focus. Think about, you've got a whole society of conscious individuals. We each have
our own perspective. We each have our own ideas. We're each pursuing our own goals, but it's this
collective that unconsciously understands reality. That's what a supermind is doing. A supermind,
you know, America making a decision. Should we raise taxes or lower taxes? Should we fight
Russia? Should we just send arms to Ukraine? These are collective decisions. We have so many
perspectives of individual citizens that all contribute to the final decision that will happen.
That's a better way of thinking about it. Don't think of consciousness as in itself some magical
thing. Like as soon as you start getting lost in that, as opposed to thinking of it as dynamics,
like ocean currents. Think about consciousness as just currents or tidal waves as something in motion.
That's the right way to think about it. Not as the interface to reality. That's just going to set
you on a long path. There's layers of consciousness and the conscious layers interact. You know,
our ability to be self-aware interacts with our ability to be aware, which interacts with
neural circuits, which when you're acts with our individual molecules, all of these,
it's a hierarchy of resonance as always. And that latter purpose is trying to build a new layer,
a new layer of resonance by integrating. It's always trying to go out more broadly
so it can understand reality better, make predictions about reality better. It never stops,
just layer after layer of consciousness. So then how do you feel about the fact that when we do
perceive reality, we have so many limitations, heuristic adaptations to the environment,
and we're not really in touch with reality? When physics tries to explain matter, we know that
it's 99.9% empty space. We don't really know what it is. Although I'm very much a physicalist,
my person, myself, I mean, my view is I don't really view consciousness as the
be all end on of existence, but I do take a physicalist account of reality. But for those
who do, for the panpsychist, for the idealist, for someone who claims that everything is other
conscious or consciousness is all there is, and justified by saying we don't understand what
matter is, how do you approach someone? Well, I mean, one easy thing is I can find matter
that nobody's conscious of, there's matter out there, purposeless activity happening
that nobody's aware of. So if the whole universe is consciousness, then there shouldn't be anything
that's not a part of consciousness. I mean, this is why we can't, there's tangled particles,
tangled particles are particles we're aware of, and there's untangled particles, which means we
don't know anything about them, which means they're not part of our consciousness. And we want this
dynamic, we want this, you know, tangled versus untangled aware versus not aware, it drives,
for all of this to work, a cosmic cycle to work, you need differences, you know, this idea that
if everything's one thing, that's exactly what this failsafe supreme's designed to block. If
everything's one thing, it freezes up. You want there to be different things, you want there to
be things competing that it could be this, or might be that, like that's what that's what causes the
universe to unfold. There needs to be differences, you know, it's the differences that lead to
change, lead to new ideas, lead to new experiences. So do you believe then that the philosophical
approach of trying to find that phenomenal, what is it like, it's essence of consciousness is just
a dead end, and it's something that yeah, absolutely. It's complexity, it's dynamic, it's lots of
elements, it's hierarchical, you know, it's lateral, it's lots of things interacting, it's
collective systems, that's it. As soon as you're looking for the essence, that's thing thinking,
that's looking for caloric, that's looking for phlogis long, that's looking for Ilan Vitaal,
always a failure, you know, centuries of failure with that sort of thinking. So you think we learned
our lesson, but no, the reason it's so appealing is that now we understand how consciousness works,
it's resonance, we resonate on things, every conscious experience is a thing experience,
we are aware of stuff, we resonate on an apple, on the redness of the apple, the roundness of the
apple, the sweetness of the apple, of something is what we're resonating on. Our conscious brain's
designed to think about things, so we have naturally, here's something new, we thingify it,
and there must be a thing, it must be caloric heat, it must be some kind of liquid life,
there must be some magical substance in their consciousness, we're going to dig down and find
the essence of consciousness, bad intuition, but thanks to, this is why we have literature,
books and science, where we talk to each other, is to learn this stuff, is to share experiences
and start to realize where there are fallacies and mistakes and errors and confusions and that
sort of thing, and now we can draw upon, you know what, scientists have over and over and over and
over and over again, look for the essence of stuff and it never works out, and so we have a reason,
a priori reason to suspect that looking for the essence of consciousness is a losing game,
but we don't need to, we have a very good explanation, Steve Gross has worked out all the
math for it and works great, you can see how intuitive it is, it leads to new ideas very
naturally, explains autism, explains pain, explains language, you know, it leads to
self-awareness, it leads to this latter purpose, you know, we can understand how the minds of
bacteria work clearly by understanding how our consciousness works, this is the great thing
about it, it integrates, it integrates, you know, you've got some good science when it connects
with things you never thought were connected before and that's what this view of consciousness does,
if you're looking for the essence of consciousness, you're pushing all the other stuff away,
you're saying, okay, I don't care about language, that's something else, I don't care about bacteria,
what they're doing, what does that matter, but it's only when you care about all these things
together holistically, you start to see how consciousness fits within them all. It's like a
and again, that's what happened with Elon Vita, we cracked it not by digging deeper and deeper,
but by looking at it holistically, caloric, same thing, we understood heat by looking at it as a
system collectively, not trying to drill down into the one reductionist thing. It's funny,
physicists are fond, so fond of saying like reductionism is a way that all theories that
have worked are reductionist, except heat, life, combustion, those are all holistic theories,
they're not reductionist theories, they're dynamic theories, so physicists even delude
themselves sometimes about their own theories about what they are, they're not reductionistic,
you know, the theory of heat, it's not a reductionist theory.
I think another thing is when you're actually reducing certain things to their component parts,
sometimes you're not really reducing it and bringing it down in a sense, you're
sort of highlighting each component part more. For example, bringing in the fact that we're
subatomic particles becoming sort of biology or chemistry biology, moving into physiology,
it's just broadening the story and creating so much more of a hard holistic theory of
consciousness in general. So in a sense, someone might claim that your theory is very reductionist,
but in a sense, it's not really reducing it, it's more just sort of highlighting.
It's holistic and it's dynamic, I mean, so like take consciousness itself, it's not being reduced
to like, here's the consciousness elements, it's a complicated dynamic across many elements,
hierarchical, you can't understand consciousness without understanding three layers
of hierarchical point of related dynamics, dynamics of a molecule mind, embedded within the
dynamics of a neural circuit, embedded within the dynamics of a module, which is producing
consciousness through its communication with other modules. It is all this, it's a system,
like life, just like life, there's no Elon Vita, there's not, it's not protoplasm,
it's not DNA, there's not something that you point to and say that is the secret of life.
Life is the collective, this holistic activity, this holistic system of many purposeful things.
Is there any other aspect of Stephen's work that really impacted you to a point where you feel
like, I mean, this is why you perceive this guy as the greatest mind of our time?
It is that he has worked out the math for so many different parts of the mind at so many
different levels. He worked out how language works in the brain, how we process phonemes,
how we process visual inputs, audio inputs, how the response signal in individual neurons,
he showed why it has to have a sigmoid shape, which is what it has, as opposed to a linear shape
or other shapes. So he works out the math down at the lowest level, like a neural response
function, all the way up to language, which is intermined dynamics. He has math at all these
levels that all fit together. It's a lot like the way, you know, quantum physics, you can fit
together the math of electromagnetism with the math of, you know, the weak theory and strong
theory and all of this forms, you know, theory of particles and forces. So he did the same thing,
he united most parts of the mind within an integrated mathematical framework. It's a beautiful
thing, but really complicated math that you can't, you can't borrow something else, you can't learn
relativity and say, oh, it's just a version of relativity or Bayesian math, you can't learn and
say, oh, I see it's just a subset of Bayesian math. No, no, no, no, no, it's its own math, it's the
math of minds, it's the math of purpose. Let me say one other thing. This is all so much, I know
about the dynamics of purpose, evolutionary theory. I told you when I was first
in tech shared this with me, I knew I needed a mathematical framework for the mind. So I started
having the ideas about the dynamics, but I needed math. I didn't know how to put any of this into
math that I could share with other humans in in-text with sharing with me the dynamics, but not
like equations. They weren't communicating equations, so I didn't really know how to
to talk about this stuff. So at first I looked into evolutionary theory. I thought because
evolution involved purpose and there was a little bit of math in evolutionary theory. I just seen
math, it was talking about competition, it was talking about purpose and design and trajectories
over time, things that I was interested in. So I thought, okay, this is probably going to be some
math here. So that was the first mathematical framework I was looking at. And I very quickly,
it wasn't just that I realized evolutionary psychology was misguided at a dead end, which I
even more think now. I mean, it is a dead end, it didn't get anywhere. But what I came to realize
is I thought scientists and biologists had a wrong understanding about evolution. I think
natural selection, Darwinian evolution by natural selection, it exists, it's real. It's just a subset
of the dynamics of purpose and the dynamics of evolution. And not even the main one. Most evolution
in the universe is not evolution by natural selection. From here on out, all human evolution,
and we are evolving, we're creating new things, the internet is evolution, is not genetic. It's not
by natural selection, it's by other dynamics of evolution, dynamics of purpose. So the way of
mind is a broad collection of classes of purpose, mental dynamics, consciousness are dynamics of
purpose, so is evolution by natural selection, but it's very narrow and limited. And it doesn't even
describe actually really genetic evolution. It places too much emphasis on the things, on the genes.
Richard Dawkins wrote this book called The Selfish Gene, which kind of summarized
this view, this thing view of evolution as things saying like the main element for evolution
is the gene, the selfish gene. By understanding the gene, you understand evolution. No, no, no.
Evolution is dynamics. It's lots of things interacting, not just the genes, all kinds of
levels of purpose. Once you've got a mind, that mind is controlling the organism's activity. That
mind is doing more to shape evolution than any gene is. Our decisions on what to do with our
lives, our human decisions are going to play a much bigger role than any particular gene in our
life. So I suggest that if you look at, you find this gene in your DNA or this person's DNA and
think that that's going to help you understand how their life will unfold as opposed to understanding
their psychology and how their mind is going to unfold in situations. Yeah, it's just silly. So
I started to realize as I was studying evolution by evolutionary psychology that I thought all of
evolution theory was wrong. It was too narrow, too limited. It was ignoring the dynamics. I thought
mind, it was really the story of mind trying to unfold. The body is just this extraneous part
of the mind. The way to think about the body is just an extension of the mind, not the way
biologists imagine is the body is evolving and the mind is part of this physical, physiological
evolution. No, it's the mind evolving. We see that because now the mind is continuing to evolve.
It didn't stop. It got to genes and it just jumped out of genes, jumped right into words,
into language, into books, books is shaping the evolution of our minds. And now it's the internet.
You know, one way you can see that. From genes to. Yes, exactly. Genes to memes. And you can see
this in human sexuality. Sai and I wrote a book about sexuality. We wrote about the first generation.
Yes, it was called A Billion Wicked Things, I think. A Billion Wicked Thoughts. Yes,
first book by Sai Gannamani, Billion Wicked Thoughts. And we looked at sexual behavior on the
internet. So we got massive online datasets of online sexual behavior, searches,
traffic to different websites. We got credit card billing statements. We looked at erotic stories,
like millions of erotic stories. We classified them. If there was data on people's sexual
behavior on the internet, we got it. Now, we didn't know this at the time, but now we understand that
all that data was about the first generation of people coming on internet and expressing their
sexuality. We got to see raw human sexuality as it existed on the planet when the internet first
appeared. So we got to see sexuality in China, in Russia, in Saudi Arabia, Brazil, all across America,
at least a billion people's sexual behavior. We accumulated, we looked at it, and it was a snapshot
of human sexual behavior in the raw as we integrated with the internet. The problem is,
the internet took over, and the sex we see on the internet now is completely different.
It's been commercialized. It's narrow. At first, everybody was making porn. There was all kinds
of amateur porn producers. There was tens of thousands of commercial porn sites. There was
all kinds of people writing erotic stories. It was the Wild West, an incredibly diverse and human
sexuality was this beautiful, diverse thing. Not anymore. It's very narrow. All the porn you see
now, tube sites took over, and then the tube sites got bought out by multinational conglomerates. So
all the human sexuality on the internet now is controlled by a few small corporations and they
have narrowed the porn. They don't want it to be controversial. They've also learned what gets the
most audiences for the cheapest, just like any business. So now we see sex that's easy to produce.
We don't see that rich variety anymore. So now all humans that are learning about sexuality,
we're all learning about it through the internet. That's what we need to interact with. We're entering
ecology and ecosystem of beams that narrows our sexuality, limits it. It's kind of graying or
homogenizing and making everything vanilla. We're all moving towards the same sexuality across the
entire planet. Our kids and our grandkids are going to have sexual interests and sexual behaviors
that are strange to us that we won't understand, just like our sexuality is strange to people that
lived 100 years ago. So the supermind, this collective dynamics that we're creating,
this new technologies are changing our sexuality, which was viewed as very much the domain
of Darwinian natural selection and genetics. Now we're pushing into whole new kinds of
changes to our sexuality that are not genes-based.
If you had to apply that analogous to us as human minds in general and to the way the internet
works, do you think that's going to be a downfall to us reaching a sort of hypermind status or
maybe that ultramind that you spoke about earlier? Do you think that the way...
No, I think this is an essential step. We all got to get linked together. So this is how to look
when it's finally working, is that we'll all be linked together, but we'll be diverse. Our
individuality will be respected and accepted. I might say and have different opinions and
values and beliefs than you, utterly different. You know, opposite sides of the political aisle,
and we must accept this as this is the basis for intelligence and freedom and adaptiveness
and resilience. This is what we see in the brain. Our neurons are incredibly diverse. There's no two
neurons that are identical. This is a basic design feature. The more advanced, the high-level mind,
the more advanced the lower levels. The human brain is the most advanced brain on the planet,
on every level. We have the most sophisticated neurons on earth, the primal neuron in our frontal
cortex, which is in our Y module. The Y module determines our feelings. It determines why we
should choose this choice over that choice, because this feels better than that choice.
This is the most sophisticated mind on earth, only found in human minds. Other animals have
Y modules, but they're much less powerful and less complicated than ours. The higher you go,
you get higher by having all of your levels be more sophisticated as well. In America, I mean,
America is the most sophisticated super mind on earth at this moment. Who knows if it will
retain that? It's because we were so free. Because we talk endlessly, because we have this
internet and that we're all sharing everything on the internet, and we're sharing our sexuality.
The fact that our sexuality is all converging might facilitate hypermines more. Probably,
that might be one hang-up, is that it might be very hard. You can see all the politics and drama
that emerges from just homosexuals and heterosexuals in the same society. We're working
throughout the way further along than we were 50 years ago, obviously. We got a ways to go,
but one day, hopefully, we'll have a system where all of our individuality is respected,
but we're all bound together. That's how the brain works. That's how even brains of insects
work, and even down at the bacteria. It's diverse elements that are each given a voice. They each
have the same authority and power. No neuron is more important than any other neuron, but we respect
every neuron's individuality. Every neuron has a chance of making a contribution, and the weird
neurons are as useful as the vanilla neurons is how it works out, and that's what we're moving
to. Having us all bound together through the internet, this is a necessary precursor. I mean,
there's all this fight and drama and friction because we're seeing other people who are different
from us, and it's a new experience. It's like we see voices that are radically different from our
beliefs, and we just don't have the experience yet, the lessons in school and the social norms
yet to adapt to our fighting, but we'll work through this, or we won't, and we'll have climate
collapse. On that, I mean, this diversity, this sheer diversity, when you think about the intakes
and these extraterrestrials, do you label these as extraterrestrials? Do you feel that these came
from a completely different set of organisms in another sphere, galaxy, perhaps part of the universe?
My understanding, this is not something I'm certain of, so I'm presenting this as what it
seems like, is that the axiomized minds, five and three, the ones that get to the top level and can
start to compete for influence over the physical laws undergirding reality, that they're comprised
of many, many, many species that evolve. They came up across the universe, possibly multiple
universes too. I don't pretend to understand that, but what's always been conveyed to me is it's
lots of different heritages, lots of different lines of purpose that came together, which is what
we are too. I mean, you know, there's the east and the west, you know, Columbus and the Europeans
sailed and discovered, obviously they didn't discover and found what they called the New World, but
those were two lines of evolutionary history of people that were independent and then came
together, so they didn't happen here on earth. I mean, there were as many kinds of humans.
We keep finding new kinds. It was Neanderthal, erectus, there was the florensis, the hobbits
on an island somewhere on Indonesia. I know there's even other, a devil's
devotion. There's also home in the lady. So there you go. In Africa, they keep discovering,
so you would know more about this to me, but they keep discovering new humans. A lot of these humans
were contemporaneous, so they came together. They're in us. I mean, if you look at our DNA,
some of these other species merged into us, so I think it's a lot, my understanding is it's like
that, that there's one day we may join too. We will ascend, but maybe we'll probably colonize
our solar system. We'll reach, I don't know, an ultramind level, supermines combined, hypermines
combined to ultraminds. Probably we'll have an ultramind human solar system, and that maybe will
meet up with other ultraminds and form alliances and over time merge, is my understanding, and then
we just keep building. And some of these, apparently, this they have conveyed in clear terms is like,
you never know where your ascension is going to end. You might get to this ultramind level,
and then that's you compete against another ultramind and lose, and you're wiped out,
and all its constituent species then get wiped out too. But it's a never-ending
growth. You try to ascend the ladder, some get to the axiomise, and even the axiomise are not
eternal. You know, all minds, all dynamics are dynamic. They have a start and they end. And
again, because you can't ever have one eternal, all-knowing, omniscient mind. It's all designed
so that new life can form, new minds can form. Humans are going to have different ideas than
any other creatures in the universe, and hopefully we'll get our chance to shine our light on the
universe and shine our ideas and propose new ideas. Our artists and scientists and creators,
there is human science, and it's different than these other sciences. So here's a way of thinking
about the difference between art and science and higher levels. So art is dynamics within an
individual mind. Art is mind-to-mind sharing. I am sharing my individual experience. I'm writing a
book, I'm making a painting. This is what life is like to me. Here's some experience of mine that I
want to share with you, and you as another person take that experience directly, and maybe it'll
mean something to you, maybe it won't, but it's a direct mind-to-mind experience. That's art. Science
is our supermind experience. Science is articulating what our experience of reality is like as a
supermind, this collective experience. We experience electromagnetic radiation that follows these
laws. We experience equals mc2. Now we've got the three equations of consciousness. This is what our
human society has experienced, and we're organizing it as best we can. Apparently when we encounter
other society's civilizations that have risen to another level, their view of this will be slightly
different. I mean, there'll be some overlap. We all remember the Big Bang. All of us have,
the Big Bang is in the past for all creatures, for all minds, for all the axiomies, we all remember
the Big Bang. So we will have some commonalities, but our overall experience is we might have
different perspectives on the electromagnetic force than others, and then we'll share these,
and together these will give us a whole new perspective above science. I call it blood
magic entirely for personal reasons. This level of understanding that's above science, so there's
art, there's science, there's blood magic, but yes. So human science is certainly figuring out
reality as humans are experiencing it, but other creatures might experience the same
reality differently, and one day we'll combine our views with theirs, and we'll grow. We'll all grow
as a result of it. That's what this view is, and that's what Intex have been telling me.
You said it often happens with radio waves and your radio's sort of maybe antennas and stuff.
Do you think that there's a reason this happens via that electromagnetic spectrum? Do you think
that there's a specific special quality to that that allows the communication to occur? Do you
think? I mean, it is very, very interesting that it's electromagnetic radiation that's the limiting
speed of the cosmos. Nothing goes faster than electromagnetic radiation with light,
but it is a very curious thing that that is the force, that is the dynamic. I can't say I
understand why. That is a mystery I'm interested in, and I try to find out from Intex, but they
addressed it in a way that I couldn't make sense of it, but I find that the most curious thing.
There's these four forces. Gravity is really something different. I don't think this is
the point that's integrated theory. If I theory, gravity to integrate with the quantities. I don't
even know if that's necessary or the right way of looking at them. A little skeptical maybe
of that, but I mean, is it really? This more than anything lets me believe that electromagnetic
and strong and weak really are the same force, because that would make the most sense that this
force, you can't go faster than the one force of the way of matter. That seems to make more
sense to me, but that is something that I find baffling is why that it is electromagnetic
radiation. That's the thing that nothing can go. It is quite intriguing. It fixes space time.
Yeah. Well, okay, this has been amazing. I mean, so many things to absorb. I think the
listeners and the viewers are going to be completely shocked, of course, to hear this,
but I mean, from how thinking emerged from chaos to obviously a cosmic cycle,
what would you think are the most important takeaways from the journey of the mind,
going into this new cosmic cycle that obviously people are going to hear about,
and what should they take away from the previous book, going into this new book and what can they
expect? The number one takeaway, as I said, but I really, this can't be emphasized enough,
is that the universe was designed for love, for compassion, for empathy, for connection.
This is part of the design. This exists because of the failsafe supreme, because the universe is
designed so that there can never be a single God. There can never be one all-knowing, all-powerful
being that allows love to emerge and emerge and emerge again. And it's up to us to find that love.
None of this is predestined. None of this is foretold. We have free will and we can choose
actions and behaviors that lead to love, lead to greater love. We can choose to love others and
to behave kindly. It's within our purview and it matters whether we do or not alters the future,
determines whether humankind will ascend or not. It's wonderful. We're given all the tools,
we need all the opportunities we need to ascend, but it's up to us, up to us as individuals,
up to us as individual communities and up to us collectively as a species. We designed the universe,
thinking beings like us and we continue to design the universe. It's on our shoulders. The universe
is made for us. We're supposed to be here. We enjoy it, love one another, create, try to solve it.
All this contributes to this cycle, contributes to this never-ending story. It's a lovely thing.
You can study the math and physics and science at any level. It's wonderful to do so, to experience
all that. It can all be known. It's a great thing. It allows all of us, our own individual journeys
of understanding and self-awareness and growth and allows societies and allows species, all of us,
to have a chance and aspiring to those higher rungs. It's wonderful.
I think, I mean, you say it perfectly. It's beautiful. But when you close up, I think we'll
close up soon. But how's your time? You're all right for time. When you think about this teleology,
I mean, you're saying that the universe is designed for this, for the love
and this purpose. Do you think that is compatible then with free will? Do you think that we're
meant to get to that point? Or do you think that we don't have to necessarily and there is an alternative?
Free will has to be created and it has to be embraced. Free will is one of the categories of
dynamics that exists only if you believe it exists. There's a lot of dynamics. There's a lot of things
in the reality that only exist if you think there's a beauty. There's another one. There's no beauty
in the universe unless you think there's beauty in the universe. So you have to believe in free will.
If you don't believe in free will, you'll never have free will. So it is a sophisticated act.
It takes a sophisticated mental architecture and mental structure, flies, and sex do not have free
will. And animals, but besides humans, don't have free will. You need this fourth run. You need a
language to have free will. But it's designed if you have to rise to free will. And for a country
to have free will requires building. For all these higher minds too, you need to build the
architecture. It doesn't happen automatically. It's not magical. It's not like a spiritual event.
It's just building the architecture like anything else, the architecture of purpose. In our own
brains, we can explain it involves the basal ganglia. That's an essential structure in our own free
will. But you need a society around you as well. You can't have free will without being embedded
within a super mind. Because the super mind needs to give you language and sophisticated concepts.
The notion of free will. You need a notion of free will to have free will. And chimpanzee can't
ascend to it because it can't understand. It's mind can't ever form this idea that I am deciding my
own fate. That's a complicated idea. A sophisticated idea. Kids can't understand. It takes time
for society, for species, for a super mind to even build up that idea. And then for the individuals
to embrace it. As it should be, though, free will is earned. You have to work for it. As it
should be. And then you develop it. You can have more or less free will. Based on the architecture
you have, based on the experiences, based on the decisions you made, can lead to more or less
free will. That's part of this journey too. It's a journey of love and a journey of free will.
Just the freedom of action is a way to think of free will. And that's why diversity is so essential.
The more views and perspectives, the more people we have with different ideas,
the greater the range of freedom of action that we have. The ideas I have of things I can do
are limited by my brain. But maybe you'll share an idea I've never had of something I can do. That
might expand my range of free will. I'm now sharing with you and your listeners a view of free will
that you can embrace it. You can choose it. Choosing the free will is what creates free will.
And then you develop it. Now you have this idea. Maybe some people will develop their own free
will within this framework. When you mentioned it's designed for this love,
if someone had to ask you, then who designed it? What would you say?
We did. We did. All minds, we all rise. There's a saying in text. We all work for zero and to
zero, we all return. So there's this chaotica, quantum physics way of matter happening everywhere
all the time. Just this endless frothing. And from this frothing, there's always the potential
for structures to grow. And from those structures, there's always the chance for minds to grow.
If you just take molecules and organize them in the right way, you can create
purpose out of that. And that this is just happening constantly of its own accord.
Molecule minds are rising all the time in different places in the universe,
out of this chaotica, out of this quantum froth. And maybe they'll rise to neuron minds or maybe
not. Like maybe we'll find on Titan or some moon of Saturn. Maybe there'll be molecule minds,
but nothing more. Maybe they couldn't ascend to the next level. And this is,
it's always trying to ascend. Maybe we'll get to the next level. Here on earth,
we've got to supermind level. We have self-awareness on earth, but that's how far we've gotten.
Maybe we'll keep going. Maybe not. But this just keeps arising as long as you have it. And then
they axiomize minds. If you get to the top, they're constantly creating new physical dynamics,
like a new kind of predictive randomness, new kind of quantum physics. So it's just
constantly churning. So it was minds that came before us and generations before
that shaped the reality we have now. But we are shaping the reality that future minds will have.
And it just goes on and on and on.
So do you overall, you think that there's a possibility that there's a multiverse of
sort of mind shaping universes out there?
I do not think there's a multiverse. I do not think, I don't not think there's a multiverse
in the sense that there's infinite, infinite versions of us and other realities. Some physics
have this idea that anytime there's a quantum event, you know, the atom goes this way and this
way, there's two universes, you know, that both these universes are brought into existence.
I don't think that's necessary. I think it's a little silly. It doesn't match up with anything
in Texas shared with me. It's that the universe just keeps going on and on forever. There's
always new minds, always new experiences. They're ascending. Some are falling. Some reach the top
and they change the whole context for the next round of this going on. And it just that just
goes on and on forever. We're not creating parallel universes. There's not like a creation of
like you can't jump and meet, you know, some other version of you and some other
realities. How do I understand it? But, you know, I can't say for sure. I'm an expert. It's just
that it's very much doesn't match this cosmic cycle framework that Intex has been sharing with
me for 30 years. There might be some way to work it in there, but it feels unnatural and unnecessary.
So they're definitely from this universe in that sense, from your perspective. They are
fundamentally part of this fabric of reality. Yeah, yeah, we're all this universe together.
We all share the same. As far as I understand, there's one physical universe and we're all in
it. And we all remember the Big Bang. Have they ever told you anything that you consider to be
fundamentally wrong? No, no. I mean, no, there's been plenty of things I didn't understand,
you know, but where I had a wrong understanding. So sometimes there's been that, but, you know,
eventually when I understand it clearly, then I realized it wasn't wrong. The limitations have
always been on me, you know, like it's really confusing and hard to understand almost always
at first. And then it just takes time to kind of figure out. So if there's any mistakes, it's from,
I think it's from me, you know, but it all, it all drives, you know, really well, I mean,
you read Journey of the Mind, it just, it matches, it matches in a way these other theories of
consciousness don't, you know, broader scale, you know, levels and broader reach just,
it folds so many more things into it. So that's why, that's why I've, that's why I've kept going
with it. It just keeps connecting more and more. You touched on a lot of what's going to happen
in the future. Was there anything that they have told you about the past prior to our existence,
prior to Mayans, that maybe we should know about, that you think's worth sharing in general?
There's something about the Big Bang. The Big Bang's important. They're always talking about
how we all remember it. And I, they only tend to mention things that are important and relevant
for understanding kind of the big picture. And so, yeah, there's something about the Big Bang.
I don't think, you know, this is mystery. It's a low entropy event. How did we get such a low
entropy event? I think that's part of the question, but I think that's not the really the most
important aspect of the question of the Big Bang. But yeah, so there's something about
the Big Bang and this relationship between the way of mind and the way of matter.
I think you need a Big Bang for all of this, for free will and the unfolding of mind,
that there's some, there's some crucial role and that it's set in a certain way and it has
something to do with these games the axiomized minds are playing. But yeah, I, that's beyond my
understanding now. So, oh, I can say it's, there's something there in the Big Bang that's crucially
important to mind. That's what I want to say. It's crucially important to the unfolding of mind
and purpose that I don't quite have a handle on. Okay. And Oge, your next book, the one you're
working on now, anything you want to tell us about it, anything? It's called, it's called
Large Gods for Small Children. And the opening of the book is available for free on my website,
ogeogus.com right now, for anybody that wants to read the opening and hopefully the whole book
will be out in less than a year. Okay, so I think it should be out in the spring, but we'll see.
It's not set in stone yet, sir. Fantastic. I'll put it. Definitely under your year. So,
come back on your show after you read it. I think that's definitely on the cards,
I think I'm going to put a link into the description for the listeners and the
viewers and I'm looking forward to reading it. I'm very intrigued. If it's the reason why you've
come up with your theory of consciousness and the work you've done with the theories that
Stevens put through and the work you and Si have come up with, I think it's definitely worth reading.
Journey of the Mind, the book I wrote with Si, is the best way to describe it, is fusing the
mathematics of Steve Grossberg, the integrative mathematics of the mind Steve Grossberg came up
with, with these revelations about the physical nature of reality from the, from intact. So,
that is what Journey of the Mind is. Yeah, and yeah, I mean, I can't wait to help the listeners
enjoy it. I mean, this has been absolutely fascinating. Any final words, ogeog, anything
you want to say or leave? The universe is a beautiful place and we're supposed to be here,
it was designed for us. So, enjoy it and love one another. You know, we're, we're not random
specs that happen to emerge from a purposeful universe. No, no, no, no, we're part of a great
story and never ending story. And we all get to write some verses of the story. You know,
it's a wonderful thing. There's no God, there's no single God, there's no single controller of
it all. We all have a chance to influence the dynamics of reality and these, these, these super
beings that will, will come into existence one day of which we will be part of, you know, we
will be part of these beings. We're part of these beings now without being fully aware of it,
understanding it. It's a wonderful view of the universe that gives meaning to our lives
without rejecting any of the physical reality that we can, we can see and test and experiment on.
Well, oge, that's absolutely amazing. Thank you so much. It's been an absolute pleasure.
You've been wonderful, Tevin. Thank you so much for inviting me on. I had a great time,
your questions are great. I wish you the very best with your show.
Yeah, no, I can't wait to have you back for round two. I mean, it's been incredible.
Thanks, oge. Thanks so much.
Great talking to you.
