Phillip, I want to frame this conversation the same way I did with Keith. I even did
this with Helen, actually, her idealist view, Keith's illusionism, and not with you and
panpsychism. But before we get into that, the question I asked them, which is what I'm
about to ask you is, can you give me a philosophical history of the mind-body problem? How you
conceptualize this, how you started reading about this topic, and how you got to where
you are today? The reason why I ask this question is, I believe it allows us to understand
your views and how it's changed over the years, and how you sort of came to the view you have
today or the conclusion you have today. So if you had to give me that philosophical history,
what would it be?
Thanks. That's a great first question. Yeah, I mean, the mind-body problem has been wrestled
with for centuries, and I think it arises because there are two things we know about
in very different ways. There's the physical world around us that we know through our senses
and which we learn more about through scientific investigation. But there's also the world
of our own experiences, our thoughts, our feelings, which we know about in a quite different
way, I think. I can't look inside your head and see your feelings and experiences. Each
of us knows about our own experiences just through being directly aware of them. If you're
in pain, you're just directly aware of your own feeling of pain. So there are these two
things that we think are real, namely the physical world we know through the senses
and our own minds we know through our immediate awareness of our own conscious experience.
And the challenge is, how do these fit together? How do these seemingly very different things
fit into a single unified theory of reality? I mean, suddenly nowadays people call it the
hard problem of consciousness and think of it as the mystery of how do brains make consciousness?
I mean, that's one way into it. I suppose I think maybe that way of setting it up might
limit our options somewhat. But I think more generally, that's the question, how does consciousness
and the physical world fit together? And it's, yeah, it's a problem I've been obsessed with
as long as I can remember really, because it all of the available options seem to have
such deep challenges associated with them. So it's sometimes say it's a little bit like
Churchill famously said about democracy. It's the worst theory of government apart from all the
others. So I sometimes think that's what it's like trying to find a solution to the mind, body
problem. You're sort of trying to find the least worst option. But yeah, that's the core of it,
I think. So if you had to look back at the philosophers, the scientists, perhaps, who
influenced your views the most leading up to this point, who stands out for you? Who were those
people who actively changed the way you perceived this problem?
I think Descartes has to be a huge influence going back to studying Descartes at high school. Mr
Foley was my philosophy teacher. I didn't do that well, actually. I would keep me to go about
and visit him one day. But I mean, what I think Descartes got dead right is that the mind is better
known than the body and the external world. This is what we find in the first two meditations.
Descartes' famous work is set up as six meditations where the narrator is sort of
philosophizing to himself or herself. I suppose himself if it's Descartes. And the method is to
try and doubt everything that we can doubt, to see where we end up, to see what, if anything,
can't be doubted. And the narrator, namely Descartes, concludes that the body, the brain,
the physical world, all these things might not exist for all we know for sure. But the one thing
we can't doubt is the reality of one's own conscious mind. So I mean, again, just to come to a vivid
case of if you're in pain, you can't really doubt the reality of your agony because you're
sort of directly in touch with it in a way that makes its reality totally evident to you.
So I think Descartes was right about that. After those meditations, it goes a bit
sketchy, sort of where he tries to prove the existence of God and then prove the existence
of everything else on that basis. It goes a bit awry there, I think. But I mean, in more recent
times, the philosopher David Chalmers was a huge influence on me. You know, when I studied philosophy,
we were taught the two traditional options, dualism Descartes view that the mind is
separate from the body or the brain. At the other extreme, materialism, the view that all that really
exists is the physical world, bodies, brains, physical processes in the brain. And I came
to find deep for both of those traditional options. But we were just taught that's what you've got to
choose from, like an olympic and I got really disillusioned and I actually left my first degree
just wanting to stop thinking about consciousness thinking there was no resolution. That's actually
what I I argued for in my end of degree dissertation. But I later discovered the writings of David
Chalmers, who really brought back to life, I guess, something like the Cartesian project.
Also, Thomas Nagel, his famous paper, What's It Like to Be a Bat, where he argues that no matter
how much we learn about the neurophysiology of a bat, we'll never fully understand what it's like
to be a bat, what it's like to adopt a bat's perspective. Galen Strawson, actually, so I
wasn't taught these things as as an undergraduate. And then when I started my MA, finally, at the
university, there was a professor who thought all the same things I did who adopted this
crazy view known as panpsychism that that I that I adopt. And so this was Galen Strawson. And he
was a real confidence booster. I hadn't met another professional philosopher who thought anything like
the kind of views I was attracted to in the philosophy of mind. So so he from personal
interaction, he was a very important influence. And later also, David Chalmers has been an
important mentor as I got to know him personally. And finally, someone who has a very opposed
view to me, David Papineau, who was who is a physicalist with a total opposite view to me,
but was very kind in guiding me and and help him helping me argue against him and understand
his view and argue against him. And was really a model for I think, really set me a model for
how intellectual interaction should happen through civilized respectful disagreement.
So there's probably more than I can mention, but that's that's a handful of the influences,
I think. I mean, you mentioned so many great names, the legends in the field.
But something that captures my attention is exactly what you concluded with is that having this
discourse and disagreement actually helps us move forward. And I think you and Keith are doing that
wonderfully at the moment. I mean, mind chat, the fact that you guys are such esoterically
different views, opposing different opposites in a sense. I mean, to keep consciousness,
phenomenal consciousness is an illusion. Whereas for you, consciousness is the fundamental basis
of reality. So let's go through panpsychism. Let's run through this. Give me your definition
of panpsychism, how you see it, how you interpret it and how it's different perhaps from other views
of panpsychists out there who are perhaps popular in the field.
Brilliant. I mean, just to say on your your last point, you know, I've just always loved to engage
with people with radically different views to me, just try and get into their mind and think,
how are they thinking these crazy sounding things? And I really do think that's a really productive
thing to do. And something me and Keith have tried to have aspired to don't always achieve it.
Sometimes we get a bit annoyed with each other. But yes, but turning to panpsychism.
So I mean, in our, you know, I guess, in our standard way of thinking about things, consciousness
only exists in the brains of highly evolved organisms. And so only exists in a tiny part
of the universe and only in very recent history, at least in terms of the cosmic history of the
universe. But for the panpsychist consciousness pervades the physical universe and is a fundamental
feature of it. Contemporary panpsychists don't necessarily think that literally everything
is conscious, despite the meaning of the word pan means everything, psyche, mind. So the word
literally means everything has mind. But contemporary panpsychists tend to think
that the basic building blocks of reality, perhaps fundamental particles like electrons and quarks,
or perhaps universe wide fields, many theoretical physicists tend to think that fields rather than
particles are the things that make up reality. But whichever way you go on that, these basic
constituents of the physical universe have very rudimentary forms of subjective experience. So
not the very rich, complicated experience that you and I have, not just you and I or the human
beings or the animals, which is the result of millions of years of evolution. At this very
simple, so the idea would be that that's what evolution does with consciousness,
molds very simple forms over millions of years into much more complex forms that you or I enjoy.
But the thought was in the beginning, as it were, all there were were these very rudimentary
forms of experience at the level of fundamental physics and everything else is kind of built up
from there. So in essence, you're saying that, let's say quarks, bosons, well,
the most fundamental particles that exist have experience, in a sense, it's got some sort of
an experiential aspect to it, not necessarily a thinking cognitively engaging sort of experience,
but an experience nonetheless, this comes down to some sort of a qualitative phenomenon.
Absolutely. So, yeah, it's hard because people all automatically think of something like human
experience or they think of the electron feeling existential angst or wondering if it's Tuesday
or something. But, but, you know, think about, I mean, as a way into this often like to go down the
spectrum of life from very complicated organisms, as we move to simpler forms of life,
mice, bed bugs to bed, but if bed bugs have experience, it's presumably
much more simple than we can conceive of. And as we move to simpler and simpler forms of life,
we find simpler and simpler forms of experience. For the panpsychist, this just continues right
down to the basic building blocks of the physical universe. But you said that an aspect of it is
experiential. And I'm not sure how you intended that exactly, but that can almost suggest a sort
of dualism like particles have physical properties like mass and charge, and also these invisible
consciousness properties. But that's not actually the the the view as it's standardly
defended these days, the view is rather that all there really is at the fundamental
level of reality is forms of consciousness and what we think of as particles or fields or
physical properties like mass, spin and charge are just ways of describing these fundamental
forms of consciousness. So it's a radically non-dualistic picture of reality is not
mined on the one hand matter on the other. In some sense, all there is is mind. And what we call
matter is just a way of describing these fundamental forms of consciousness did not
intend for for it to have that dualistic aspect. But so in essence, what you're actually saying is
that the charge, the the movement of the particle, these are the things it's doing. It's not what it
is fun. That's that's the basic difference here. These are merely the way in which it's behaving,
but it's not it doesn't explain what it actually is. Yes. And this is the reason panpsychism after
being laughed at for so long in so far as it was thought about at all. I think for a long time,
there was maybe just this guy Timothy Sprig in Edinburgh, who defended panpsychism. I
earlier my undergraduate career, I went to a conference they had just after he died
to to to to remember him. That was my one of my first conferences. But it's recently again,
come to come to attention, largely through the rediscovery of really important work by Bertrand
Russell from the 1930s. And very much, as you said, Bert, having Russell's starting point
observation was that for all its virtues and wonders, physics is confined to telling us about
what stuff does physics tells you what an electron does, what a quark does, how fear it gives us
detailed equations to predict how fields are going to evolve over time. And that's really useful
information and allows us to manipulate the world in extraordinary ways and build incredible
technology. But as a, you know, as a philosopher interested in the ultimate nature of reality,
you might want to know, okay, that's interesting, very interesting, what an electron does. But
I'm also curious about what an electron is. And about that physics, as it were, isn't really
interested. It's just interested in the behavior. So there's a kind of a hole in our scientific
story of reality there. And then Russell's observation is, well, we're looking for this,
we're looking for a place for consciousness, this mind body problem we started with, how the hell
do we fit consciousness into our scientific story? We've got this big hole. Maybe we can
stick consciousness in the hole. So I sometimes put it by saying, on this view, matter is what
consciousness does. So there's just conscious, there's just very simple forms of consciousness
interacting in simple predictable ways. And what physics does is give us equations to describe
how that stuff behaves. So in this way, physics emerges from underlying facts about consciousness.
So typically, people try and do it the other way around, they start with physics, or physical
science, more generally neuroscience, and try and work out how you get consciousness out of that.
I think that's impossible, incoherent even, for reasons we could perhaps discuss. But actually,
it turns out to be pretty easy to do it the other way around, to start with some facts about very
simple forms of consciousness, and get physics out of that. And that's very easy, because physics is
just purely mathematical. So as long as you've got, it's just about, you know, patterns really.
So as long as you've got some kind of stuff, whatever it is, interacting in the right way
to get the right patterns, you've got physics. Yeah. And I think something we often don't,
well, most physicalists don't comprehend and think about more than they should, is that
we even speak about the fact that physics claims that 95% of the universe is inexplicable. It's
something we don't know anything about. So physics is so thoroughly incomplete, that you
shouldn't, it's like almost a clue that you should not be a physicalist, because we in essence
understand almost nothing about the universe. Yeah, that's a good point as well. I mean,
well, one thing I said, I guess, it could go a few different ways. I mean, if you're talking about
dark matter, I suppose that's distinct, as I understand it, at least from the matter that
makes up our bodies and brains. So someone like Sean Carroll, who I've argued with a great deal,
thinks, oh, yeah, physics is far from complete. But in terms of the matter in our bodies and brains,
in normal terrestrial conditions, so not in very high energy, or the kind of high gravity when
you're about to step into a black hole, he thinks, you know, in those conditions, it's very well
understood. And he uses this as an argument against the kind of view I adopt where consciousness
is a fundamental feature of reality. But there are, I mean, there are two problems with that. I mean,
one is that although we do have some kind of consensus about physics at those energy levels,
the kind of experiments we use to support our theories in that region, as Sean Carroll agrees,
are all conducted with very small numbers of particles. You know, for example, in particle
cliders, we just have no idea, I would argue, whether the equations would look exactly the
same in incredibly complex systems like living brains, you know, one of the most,
you know, with 85 billion neurons, you know, we've never done any experiments to test that. I feel,
I think it's a kind of zeitgeist of the moment that people assume some kind of very reductionist
story. But given that our physics is based on experiments of small numbers of particles,
I think we really just based on the experiments ought to be quite agnostic about that. But of
course, the more fundamental reason is, okay, even if Sean Carroll were right, for example,
that we do understand the physics of the matter in our bodies and brains, that's only telling us
what matter does, not what it is. So even in that case, there's still the option of
the panpsychist hypothesis. Of course, you'd have to look at what, you know, what are the reasons
for accepting that hypothesis. But I don't think really, what we currently know about the
scientific world, the physical world scientifically, casts any doubt on that story.
Yes. I mean, when people talk about panpsychism, a lot of people sort of say it as if it's some
spiritual claim, because it was often associated with spirituality, a lot of people who meditate,
for example, people perhaps in Eastern traditions, they've made this claim before many years ago.
So for thousands of years, many people have been saying, I mean, this entire universe is conscious.
If someone has an LSD trip or an acid trip, they start to see things in a way as if the
universe is sort of palpating or has a heartbeat or sort of some sort of a living system. So this
has always been part of the conversation. But yet when people talk about panpsychism, a lot of
physicalists, reductionists have this doubt, they look down upon these people as if they have
absolutely no idea what they're talking about. What do you think they most misinterpret about this?
In terms, so in terms of the connection to spirituality, I always say two things. Firstly,
that there is no necessary connection with panpsychism and anything spiritual.
Many of the contemporary proponents, like Angela Mendelević, or Luke Rolos, or indeed David
Chalmers, you sympathetic to panpsychism, these people are the most, you know,
atheistic secular reductionists. They reject the coherence of a materialistic
kind of consciousness, and they think consciousness obviously exists. So they don't
believe in any sort of transcendent realm. They just believe in pain and seeing red and think,
you know, look, we need an explanation of that. In many ways, I think there's perhaps a
division in the panpsychist contemporary community between people who are more secular and people
who are more open to spiritual ideas, a little bit like maybe you had in the psychoanalytic
community between Freud and Jung, you know, Jung was very open to spiritual convictions,
whereas Freud is like, this is supposed to be science. Get all this mumbo-jumbo out of my face.
But anyway, so firstly, there's no necessary connection. But if for independent reasons,
perhaps as you say, on the basis of mystical experiences, maybe through meditation or maybe
through psychedelics or whatever, you independently have certain spiritual convictions, then
probably a panpsychist worldview would be more consonant with those convictions. So,
you know, if you have the kind of mystical experience you just described were that
it seems to you that reality is filled with consciousness. Well, if you're a panpsychist,
you already think that. And so, you know, whereas if you're a materialist and you just think
at the basic level of reality, it's just what you get from physics, then
it looks like you have to think the mystical experience of that kind is a sort of
delusion of some kind. You don't have to think that. Of course, it's a further deep philosophical
question, even so, whether it is rational to trust mystical experiences. I mean, on that
score, I am somewhat persuaded by the argument of William James in his chapter on mystical
experiences in his great book, The Varieties of Religious Experience. Most of this is a
psychological study of mystical experiences as they just as a psychological kind. But at the end,
he says, you know, would it be rational for someone having that kind of experience to trust it?
And he says, well, look, if we say it's okay to trust our ordinary empirical experiences,
you know, there's a table in front of me, but it's not okay to trust the mystic to trust her
apparent mystical experiences, then there seems to be a double standard there. You know,
yes, a mystical experience could be a delusion, could be just something funny in the brain.
But our ordinary empirical experiences could be a delusion. We could be in the matrix, right?
This could be a long dream as Descartes made vivid to us. So, you know, I think all
knowledge is rooted in trusting experience, trusting how things seem to be. And
I don't see why you can say what the argument would be, that it's okay to trust empirical
experiences, but not okay to trust mystical experiences. What's the relevant difference?
I don't think anyone's ever answered that. Yeah, I mean, even when you take into account,
I mean, certain physicalists, someone like let's say Anil Seth, I mean, the way he describes
reality as a controlled hallucination, and yet in a dream, it's sort of an uncontrolled hallucination.
So, so in a sense, when we're awake, where our hallucinations are more attuned to the reality.
So, although I am hallucinating this experience, the fact that I do pick up the pen and it does
feel like I'm picking up the pen means it's a little bit more controlled. But that doesn't
change the fact that I'm hallucinating in essence. The fundamental nature hasn't changed,
whether I'm asleep or awake. They're both still a hallucination. So, in what you're saying, it
makes so much sense because the truth is, whether it's mystical, whether it's some sort of a thought
or whether it's reality, they're both still inexplicably different. They're the same.
Yeah. I mean, Anil Seth, Anil Seth's work is really, really interesting. We've debated a lot of times
were due to debate again in November of the Royal Institute of Philosophy annual debate.
And I'm always saying to him, I totally agree with all your scientific work, you know, but I think
the scientific work on consciousness just leaves open all the philosophical positions. You could
be, you know, Anil is a materialist, but you could have a dualist version of Anil, a panpsychist
version of Anil. We've got to distinguish the philosophical aspects of the problem from the
scientific aspects. Some people think, oh, you know, science is proving materialism, but no,
materialism is a philosophical hypothesis, as is panpsychism, as in dualism. And we need to
assess all these on philosophical grounds. But actually, I've digressed slightly coming back
to your point, which was an excellent one, I think. Yeah, I mean, some philosophers get a little bit
not annoyed by the word hallucination there. It sort of seems to suggest that the external world
is not real in some sense. But if it just means that our experiences are in our own minds, in our
heads, they don't put us in direct contact with the world around us. We can't get outside of our
own consciousness to see if it corresponds to reality. So what do we do? You just,
all you have direct contact with is your own conscious experience right now. You don't even know
whether you existed a few seconds ago, you can only do that by trusting your memory,
which is itself another kind of seeming, another kind of experience. You know, of course we can,
you know, then people say, well, we can, we can check our memories, we can check our senses,
we can get precise with science. But only once you decide to trust them in the first place,
if I don't decide to just trust without any reason, my senses or my memory,
I can't get out of the present moment, I can't do any science. So although in a sense, we can
verify our senses, what our senses are telling us, only, that's only in a kind of circular way,
once we've already trusted them. So it seems to pretty, pretty much the same in the mystical
experience. You can't totally rule out it's a delusion, but it's the same in the case of
sensory experiences. And if anything, people who have mystical experiences claim that it seems
more real than their ordinary experiences. So I think I once, I think I once heard you mention
the fact that when someone claims to have some sort of experience in whatever way they have it,
what makes that any less true than anything that they've experienced otherwise? Like in
the normal realm, when you speak about this quite often, I feel that when I first started out
reading about consciousness, when I first entered the field from mid school, when I thought about
it, I mean, I always wanted to study this, I was materialistic all the way through. I even wrote
an essay, my dissertation, Keith read it, he gave me comments. It was, but I defended illusionism as
a theory of consciousness using psychiatry. I'm sorry, I'm sorry. I'm going now. I'm really joking.
But prior to that, I had the emergentism view of consciousness. Then I somehow slipped into
illusionism. Sorry. Had the flu last week, I'm slowly recovering. And for everyone who's watching
and every time you see Philip looking down, it's because he screens at the bottom. So don't
he's just looking at me, basically. Are you giving my secrets away?
I'm in some context in case they're wondering, is he reading something? What's going on?
Well, I was turning my emails off actually that bleeped to one point. Anyway, but anyway,
so yeah, as I was saying, when I started out, I started out as someone who believed in emergentism,
I mean, slowly you work your way up, then I went into illusionism. And from starting this podcast
and listening to people's coherent logical arguments, philosophical arguments, I don't know
anymore. I have absolutely no idea what I'm so agnostic at this point that to me, if anyone approaches
me with some sort of a cogent, coherent argument, I'm willing to listen all the way. And I think
that a lot of scientists per se, because of scientism, just look down on certain views like
panpsychism, idealism. In fact, we should talk about those two and how they're different or
similar, because they both somehow talk about the consciousness as being fundamental. But I think
that link as we spoke about earlier between spirituality and panpsychism is exactly why
scientists or scientism hinders listening to this philosophical argument. Do you agree with that?
I do very much. I mean, I think we're going through a strange period of history where
people are understandably totally blown away by the success of physical science and the
wonderful technology it's produced. And that has such a visceral effect on you think, oh my God,
we can put someone on the moon, we can have these tiny mechanisms that just such incredible
technology. But it doesn't follow from that that experiments and observation is the only way of
finding out about reality. Clearly, experiments and observation are a very important, very successful
way of finding out about reality. But their success does not entail that there are not other
ways. And the least controversial way of finding out about reality, independently of observation
and experiments, is the reality of your own feelings and experiences. If you strictly follow
the kind of methodology of Daniel Dennett or my good friend Keith Frankish, and you only believe
in what can be established on the basis of observation experiment, then you're led to disbelief
in your own feelings and experiences, or at least you're not allowed to believe in
anything known on the basis of introspection that doesn't also come from external observation.
So Keith often says, I believe in consciousness, I believe in feelings and experiences.
But when you dig into that, he totally agrees with Dennett. And Dennett says the data for a
science of consciousness or what he calls heterofenomenology, which is explicitly restricted
to what you can know from the outside, including reports, when you say something about your
consciousness. But Dennett isn't taking that as testimony about an inner realm of your inner life.
He's just taking the report as a physical act that we need to explain in terms of brain mechanisms
or whatever. So the only things Dennett believes in, and Keith believes in, are what can be established
from third person public observation experiment. Why? I've never, my hours and hours and hours
of talking to Keith, why can't I? Yes, of course, experiments and observation are very important,
but what about my immediate awareness of my pain? Why isn't that another fundamental way of knowing
about reality? So I think someone like Keith is at least consistent. I think I'm consistent,
but I think most people are in this confused middle way where they think, of course, my
consciousness exists, but they don't follow through and realize, in that case, there's a
fundamental data point here over and above experiments and observations. So you can't just
say we can only find out about reality through observation experiments because, no, there's
something else we need to plug in here. And so that's the least controversial example, but I think
there are other examples like our experience of value, our experience of the human trafficking
is abhorrent. We think there's something objectively bad about this. And you could say, well, that's
just our subjective reaction. Well, it doesn't seem to be. Why? If it's okay, I mean, that's just
like saying, oh, my experience at the table might be hallucination. I might be in the matrix.
I might be, but it's rational to trust my experience at the table. And it seems to me
similarly rational to trust my deepest moral experiences. So I think there are many different
ways of knowing about reality. And the task of the philosopher, which we've kind of forgotten
about in recent times, in my view, is to put them all together. It's the job of synthesis.
Take what we know from science, what we know from our careful ethical thinking,
what we know about mathematical reality, excuse me, the world of numbers and logic that
necessary structural reality mathematicians and logicians tell us about, what we know about
our own conscious experience and synthesize it all together in a single unified theory of reality.
So that, you know, that's what I'm most passionate about is moving us on from this
scientism, where we think, no, it's just, you've just got it all we can really believe in is what
we know from experiments, and everything else has to be squeezed into that. And if it can't be,
it doesn't exist. Because that leads to this really impoverished picture of reality, where really,
that our official worldview, it doesn't allow for the reality of consciousness,
doesn't allow for the reality of moral facts about good and bad and human dignity.
And I think that's a weird, unhealthy, difficult way to live. I mean, if it was the truth, it'd
be the truth and we'd have to get used to it. But once we see that there is no good reason
philosophically speaking, not to take seriously these other, these other ways of knowing about
reality, because all knowledge, including scientific knowledge is just rooted in trusting
experience, then I think we can, we can come to a more expansive conception of the world we live
in, and one that's a little bit better for our mental and spiritual well being, I think.
I mean, you pay a bit long winded. No, no, it's fine. The more long winded, the better. I think
the listeners, they want to hear you've used them. This is all about, I mean, it's your episode.
This is about you. But along the lines of what you were talking about, Dennett,
how would you respond to something like this? Because Dennett once said something about idealism
and panpsychism in a way, describing them sort of as a modern day version of the Ian Vitale.
I mean, I mean, we're always looking for something deeper. We always want that little extra thing
that makes us a little more special somehow. And for humans, from it being life,
being at the center of the universe at some point, Copernicus ruins that,
then Darwin takes us off the top of the food chain, and now we all we have left is consciousness.
So we're going to find whatever way we can to make this the most important thing.
What do you think about that? How do you respond to something like that?
Well, it's an ad hominem argument, isn't it? Which means it's not engaging with the argument.
It's speculating, psychoanalyzing about the motivations of the person defending it.
You know, I think we're very culturally used to the idea that people who have religious or
spiritual ideas, it's because they can't face the reality of science or something,
that they need to believe in something. But actually, for my own case, I think I'm more
subject to the motivations that lie behind the Dennett picture, which are very seductive as well.
It's very seductive to have this simple picture that experiments are giving us the truth,
like the kind of Ricky Gervais story. I think Ricky Gervais, it's very important
his identity and his sense of who he is and his sense of security. I think he needs to believe
in this very simple story. The experiments give us the answers, and we're on the right side of it,
and these superstitious fools. I think you can psychoanalyze people's motivations in that way.
That's the, I feel often very silly defending the views I do, because in the kind of culture
that I grew up in and that I hang around in, these things don't fit in. If I need to be,
I need to constantly analyze why I'm thinking what I'm thinking, and I'm constantly critiquing my
arguments. I actually think I need to be more on guard about the seductions of
scientists than the seductions of some need to believe I'm special or something.
At the end of the day, one can only speak for oneself. I'm sure I do have motivations,
in lots of ways, but fundamentally, I've always just really wanted to know what's true.
That's just been my job. I want to know the answers here. I've changed your mind a lot. I
constantly am sort of talking to myself in my head, trying to find the best argument,
because I want to know, is this right? I just want to know the truth. Then if Dennett says he
doesn't believe me, then what can he do? At the end of the day, we should just engage with the
arguments and try to do anything. I mean, hatred phenomenology, as you say. Keith calls it quasi
phenomenal experiences. It's implicit that it's existing, but it's just not what we think it is
to these thinkers. It's almost there. It's just how we interpret it that's different and a bit
misleading. That doesn't sound too radical, does it? When you say our consciousness is just
different to how we think of it, what you've got to know about Keith and that it's position,
I should be Keith, he's probably going to be listening, he might listen to this money,
is just come back to this point, the heterophenomenology idea that the only data
for a science of consciousness are what you can know from the outside. That is the only
things we can take seriously. Again, that includes what people say, but it's not what
they say because then you can... I think most people, when they trust what someone says,
they're in pain, they're taking that as testimony and evidence about what can't be seen. I can't
see your pain, but you tell me about it and I thereby indirectly know. That's not how Keith
sees it. He sees the report, the act, the physical act of your mouth moving as the datum.
It is the first person objective quantitative experience. That's everything, that's all that
exists. First person's objective qualitative experience, which to you is the fundamental
experience and to Keith is the complete opposite. Yeah, I mean, well, it's both. Of course,
I agree with Keith that we... Of course, who would deny that we do know a lot from the outside
and that's part of the data, but I've just... I've never seen a good argument from Keith about why
I can't just take it as a starting point. My feeling of... You know, then it's noticed,
you know, then it's got fascinating arguments about how introspection can lead as a stray.
Eric Schvitzkabel, one of my favorite philosophers who's a materialist,
has got some great stuff on that. But, okay, introspection makes some mistakes.
Doesn't mean the whole story's wrong. Like, you know, the objective qualities we seem to experience
are just not real at all. Yeah, the challenge is, I think the more conventional
physicalist picture you refer to earlier, the emergentist picture, they want to try and
reduce or account for... They say, oh, yeah, we believe in subjective experience. We want to
account for it in terms of the purely third person quantitative science. I think Keith and I both
agree that just doesn't make any sense. That's just... You can't even articulate these
subjective, private qualities, like the redness of a red experience in the language of physical
science. So, you know, your neuroscientific theory couldn't even articulate the data,
so it's not going to be able to explain it if it can't even articulate it. So, we both agree,
that doesn't make sense. But he thinks, well, just believe in this stuff, you know, about
through the third person way. And if you can sort of translate your talk of consciousness into
the stuff, you know, about in third person terms and, okay, that's fine, but you're only allowed to
do that. Why? Why? It's just... I think it's just over-enthusiasm with science. But you mentioned
Eric Schwitzke, I think I interrupted you there. Yeah, sorry. No, we... I mean, Eric and I also
chatted about it. Oh, brilliant. He is very skeptical. I mean, he's got that skeptical mindset
that leads him to think of so many creative, different ways that you can interpret reality
and the way we live. I mean, some of his philosophy of science fiction is very intriguing,
very diverse writing. And I think that only happens when you are sort of
someone who can think metaphysically about things without necessarily having a religious or
spiritual view on it. There was almost no dogma towards it. You're just naturally skeptical.
Keith and I actually had a three hour conversation about illusionism. We went into the ethics of
it all. It was quite a long chat. But I just spoke, I think about three days ago to Helen,
yet to Chappelle, am I saying the surname correctly? But we spoke about idealism and your view,
panpsychist, the panpsychist and the idealist view sort of overlap in certain ways to some
people. And to some people, they believe it's completely different. How would you differentiate
between these two views? I mean, there's a lot of new people out there. Bernardo Castro is Donald
Hoffman with conscious realism slash idealism in a sense, because he is taking consciousness to
be fundamental. How do you differentiate your views? Good. Yeah, it's a good question.
Obviously, to start off with, obviously, I mean, I think of all of these views as
very much on the same side of the debate and close in all sorts of ways. It's just wonderful that
from both science and philosophy, people are really exploring these ideas that start off with
consciousness and build up on that basis instead of starting off with matter and getting to
consciousness starting off with consciousness itself. So, you know, it's great all these views on the
table. People define terms in different ways. The way I tend to think about it is that
the panpsychist, although they think consciousness is fundamental,
they also think the physical world is fundamental. But without being due list because
how do you square that circle? Well, the physical world is just somehow made up of consciousness
or infused with consciousness. Whereas the idealist, I think, tends to think
there's something more fundamental than the physical world. Either the physical world is some
kind of illusion, or there's some deeper reality underlying the physical world.
So, I think Bernardo and Donald Hoffman fit into that camp. It's a little bit difficult with Helen,
Helen actually. But her view is inspired by George Barclay, the great 18th century
idealist who, yeah, thought that the physical world is real, but it's not fundamental tables
and chairs and mountains and so on or constructions out of ideas. At the fundamental level of
reality, we've just got kind of immaterial minds and the physical world is constructed out of
ideas in those minds. And she sort of embodies God from that picture. So, to her, it's the
ideal, the Berkeley and idealism without God. Yeah, so then God was central to Barclay's picture
because there's a question, well, what happens to a table when we're not looking at it? Yeah.
And Barclay's idea is what God's looking at it. And then Helen's idea building on that was, well,
why does it have to have, why does this cosmic mind or whatever it is, have to have all the
attributes of God? Why does it have to be all powerful? Why does it even have to be a sort of
thinking agent in order to sort of experience the table when no one's looking at it? So, she
instead thinks of it as a sort of tapestry of experience, lots of threads of experience. So,
but if we, I think the problem is, I think she, problem in terms of distinguishing her view from
panpsychism is, I think she wants, maybe does she want to identify that tapestry with the physical
world? Yeah. Helen is idealist in the way she thinks. There's almost, she's just defending
a sort of idea within idealism without actively calling herself an idealist.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, that's a good point. And, and but why that view that she explores
should counters idealism rather than panpsychism? I'm not totally sure, actually.
But after having such a lot conversation, I'm still not entirely sure.
Yeah, because it's not, it doesn't fit the most standard understanding of idealism where there's
something underlying the physical world. And that's, I mean, that's the argument I have with
Donald Hoffman. I'm not sure the motivation, I never understand the motivation for thinking
there's something deeper than the physical world. You know, so in a way, you can think of panpsychism
as a sort of middle way between materialism and idealism. So there's for the panpsychist,
you know, in some sense, there's just the physical world, particles and fields,
but that's filled out with consciousness. And I don't see why we want a place for consciousness.
Why can't we put it as it were inside the mathematical structures of physics? Why do we
have to put it at a deeper level than that? I've never really understood the motivation.
Sorry, this is going to digress, but it's going to go back to something you mentioned earlier,
which was, I mean, values inherent morals and ethics and how these all play a role.
I would like to ask, what about cultural differences? Because, I mean, if we have this
objective truth about ethics and morals, I mean, we clearly see a difference in culture.
I mean, and to some cultures, perhaps human trafficking might just be the way the culture has
just grown up over time. And to many people, maybe they don't see it as bad. I obviously,
though, I'm not one of those people, but how do we differentiate them? Because then we have to
agree that we don't have objective morals or values. What are your thoughts on that?
Yeah, it's a very important challenge to the moral objectivist position.
And, you know, I introduced this by saying, if you're going to be skeptical about
moral objectivity, you need to say, well, why is it okay to trust your sensory experiences,
but not your moral experiences? Otherwise, there's a double standard. But actually,
you've just potentially answered that question. I think here's the difference, you know, with our
empirical experiences, we get a great commonality, but then there's this disagreement. And that's
a very important challenge. And so why else have I thought about this? I'm trying to remember
what my view on it is. I mean, so one thing is, I think there's a lot more, I mean, I would say
not so much I'm a realist about morality, but a realist about value, that there are facts about
what is objectively valuable. And when you think in terms of very, very general claims about value,
there is a hell of a lot of commonality and universality. For example, pleasure is good,
suffering is bad. Understanding is good, ignorance is bad, creativity is good,
apathy and banality are bad, right? Does many people disagree with those general value claims?
Now, where you get disagreement is when it gets into the how it all fits together, you know,
more specific value claims about justice or the ethics of abortion or whatever. But then that's,
to my mind, that's to be expected, given that things just do get, A, things just do get very
complicated when the value equation gets so many different factors are at play. So you sort of expect
people to evaluate them in different ways, just as you do in philosophy or any complicated topic,
when there's complicated considerations, and you've got to sort of do some
highfalutin abstract thinking, people end up disagreeing, that's kind of to be expected.
The other factor, of course, is that there's a lot of self-interest with morality and people
wanting to believe certain things. And in our modern times, corporations influencing how people
think and so on. And if you don't want to believe equality is an important part of,
economic equality is an important part of justice, if you're very wealthy and you don't
want to be taxed, you've got a motivation not to believe that, because there's people coming out
of certain religious cultures or certain traditional views. So for all these reasons,
you'd expect, I think, there to be diversity. But on these very, very general sort of axioms of value,
like, pleasure is good, pain is bad, I think there's actually a lot of agreement which is
consistent with value realism. So within the panpsychist view, if you take, I mean,
you mentioned something like abortion. So ideally, that draws a lot of philosophical questions with
it. Because in essence, this is an experiencing system, part of reality. And now, we're drawing
the line using scientific methods saying, okay, 12 weeks is the cut off line, because this is what
has developed since then. How do we work around these things? How do we work around perhaps
life after death? I mean, there's so many aspects to this where we,
what does panpsychism tell us about these things?
Wow, we're getting these very deep and difficult ethical questions. I mean, in a way,
panpsychism might not make that much difference insofar as panpsychists tend to think
at the macro level of reality, not everything is conscious. And so they might,
you know, the view is that the fundamental, at the level of fundamental physics, everything is
conscious. But at the higher level, a panpsychist might hold the same as anyone else. It's a sort
of open question. So they might not think this, they don't necessarily think the table is conscious,
they think the bits it's made up of are. But I suppose, I suppose panpsychists will naturally
think spread consciousness, think it's more spread throughout the biological world than
other people may. And I mean, for one thing, it makes it very difficult to,
when you think about the ethics of eating, I argue a lot on Twitter with vegans about,
you know, if you don't think plants are conscious, then you've got a nice moral cutoff
point, because I'm just not going to eat, I'm going to eat things that aren't conscious. I'm
not going to eat things that are conscious. But I think, I think pans probably are conscious, or at
least are communities of conscious entities. And so you've got to eat something. It's hard to know
what the moral draw off comes pretty difficult. I mean, maybe same with, with a, with a fetus. I
mean, again, it's, I mean, for anyone, it's, it's very difficult to establish
where exactly consciousness emerges in, in, in pregnancy. But, but a couple of things that I
mean, I suppose, for that reason, I'm more inclined to place a lot of moral weight on
self-awareness, awareness of one's own existence, the capacity to understand
oneself and the world around one, which, for example, pigs have more than newborn babies.
So you might think in some sense, this was great, I'm not saying we should kill babies,
but there is, we've got to bear in mind that I mean, I think, I think a pig is much more
intellectually, cognitively sophisticated than a, than, than a very early fetus. So, so I think
those kind of things play heavily for me. I was always very influenced as well by
the argument of Judith Jarvis, Tom Thompson, but that it's not so much, didn't necessarily
it's not so much didn't necessarily denying a fetus a right to life, but thinking about
the right, the right of the pregnant woman, not to be forced to have her body used to sustain
that life. So Judith Jarvis, Tom said this wonderful analogy of you wake up, you've been
kidnapped and knocked out and you're hooked up to a famous violinist and it's a bizarre story
really that the musical society have hooked you up to this violinist because you're a rare donor,
and unless you stay hooked up to this violinist in this hospital room for nine months,
the violinist is going to die. Now, no, everyone thinks the violinist has a right to life,
but that doesn't mean you're obliged to allow your body to be used to sustain that life. So
I think I, for those two reasons, that would be my motivation for being pro-choice that,
you know, the lack of cognitive sophistication of a very early fetus and also the right for
a woman to choose where the hair body is used in that way. And that's a great answer. Very difficult
though. It's going back to your story about the vegan argument. Just today, I mean, I was my receptionist
told me that she doesn't like vegans, but she's just joking around and she's like,
my main argument is that if you're eating all the plants, you're technically stealing all the
animal's food. So in essence, you are still killing the animals. That is quite a ridiculous
but yet still quite fair, fair enough.
I mean, the position I've come to is what I call humanitarianism of just
treating the animal, not eating any animal products that are factory farmed. And you know,
a lot of people say, oh, you know, I don't agree with factory farming and maybe they'll
buy meat that's not factory farmed, although that can be very expensive. But very few people
ask in restaurants, is the meat factory farmed, you know, don't eat chocolate unless the milk is
not factory farmed. You know, dairy is often one of the worst, most cruel forms of factory farming.
So, you know, it's strange to me in some ways being vegetarian, if you're happy to eat chocolate,
because you know, milk chocolate, dairy products. So my thought is if more people did that,
then that could really have an impact. But I'm going to read, I'm going to read George
Mombio's new book, actually trying to persuade us all to be vegan for environmental reasons.
Maybe I'll end up being on that. He's, but anyway, let's not get into that. The main thing here is
let's tell me about some of, Philip, some of the best counter arguments you've heard
for pants against panpsychism. If you're to play devil's advocate on yourself right now,
what has really gotten your attention where you really thought I might not be able to argue this
as well as I wish, but perhaps one day someone will. That's a good question. I mean,
probably the most discussed challenge is the so-called combination problem, which is
okay, it's all very well postulating particles having consciousness or whatever. But ultimately,
what we want to explain is our consciousness and how on earth do these little conscious things come
together to make our consciousness? And on the face of it, it seems to be something very hard
to make sense of. Is it even coherent for lots of little minds to make one big mind?
And this is something I've changed my mind about a lot and thought about a lot. I think where I've
ended up with, though, is I think that the challenge is really is at its strongest, at least,
if you're going for a very reductionist panpsychist story where you say,
really, all there is is conscious particles. And what I think of as my mind is just a complicated
collection of conscious particles. So someone like Luke Rolofs tries to defend this very reductionist
kind of panpsychism. That is hard to make sense of. There seems to be a deep unity
about my own conscious mind that resists that kind of very, very reductionist story.
It's hard to deny that my mind is something over and above just a very complicated collection of
particles, whether they're conscious or not. But actually, and this comes back to my dispute with
Sean Carroll, I now no longer think there's much of a motivation to go for that very reductionist
story. You only feel pressured to do that when you start from the conviction that
everything that happens is ultimately explicable in terms of known chemistry and physics.
And I used to think that. That's kind of what I got taught as an undergraduate. But just from
talking to neuroscientists, really, we've got an interdisciplinary consciousness group at my
university here. We really don't know anywhere nearing up about the brain. What we know about
the brain, really, we know a lot about the basic chemistry, so like the bottom. We know a fair bit
about large scale functions, what big bits do. But what we're pretty almost clueless on is how
those functions are realized at the cellular level, how it works. And we'd have to know a lot more
about that before we could confidently say, you know, everything that happens in my brain is
explicable in terms of currently known chemistry and physics. I think we just don't know that.
So I'm more attracted to at least not such a reductionist story. You know, once you're freed
from that, then you can just think that let's just stick with particles of the Zegazimicity.
Just have basic capacities to, in certain circumstances, combine into more complex,
unified forms. And we should look to neuroscience to guide us in when that happens. I'm quite
attracted to the integrated information theory, which is one proposal as to when consciousness
arises in the brain. I actually wanted to ask you about that at some point. Your view and
integrate into information theory and how do you feel it plays a role with the sort of explaining
or adopting a panpsychist view? Because obviously they're starting off with phi and moving upward.
Do you feel as that represents a panpsychist attempt at philosophical thinking?
So my view is we need to distinguish very sharp, not very sharply, quite sharply,
scientific bit of consciousness research and the the, and the philosophical bit. So the scientific
bit is to work out what kinds of brain activity go along with what kinds of experience. That's
the scientific bit and integrated information theory is one proposal on that. It says that
you get consciousness in a system when there's more phi, as you say, or integrated information
in the whole system than in its parts. So probably this glass of water isn't conscious,
because there's probably more phi in the molecules than in the liquid as a whole. But in the brain,
there's hue in certain parts of the brain, at least there's huge, even though there's a lot of
fine and neuron, there's even more in the whole system. So that's why I get conscious. So that's
one interesting proposal. What I like about it is that it gives us, allows for kind of sharp cut
off points between systems that are conscious and systems that aren't conscious. And
on philosophical grounds, I don't think it makes sense to have fuzzy boundaries around
consciousness. Like you think of a cloud, there's no sharp cut off point between the
where's the edge of the cloud, which is this a little bit of water vapor outside the cloud,
or is it part of the cloud? There's probably no factor the matter there. But if we're thinking
of my consciousness, either something is part of my experience or it isn't, I don't think it kind
of makes sense. And for there to be fuzzy boundaries around my mind, I mean, that's
something we could debate. But IIT integrated information theory can make sense of that. But
that's just the scientific bit. And I think that like any philosophical theory, it's sorry,
like any scientific theory, it's, it's neutral on all the philosophical options. So you could,
you could be a materialist proponent of integrated information theory and think
just, just have an identity between consciousness and fi. Or you could be a due list like David
Sharma's and think fi and consciousness are different things, but there are special laws
of nature that tie them together. Or you could be a panpsychist and you could think, you know,
consciousness is the fundamental level and that bubbles up when you've got fi or something. So,
so yeah, so, so fi, I think I like for certain specific reasons to do with
you can't have fuzzy consciousness, fuzzy boundaries and consciousness. And I suppose
it fits upon psychism in that it, it predicts that there's more consciousness than we ordinarily
expect. But are there any other neuroscientific theories that you sort of are attracted to?
Not really for that reason, because, I mean, look, there's a lot, there's a lot,
it's very, it's very early days, there is no consensus in neuroscience, you know,
some people thought it would be all wrapped up by now, but there's, it's very hard because,
because consciousness is not publicly observable. And so
where you've got a human being, you can ask them what they're experiencing, but that, you know,
the more distance you get from the human case, it's very speculative. Eric Schvitzgabel now thinks
we will just never know whether snail is conscious, because it's just too distant from the human case.
But I think we can try and look for philosophical
signposts. And I think this important, what we can, we can look for what we know about consciousness
from the inside. And one thing I think we know about consciousness from the inside is that
there can't be fuzzy boundaries when it comes to consciousness. And I think
I'm happy to be corrected on this, but I think the integrated information theory
is the only scientific proposal that can accommodate that philosophical data point.
So to my mind, it's whatever its flaws are, very far from a final three-year consciousness,
it's, to my mind, it's the only philosophically credible one.
Yeah. What are your thoughts on, like, let's say someone like Penrose and John
Bovecki and quantum consciousness, where do you, where's your head at with that?
I mean, Penrose thing starts with a fascinating argument to do with girdles and completeness
theorem. And it's interesting, though, that that is really when you, when you think about it,
it's not so much to do with consciousness, it's to do with cognition, it's to do with
understanding, because what Penrose is thinking is he's wrestling with how to make sense of
mathematical understanding, given girdles and completeness theorem girdles and completeness
theorem seems to show Penrose thinks that, you know, a computer couldn't do the kind of
mathematical and have the mathematical understanding we have, because you can't
reduce mathematics to a system of axioms where you can prove everything with those axioms.
So he thinks mathematical understanding must be sort of non computational.
And that's why he thinks there must be some kind of quantum, non classical physics coming in here.
So, you know, that's fundamentally his motivation. I wouldn't, you know, I wonder whether, again,
this comes back to the, to the need to connect everything to kind of currently known physics or
closely related to currently known physics. I mean, in terms of that problem,
I think I'd be
much more open to supplementing macro level physics with the idea that there are just
new causal dynamics that kick in in complex systems. This is sometimes known as strong
emergentism. So we don't have to go down to the quantum level. We can just say, look, there's
new causal dynamics that emerge in human cognition. And this is actually what I talk
about a lot in my new book I'm working on that's much more about conscious understanding
and conceptual meaning. When philosophers and scientists talk about consciousness,
they always talk about pain and seeing red and itches and these kind of very animal sensations.
But I think consciousness is permeated with meaning and understanding what things are and
what they mean fills my experience. You know, I don't experience colors and shapes. I experience
tables and chairs and faces and stuff. So, so I think Penrose is one that is spot on and he's
one of the few to be wrestling with these deep mysteries about conscious understanding. But
I think I would go a slightly different way with that and just say go for stronger emergentism
rather than trying to hook everything up to the quantum level. And then people like let's say
Rupert Sheldrake. What are your thoughts on someone like his view on consciousness?
So I'm quite good friends of Rupert Sheldrake and we're doing a debate or a discussion rather
in the near future on religion without belief because I guess we're both kind of practicing
Christians who have very unorthodox views of what it means, what is involved in being a Christian
and then we're hooking up with, oh, what's his name? My mind's gone blank. Wonderful poet
and environmental activist who recently surprised everyone by converting to quite
conservative Christianity. And anyway, we're going to be having a chat with him. But anyway,
coming back to, yeah, so Rupert's got very interesting views. You know, I think he can
defend them very, very articulate, he can articulate them and defend them very well. But
so I suppose Rupert is defending his views as a scientist on empirical grounds rather than
strictly philosophical grounds. So I suppose it's kind of, this may be a bit of a cop out, but it's
sort of outside of my skill set in a way. I think, you know, knowledge is very specialized now.
And I'm jealous to people in the 16th century when you could sort of understand the cutting
edge science and the cutting edge of mathematics. But you know, in a way, when it comes to
imperial questions, I sort of have to, because it's not my skill set, I sort of have to trust
the, you know, the consensus. And I suppose, for better or worse, the consensus is against Rupert.
I suppose he would say that's for cultural reasons. And people aren't taking him seriously for
cultural reasons. And I'm very much open to that argument. I've experienced in philosophy,
which is my area, you know, how ideology stops certain views being taken seriously. And
so I can, I'm open to that possibility, but just because it's not my skill set, I just don't think
I can assess whether he, whether he's right or not. It's absolutely fascinating views, though. And
you know, I certainly, you know, he's had his TED talk banned and everything. I certainly don't
think he should be as ostracized as he is. I think, you know, yeah, again, there's a,
there is a sort of fear there, isn't there about, I suppose people worry about losing control,
you know, being open to any old stuff. But look, if someone can defend their views with
rigor and seriousness, then, you know, they, they, they should be given a hearing. And I think,
I think, but do you think that people are now mysterious regarding consciousness because
they're, they are just that many convincing arguments. And we just don't know.
Yeah. Mysterianism is, is, is again, a position we should take seriously. And I'm, I'm, to some
extent, open to it myself. I mean, you're asking for challenges to panpsychism. I suppose another
one would be, well, just the position of, shouldn't we be agnostic, you know, I can't look into an
answer, it's conscious or not. Maybe we should just be agnostic. Maybe we should just say,
there's a, there's a, there's a view that's very closely connected to mine that just says,
so agrees with this Bertrand Russell starting point that physics doesn't tell us what matter
is only what it does. And agrees that, you know, whatever manner is, it's, it somehow
explains consciousness. So you might say it's proto-conscious that it's, it somehow has a nature
that makes consciousness, but it's not itself conscious. And, you know, I'm very much open
to opposition. The philosopher Daniel Stolljar and his review of my academic book, Consciousness
and Fundamental Reality, was sort of pushing this line, you know, that there's something right about
this Bertrand Russell position, but we just don't know enough to be able to say panpsychism is good.
So I'm kind of open to that, but at the end of the day, my current thinking is
why go for mystery when there's an intelligible hypothesis as an alternative. And
all we can ever do is science and philosophy, I think is try and work out,
you know, the most simple,
parsimonious hypothesis compatible with the data, if we can account for
not only consciousness, but the facts of physical science and natural science more generally,
by postulating basic simple forms of consciousness, then that seems to me by normal scientific
criteria of, you know, the simp going for the simplest theory that can account for the data,
that's the view we should go for. We don't know for sure, we'll never know for sure,
and we should be open to other possibilities. But I still think panpsychism is just a bit more likely
to be true than other options on the table. I think you give a great, great coherent argument
for it. I mean, I've read Galileo's era of red consciousness, fundamental reality, and that
one's a lot more in depth and in detail. So like for all the people who read Galileo's era,
I think I highly recommend you go read the other one, because you're going to far greater detail.
And it's obviously meant for a different group of people. But if people have some sort of a view
on your view of panpsychism, they should definitely read both before making a conclusion.
On that matter, who do you think, because obviously I would recommend your books to
someone who wants to read about panpsychism? Who are the people you'd recommend people should read
in order to get a greater understanding of panpsychism?
Oh, well, there's just, yeah, there's so much going on at the moment. I mean, it's difficult,
isn't it? Because I guess a lot of academic philosophy work now can be so inaccessible.
I think this is, again, it's a reflection of knowledge being so specialized and
often philosophers, I think we're trained to try and have these watertight arguments.
And so, yeah, you try and cover all bases, and then it ends up getting really complicated and
the jargon comes in. So that's why in a way, you know, I wrote my academic book first. Because
once you write a more accessible version, you've got to be a bit looser with the argument, you
can't cover all objections. So then philosophers read it and say, Oh, you haven't considered this,
you haven't considered this. And so then I could say, well, read the academic book, if you want
the full story, the full argument. But yeah, so Luke Roloff's book, Combining Minds is a wonderful
book. A little bit challenging, I guess. Heather Hasselmer, a great philosopher, she's got a great
piece with Nautilus that I would recommend giving the basic panpsychist position, something on the
integrated information theory for philosophy. Now she wrote for a special issue I edited.
And she's working on a book on antiphysicalism, actually, for Keith's series in Philosophy of
Mind. Keith told me about recently. Another resource people might want to look to is there's
a special issue of the Journal of Consciousness Studies.
On 20 years, how many was it? Now 19 essays by philosophers and scientists and theologians
responding to my book Galileo's Era. And this is going to be coming out as a book actually later
this year called Is Consciousness Everywhere. So there's essays by Anil Seth and Sean Carroll and
Giulio Tinoni. The usual. Yeah, but I mean, well, in a way, usual suspects, but I don't think there's,
I can't think, another time, these kinds of scientists have responded to panpsychism. So it's
in a way, I personally can't wait to read this. It's quite, there is a development. I mean,
these guys don't agree with me, but, you know, I think taking the viewer seriously enough to engage
with it, I think, is an achievement. So that's, oh, there's loads of stuff. What is I suppose?
Marie Alba Hari is a very good Australian philosopher who defends a more spiritual version
of panpsychism inspired by Hindu mysticism, and partly based on arguing that we can trust the
testimony of experienced meditators. She's been working on a book for a while. I hope to come out
soon. My blog. Yeah. Yeah. So tell me for the book that you've got prepped and ready to go.
What's the goal here? Well, what's the next mission? Because I mean, you've written the
academic one, you've written Galileo's Era. What do you hope to show us next?
I hope this book actually is going to be both academic and accessible. I've wrestled for a
long time about which to do. I can't. Tough. Yeah, I'm hoping maybe it's not possible, but
through each chapter at the moment is divided into a more accessible bit and the more technical
bits and, but the whole thing I try to make quite accessible. But it's a different book
in content as well. But it's I guess the big idea is exploring the middle ground between
God and atheism. So I think in the West, people think you have to fit into one of those groups
you either believe in the Omni God or powerful knowing perfectly good. Or you think we're in
this meaningless universe where meaning only arises at the end of evolution or whatever.
And I've come to think that both of these views are pretty implausible.
Both have data they can't handle.
In terms of the Omni God, it's the familiar problem of evil and suffering.
Why would an all or powerful loving God allow or create a world of so much suffering in it?
In terms of atheism, the meaningless universe, I think
one thing I discussed there is the fine tuning of physics, the discovery in recent decades that
for life to be possible, many numbers in physics have to fall in a quite narrow range,
such that it's incredibly improbable that that would happen just by chance. I think on the
face of it, if you just look at it dispassionately, that is very strong evidence for some kind of
goal-directed activity, some kind of directedness towards life in the very early universe. And I
think I basically think there's a culture in denial about this. I think it's reminiscent of
the 16th century where there was this growing evidence for the earth not being in the center
of the universe. That didn't fit with the picture that people have got used to. And people couldn't
accept it and they tried to think of these ways of avoiding it. They postulated these
epicycles so they thought everything went around the earth, the sun and the planets and the stars.
They postulated these extra little orbits of the planets in addition to their orbits around
the earth. And that didn't do it. So they postulated these orbits around orbits. And we think, oh God,
they were so stupid, they couldn't just accept the evidence and we're so enlightened now. But I
think every generation has got used to a picture of how things are supposed to be
and you get laughed at if you don't fit into that. I think it's just culturally impossible
for people to take this evidence at face value, which is that I think what we might call cosmic
teleology. So I think there's strong evidence for cosmic teleology for some kind of directedness
towards life, but also strong evidence against the Omni-God. And so I'm exploring positions in
between. Sorry to cut you off there, but within this cosmic teleology, where do you think it's
headed then after humans and life? Do you think artificial intelligence is sort of the next step
and then we're going to move forward from there? What do you think is happening?
God knows, nobody knows. So look, as I say, I think there is very strong evidence.
Could change tomorrow, but science as we have it now is very strong evidence for a sort of
directedness towards life. Maybe that's the end of it. Maybe this is the end of the cosmic
purpose as it were. But in a way, you might think that's kind of improbable to think that
we're the culmination of this cosmic story. So we might speculate that it's still unfolding.
Some kind of greater reality is yet to come. But that would be somewhat speculative. I always
like a hero of mine growing up the heretical Catholic priest, Tyar de Jardin, who had this
early days after Darwin and parts of the church were sort of worried about what to do with Darwin.
But he was inspired by the idea of evolution and the idea of an evolving cosmos. And
he thought there was these great leaps of life and sentience and self-consciousness.
And he thought the next stage would be people, humans getting more informationally connected
up and this bringing about a new form of life and consciousness that he called the new sphere.
So some people think, if you look at the way we're all connected up with the internet and
whatsapp and stuff, maybe he was under something. I think that still might be possible. We don't
even know. But I think it's a good life to live in hope that there is some point to it all and
that what we do contributes in some way to some greater purpose. I find doing that helps me keep
my ego in check that I'm not just thinking of my success. I'm just thinking I'm just contributing
in some way to some greater purpose. And maybe there isn't a greater purpose. But we'll never
know and I think it's a good way to live to live in hope of that. I think it's happiness conducive
form of life. Would you describe your religious, if you had to pick one, would it be more of a
deistic God rather than theistic, sort of omniscient, omnipotent, interactive God? Would
yours be more deistic? You started off, let the cosmic teleology just roll and whatever happens,
happens. So we need some kind of explanation of why the source of cosmic teleology, why things aren't
better. We need a plausible hypothesis that explains, can explain the directiveness towards
life, but can explain why things aren't better, why this source of cosmic teleology is not more
evident. So look, I explore a variety of options. One is just teleological laws that Thomas Nagel
explored in his 2012 book, Mind and Cosmos. So this isn't a kind of mind, it's just impersonal
laws of nature that with sort of purpose is built into them. Another is some kind of,
something closer to the traditional God as a sort of mind, but a non-standard designer,
maybe of limited power. So maybe they really care, maybe they're trying to do stuff, but maybe they,
yeah, maybe all they could do was kick things off, or maybe they've got limited powers of
intervention. Or maybe it's the simulation hypothesis, maybe they're just some,
you know, scientist in the next universe up trying out a simulation to see what comes of it. That
would be a cosmic teleology hypothesis. One more naturalistically inclined people tend to like,
or cosmic psychism is the other one I consider that they're, you know, if we already think the
universe is a kind of mind because of our panpsychist views, then it starts to be less mysterious
that there might be some kind of limited goal directedness in it. So I'm open to all those
possibilities. You know, in terms of my religious practice, I think for me, it's more about
bringing the community together, you know, marking that the seasons and the big moments of life
you know, giving my kids a moral example, connecting individuals in the community up to
something greater and you know, inspiring moral action in the community, things like that. And
so I think, you know, all these things are, all these matters are very uncertain. But you've
got to live your life. And I think people are too folk, when it comes to religion, a lot of people
are too focused on, is it true? Is it not true? And I think, you know, I think a, I personally
think for some people, at least a religiously engaged life with the community and the spiritual
practice and is a wonderful way to live your life. And you know, if it turns out all to be
nonsense, you've, I still think you've gained much in terms of a rich life and lost little,
really, it's, you know, rather than sort of, you know, some people have no interest in religion,
and I'm not, I'm not interested to persuade them. But I suspect there are many liberal
minded people who would get a lot out of it, but think it's kind of Richard Dawkins has told
them it's stupid or, you know, how do we know it's true? And, you know, whereas I think, you know,
engaging with community and tradition can be a wonderful thing. And people can
He mentioned he's a fan of your work is Raymond Tellis. And something I like that he said, well,
this when we spoke, he actually told me, now that I realized, I realized if he asked me a
couple of questions to ask you, and I forgot to take them down before this interview, but then
again, we were meant to do it tomorrow. So I was, I was planning on doing that. But nevertheless,
he's a big fan of your work. And he finds it very fascinating. And something he said that I really
liked was he's, he's ontologically agnostic about everything. But there are certain epistemologies
that you can tell are just really just incorrect. But but when you when you're talking about
religion, we're talking about life, all of this, you have to be ontologically agnostic.
We don't have the answers. That's just the bottom line. And I think that's a really cool statement
to make. Yeah, absolutely, absolutely. And my wife's text me, I think I'm going to have to
attend to some family matters in the not too distant future. But but just sorry, just to throw
that in. But yeah, no, I, I, I totally agree with that. I think, I think a lot of people on both
where we use again, it's come back to we're used to the the epistemic vices of the religious,
we're used to the idea that religious people might be clinging to certainties. But I think
that's very present for a lot of people on the scientific side as well. You know, I think Daniel
Dennett, he needs to believe this stuff for it, you know, he believes to believe it's obvious,
and it's, you know, for a sense of identity. And I think
so like Ricky, he has to sort of have this easier that's painted.
I think, you know, yeah, just this kind of uncertainty is unsettling to a lot of people,
I think. You know, I just, you, you'll never know, you've got one life, you know, and
you have your best, you know, you can have your best guests and, you know, it doesn't have to be,
you know, I'm certain, or it's a load of nonsense. I mean, I, I've never had a mystical
experience, but I have, I have what I would describe as spiritual experiences to some,
often with morning or evening light, or, you know,
watching my kids play or something, you know, a sense that there's a way things are supposed
to be, or there's a greater reality at the root of things. And most people think you've
either got to think, oh yeah, that's definitely right, or you've got to think, no, that's nonsense.
But I'm in a ways to sort of engage with that. Take it seriously,
work with it in your spiritual practice, and you'll never know one way or the other, but you can
maybe live a richer life through engaging tentatively those experiences.
Beautiful Philip, you're already touching on that. But like concluding, this is obviously called
mind-body solution. I mean, you're already touching on it, but how would you say we should
move forward in order to get one step closer to that mind-body solution?
We're a long way from the final answer. Humans always think they're at the end of history,
and we're kind of there. We just need to, you know, dot a few i's and cross a few t's. You know,
so I think that that needs to be the starting point. What I'm most passionate about, and here's,
we're going from what we don't know. Here's one thing I feel most confident about is that
consciousness is not just another scientific problem. And the reason it's not another scientific
problem is that we're not dealing with some public observation and experiments. We're not
dealing. It's a very different kind of data. We're dealing with something that's privately known
and trying to explain this privately known reality. You know, science is used to dealing
with things you can't observe, but we postulate things you can't observe to explain what you
can observe. In all other cases, the task of science is explaining the data of experiments
or observation. This is a totally different explanatory project. We're not trying to do that.
We're trying to explain this privately known reality. So we're not even at first base. We've
got to get on to that. This isn't just another scientific problem. It's a philosophical problem.
It's how we bring together what we know about scientifically and what we know about privately
trying to meld them together. And, you know, so we're still about, you know, debate Nanel Seth,
and he's saying, oh, what are the predictions upon psychism? What does, you know, what scientific
experiments result? But that's not at first base, because that's seeing it as just a scientific
problem. And it's not just a scientific problem. Panpsychism might be wrong. There are lots of
good challenges, but treated as a philosophical problem, not a scientific problem. So we've got
to understand the nature, the philosophical underpinnings. We've gone from pretend, you know,
the latter half of the 20th century, people pretended consciousness didn't exist to avoid the
problem. Since the nineties, the 1990s, we take the problem seriously. But too many people still
think just do more neuroscience and we'll solve it. We need to see the philosophical underpinnings
of the problem. We need to see that it's fundamentally a task of how we bring these things
together as philosophers ultimately, scientifically informed philosophers. Once we get there, I think
we'll be at least on the first stage. And I think just that first stage actually will,
in itself, necessitate a kind of revolution in how we think about science, how we think about
the way we know about the world around us. So yeah, exciting times ahead.
I think that's a beautiful way to end, Philip. Thank you so much for your time. It's been an
absolute pleasure. Thanks, Tevin. It's been lovely finally speaking with you. I hope we get to chat.
Yeah, I'm looking forward to it. Hopefully after your book comes out, we can have another chat.
But I really appreciate your time. I mean, this is, and please just continue doing the work you're
doing. Because as I said, the more diverse the views, the philosophical arguments, as we spoke
about, not neuroscience, but philosophy, the more diverse and the more people like you come out and
speak about it, the more we can engage in this topic. And this podcast would not exist without
people like you. So thank you so much for that. Thank you very much. We'll see you again.
