So it's a weird world we live in.
It's a strange universe.
I call ourselves a conscious conglomerate of cells
assembled by atoms, manufactured by molecules
designed by DNA, forged by fusion via stellar supernovae.
I mean, this is a crazy story.
Every night you have to go to a tribal council
to sacrifice and legitimately think about who you would kill,
who you would you be willing to actively kill?
Tribal council.
It's like basically sitting in heaven
looking at all the people you killed
and then asking them for forgiveness.
And then to still give you a million dollars or a million reds.
It did spark a memory for me, though.
I've only actually shared this with two other people in my life,
so this is opening up a bit.
If you think that there's somebody else or something else controlling them,
it is very eye-opening.
I remember feeling so free.
That day when I left the temple, I remember just thinking,
this is the most free of ever felt amount.
Just pure ecstasy of freedom.
Any decision I make from here or not is my own decision.
And I will bear the responsibility,
whether it's praise or blame, I take it.
It's ultimately my fault.
There's no one to blame for this.
There's no one to praise for this.
Except, and I think it's quite a freeing and yet terrifying.
Possibly, I can't call it a quarter-life crisis or whatever,
but it's a very young life crisis.
Dr. Tevin Naidu is a medical doctor, a philosopher, and ethicist
born in South Africa of Indian descent.
He attained his Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery degree
from Stellenbosch University and his Master of Philosophy degree,
Cum Laude, from the University of Pretoria.
His academic work focuses on theories of consciousness,
computational psychiatry, phenomenological psychopathology,
value-based practice, moral-luck addiction,
and the philosophy and ethics of science, mind, and mental health.
He has a television background as the host of two popular South
African shows as a castaway on Survivor South Africa.
He is currently the host of the Mind, Body, Solution podcast.
Tevin, thank you so much for coming on.
Thank you so much for having me. It's an absolute honor to be here.
Thanks for that wonderful introduction.
I mean, you did it yourself, my friend.
That's your background.
We got it together quite well.
They make me sound better than I think I am.
I've done a lot of research. I'm a big fan of your channel.
Yeah, I mean, I've loved it.
I discovered it a little over a month ago, I think,
and I've, I mean, over half of your episodes I've listened to
and I plan to just absorb the whole library soon.
I'd love to start off kind of early because one of the,
one of the really core pieces of content was actually someone else's
interview of you, Dr. Tony Nader's interview with you,
which I loved.
And one piece that really piqued my interest was when you're talking
about how early you started questioning things,
asking the big questions, metaphysics, et cetera.
And you said it was around the age of nine or so, I believe you said.
And I loved if you could just give us some context around that
and what that was like.
Yeah, no, I mean, it's such a strange world.
I think it's, I mean, I was just discussing this with my girlfriend
and one of my friends today.
The universe is such an intriguing place.
There's so much going on.
I mean, someone that always comes to mind is Charles Darwin.
I think about the years he spent on the Galapagos Islands,
just traveling, inflicting views with his own theory
and his religious beliefs and how he spent so many years trying
to convince himself, not others, but himself,
that what he believed religiously just did not correspond to the data.
And for me, when I was a kid growing up in South Africa,
it's very, very multicultural, very diverse.
We've got 11 official languages.
There are so many different cultures and backgrounds.
And I mean, people often say Cape Town, when you're in Cape Town,
you feel like you're in the rest of the world.
There's just so many different people all coming together.
And me personally, part of my family, very much Muslim,
traditional Indians, the other half, Hindu, traditional Indians.
And then I've also got Christian, traditional Indians,
but still South African at heart.
So I consider myself more South African than I do Indian
because we've been here for around seven, eight generations.
Oh, wow.
I was brought as endangered laborers by Brits.
And then at some point, obviously, of post-apartheid,
sort of pulled their way up and made their way into society.
But so the cultural dynamic is very intriguing at that point
because I have my Muslim best friends and cousins
on the one side.
I've got my Christians, best friends and cousins
on the one side of my Tamil, Hindu.
Everybody is all just integrating so well.
And none of the ideas corresponded.
And I found that very frustrating.
I felt that when I went to school, when I read books,
when I went to science, for example, class,
was always some sort of a consistency with the story.
And if something did change, which it often does,
science consistently replaces all the science
with new data sciences, these stories sort of set in stone.
And I didn't like that, I didn't like the fact
that whatever the person said was the gospel of the truth.
I felt that, I mean, channels call the truth.
I felt like if I had to look for radicality and truth,
this is probably not where I'm going to look
because I had this bad tendency of asking questions
and I would often get kicked out of temple
while I get kicked out of the mosque and kicked out.
So when that happens, you start to question,
I mean, is this really the story you want to be told?
Are you being told the story or taught the story?
What's the difference?
And at that point, I stopped.
I became completely atheist.
I was nine, I remember, I left the temple,
I remember being so frustrated.
At that point, I actually became quite anti-theist.
I became very much anti-religion.
I remember being so irritated by this whole story,
like that people are so convinced by these ideas.
And as the time went by, I became a lot more conservative
with that view, no longer anti-religion, anti-theist.
I think everyone's entitled to their own views.
I respect them all.
I think that at the time, it was more my own hatred
towards the person who spoke to down to me at the time
that caused this almost neo-Atheistic view.
You know, the sort of Richard Dawkins, Christopher Hitchens,
type of Sam Harris, Daniel Dennett type of hatred.
And that's slowly changed.
I mean, I have huge respect for Christian scholars,
theologians, and even gurus, priests alike.
I mean, to me, it's changed over time.
It's an interesting dynamic.
It started when I was nine, which was very young,
because many of my friends thought I was crazy.
Of course.
Yeah, that's so young to be questioning.
You must have been a curious kid.
Do you remember, was it a gradual thing?
Was there a moment in time where something snapped?
I think it was always brewing.
I think my dad always told me to watch Discovery Channel
National Geographic.
I mean, he forced me to sort of watch this
when I'm watching Cartoon Network.
Changed the channel.
That's good.
In hindsight, I mean, at the time, obviously, it didn't like it.
But when I look back, I think, I mean,
those are the stepping stones.
Sort of those curiosity builders that started asking
the deep questions within.
Because often, growing up, I wanted
to be an astrophysicist.
And I've always wanted to be an astrophysicist.
I remember just getting 100% for mathematics every year
all the time, just thinking it's going to happen.
And then as you get older, you make the more conservative
choice.
And at the time for me, it was to look after my family,
my peers, and Indian cultures.
I mean, becoming a doctor is pretty much an expectation.
And I think I sort of fell into the trap.
But no regrets.
I enjoy it.
I love it very much.
But I went for the conservative choice.
But astrophysics in space, just trying
to understand the nature of this universe.
And it's an incredibly complex system.
How does it all function?
What is the purpose of all of this?
What is the meaning behind all of this?
I think it intrigues a lot of people.
And I think religion does provide people with those.
It provides us with those answers.
But for me, it wasn't enough.
I wanted to find out for myself.
And that's what sort of stirred me towards that.
My parents were never that religious anyway.
They were very cultural.
We often celebrated Diwali or all these Hindu festivals.
We went to prayers.
I still go to many of them.
But yeah, they never really ingrained
the religious doctrine within.
So they often allowed me to do whatever I wanted.
When I was nine, I told them, I'm done.
They were fine.
I was like, it's like, it's a nine-year-old.
My goodness.
Yeah, that's so cool.
Well, it did spark a memory for me, though.
I know I'm interviewing you, but if I may share something.
I've only actually shared this with two other people
in my life, so this is opening up a bit.
And it's not like crazy big.
But I remember, because you said around nine,
and I was around eight or nine years old,
I remember I was definitely in the third grade.
So whenever that's around then.
And I remember the moment when I was in my childhood bedroom,
a lit bedroom, and I was looking through the doorway
into the hallway that was dark.
And all of a sudden, it was like something changed.
It's like the top-down control became apparent,
if that makes any sense.
I didn't know the word agency at the time,
but it was like, oh, I have control over this.
It wasn't solely the ether of my childhood, let's say.
But it was like a moment.
And from then on, I remember going to school
the next day and being like, oh, my goodness.
Everything just clicked at a critical time.
It sort of gives you that power, that sort of autonomy
you've been looking for.
Yes.
Waiting for the autonomy.
I mean, everybody just craves it, everybody wants it,
but he really gets it.
If you think that there's somebody else or something
else controlling it, it is very eye-opening.
I remember feeling so free.
That day when I left the temple, I
remember just thinking, this is the most free of ever,
the ultimate, just pure ecstasy of freedom.
Any decision I make from here on out is my own decision.
And I will bear the responsibility,
whether it's praise or blame, I take it.
It's ultimately my fault.
There's no one to blame for this.
There's no one to praise for this except me.
And I think it's quite a freeing and yet terrifying.
Possibly, I can't call it a quarter-life crisis or whatever,
but it's a very young life crisis.
A one-tenth life crisis, a one-twentieth life crisis.
Hope you live to a long time.
That's so interesting.
So then from there, the progression,
you said astrophysics was a big passion of yours.
You got through high school.
You obviously, I'm assuming you were a great student,
never causing any trouble in the classroom.
It's on top.
And then I had archeology as one of the others.
Oh, interesting.
Qing is one of the others.
What was the other one?
Teaching, just general teaching.
Most likely, mathematics or physics.
Oh, wow.
Very cool.
I mean, archeology, I mean, I loved it so much.
I speak very highly.
Darwin's one of my favorite scientists of all time.
And just going back, I mean, Stephen J. Gould,
when I think about the work they did back in the day,
I mean, it's some of the best things I've seen.
Absolutely, it's incredible.
Cool, so that's all right.
Point, I was very much in the sciences, very, very science
oriented, and then as you get older,
you start becoming more philosophical.
Your scientific start to question those as well.
So at nine-year-old, eventually she
had to change really to a 19, now 29, currently 29.
But over time, things have changed every sort of decade or so.
Sure.
And what made you decide you wanted to become a doctor?
So I was always one of the choices.
It was something I've always loved.
But the main reason, a lot of people
find this completely absurd and ridiculous
is I was watching House and I love House.
Yeah, great show.
I remember I watched it as a kid, too.
Yeah, sure.
Probably my favorite series of all time,
because I've watched it so many times.
There's eight seasons I've watched all of them
back to front, possibly around eight times.
And I know a lot of it's before med school days.
Yeah, yeah, a lot more time back then.
I sort of made the excuse in med school
that this is me studying.
Whenever somebody asks me what I'm doing.
As if.
Always, whenever someone asks, it's always lupus.
It's always the first lupus, lupus,
or sarcoidosis, the other one.
Oh, I forgot that.
Yeah, OK.
So I was watching House.
I remember my mom running down the stairs
when I was at home and she got in for med school.
And at the time I'm watching House, I look at the TV
and I look at it and I just think, let's just say, let's go.
Let's just do it.
It was one of those spur-of-the-moment thoughts
where I just didn't even think about astrophysics.
I didn't think about anything else.
I just let's just do it.
And when I got to med school, I realized it's nothing like a house.
Very good.
Very different, yes.
And how would you describe your experience in med school?
Super difficult.
School was very well.
I got to med school and I think this
is where cultural dynamics in South Africa play a big role,
because I went from a school where the school had a majority
of 800 black students.
In South Africa, we refer to mixed-race people as colored,
and this is not politically incorrect within this country.
So we refer to mixed-race people as colored.
So they were about 800 blacks, 200 coloreds, about 200 Indian people,
no white people at all.
And then I went from that school to Stellenbosch University,
which is the majority of Afrikaans white university.
It was a complete cultural shock, something I never anticipated.
I mean, I did Afrikaans as a language in high school and primary school,
but I always sort of learned it with a pitch of salt,
like thinking I'd never use this.
It's not going to be something I'm going to be using.
And I get to Stellenbosch, where I kept on 75% of the population
speak Afrikaans and I was completely shocked.
I couldn't believe it.
And this is the first language.
So it was very surprising.
I immediately felt homesick, just went into sort of a depression,
I would say, very dark.
I would go to lectures to fall asleep and go home and self-study,
because they were speaking Afrikaans.
I couldn't understand what they were saying.
What they were saying, I couldn't understand the lecture.
So I just, it was very, very difficult.
But over time, you get used to it.
It's not that bad.
You start to fall in love with it slowly.
Trauma starts to become almost like a toxic relationship.
You hate it, but you love it.
You keep going back.
So I kept going back.
Things got better.
It slowly fell in love with it.
Cool.
But it was difficult, I'm sure.
And then you, I mean, you can imagine yourself
being in a war-drowned.
And guys just talking to you in a different language,
sort of talking down to you as well,
because he sort of assumes I don't understand the language.
And then you don't realize he's asking you the question
he's asking, because he's just done dark questions.
And this is you in a war-drowned, academic war-drowned,
for Marx, you're getting graded on this.
And then you put a mark because you just don't really know.
It was very, very frustrating.
I sort of built up a little bit of anger within me.
I remember not wanting to learn Afrikaans
just to spite them.
But I learned it eventually anyway.
Yeah, you had to.
You had to.
I had to pass.
I had to figure this word thing out.
But Africa is so politically complex.
You can imagine, I mean, 11 official languages,
Afrikaans is one of them.
English is one of them.
That means there's, I and other official languages left.
I used to speak Zulu quite a lot back when I was a kid.
And then in Cape Town, we have what's known as Isikosa.
So there's so many different languages.
Difficult to learn them all.
Sure, yeah.
You have to just cover what you can
and move forward from there.
So.
Take it with some of them.
Yeah, right.
Yeah, gesture and get by that way.
You get sort of the vernacular.
You get the gist of it.
And you can get through a conversation.
Sure, sure.
So you're in med school.
And how did you get into this television media space?
Like, what was, what was that path?
This is my first time actually, just by the way,
because I was just doing an interview
where I'm integrating all these lives together.
Because I've either done specifically television stuff
and then I've either done academic medical
mind-body solution content.
It's kind of intriguing to have this discussion.
It's my first time.
So, yeah.
Me, it was, I was in high school, I remember.
I think I was about six foot one at a time, height.
And I met this model agent who told me
I should try and just do some modeling,
just earn some extra cash.
And obviously, I didn't grow up in a very rich area.
I wasn't very wealthy.
And I thought, this is a great way, unique.
And it was, it was a great way.
Awesome, great.
I did it.
And then at some point, I entered this,
I entered Mr. India, South Africa.
I was, I think, about 17 of them.
The agent said, enter the competition, do this.
You might win it.
You do, go on to bigger things.
And I did, and then I ended up winning it.
And I went on to then host a television show in South Africa.
And it's one of South Africa's most popular
Asian lifestyle television shows.
So, millions of views every week.
And I was fortunate enough, it's called Easter Mosaic.
They contacted me because they saw me
when they sell the competition, which was pretty cool.
And asked me to join team when I did.
And at that point, I think, was 17 when I won the competition,
18 sorry, when I won.
And when I won it, and then afterwards,
I went on to TV show and I was in my first
to second year of med school.
So around then, I've been living,
I've started living this double life.
It was like entering two different realms.
I mean, you mentioned in your emails, Joseph Campbell,
the hero's journey type of thing.
You know, that call to adventure.
This was it, you know, because I really
started this medical journey.
And then I got approached by this other world
that was completely different.
Yeah.
For a guy who's homesick, really irritated
with the way things are going and not really happy
with where he is, this was like a blessing.
This was completely, this was fun to travel.
I got to teach because I wanted to be a teacher this whole time.
So presenting to me became this platform
where I could teach people, speak to an audience.
And I think I really enjoyed that and I loved lecturing,
I loved giving talks.
So it was pretty cool because I got to then use
a lot of these hobbies to get to sort of something
that made money and help pay med school fees
and help do a lot of things for my own lifestyle in general.
And then at that point, the show was doing very well.
We ended up getting another show.
And it all just rippled from there.
I mean, I kept doing TV shows, but then I was sort of
living this double life.
And it started becoming a little difficult.
I mean, I'd go from a 36-hour shift at the hospital
and then I'd have to film an entire event the next day
for the television show.
So I'd be exhausted.
I remember I'd like bags in my mind completely dark
and like sunk and I'd look tired all the time.
So there was like a chronic fatigue, but I loved it.
It was too exciting to stop.
It was almost like being on drugs.
I find this energy that you just keep wanting
to get addicted to the dope.
And back then I had a lot of social media.
I was using, I was actively engaging with the community.
So that constant feedback started really feeding the ego,
I would say, and I mean, I enjoyed it at the time.
But then at some point I decided there's got to be a limit.
I have to either continue with one
or continue with the other.
I chose the medical and the science background.
How'd you make that choice?
It was difficult, I mean, I always would have.
It was never, and it was never me actually
thinking of leaving that for.
But it was more that you get tired of the,
I don't want to son, you get tired of, it's almost
like a fake world, it's kind of like a curated world
that you start getting frustrated.
You get tired of the fact that everybody has this facade.
They're not showing the true colors,
they're not being themselves.
Whereas in medicine, people are being pleaded.
Lack of better terms, I'm assholes to you.
Just nailing you, just telling you
how bad you are at this thing.
No filter, absolutely no concern whether he hurts me or not.
And I found that a little bit better for something.
It felt like I'd rather know exactly where I stand with you
versus going into this big event with everyone
just being fake the whole time, pretending
like they love you, pretending like they care,
and constantly in this environment,
you don't really know how to read people.
For someone who loves psychology, philosophy,
you want to know how people are thinking,
you want to know why they think a certain way.
I mean, in this act, it's sort of like it's constantly acting.
And I didn't really like it.
And then the politically correct,
I started growing over time.
I had my own views on that.
And it started becoming too much.
I felt that being online, not being able to speak your mind,
not being able to talk and openly and have discourse,
which is the main reason why I started MindBodySolution
was having a platform to provide a lot of these people,
have theories they're afraid to actually share sometimes
because of the repercussions.
So I was always a fan of having that freedom of speech,
trying to be able to say what you want to say,
without offending people with intent.
I mean, context is always important.
Content is not relevant without considering the context it's in.
If you just take content for what it is,
that just doesn't work.
Someone can say something.
It can mean a completely different thing
in a different contextual situation.
So I found that very, very frustrating
about the television slash online world
where context is completely eliminated.
And possibly eradicate the scenario.
And yeah, it became easier at that point.
Had it not become that way, I think I might have stayed longer.
But the more I watched the way it started to go that route,
I decided to take a step back, put my mouth to much.
So I think context is very important.
Sure.
And it's funny because this is part of the reason
why these long-form discussions, I think,
are so popular and have become popular in less than 10 years
or so is that we get the time to have the whole, the context is,
it's built in there.
And on TV, it's like, give me your soundbite.
Give me 30 seconds.
Make it quick because we got a mistake.
What's that?
It's like a 10-second clip of a making a mistake.
And just wait for a lot more to say,
they stopped at just time.
Not a fan of that.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think so.
Yeah, I agree.
I think it is.
I'm personally, I'm just getting into it.
You know, this is sort of the beginning of a new chapter
for my channel.
I want to do some more long-form stuff like this.
And because I think it's fascinating.
And you were with your dog, I mean.
Oh, thank you.
Oh, jeez, stop.
Flatter really got you very far.
So I appreciate that.
I mean, you are, but I mean, I can
tell one of the things that comes through on your channel,
which we'll get to in a little bit,
because I think I'll be the main focus of the discussion,
is how polished you are.
I mean, how clearly you have your, what, five, six years
of TV experience?
I mean.
Yeah, but more on that.
I think, like, yeah, about I started in 2012 or so.
And I ended around 2018, 19.
But then I did, obviously, I mean,
as you know, Survivor and the other shows.
Oh, yeah.
Very different reasons and different circumstances
around that.
Well, since you brought it up, let's talk some Survivor.
Survivor, one of my favorites.
If not House, it's going to be Survivor.
Yeah, if you had to choose, your on a deserted island.
Which one do you go with?
Oh, difficult.
I think I'll go with, if I'm on a deserted island,
I think I'll go with Survivor at that point.
So I would say the same thing.
But then you're also, you're in this vicious loop
where you're on an island, watching a show about an island.
You might want to escape from that.
Especially if I'm watching a season where I'm on,
because then it's going to feel very much like inception.
Oh, absolutely.
Were you on two seasons or one season?
Two.
So we recently just, this year, had our first South African
return season.
So it was pretty much an all-star season.
And that was very, very cool.
Went home too soon again, wasn't it?
That is so cool.
And what made you apply for Survivor?
Or did they reach out to you?
Did they see you?
Like, how did that work?
So no, no, no.
So I love Survivor.
I've been a fan since I was probably around nine as well.
I mean, I think there's one climate in 2000 and...
Oh, yes, the original one.
Richard Hatch, that season?
Yes, Richard Hatch.
I think it was 2000 or 2001, which meant I was around seven,
actually, seven or eight.
I started watching from then.
And it's a family show.
My mom loves it.
My sister loves it.
We've been watching it as a family since then.
And I used to save seasons, come in a different city,
to watch it when I get back.
I'd download and get back to the other city
to watch it with them.
And I've been a fan for such a long time.
I love the psychosocial behavioral dynamics of it all.
For me, it's very much a biopsychosocial game.
Medicine, we focus on a biopsychosocial model.
It's extended itself to biopsychosocial spiritual,
biopsychosocial cultural.
But when you think of Survivor, it's not just
a television show to me.
To me, it's more for...
Pretty much what Jeff Prob says.
It's a social experiment, except I think it's a lot more
complex than that.
I think there's a lot of dynamics behind the game
that can dictate how people behave in real life
and how people perceive themselves within the game,
dictates a lot about what they don't know
or what they're doing real life.
Because people have this image of almost
when you enter this game, it's not reality.
You're almost taken away from reality
because they build this box where you can behave
a certain way based on the rules that they've set out.
But this box just so happens to be within the real world
that you've always been a part of.
So you can never really escape reality.
So a lot of people who have this perception
that when you leave the real world and enter Survivor,
you can be an asshole, you can be a dick,
you can be those people.
I don't think that's true.
I think the way you behave, yes,
if you want to play a character, entertainment purposes,
very enough, I'm all about that.
I did that my first season.
Very mischievous, very much the naughty guy
trying to put people against each other.
The second time I played I was a lot more mature.
I was four years older, but then I wanted to play
more like the doctor that I am.
And it comes across on the show.
You see myself in places and very naughty.
She was lying, making up stories.
And now, and I went through this intention.
I told him, like, listen, I come from a television background.
I'm here because I love the show
and I want to make the show better.
Mangle here is not just about me.
It's about less make South African Survivor
as cool as it can be.
But at this point, Survivor had just finished season five
and season six got taken over by a new production company
called Afrocons.
And this production company is filled with massive fans.
Just huge, like, big Survivor fans.
One of the producers, he's like one of the,
he's got a tattoo of the Survivor staff on his arm.
His name is Albin.
One of the biggest fans out there.
So I got onto the show at the right time
because this group of people decided to make it
just like the US version.
And it became one of the best seasons internationally.
I mean, at some point people didn't know
of international ranking and it comes out second,
season six of South Africa.
So it's Philippine.
I think one of the US seasons was first
and second was Survivor South Africa Philippines.
And then thereafter is an Australian season.
I can't remember which US season it was.
Yeah, at the time, it was because of how good
the production crew managed to edit the show
and make it so realistic.
It stayed true to everyone's characters.
It gave you enough content,
of context, which is also quite cool.
Not just those snippets to create characters.
We sort of had the freedom to make our own characters.
And nobody comes there to act.
Nobody's there.
It's not scripted.
It's not an act.
It's not a play.
We do everything's legit.
So the big thing is, though,
if you want to play a character as a fan, we'll do it.
So if I loved Richard Hatch, for example,
I'm more likely to then play a little bit villainous
and I'll be a little bit more than someone else.
It's quite a fascinating scenario.
Absolutely.
I mean, what was the most surprising thing about it?
What didn't you expect?
Or what was, when you actually got there, day one,
everyone must just be here on the moon
or just kind of play of emotions.
But what was different about the experience?
What surprised you, I guess?
I mean, just for some context,
I mean, I don't think I answered your question.
When I saw that Survivor South Africa season six,
because this has been years in us since season five,
we haven't heard about it for a while.
So then they announced that season six is happening.
And the day before the auditions were finished,
my best, one of my best friends at the time,
she sent me a message to say that Survivor's happening again.
I know how much you love it.
Don't you want to enter?
But I just finished a 26-hour shift at the hospital.
I sent a video of myself in scrubs.
I think I quickly got home.
I made a quick recording of myself.
I'm just saying, listen, I love this game.
I'm going to be a villain.
Just point blank.
I'm going to be a villain.
I'm going to entertain and just light sheet steel,
do whatever it takes to make sure the audience
and the tribe mates are eating out of the palm of my hands.
I had this whole thing prepped into food.
It worked.
They called me back and they said, okay.
They knew that I was from television, obviously,
but they actually asked me,
am I going to come as the television presenter?
Or am I going to come as Dr. Naidu?
And I said, I'm coming as Dr. Naidu.
So let's forget about the fact
that I've ever done anything on television.
I'm coming as someone who has a background in psychology,
neuroscience, medicine, and I'm going to play mind games.
This was my character.
I was a really curated character.
And so you get to Philippines,
fast forward a couple of months later,
and you have to isolate in a room for about 10 days.
It's so crazy.
You start losing a bit of yourself during that period.
Why do you isolate?
What do you mean, like before the game starts or?
Yeah, yeah.
And this is pre-COVID as well.
So it's a good way to get everyone onto the,
into the same country without seeing each other.
So you get one contention at a time,
because you might,
because especially in a place like South Africa,
let's say you're in Durban or Cape Town,
you might know the person who comes across at the airport.
So you'd rather avoid that scenario.
Let's let them go through 101, the minute,
and not allow them to actually leave the hotel room.
So you have to stay inside.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's horrible.
That's probably one of the worst experiences.
Oh, no.
Have you ever watched Mindfield with his name?
He's a YouTuber.
He's got this show called Vsauce.
Michael.
Yes.
It's been a while, but yeah.
Yeah, yeah, of course.
He's got this YouTube show called Mindfield,
where he sits in a room for about,
in a black room with nothing to do for about 10 days.
I can't remember exactly.
But that's what it felt like.
You're stuck in this room.
No clocks, no watches, no cell phones, nothing.
So my room specifically had no window as well,
because it was covered by some sort of a dark alley
that had a roof over it.
So I couldn't tell whether it was night or day.
I had no inkling of what time it was ever.
The only thing that kept me sort of on track
was each time a meal came to me, and it messed me up.
I remember getting off, because I had all these notes
for all the cool things I was going to do on the island.
And day one, I completely forgot about it all.
I went there just, I hadn't slept for like three days
before coming onto the game.
And I think it was seven days.
I spent seven days in the hotel, not 10,
but seven days of just not knowing what time it is,
not knowing what's going on.
It's quite rough.
Weird, yeah, weird setup for...
Yeah, it gets to you.
And I think in the second time,
because of COVID, it was another, it was just the same.
You had to stay in the hotel room,
at least it was light, there was sunlight in this hotel room.
It's a much better experience, but still, it gets to you,
because you then play the game within your head too much.
And you can be your own worst enemy,
especially in a game like Survival,
where you're completely paranoid all the time.
Yeah.
You don't trust anyone, you really don't know what to expect.
You get out there and you realize
that they're all doing the same thing you're trying to do,
which is lie, cheat, and you realize
you're not that good at it.
You think you are, I'm just revealing.
You think you are, yeah, right.
But you're not that good at it.
Because you're a good guy,
you're not doing that in the real,
you're not getting practice in your real life, you know?
I'm going, they're trying to put on a show, you know?
Yeah.
That's what the second time I tried
to be a bit more like myself.
Sure.
Which then became bad thing anyway,
because then I got to seeing this guy
who's in charge of the truck,
who look up to me, people are constantly asking me advice,
who want to know what to do.
And then you get labeled with a different label,
which is he's winning material,
he's someone who's gonna possibly win.
Right.
It's a crazy, it's a wonderful,
I agree, it's a wonderful game.
I think I mentioned to you in our correspondence before
that it's funny, because I might not be here,
we might not be having this conversation
unless I applied for a survivor like five years ago.
And I got to the final stages.
I did the whole thing, you know,
you're in the hotel room,
you can't talk to the other contestants.
They're, but you know, everyone else is around,
you know who the people are.
And I mean, it's a while, it is for a week, you know,
you're, it's, yeah, it's kind of messing with your head.
And I did a bunch of crazy stuff.
I would show up to breakfast and a robe
and a crazy outfit and stuff like that.
And just like trying to create attention for myself,
you know, trying to create like some intrigue around me.
And I get to the interviews with like the casting person
and Jeff Probst, you know, which is like, whoa, holy shit.
That's Jeff.
And they'd be like, hey, everyone's talking about you.
You know, you're causing a stir.
Like, and I was like, yeah.
I was like, that's what I will do on the show.
Put me on and I will do stuff, you know, it'd be interesting.
But yeah, and I had, oh my God.
I was so into it.
I like had, I have an 80 page Google doc
of like survivor strategies, you know,
all this stuff to do.
I completely agree.
I did the same thing.
I had this huge with a whole bunch of notes.
Ready?
I also put on like, cause I was thinking I went into it
and at the end of the whole process, I thought to myself,
that's the best I could possibly do.
I was like, I have no, I left it all in the field, you know?
I was like, that's all I got.
And I thought I did, I did as good as I could.
And so I was like, the turnaround between when they tell you
you're going to go on and when you go is a month.
I don't know, it's quick.
So I, my thought process was like, okay,
you're going to lose a lot of weight
when you're on the island.
But you don't want to, you don't want to like eat a ton.
You don't want to put on like 10 pounds right before you go
because then your body is used to that.
So when you're fasting, it's going to be way worse.
So I thought, what I'll do is I'll put on like 20 pounds
a few months before, get my body accustomed to that weight.
And then fast as I approached the date,
but I didn't get it.
So I just put on a bunch of weight.
That's almost exactly what happened to me
because when I first, I remember for the second time
I got so ripped, I exercised and trained every day
and got COVID, then I got the flu,
then I got COVID again.
So I ended up eating and just laying in bed
for the next two months before I got into survivor.
And all I remember seeing on TV was me just with this
huge tummy, all unfit.
And I thought, I was hoping I'd be a bit more fit
for this tribe, but luckily I was still manageable.
Whatever.
I mean, you can always frame it.
What's funny is, if you are the ripped guy,
then you have like a target sort of,
survivor, challenge threat or whatever.
So you can always kind of work it in a way.
That's exactly what I did.
I used it to my advantage.
I was like, they aren't all more ripped guys, Archie.
Let's go.
And it's so interesting too.
Like the, I love it for like the game theory behind it,
you know, all this kind of stuff.
But what it always, what it ends up coming down to,
it's, you know, the emotional, you're at the mercy
of the jury at the end.
And their decisions are, from what I've seen,
it's like 95% emotional, you know,
did they like you or not?
You know, is what it always comes down to.
If you got to remove your emotions from the game.
In fact, that plays the biggest role.
You're correct, you're 100% right.
Because I remember when, when I got voted out,
when I got home, I thought to myself,
the person, like one of the people who voted me out,
I thought I'd never vote for that person to me.
Even though I knew that person was playing the best game.
Wow.
When I thought about it, I was that person,
I was that guy who always said, I'd never do that.
I would never allow my emotional judgment to,
I just heard the rational thinking behind my mind.
And it happened.
That's how strong the game gets you.
You're broken down, you're cool.
Literally just dirty, hungry, tired, burnt,
scarred, bruised, bleeding, starving.
Like there's no food, you're losing weight at a rapid pace.
The first time I lost eight kilograms in 18 days.
I mean, that's too much weight so fast.
It's not healthy.
Sure.
It's absurd.
But I still remember thinking when I often,
one of the things I said when I interviewed for,
when I tried to audition for the game was,
think of survivor as real life
and actually think about it philosophically.
You are placed in the scenario where
you're forced to lie, cheat, steal, whatever,
make an environment, create a social structure,
try and create society.
And thereafter, think of it as a tribe,
because we are a tribe.
And every night you have to go to a travel council
to sacrifice a person.
So think of it that way and legitimately think about
who you would kill, who you would you be willing
to actively kill, travel council that way.
Really give that some thought
because that's primarily what's happening.
Every night we're actively going to kill someone.
So you have to, so I even approach a lot of people
that next, the second time I played with this argument,
I was like, if you are willing to kill me
versus this person, really,
that's what you're doing at this point.
Really give it some thought philosophically.
Take the game for its core meaning.
Because I know when, I think it was Mark Burnett
who took over from Charlie Parsons, author rights.
Charlie Parsons was, I think he's Brit.
And he started off with this show,
I think it was in Sweden of Switzerland
where he got this bunch of guys together
and he put them on this island and he sort of realized
that this has potential to be something intriguing.
Because fundamentally that's the core of the game.
Is this whole psychosocial element
where you have to get people to forgive you
for putting them on the other side.
And that's so difficult.
Unless you're a really, really nice person,
you're never going to get forgiveness.
It's going to be ancient.
Wow, you've, I haven't heard these kinds of framings before
around, or maybe it's been a while,
but around your sacrifice, a human sacrifice.
And then at the end you're asking for forgiveness
from the tribe.
It's like basically sitting in heaven,
looking at all the people you killed,
and then asking them for forgiveness.
And then to still give you a million dollars
or a million rent.
Sure, it's amazing.
Crazy stuff.
I mean, what's, I was crazy talking about this.
I just seem like the psycho philosopher.
No, it's cool.
It was way too hard and it was too much for someone.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's so interesting.
Don's overthinking it.
Yeah, that can happen.
Yeah, pretty easily.
I feel like we've been talking about Survivor
for a long time, but let's,
I mean, there's a lot that we could talk about there,
but I'm sure that you have lots of like little stories
and stuff like that, but I'd love to get-
Well, we'll just get about it another time.
Yeah, yeah, no, no, I'd be very interested for sure.
So Survivor happens, you're coming out of that.
You decide, and I think you may mention
even on an interview that you had to like turn down
a position to do Survivor even.
You had to like-
Yeah, I mean, but is that a small matter?
My second time on, I got accepted
to do a specialist program for microbiology at the time,
because this was in COVID-19, it was super ripe.
Everybody was talking about microorganisms.
I was like, this is fascinating.
Let me read more about it.
I was doing lectures.
I was in the military at the time working for the military.
And I remember just going out, giving public lectures
on virology, microbiology,
just discussing how organisms work,
how COVID's nothing more than just a virus,
just like every other virus.
In fact, I just read a Lancet paper just today
that shows that September, 2022,
which is now, well, we're in October, but last month,
the most common respiratory viruses in South Africa
have been rhinovirus, adenovirus,
and influenza virus was third.
The COVID's not even in the top 10 at the moment.
No, so.
I was trying to give this lecture
to put some context into the situation,
because a lot of people get very, very hyped
when they hear something new.
Novelty really creates chaos,
and that's exactly what happened with COVID.
We really lost the idea that there are other viruses out,
they're all high blood pressure and diabetes still exist,
you know, you can't sit at home and hide from the world
and then eat a bunch of cakes for the rest of your life.
There are other killers out there.
So, my lectures were focused on that,
and then I wanted to do microbiology,
but then got this second opportunity.
I'll take survival.
Sure, yeah.
When you're that big a fan, it's an easy choice.
A lot of doctors literally despise me, so, not okay.
Yeah, who cares about that?
Yeah, right, right.
Survivors only got, I mean,
but if they came back to you now, would you do it again?
Yeah, 100 days.
Are you just always in?
Third time's the charm, I think that's right.
Third time's the one.
I have to just play my card.
Me for more years, a bit wiser, I need some wisdom.
Wisdom helps, it's always useful.
And then at that point I came back,
and well, it was after my first time on Survivor Way,
I started to think about maybe starting a podcast,
I think that's where the journey started to take.
Okay, how'd that start?
Yeah, I mean, I was in Otsun,
which is a small town outside of Cape Town,
so it's about five hours away from Cape Town in South Africa,
and I was doing my master's degree at the time,
and I started doing it in philosophy
and ethics of mental health,
and this took me into a hugely different domain.
As a doctor who's focused primarily
on physical sciences, biology, chemistry,
when you do a philosophical degree
and you write dissertations
and you try and actively argue certain points,
you start to really realize how flawed
a lot of your thinking was
while studying the topic you were studying,
and that's exactly what happened to me,
because I wanted to be a neuroscientist,
I wanted to be perhaps a neurologist or psychiatrist,
and when I started this degree,
I started to listen to the arguments
or the counter-arguments of physicalist theories
or how we just make the assumption
that the brain is merely a correlation of this,
I mean, the mind story is merely a correlation
of this part of the brain,
and I started to really dissect this philosophically
within the degree,
still very much physicalist at heart, even currently,
but I remember really thinking about it,
thinking, right, I mean,
we can't just make these assumptions
and assume it's correct,
we can't, we barely know anything about physics,
I mean, we'll discuss metaphysical things,
I'm sure we're gonna discuss at this point,
but when you think about the metaphysical reality
and the fact that 99.
whatever percent of the universe is dark matter,
and we can't really even tell you what that is,
you have to really question your physicalist view,
you can't make the assumption
that the physical reality is verticality,
or vertical truth,
when you're asking yourself what is the truth
to your podcast and your YouTube channel,
I mean, what is the truth?
When you look, I mean, when I look at you right now,
I'm seeing photons of light hitting my retina,
trying to getting transduced,
I mean, converting, processing information,
and then I'm getting that back,
that's not even happening right now.
So when we think of temporal reality,
we think this is that right now, that's not.
There's time that takes for the light to come high,
it takes time to get some cortex,
come back, get processed,
memories come back in, flood,
and the last time I chatted to you,
and then I bring up this sort of vision of you,
and that takes a long time.
Joshua Bach talks about that temporality,
and the ontology of reality is very blurry.
I call myself epistemologically,
I call myself ontologically agnostic,
but epistemologically,
I can tell you that certain things I know to not be true.
Like what?
So if I had to say,
one of the things would be,
when it comes to my views on religion or God,
ontologically agnostic,
regarding the origins of the universe,
what's out there, and what could be.
I don't know, fundamentally.
I can tell you what I don't think is there.
I don't think that there's a man in the sky.
I don't think that somebody can tell you what to do,
tweak it here or there.
I actually don't even think that
deistic views are possibly true.
You're always gonna fall into that infinite regress
of who made the deist,
who made, and then who did that,
and just keep going and going.
I think it's so much more complicated.
I think that whatever the truth actually is,
is not something we're ever going to be able to understand.
I don't think we have,
I mean, and I find it very, very arrogant,
that a lot of us think that we will gain access
to this knowledge.
I think that the truth is not something
that we'll ever see.
You think the truth is something we'll never see,
we'll never experience, do you think?
Yeah, we'll never really,
I mean, we barely experience reality.
If you think of the optical window on Earth,
it's called the optical window
because it's all we can actually see.
It's all that electromagnetic radiation
that the light passes through,
and it's all from ultraviolet to infrared.
We don't get anything more than that,
anything less than that,
and then some species can see the ultraviolet rays,
for example, birds,
and some can see infrared like snakes.
And we see everything in between,
red, poison,
we'll never see gamma rays.
Well, we never ever see radio waves.
I mean, they're always here,
but we don't see it.
So we see almost nothing,
but we do experience something.
So why is that, and what is the case?
And that's primarily the reason for my podcast is,
my views changed so much over the last,
I would say five to 10 years regarding my own beliefs.
I was very much a physicalist, hardcore materialist,
not materialist in the sense
that I like to buy fancy things
in case anyone's watching this.
The philosophical sphere,
I mean, I'm not a materialist in the sense
that I don't think everything's material.
I mean, I thought everything was material, sorry,
and that the physical world was the objective reality
and the objective truth,
but that changed completely.
It slowly became very much emergentist.
I thought, okay, consciousness probably merges over time.
And with my body solution, the podcast that I have,
the goal was to see if that's true at the time.
And during that period, while doing my mental,
my master's in philosophy and ethics of mental health,
I slowly became an illusionist.
I started to really question
whether we really see reality for what it is.
And illusionism became very convincing.
And that's Daniel Dennett, Keith Frankish,
Michael Graziano, Joshua Bach.
They're very much illusionists at heart.
And I found myself very convinced
on the argument to be very convincing.
Galen Strossen calls it one of the stupid,
one of the most idiotic or stupid theories
he's ever had in his life, no phrasing.
But Galen, I mean, I'm scheduled to chat to Galen
at some point.
I mean, he's very, very prominent
in the philosophy of my sphere.
And I mean, he's a mysterious, I mean,
and I think at this point, I'm closer to that.
I just don't know.
And I don't claim to know.
It's too complex, it's too complicated.
Sure, but you still want to get close.
That's the goal of this podcast, is explore this.
And I often close the podcast, I'm not sure if you noticed,
but I often say thanks for taking us one step closer
to the mind of the solution.
I never said thanks for providing me
with a mind-body solution.
Yes.
Because I don't think we're gonna get it.
I think that this podcast is merely a stepping stone
to what could have been.
That's interesting.
But you still, I mean, we still enjoy the investigation.
We enjoy it.
I love it so much.
I mean, knowing isn't disheartening to me.
It makes it even more intriguing.
I would love for someone to give me a theory
that I cannot refute or that other philosophers
cannot refute.
Just completely construct information.
I mean, just concrete info that I cannot dispute.
And I think that's impossible.
I don't think, not me personally,
but I think it's possible for someone to give
that information where someone else is not going
to counter it with something else.
Sure, yeah.
And I agree, I mean.
And there's so good theories out there.
Yeah, I'm with you.
Yeah, there's so many interesting theories,
interesting people to talk to.
And even sometimes I feel like even if a theory is wrong,
the process of going through and thinking through it
can lead you to some insights
that you'll apply somewhere else.
It's not like all or nothing.
And just thinking back, my channel is called The Truth.
I think the closer to truth is already taken.
I don't know if you've ever seen that.
So I was like, ah, shit, I can't, I can't.
Thank you, if you're on screen, took that from you.
Yeah, he's great.
And he's lovely.
I mean, his interviews are awesome.
He's very, very well.
One of the people that I wanted to curate by content
and sort of align it with his size, he sort of show.
There was one that she got into television was,
I try, I wanted to actually host something like that.
That was the main reason I went down the route.
Okay.
Oh, now we're pulling stuff out here.
We're like figuring out, okay.
So when I started out, I was thinking,
okay, if I start here, I could end up doing a closer
to the truth type of thing.
So cool.
One day I might be able to do this.
And it never happened, unfortunately.
I tried to approach the South African Broadcasting
Commission with many ideas about this,
but they felt that the niche audience, enough of us.
Yeah, it's a real, the audience size, I don't know.
I feel like there's a hunger for it as well.
I mean, clearly, you know, but it is tough, you know,
it's like how accessible can you make it to people?
Like some folks have an interest in it and they don't maybe,
perhaps they don't have the educational background
to sort of like get there, you know.
There's one of the things I try to do
with some of my explainer videos
is provide a lot of visualizations to the point
where like if someone is interested
but can't quite get there,
the visuals can kind of get them closer, you know.
It can kind of be like, okay, it's kind of building
and maybe, you know, they return to the video
a year later or the topic a year later
and their mind has had time to think it, you know,
think it through in the back of their head
and they can return and they go,
oh, I kind of get that a little bit closer, right?
So there's like a lot of different ways
that we can help teach people and get them closer.
You know, I was watching your videos
and I think that you do a great job of doing that
because, I mean, you say you're starting out
but I mean, the way you're able to edit your videos
and get them all into such as succinct
and detailed manner, it's pretty epic.
I find it quite enjoyable to watch.
Thanks, man.
I will never tire hearing that.
Thank you so much.
That's really nice.
I had quite a nice binge.
Oh, nice.
That's why I want that session time, baby.
Get it up there.
I will say too though, I have been considering a rebrand
and maybe like true enough instead of the truth, you know?
But then I feel like the association might be
that it's not good, that people are like,
it's closed, not really good.
I can't believe it.
Yeah, but I do think, well, that's something
that we can talk about, maybe jump into Hoffman a little bit,
which is your most popular video so far
and I've covered him, well,
let's just finish the truth there on my channel.
This idea of like, satisfying,
this idea of like, good enough, true enough, right?
I can't remember which philosopher it was,
like Schopenhauer maybe, who said like,
the truth is just what's true enough, you know?
You have to just accept the limits
and move on with your life and, you know, you can't,
because otherwise, I mean, you can really easily,
and I know I've been there in my life at times
where you get into this like existential nihilism about it,
where the weight of it,
the fact that you can't get there weighs you down so much.
And I've had friends over the years
who have been in that situation as well
and it's a tough spot to be in.
Like, it sounds like, yeah.
I've been as well.
I think that when you question too much,
you can take it down the rabbit hole,
right down there to a point where you just think
there's no way out.
What is the purpose of this?
Why am I here?
It's like you're not even a speck of dust on a stage
and this play is just not about you.
That's what it can take you towards.
When you really start digging deep,
what is this universe?
Where are you?
That existential nihilism is very, very easy to fall into.
And I've been there.
But then you find things, I mean,
that can bring you back up.
I don't know how you managed to do it.
Do you want to share that with me?
I would, yeah.
If you'd like to hear, I mean, I want to hear.
Well, you kind of touched on it.
I think quite a bit at the beginning.
I had that kind of period during college
between my junior and senior years for about a year
where in hindsight, I didn't realize
it was like my first oppressive period
where every day I woke up and all I could think about was,
does God exist?
Like, what is going on here?
Metaphysical questions, right?
Like, what do I do?
And I was a very religious person growing up.
And it was partly due to my folks and my family,
Catholic, go to Mass every Sunday.
So I was kind of instituted,
but I took the ball in high school
and went running on my own too.
I'd really, it was something that was very significant
to my life and my identity.
And I believed in it wholeheartedly.
I mean, all the way through and I led retreats
and I was very, yeah, I was very religious.
And then I got to college and I went to Brown University,
which is a very liberal place, super different
than when I was used to going to Catholic school
my whole life growing up.
And that just, that religious tendency,
that conservative tendency crashed into that world.
And it was very difficult, especially at the beginning,
but then slowly I started to open my mind
to other ways of thinking.
And then, yes, at some point I thought,
how can I ration my way to the, yeah,
to the core, right, to the truth?
And I wrestled with it for like a year, I mean, every day.
It was like really weighing me down.
And at the end of that period or so,
it was like between my fall and spring semesters at college,
I just threw my hands up and I was like, I don't know.
I can't, I have to be agnostic.
I can't choose.
Because what I was also finding was I was like,
getting to my, I was kind of like logically trying
to get to where I already was, you know?
I was like, eh, let me, because it's comfortable.
I mean, there's a lot of good reasons to,
I'm not anti-religious by the way.
I'm very, you know, whatever works for people, you know?
Very open to it, but I just had to let that go
and you hinted at it before too.
It's scary to be like, you thought you had,
you had this feeling like you had this support
that everything was gonna work out,
that, you know, a guiding principle
and then you're in the void, you know?
You're by yourself, you have only yourself to rely on.
And your relationships with other people,
of course, in the world, but yeah,
that was the period of, yeah, the darkness.
And then I just, a certain amount of acceptance
that just wasn't gonna get there by rationality alone.
Yeah, it's one of those strange feelings you feel.
Like I said, I felt super free at the time.
And I mean, that didn't last very long.
It was, it quickly deteriorated into this downward spiral
of trying to search, I mean, what is the point of this?
Why are you doing this?
Yeah, I mean, you start asking yourself some dark questions.
But then you slowly fall in love with certain things again
and you start to, and you start enjoying the chase.
I mean, that's pretty much what you're doing now
with the truth, you're trying to find it.
You might not think you will,
you might think you get close enough, true enough,
but same goes for me.
I mean, I'm all about the journey at this point.
It's not about finding the mind-body solution.
I mean, the mind-body problem is, to me,
my favorite problem, philosophically.
It is what I live for at this point.
Obviously, I mean, it's become pretty much
my identity at this point.
But the mind-body solution is something
I don't think we will find,
not at least in my lifetime,
but I think that trying to find the solution
or getting people to discuss it
and have this discourse and communicate,
I mean, the fact that we're discussing it right now,
I mean, it's pretty cool.
It's so cool to know that there's so many people out there
who want to talk about this.
And when I started the podcast,
I was so surprised because I initially
intended on not doing any sort of active marketing
or trying to promote the podcast or doing anything.
And I haven't.
It's just grown very, very naturally.
A lot of people have been coming to messaging me,
emailing me, making contact very naturally.
And it's pretty cool because it seems like people
are longing for this information.
They want to see this or listen to this discourse.
And I think that time has come.
And podcasting has given us this opportunity
finally the deeper questions can be spoken about
without sounding like you're in a psychotic episode.
Sure, absolutely.
And I want to touch on one thing that interests me
and it brings me to your interview with Chomsky
is because you asked him about,
I think the mind-body problem or something
or consciousness in general.
And he said something to the degree
that it didn't really interest him that much.
He wasn't that interested in consciousness.
Oh, sorry, go ahead, Redhead.
Can I continue, I'll touch on that.
I was going to say, when he said that,
I don't want to say I agree with him,
but it interests me.
It's like an interest of mine, of course.
I mean, it's like a core question, right?
What we have access to is this experience.
That's what we have.
That's a big problem.
But I do think it's interesting that like,
to me, the question is like, what is reality?
You know, what is everything?
And including consciousness, right?
And so I want to hear,
I don't hear why it's the most interesting problem to you.
Like, yeah, if you could.
I think, so I agree with you.
I think that fundamentally,
I actually care more about what reality is than consciousness.
So the essence, I'm on the same page,
but for me, the issue comes with the fact
that you can have a theory of consciousness
that does incorporate reality within it.
So Donald Hoffman, for example,
a lot of panpsychist theories and certain idealist theories,
reality can become part of consciousness.
So because it's the only thing except for reality
that you can sort of bring into the topic.
And the fact that I studied medicine
and did a master's in mental health and did psychiatry,
obviously I came towards it with a bias towards the mind.
But overall, I still care more about what reality is.
And I agree with Om Chomsky because what he said was
that the more important question is what is reality?
And I agree because the issue is
that we don't know what reality is.
So physicalist views don't really hold much weight,
particularly today when people are showing
that we don't know what physics really is.
I mean, quantum physics says one thing,
general relativity says another thing.
We were struggling to coincide these two theories.
And then they have, there are physicists out there
that are showing that space-time.
I mean, Donald Hoffman says this all the time
and it says time is doomed.
And then you have to start wondering, why are they saying?
Yeah.
It's such a weird statement to hear a physicist say,
space-time.
That would freak someone out who doesn't take,
I mean, if you take physics seriously,
you take predictions and mathematical calculations seriously.
You have to start pondering,
why would someone with such a vast intellect
and knowledge base say something so absurd?
Maybe because it's true.
Maybe because it's the truth.
So, for me, that was a big part of this whole thing.
I started to wonder, okay,
if we're not seeing reality for what it is,
that's why I went down this illusionist route.
I was like, okay, why are we so obsessed
with this question in the first place?
Well, because I know David Chalmers calls it
the meta problem of consciousness.
The fact that we're so obsessed with this problem
of understanding consciousness in the first place
is a hard problem.
He first labels it the hard problem
and then he labels it the meta problem.
Why do we want to know this?
What's the problem here?
And I started to realize it's because human beings
have the tendency to put themselves
in a slightly higher pedestal than every other species.
We've done so for many years.
In my dissertation, I have one line where I said,
the same way that Copernicus took us
out of the center of the solar system,
same way that Darwin took us out of the top of the food chain,
illusionism will do the same for consciousness.
It'll take us out of this idea where we think
we have this essence or this envetel-like soul, for example,
that only we have, only human beings tend to possess.
For some reason, we love to put ourselves up there.
And then over time, I did the podcast
and I started to question illusionism.
So I think we'll see how that happened.
It all just keeps changing.
I'm so agnostic at this point.
I have absolutely no idea what I think.
It actually can cause mental distress, to be honest.
Still.
Yeah, I spoke to, I mean Kurt,
Jay Mungle from Theories of Everything.
We were discussing how, I mean,
our podcasts are very similar.
And we were talking about how the more we investigate
these topics and these phenomena,
the more you start questioning your own mind, reality,
and it really can get to you.
It can drain you.
It can almost put you into,
it can either make someone very schizophrenic,
it's a psychotic, in the sense that they start
to lose touch with reality.
Psycho-phrenia, for example, is not really a split mind.
It's more of a split reality.
You start to misinterpret information a lot more.
So let's say, give you an example.
If Donald Hoffman comes to me and tells me
that spacetime is doomed, and he shows me the physics,
teaches me why, I mean, I could, at some point,
just lose touch with reality altogether.
I could, at some point, just not care anymore.
And what's the point in waking up
and going to work anymore if this is not true?
Now, that's a poor example.
I feel like I've given you a better one.
But the fact is, if someone gives you something like that,
if someone tells you, like,
the sun doesn't really exist,
and what if the sun was my favorite thing
to wake up to every night?
It can affect your mind.
So we were talking about how these theories of everything
and these theories of consciousness, in my case,
the more you dig deep, the more you delve into it,
and the more confused you get,
more you lose touch with reality.
And that's what it's like to be schizophrenic, in a sense,
is losing touch with reality.
Sensory stimulation versus your interpretation
of what's going on start to change.
And I know Kurt spoke to Carl Friston about this,
and I wanna ask Carl Friston about this as well.
He's one of the most cited neuroscientists on the planet,
if not the most cited neuroscientists on the planet.
And he often talks about it as well.
I mean, we take in prior information
and make posterior conclusions
regarding what's going to happen.
So for example, if you're a musician and I'm a painter,
you and I both enter a lecture at Brown one day,
the first thing you might notice in the lecture theater
is a lecturer's guitar,
whereas I might notice the artwork on the walls.
So the fact that we both enter the same room
discussing the same thing while heading there
with the same intention, the moment we enter,
sensory stimulation enters our listeners,
completely changes the way we'll experience this lecture
from the beginning to the end,
because the prior information
dictates the posterior conclusions.
So a lot of neuroscience is very intriguing in that regard,
and starting to show a lot about how we really think.
And we have heuristic adaptations to the world.
So we take shortcuts a lot of the time.
We don't really see anything for what it really is,
and the brain has to make assumptions.
So we have to guess estimates, basically,
of what's really happening out there,
caricatures of the reality.
And to me, that's a big problem,
because that means trying to find the truth in a world
that is a caricature, or a cartoonish version
of what reality might be.
It's going to be a very difficult task.
Yes, absolutely.
That's so much done, Pac.
I want to...
Well, let's talk...
We want to talk about Donald Hoffman a little bit,
because you spoke with him.
Yeah, but we actually just chatted the other day
and we're scheduling around two.
We're discussing one of his new papers as well,
and he's here to publish it,
so I can't chat about the paper,
but ideally, Donald is such a great guy,
such a kind...
I mean, he's so, so misinterpreted.
And that's something I love about this podcast
that I'm doing, is that I get a guy whose theory
is so, perhaps outrageous to so many other people,
and then try to incorporate that theory into it
and make it understandable to an audience
that might have misinterpreted it from the get go.
And so my goal is never to actually debate the biggest.
The goal is to always try and understand the point of view,
and even if I disagree with it,
try my best to actually defend their view
during the podcast.
Play the devil's advocate every now and then,
but then slowly try and portray their view
in a way I think I would have liked them
to have articulated it to me,
and a way I can tell that the viewers from their comments
want to hear it,
because obviously read the comments and try and determine,
okay, what are people saying
when they do an interview with someone else?
What are they asking?
And I try and incorporate those questions as well,
so it's very well researched and refined,
and I try and ask very informed questions.
Not always the best,
and so I mean, we're all learning, we're all trying our best,
but with Donald, it was so easy.
I mean, he's so courteous, he's so kind,
he really liked the fact that I did do that, though,
but I took the time to try and understand his theory,
because he told me after the interview was done,
that he'll be willing to come on the show
whenever he wants, whenever I ask him.
I mean, which is a really great thing to know.
Shoot.
So, his theory is so incredible.
So, he speaks about how he was doing the calculations,
and he decided to calculate what are the odds that
if fitness payoffs, or trying to determine how
we would have to survive within the reality we live in,
based on the information we receive
by the retina, by the auditory system,
proprioception, knowing where we are, et cetera,
what are the odds that we would see reality for what it is?
And he did the calculation, he sat down with
a bunch of other physicists and mathematicians,
and they came up to the amazing,
astonishing number of zero.
Probability of seeing reality for what it is would be zero,
and he said, and I quote, he had to sit down,
paraphrasing, but he had to sit down
and just take a breather.
And when he told me that, I remember also,
this is crazy, it's zero, not even one.
Not even, yeah, not even point zero one, yeah.
Well, I think it's the, it approaches zero
at the limit or something.
It's like, if it goes to infinity,
if you have like an infinite number, it's like zero, yeah.
One, it's just a zero point zero zero something,
and yeah, really, really concerning.
I was like, wow, it's not the only one.
Firstly, I asked one of my friends,
who's a physicist, and he heard in South Africa,
I asked him, what are your thoughts on space time,
and do you think universe is real?
I remember him just saying, no.
And he said it so, I'll say, he was just kinda like, no.
What do you mean, he said, no, if you do the calculations,
you sit down, you actually think about it,
reality's nothing like what we think it is.
Then you have to really ask yourself, okay,
physicists are really starting to take this idea seriously.
Here comes a guy who's doing that,
and then adding another theory to it.
So he's done two things.
One is he's sort of shown us that space time
is not fundamental, the way we see it,
but he takes it further, which is where a lot of people
then disagree with Don.
And a lot of other neuroscientists and philosophers
of consciousness disagree with Don,
is where Don decides to make conscious agents
a fundamental aspect of consciousness.
And this is the issue where he has to not fight a battle.
The introduction of conscious agents
is always an assumption that we have to make.
I mean, anyone who makes a theory
has to start off with a basic assumption.
And if you introduce conscious agents as the basic assumption,
one problem is you introduce conscious agents,
which is not necessary, but the second problem is
you always need two conscious agents,
according to Don's theory.
And that makes it a lot more difficult,
because now you've basically doubled your problem.
And a lot of even idealists,
because Don fundamentally conscious realism,
which is the name of his theory, is a form of idealism.
And a lot of idealists disagree fundamentally
with the fact that he introduces conscious agents.
Yeah, I mean, Don's theory, I mean,
I'm never going to do justice to it by discussing it,
but I can tell you one thing,
it's far more complicated than what I just said.
Oh yeah, absolutely.
I've gone down the rabbit hole.
I've read most of his paper, like, yeah, a lot of his papers.
I've read his book, and I think about 20 different papers
of him and his colleagues, Singh, but the others,
but she's, so it's very intricate.
These guys have spent time, years, effort,
reducing the wonderful mathematics they have.
Yeah, and I did, I mean, I've done a three-part series
on just fitness beats truth.
So not even getting yet to,
I mean, interface theory perception builds out of that,
pretty, I think, intuitively.
But the conscious agents, how I describe it to people
sometimes is like, and I'm not sure if Don would say it
this way, but most people assume
that consciousness is like a bottom-up process
that forms from the neuronal activity in the brain, right?
Don's is like top-down.
It starts with consciousness and works its way that way.
That's how I think about it, and I'm like, okay, maybe, yeah.
I think I'm super interested in that idea.
I'm most, I think I'm most convinced
by fitness beats truth because there's a layer,
there's something intuitive about it
that just when I first heard that, his TED talk,
six years, however long ago it was, I was blown away.
All I could think about for weeks,
telling people about it, telling my friends,
telling family, oh my God, this is crazy.
You gotta get this.
No one was interested.
It's actually funny.
One of the reasons why I started this channel
was that I couldn't find any one of my social circles
that cared about this stuff.
Same, same.
You too, okay, cool.
We have a related thing.
It's like, how do you not think this is interesting?
Come on, wake up.
But watch that TED talk.
You're talking about the one with the blue shirt, eh?
Oh yeah, absolutely.
I've cut that one up quite a bit for my videos.
I've thrown in a lot of hero shots of him from below
where it's him in the background,
and I think it's incredible.
I mean, this is really.
First, I think it was, what was he called again?
I guess, I think he has two books, I think.
The Case Against Reality.
Yes, Case Against Reality was the one.
Oh yes, I had the hardcover version.
I think it's got a white cover instead of the colorful flower
on the paperback version.
But I remember reading that,
and then I went straight into the rabbit hole, we're done.
I watched the TED talk, I started reading
all his publications and just went in depth.
So I was super excited to chat with him.
Yeah, I got to reach out to him.
I mean, I will, at some point, reach out to him
and see if he wouldn't mind doing maybe a second.
Yeah, I'll definitely chat with him about it.
I'll actually direct him to your three-part series.
I'm sure he'll enjoy that.
Oh yes, please do.
I mean, dude, that would be, that would be like a dream.
I mean, to chat with him.
And let him know that I had a chat yesterday
and I want you to watch something.
Tev, oh my goodness.
Thank you so much.
That's, it's your kind.
I appreciate that a lot.
I really do, I really, really do.
Cause I also, it's so clear.
I've listened to so many hours of his interviews.
So clear, he's a nice guy.
You can tell, like, kind soul, like, yeah, so.
He emailed me years, I think it was two days ago.
He just, I mean, this is like months after we last spoke.
Well, a couple, probably weeks.
It was just out of nowhere email.
He just said, Hey, Tev, I've got a guest
that I'd like for you to possibly speak to.
I mean, and he introduced me so much, so amazing.
I'm super keen to introduce to the audience
of MindBodySolution, but I mean,
it's one of those small things that he does.
I mean, just randomly thinking of me,
sends me an email and says,
I think you'd do a great job at getting her views out.
And I was like, yeah, thanks, thanks, Tom.
This is amazing.
That's awesome.
That's great.
So he really, he's really cool.
Yeah, yeah, that's great.
What was that?
Very smart.
Oh, I'm very intelligent.
Absolutely.
Super kind.
Yeah, super kind.
Yeah.
He's understood as well.
Very misunderstood.
That's interesting.
I guess whenever I've listened to him,
he's in the context of like an interviewer
who's open to the idea.
So I haven't heard, I guess I haven't like come up
against a lot of the criticisms,
but I'm sure there are.
I mean, it's an, it's, you know, counter to,
what I also find kind of meta interesting about that,
and about him too in his career is like,
he kind of found the most,
potentially the most fit option for his career,
in terms of like going against the grain, you know,
broadly, that like everyone was approaching the idea,
the concept this way, the question this way.
Why not go over here where there's a lot of space
to like grapple with these things
and maybe there's, there's like something,
something really substantial here.
I think that there is.
Yeah.
I mean, he has that way of thinking
because he never really wanted,
he never really took serious the idea
that we could understand everything
with the perception we currently have.
Yeah.
And I think it's stuck with him throughout life.
And I think he wanted to figure out why he would think that,
but I don't think he was ever prepared for the outcome
when he's maths told him it's zero.
Oh, that was zero.
Apparently he sat down and felt faint.
He felt, he felt ill.
Like it's one of those feelings when you know
that gut wrenching feeling when you know
someone's in danger or someone's about to break up with you.
It's sort of that deep sensation that he felt.
He describes it perfectly.
And I think, yes, I can imagine if you are someone
who understands the maths and physics
and you get, and you literally figure out for yourself
that space time is not what you think it is.
It's got to be pretty, pretty horrific.
Absolutely.
Have you gone down the rabbit hole of,
because usually when he refers to space time,
he talks about Nima Arkani-Hamed's Amplitahedron.
Yeah, that's something I have to...
It's very confusing.
I mean, it seems like I'm mapping.
It's the Harvard lectures.
I think it's Harvard lectures that is at EAS Art online.
It's super difficult to understand.
I've tried.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I think you got to give it a go every few months.
Space repetition and then slowly figure it out.
Yeah, I think that's a good, I agree.
It's sort of like you take what you can handle,
go to the edge of your understanding
and when it's just too incomprehensible,
you just kind of like, I'll return back to it
and that's the great, great thing about doing that.
I'd love to hear too, just a touch on
one of my favorite interviews that you did
with Lisa Feldman Barrett.
Yeah.
Fantastic.
I had not come across her before and lovely.
I mean, fantastic interview.
I really, really loved it.
It's really cool.
She's so fine.
We actually, I'm scheduling a lot of round twos
at some point and because there's so many things
we could discuss and we just don't have the time
a lot of the times and she's,
I remember reading her book as well
and I thought this woman is so intelligent.
This is such a great book and I couldn't, I had to have her
and she was one of the first people I thought
of putting onto the show.
She might have been number one,
but Michael Graziano helped me out during my dissertation.
So kind and he came to me.
I mean, he replied instantly and helped me out
to formulate my theory of consciousness
and what I was defending in my dissertation
and all the things I was doing.
So I wanted my first guest to be someone familiar to me.
Sure.
But she was the second, she was my next option
and right there.
I mean, we had such a cool chat.
She knows so much about particularly the emotional brain
and hierarchical Bayesian brains.
She knows the same thing.
Friston works on where you look at the brain
sort of this Bayesian like organ functioning
like a statistical organ is taking in prior information
and constantly producing posterior outcomes.
It's very much like that.
Then we also have to take into account
that we've always thought that the brain is similar
to the current zeitgeist.
So pumps back in the day,
you think the pump like system,
you think that brain is sort of a hydraulic system
at some point.
Every time the science changed
or the industrial revolutions changed
the electrical revolution changed.
We slowly changed our theory.
So very difficult to claim.
Do you think that?
So that's interesting.
And you can't blame people
for using like the most advanced technology
to explain the thing, right?
And now of course it's algorithmic, simulation,
computational.
So it makes me think, oh, well, we're not even close
because we're just gonna go the next thing
will be the next thing.
And we're just gonna keep using that.
Exactly.
But what else can you do?
I mean, you can only do the best you can
with the tools that you're disposable.
So I don't blame people for thinking that way either.
That's the same reason why I say
that it's closer to the mind-body simulation.
Never going together.
But too wordy.
That's too wordy, close or two.
Yeah.
And who knows?
Maybe sometimes we're taking a step further away.
So difficult to tell.
Sure.
Sometimes you have to go.
We've had like spirals of revolutions
where we thought something
and then we've come back to it
and then we've thought it again
and we've come back to it.
You know, I mean, there was a time
where people considered consciousness to be fundamental
and over time it lost its edge.
Now it's back.
But panpsychists idealists who think consciousness
is the primary reality.
So we're going to go through these cycles
quite a lot, I think.
And I think it's cool.
I think it keeps the conversation flowing.
It keeps it going.
Hopefully we're alive long enough
to see some progress being made.
But neuroscience is doing a lot.
But it still doesn't help us
figure out what reality is.
Right.
Do you have a, I know you're agnostic about this stuff,
but do you have, I know you're at least open to the idea,
but panpsychism, are you,
you're open to more open than perhaps most doctors,
I would assume, but do you think it's wrong?
Do you think?
I find certainly people's arguments very convincing.
You've got someone like Philip Goff
who can articulate an argument very well.
And very difficult to counter-argue,
it was several points,
but I do have certain points where I don't agree.
I would be less likely to call myself a panpsychist,
even though I'm not, even though I say I'm agnostic,
I'm very much still firmly more materialist slash
physicalist than I am idealist slash panpsychist.
But I'm also not convinced by the physicalist,
materialist argument either.
Yes.
Like, this is where I was talking about,
you start losing your mind a little bit,
because I mean, I believe this,
and I think this, I think my phone is real,
and I know it's real, I see it all the time.
Then you think about what is an atom in 99.9% empty space,
and then I'm like, how is this even possible?
Right.
I'm completely touching the phone,
but I am touching the phone.
Yeah.
So it's a weird world we live in.
It's a strange universe, and I mean,
I said this, I mean, you spoke about Tony there's talk,
and I mean, I call ourselves a conscious conglomerate
of cells assembled by atoms, manufactured by molecules,
designed by DNA, forged by fusion via stellar supernovae.
I mean, this is a crazy story.
I've got a couple lines there as well.
I mean, this was part of my dissertation,
organized by organelles.
It's had this cool alliteration of lines.
The story of how we were made is so much more complicated
than any story we've ever told so far.
I mean, when you think about every religious text
and the story of how we were made,
I mean, 6,000 years, or the Bumba people in Congo,
I mean, we, Bumba spits out the earth.
I mean, we've got so many different stories,
Krishna, my own cultural stories, my religious stories.
Then you think about the actual one
that science has told us, I mean, stars had to die
in order for us, in order for atoms to forge
into hydrogen, hydrogen atoms that provide to form helium,
helium carbon, oxygen, everything nitrogen,
and it just goes on, and slowly they all come back together
at some point, and then you find these single-celled
organisms, I mean, about 4.8 billion years,
earth, 30.8 billion year light years across the universe.
I mean, it's quite crazy, it's an incredible story.
It is, yeah.
And it's so convincing, and yet we don't know
what dark matter is, we don't know what 99%
of this amazing story is, so it's amazing
and still so incomplete.
In fact, it's just incomplete, it's not even,
the story is so, probably so untrue.
And, but yet to me, it is the story I go with,
it is the story I'm most convinced by,
and if I give a lecture on what is reality,
it's the story I will tell.
Yeah.
So yeah, if you had to give, put me in a box,
I would still be very much physicalist,
yet with very counter-intuitive intuitions
about my own intuition.
Sure, open, always open to agriculture.
It's very, very agnostic, I have absolutely no idea.
I think that's the way to be,
why be stuck with one model when you,
you have to accept things at a certain point
to live your life, to get by and do the things
you wanna do, but then, yeah, just keep your mind open
and keep exploring while we can.
Can I ask which guest of yours has been the most surprising?
Ooh, that's a very good question.
Well, I've had some guests who,
I mean, I've been idols of mine.
I mean, I've loved neuroscience for such a long time.
Astrophysics, archeology, I mean, medicine,
mostly because I wanted to somehow go into
some sort of a neuropsychological route.
And when I was doing that, I mean, I had all these idols.
Lisa was one of them.
Noam Chomsky, I've been such a huge fan.
Of course, yeah, no surprise.
Me, that was, I felt like I'm interviewing a god.
Yeah, he's a legend.
I mean, yeah.
This is a living legend.
He's 93 when I spoke to him.
I have another interview I've just done with him
that's gonna come out soon.
He'll probably be 94 when it's out.
I don't know.
It's surreal to know this guy is 93
and still cognitively engages with me as an equal.
I mean, it's phenomenal.
It's someone who treats geriatric patients all the time.
He has such a sharp mind.
It's incredible because it shows how well he's done
over the years to consistently keep his mind up to date
and active.
And that's what happens when you read and learn
as much as you do as he's done over the years.
I mean, it's so easy to talk to him.
So I think he surprised me the most for sure.
I figured it would be difficult, but it wasn't.
Just floated.
I would say the only thing that was was obviously,
I mean, Noam's getting a little older.
So hearing, you have to sort of speak a little louder
into the mic.
I mean, that makes no sense.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But if I thought more, Patricia Churchlin
was someone I really enjoyed interviewing as well.
Because when I was doing my dissertation,
I came across a limited materialism
and her husband, Paul Churchlin,
is someone I also really admire.
So the two of them are very cool people
who I've also looked up to for a while.
There's also Rebecca Goldstein.
I mean, she's really cool.
Steven Pinkett's wife, I mean,
the two of them are living legends.
Both of them, I mean, I'm gonna chat to Pinkett
at some point as well,
but it was so cool to have her as well,
because I'm a huge fan of the both of them separately
and together as a couple.
I think they're pretty awesome at the dynamic duo.
Yeah, I mean, there's been so many.
There's been too many of them.
And it's growing.
I mean, I've got a lot lined up as well.
So more's gonna come out.
But I've taken a break.
I was just on vacation.
So if anyone's wondering why
I've been taking a little bit of a break.
Oh yeah, you deserve it, man.
Where'd you go?
Now I just went on holiday back home
to the city of Durban, where my family's from.
And yeah, just relaxed for a bit.
It wasn't like a full-on trip overseas or anything.
It was just, you know, I'm just seasam.
Yeah, that's great, that's lovely.
And what do you have?
I mean, what do you have in store for the next,
you know, a few months next year for the channel?
Like what kind of, how often do you come out?
Like what's your plan for?
It used to be around two weeks, every two weeks.
But because of, I mean, I mentioned to you
while we chatted before coming on the show.
I mean, there's so much political race
in South Africa at the moment.
They randomly cut the power.
You cannot prepare yourself.
So we could be chatting right now,
and they could change the stage of what's called low chatting.
That means they'll switch off the electricity
in the entire country at a random moment
at any point of the day.
And that's making it very difficult for me to schedule
any interviews with guests overseas
because obviously I don't wanna waste their time.
And when the day comes,
because this has happened about five times already,
we've had to cancel an interview.
It's very embarrassing,
because you've got this guest,
you've been looking up to your entire life
and you finally have them,
and then they just leave the fingertips of your past hand
and you're like, oh, no, I almost interviewed so and so.
I can't believe it.
I mean, that happened to Noam and I the first time.
So Noam and I scheduled an interview, no chatting hit.
Noam was so generous
because he obviously knows a lot about South African politics.
He said, don't worry, I completely understand.
I know exactly what's going on.
And then we just rescheduled.
So I mean, we've had our number two.
So I mean, Noam, you can expect Noam Chomsky one more time.
You can expect Donald Hoffman again.
All the guests I've had on,
you can possibly expect back.
I'm gonna try and change the format a little at some point.
I'm gonna try and just update it.
Perhaps, I mean, I've been doing everything on my own
at this point.
It's my hobby host,
it's something I've been writing.
And I think I need to get teed together
because it is a bit overwhelming.
It does get a bit hard.
I think I need to, at some point,
invest more energy and time into building this.
I can tell that there is an audience
that wants to engage and wants this content.
And I think I'm gonna do my best to provide it.
I love it.
I live for it at this point.
It is my favorite thing to do.
When I talk to some of these guests,
I feel like I'm talking to childhood heroes.
Some of them are current active heroes.
And it's a real, it's actually pretty cool
to speak to them as a peer.
I remember watching Noam Chomsky as a child,
like legitimately a baby.
I feel like I was a three-year-old.
Watching an old, huge, you know, the box TV sets,
just watching him before it starts to cut
to that black and white fuzz.
I remember he had this one chat with Michel Foucault,
just was a sort of debate.
He had one that he was televised here in South Africa.
This was the coolest thing I've ever seen.
Foucault versus Chomsky,
just having a fun debate.
And they both understand each other,
one speaking French, the other one speaking English.
And there's no need for a translator.
They're just, I'm watching the subtitles,
just thinking, how are these guys so intelligent?
This is absurd.
That's like upper, upper class.
That's like 53.
It's crazy.
It's so cool.
And you get to talk to them and engage with them
in this modern world.
It's amazing.
Yeah, it is, it's so epic.
I can only describe it as awesome.
It's just epic.
Yeah, very fortunate.
Yeah.
I mean, even chatting to you right now,
I mean, this is, look the content
that you've curated and created at this point.
I mean, one of your videos has over 300,000 views.
That's pretty cool.
Oh yeah, the fourth dimension.
Yeah, that's, thank you.
Yeah, it does feel good that something kind of clicked,
I guess.
You can never know what, it's a funny thing,
is you don't know what's going to, what's gonna work.
That's the nice thing about having such a diverse
and different type of podcast is that you can experiment.
I mean, you're YouTube channeling people
to actually do that, which is pretty cool.
Yeah.
It's a great topic and go with it.
It gives them what they want.
And I mean, that's the beauty behind this platform,
is we get to showcase content that we love
and that hopefully other people love.
Cause clearly 300,000 views later,
thousands of people have to have loved it too.
Yeah, that does feel good.
That's cool.
Yeah, it's hard to wrap your head around,
it's just like reality.
That is a lot.
It is a lot.
If you could...
I mean, talking about Tesseract and the fourth dimension,
I mean, it is something people want.
I mean, it's such a cool topic.
It's one of those things you want to hear about.
It is a cool topic.
I mean, we're into it nowadays.
Yeah, me too.
I mean, I did that one because I wanted to figure it out
for myself, I didn't get it.
And I just kept on going back to it.
And I think it only took me three or four days
to put that together from soup to nuts.
Yeah, it wasn't too long.
I mean, I was like, early on I was like,
really hitting it hard
and trying to pump those out quickly.
But so that was cool that it just kind of resonated
with some folks.
If you could talk to yourself at the beginning
of you making the podcast, go back a year or so.
I mean, if you give yourself one piece of advice,
what would it be?
Take your time, don't edit it too much,
which at the beginning I did and then I stopped.
Now it's very much unfiltered.
It's almost just raw.
I just cut the beginning, cut the end
and upload it as it is.
I've learned to be less harsh on myself.
Just, if I don't like the way I've responded,
if I've gotten too much, I don't care.
It's more about getting their views out there.
It's more about the guests at this point.
My best advice would be, take your time.
Don't be too greedy for views or likes.
It'll grow.
Start low, go slow and it'll flow.
I guess I wanna keep the wrong thing going.
Love it, yeah.
But I mean, talking about a year ago,
so what had happened was I started,
I uploaded four within I think a month or two.
Sure.
And then I completely quit.
And the first four were, I think it was
Michael Graziano, Lisa Feldman
and Nicholas Humphrey and Keith Frankish.
And then I stopped for months.
So I think it was, I think I stopped for about six
to eight months.
What?
I gave up on the podcast.
What?
Because of that impatience.
I thought like, is this actually gonna get gone?
What am I gonna do?
I wanna do this is...
And then I came across,
I actually sent Kurt a message about this.
I came across Kurt's channel and I remember thinking,
this is exactly what I want to talk about and do.
And he seems to be growing this very well.
I might as well just continue.
And then so he actually inspired me to continue doing it.
And then we've chatted since then.
And he even made a video,
I remember where he mentioned me in his podcast.
He said that this is a very,
so you made a video about underrated podcasts.
Yes.
I'm retrenched, yeah.
I think that's how I found it.
Okay, great.
I'm pretty sure, yeah.
I'm pretty sure that's how I came out.
I remember the day he posted that,
I got a lot of new subscribers
and a lot of engaging subscribers.
It wasn't just subscribers subscribe and don't interact.
I was getting engagement, you know?
Those real comments that people arguing,
having full-on debates in the comments and stuff.
I started loving that I was like, this is great.
So glad I continued
because this is exactly what I wanted to have.
The people not talk about me,
but rather talk about the theories
that I'm allowing these people to portray and discuss.
So the goal is for them to portray them.
So yeah, oh, by the way, Nicholas Humphrey
is one of the guests I've had on the show.
He's someone I've read a lot of his books.
I mean, one of his heroes were,
I mean, Richard Dawkins.
I mean, he really loved these people
that I loved growing up.
And he was one of those people
because he was part of that group of biologists
who sort of combined biology with psychology.
So he was also someone who I really considered an idol.
I have so many of his books on my shelf.
Like I swear about 10 different titles,
10 different books.
And no, I've got about 15 to 20 books, I think.
Yeah, I mean, I'm chatting to these people.
I mean, Pinker, Steven Pinker, when we have our chat,
it'll be like me chatting to another hero.
I've got about also about 10 plus, I think.
That picker's amazing too.
So yeah, I mean, advice, just take your time
and enjoy the process.
And I am at this point.
I mean, I don't rush.
If I don't post in a month,
I mean, I haven't posted since I'm in a month
and I'm okay, I'm not really that stressed.
I've got videos waiting.
Yeah.
I'm not really panicking.
Sure, that's a great thing.
I am worried about the viewers
and the fact that they might be waiting for the next video.
And I take that into consideration.
So I will post it based on that.
But Richard to post is no longer.
But I think if you can afford getting a team to get rich,
then you probably should take off
some of that stress.
Because it's a lot of work.
Editing, post-production, pre-production, preparation,
getting a logo, getting the podcast together,
trying to find a song, a theme, everything.
It's such a, it's so much.
Yeah, I get it.
Yeah, you're talking to a creature in a little choir
over here.
I mean.
Yes, what would you give me?
What's that?
You had to give me advice.
What would you give me?
Make my podcast.
You advice now?
Yeah.
Oh my goodness.
You're a content creator, Carlos.
I mean, at this point you've done extraordinary work.
You can give me advice.
That's what it's so kind of you to say.
I think very highly of your work too.
Huh, I have to think about it.
I don't have anything off the top of my head.
Honestly, I mean, if I had,
hmm, no, I have nothing.
Wish, if I think, I promise, if I think of anything,
I will email you.
I promise.
I promise if anything comes to mind.
Yeah, please do.
The main goal is to grow.
We can't, I love when people give me constructive feedback
because I mean, there are times we have noticed things
that you notice things you do.
You sort of, you might out loud go, hmm, hmm, hmm.
That's fine.
I think that's okay.
It's fine until you find like five comments in the video
where you're like, why does this,
why does the host keep humming?
And then I'm like, just guys,
you need to relax as the conversation.
Yeah.
Calm down.
Yeah, yeah.
It's totally fine.
It's totally fine.
Calm down and just enjoy the content.
I'm not perfect.
Neither are my guests.
And they don't claim to be either.
So a lot of my effort actually goes into making sure
that the guest is taken care of.
Because the last thing I want is for them to say something
politically incorrect that might get them into trouble.
Which I think a lot of people try to get for click bait.
And I think that's something my guests have noticed.
And that's why they want to come back is
you make them feel comfortable,
which you've done so very, very well so far.
And I'm sure you'll continue to.
We're going off the rails, baby.
We're taking this to crazy town.
No, I'm just kidding.
Not a guest trip.
And I think one of the things he told me at the end was,
I mean, where he comes from,
it's good to actually go in detail and dissect me.
He wants me to.
So for round two,
he actually wants me to play devil's advocate
as much as I possibly can.
And I said, okay, I can do that.
I choose the peaceful round.
Yeah.
If you want the devil, we can bring him out.
I mean, it's always good to make sure
the guest feels comfortable.
So my advice would be, take your time, go slow,
and make sure the guest is always comfortable.
I mean, in this type of podcast setting.
Yeah, sure.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I think that's what I was trying to do.
So I'm glad that it came through.
So if we can.
And also just to remind me something about,
I'm so glad you came back
and that you didn't abandon the channel.
I mean, yeah, because I get it.
I mean, it's probably so many creators
go through the same thing where you try
and you put all of yourself into the work
and you see nobody watching it.
And you're like, what is this?
But it was, Joseph Campbell said something
to the degree of like, when you found your passion,
you find the thing that you want to do.
He's like, be willing to suffer
for about a decade at least in pursuit of it.
Like if you're not willing to give yourself over,
that's a lot of time.
I mean, obviously not everyone has the resources at the time.
You know, you have to make these trade-offs, you know,
for your passion sometimes with the demands of life
and the things that come at you.
But on the side, if you just keep on going
and you love the process, you know,
like you were mentioning before,
all the things that it takes to do this well.
And I was talking to somebody last night
about this, like a content creator and he said too,
like, you know, as soon as you can,
what is you can offload this stuff,
certain parts of this you have to,
because, you know, you need to be able to focus your time
and attention on other stuff.
But I mean, I'm so curious,
I like learning all these things.
Like, and I would like,
I think it's interesting.
It's like, let's go into it, right?
Maybe not now editing stuff as precisely after a while,
you're kind of like, God, I wish this was over,
but initially getting in there in the project,
like I get into Final Cut and I'm moving stuff around,
I get into flow, I lose hours of time, flow right by.
And it's like, that's why, you know,
that's one of the reasons why I got into this is to,
you lose yourself in the process.
So.
And I completely agree.
I mean, I also came back
because that is something I'm most actually at the point.
I was thinking about it.
I mean, I loved doing it.
And why am I letting the fact that people aren't enjoying it
as much as I thought they would,
affects the fact that I love doing it.
So I just came back because I enjoyed it so much.
I mean, even just having the conversations,
even editing it, I love listening to it
because I'm obviously relearning it,
reabsorbing the answers the person has given me.
And you're right, you get into that flow state
and you start editing, you can quickly chop, paste.
I've made my life so much easier
by just starting it, cutting the beginning,
cutting there and just uploading it raw.
So I've taken a lot of hassles.
Yes, there's something the guests have said
that they really didn't like,
perhaps once it's been cut out,
I will go through and cut it out.
Other than that, it's very much raw uncut footage.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'll probably do something similar,
I mean, after this,
I'll probably do something similar in terms of,
because it's such an enjoyable conversation from my end.
And I hope you enjoyed it as well.
And I mean, your story too,
it's just so perfect because you really,
and you're a young guy, you're 29 years old, right?
I think you mentioned.
And you've come around already,
you had this call to adventure,
you know, this interest, this passion
that's always been there.
And then you went into the chaos of,
you know, med school and 30 hour shifts
to then doing the TV, media hosting stuff,
like Survivor, you've got,
and now you're integrating so much
of your different experiences.
You know, it's like two or three dimensions
of things that you're bringing together
with this podcast.
On top of, you're still a practicing medical doctor, right?
I mean, on top of that, you know, you have,
and that's, I think something beautiful too,
is that your day to day practice, you know,
that work that you do informs the podcast
in an angle that you don't really get that perspective
from so many people.
So it's just, you made it so easy for me
because it's a perfect journey, you know,
it's coming through, and yet there's still more to come,
you know, I mean, you're gonna go through that process
again and again in terms of that call,
you know, to do even more and integrate
even more of your experiences.
You know, thanks so much, I really appreciate it.
It's, you're right, this podcast is pretty much me
putting them all together into one part now.
Finally, being able to put everything
into one thing that I love so much,
and it truly is that one, that place I go to zone out.
This is my hobby, this is something I love to do,
and it feels like I'm reading,
because my favorite thing to do is reading books,
so when I'm doing a podcast with a guest,
I know I've read all their books,
it feels like I'm reading a book again,
and it's pretty cool, it's the best feeling,
I can't even explain it, it's just surreal.
I'm sure it is, because yeah, you take that written
experience, which is like in their psyche,
it's like a part of them, you know,
it's like the patterns that you're getting through,
and then you can actually engage, mind meld,
have the discussion.
It's wonderful.
It's pretty surreal, I must say, it's phenomenal.
What a time, what a time to be alive.
Do you have anything else you wanna say to the audience,
anything else you wanna ask me?
I just wanna say good luck to you, man,
this is going to be a crazy adventure,
this is gonna be something you're going to look back
and think, I'm so glad I continued,
I'm so glad I changed the format now and then,
because you said you're planning to do that,
the more you engage and experiment,
the better it's going to get,
so I just wanna say thank you for continuing
what you're doing, thanks for the opportunity
for chatting to me and finding my story
so compelling enough for you to interview me.
I appreciate it, I had such a great time, firstly,
but more importantly, I think you're gonna do a great job.
This is gonna be something I'm gonna keep my eye on.
Definitely gonna probably have you on the show at some point.
Oh, yes, yes, any time, absolutely.
I think we need to have a nice discussion on the mind
and why you think reality,
why you think we're going to find the truth.
I didn't say that.
Did I?
I mean, I think we might get close, but sure enough,
at least, yeah, just like a-
Are you going to change the name?
Are you actually going to do this?
You know what, I've done a little bit of a,
the last few weeks, kind of a restructure,
figuring out the future of the channel,
like obviously this is one step in that direction,
doing, I wanna do like one interview a week,
it's kind of something I'd like to do,
going into 2023, possibly like one live stream per week,
where I'm doing like a lecture,
kind of educational stuff on the fly,
but pre-prepared, obviously to a degree.
So I think I'd be like a nice,
because you gotta get the stuff out,
you have to create a lot of stuff
and put it out there and see what happens.
So that's kind of vaguely what I'm thinking about.
And I have a lot of ideas for,
yeah, a rebrand, you strike sort of a new title sort of,
but it's up in the air.
I don't know.
And one of the cool things about YouTube in particular,
but also all the social media platforms really,
is that you can rebrand on the fly.
You can like really change stuff.
You don't want to do it too often.
Obviously you confuse your audience, but...
I've done that.
So I, when I started this podcast,
it was before the four episodes I uploaded,
right to that I started the podcast,
I think almost four months or so before that,
but it was a mental health podcast.
I started it where I just did episodes talking
about mental health in general,
just me speaking, no guests.
I found myself slowly not really enjoying it.
I didn't like it, I didn't like what I was doing,
was not enjoying the content.
I stopped it completely, revamped it,
brought on guests and decided to make this a two-way street
and have a look back.
So I think if you're feeling that urge
to change it up, change it up.
I am, yeah.
And this I think is good because very,
I mean, I think it's honest criticism of my own stuff.
So myself in front of the camera,
like I had like a teleprompter prescripted,
every word exactly how I wanted,
I wanted for quality control,
but obviously scale-wise, it just really reduces your output.
And then I watch myself now and it's,
I'm so stilted and stiff on camera.
And I mean, I do think it's tough to read off a teleprompter,
like to do that with like, you know, fun energy,
you know, you have years and years of experience
doing stuff like that.
We got some training in that.
Yeah, yeah, you got some training.
I didn't, so I looked back at it and I'm like,
oh no, like terrible, but whatever, you know,
you got to just accept it and say,
you need to make stuff and mess up.
And then you kind of grew up.
I mean, as you said, it's Joseph Camel says it all,
it's the hero's journey.
You were just starting out.
Hmm, yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's just still, it's still happening.
It's still, you're still figuring it all out.
Yeah, we all are.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, we're all on this journey
and it's gonna take us all to very unique places.
And I'm looking forward to see who yours is going to be.
Likewise, yeah, absolutely.
And just for anyone watching,
you can find, I'll link to all your stuff
to have in the description.
So please go to his channel, subscribe, engage.
It's a great audience as well that you have built up.
And just for the bottom of my heart.
I love it when you guys,
I'm saying engage to all the people who are gonna watch this.
I love it when you have your debate in the comments section.
I read it all, so.
Yeah, me too.
Yes, so for you to show us love, I mean, whatever you want.
Sure, yeah, especially, you know,
at our size, I read every comment,
I look through them all.
And I think sometimes, yeah, one time,
some guy posted like, you gotta read this,
like to everyone else, read the short story
about the fourth dimension.
And I read it and it was awesome.
And he's like, I can't believe you read it.
I was like, yeah, I'm a person.
I'm interested in this stuff.
We're curious.
We wanna see what you guys have to say.
Yeah, we really care.
And we wanna know what you wanna hear going forward.
Stuctive critiques from the comment section.
I mean, you'll have some loyal supporters
who will give you good feedback.
And as your channel grows, I mean,
we're both still growing.
I mean, as it grows, we're gonna find people
who are going to support the channel,
eventually grow into people who will become a part
of the channel, because that's what happens
with these channels.
They eventually get patrons, they get supporters,
loyal customers who come here for a service.
And if you do them a disservice, they will let you know.
Yeah, absolutely.
But I can tell what you're gonna give them a good service.
So keep up the content.
And I'm looking forward to seeing you.
I can't wait to continue following your journey.
Absolutely.
I mean, I'm gonna look forward to watching yours.
Very attentive.
Thank you so much.
I really appreciate your time.
I had such a great time.
Thanks so much for the opportunity.
And I can't wait to see how this comes out.
See, me too.
Thanks.
