I've been thinking about the abysmal state of the modern internet nowadays and
Something came to me and this is gonna be a bold prediction very bold prediction
I think that within the next couple years and this is sort of already started to happen
I don't think people have noticed it, but in the next couple of years search engines will become basically obsolete
Okay, this is really already happening. It's probably just happening under everyone's noses
But search engines, they're pointless at this point like google.com
DuckDuckGo.com, Circs, whatever everything all these search engines are becoming more and more useless now back in the day
Why do I say that all of us use search engines every single day?
So that's a bold claim for me to say but back in the day search engines were you know put
Brought to existence. They were invented for you to find websites. You need to find information a search engine will help you
Do that you need to find this that or the other the other a search engine
You know will lead you to new sites things you haven't seen stuff like that
But the thing is if you go to a search engine nowadays go to Google and search something you will not find new sites
Here's what you find there are basically three things that appear on a modern search
Engine result and this is partially by choice. This is partially what Google and other companies have deliberately chosen to put first in
Responses but some of it is just people playing the search engine game
They're playing SEO, you know search engine optimization and stuff like that. There are basically three things you get firstly
The top results are always going to be stupid sites that you could search individually like big sites like
Facebook like reddit like Twitter none of which should really be indexed by Google
That might sound like a weird thing
But it's totally pointless to have Facebook results on Google when most people in the world who don't have
Facebook's are gonna click on those things and not going to be able to access the content. Oh, it's private
Oh, we'll show you like five seconds of it
And then we're gonna like bring up this menu that tells you to like, you know undo your ad blocker and become a member or something
Like that so search engines nowadays
Firstly they're indexing just a couple of sites that everyone like already knows and the results to most search engine searches
Whether you're looking for something in real life or some kind of event or whatever
You're just gonna get like the same three or four sites over and over again
The worst offender here is definitely reddit
Reddit is a terrible site. The people who use it are really terrible and they're getting worse and worse
And the worst thing is reddit is like every search result now like this obscure site that bit
Like such a miniscule portion of the world
I mean it's a big site
But like in the grand scheme of things very few people have reddit accounts and it's the most frustrating site to navigate
It is the most poorly written site you to like go through a thread on reddit
It's just impossible
But what has happened is all the other forms that you used to be able to search you no longer get those results
You will get reddit.com results. That is what Google is doing nowadays. You will just get big social media sites
So that's one thing you see thing number two is
sites that have no
Organic popularity, but Google and other search engines deliberately decide. Oh, let's prop the site up now Google has done this explicitly
They do stuff like oh well, you know if we actually are honest
But you know ten years ago. No one ever went to freakin cnn.com. Who is gonna go there like there's no
You know a couple companies like Yahoo would put their stuff like in I don't know on their main page or something like that
But realistically speaking over the past ten years
There have been a bunch of mainstream sites that were fading in importance
And they've regained importance on the internet because sites like Google have now deliberately said we are going to be
You know propagating these sites putting them, you know on the front page of the internet because we don't oh my goodness
We don't want people have disinformation. We want people to get their stuff straight from cnn
We don't want anything else so on the front page of Google
You have social media sites that you already know are there and you know how to find information on them
And you have you know basically shill sites that like there's no like no one would want to go to them
Like I'm sorry when I'm looking for a news headlock even if I'm looking for a current event
I do not want to see what the New York Times has to say about this. I know what they're gonna say about everything
No one cares. Okay, so that shouldn't be there anyway
But the third thing and this is you know probably one of the most annoying things is that the
Aside from social media sites and mainstream news sites
The only other thing that Google Sims seems to index nowadays is spam sites sites where you have some AI write articles
You know, let's say you search something like oh, how do I change my car's oil?
Oh, you guys have all seen these kind of sites, but you search something like oh, how do I change my car's oil?
You click on like the first second third Google result. What is it? It's one of these like AI written search engine optimized
Just junk sites
Changing oil is something that people do all the time. Da-da-da-da oil can be changed. What does oil do?
Ba-ba-ba you know exactly what I'm talking about
It's like as a dummy site that is just like a bunch of words
There's no it doesn't answer the question and all the sites are titled like questions or best
Computer 2021 it's all like search engine optimization because when dumb normies when they search for things they ever search entire questions or they search
You know best whatever
2021 current date. I don't know why they do that. I don't know why they think I don't either way that is what appears on Google nowadays
You know five social media sites at everyone that aren't shouldn't really be indexed anyway because they're not really searchable or usable by people
Who don't have accounts there?
Mainstream news sites and literal just spam AI generated sites
Okay, so a lot of people nowadays, you know one of the big problems is search engines and of course everyone has this isn't just a Google problem
all other search engines
They're not just following how Google does their things
But if Google propagates, you know the New York Times and gets a lot more links to that site by definition that is going to increase their
You know their appearance on other search engine sites that don't bias their results in favor of that. That's just how it is
Okay, that's how it works. And so what's happened is search engines no longer
They don't give you new sites. You will never find a new site on
Google you will never find new information you will get the same five sites that are
meticulously curated to tell you exactly what you know, they want you to you know, know or something like that
And nothing else that's it
That's what a search engine does and the thing is for the things that people actually use search engines for okay, you know
Let's put them down in a couple categories, right? So they're let's say how to stuff like how do I fix this?
How do I do that? How do I?
You know fix my car. How do I do my makeup? How do I make us something? You know all this kind of stuff, you know those?
They're really only a small number of sites that actually give good
complete information about that kind of stuff and they really could be indexed by another site that just indexes a couple sites
gets rid of all spam and that would actually be a better experience like if you made a cell phone app or
You know, so even maybe even a desktop application that just gave you a certain gave you search results of a couple
You know well-chosen sites with no ads and stuff like that for those kind of things or for recipes for that matter
That would be something that people want search engines as it is right now
They are just a pain like you have to scroll down pages and pages of stuff to actually go to information nowadays
So I think that as you know what people actually use search engines for whether that's looking up how to do something
Or most other things they could actually have specialized sites that could do this better in each case
And what's happening now is you know, I find myself relying on search engines less and less because it's just like they're just bad
They're they're really unusable. It's just frustration doesn't matter which one you use
I mean, I use all of them
I use sirks and I can have it index all search engines all together
You know order them in whatever way I want, you know, and it's still not good enough like I could get
direct results from Google or DuckDuckGo or anything else it just sucks and
Fundamentally it creates the idea that the internet is just five sites and then a bunch of spam
And that's the idea that normies have they don't have this idea that oh
There's there can be an artisanal website that a person puts together that has good information
There might be a place out there where a guy has
You know created a site with just information about how to fix your car
But I am never gonna see that because he probably doesn't do search engine optimization and he probably doesn't you know
It's gonna be drowned in a bunch of nonsense that actually shows up in the search engines
So the ability to actually provide that kind of stuff the kind of stuff that people actually want on the internet
I think there's a good market for that the other month just on a whim
You guys are my right might remember I was complaining about recipe sites not doing this
So sort of on a joke we created a recipe site that just has recipes without ads and in any of that other stuff
Based on cooking that's the website based thought cooking
But either way I think the future of the internet we're weirdly enough
It's sort of like returning to the tradition of the internet where there are a couple sites that have good informational content and
You know all the search engines stuff is just stupid. It honestly is it's so frustrating
And that is why I think in a couple years search engines will have you know be less and less important if people want to search for something on Facebook
They'll go to Facebook and search it if they don't use Facebook
They have no reason to ever see a Facebook result because I don't want to see some stupid ad
In front of the information. I'm trying to look at on a Facebook page that tells me to sign up to Facebook
It's just not gonna happen like it's just it's stupid. Anyway, so that's it
