You
Wonder what you'll find with an open mind you may be surprised
Hey everybody welcome to the atheist experience I'm your host Russell Glasser and with me today
I am honored to be joined by dr. Richard Carrier hello the author of on the historicity of Jesus and
Homer Hitler Bible Christ among a lot of things and here on this side is Chris Johnson
Author and filmmaker of a better life a hundred atheists speak out on joy and meaning in a world without God
We're we're here doing the show live today after the Bat cruise which means that just like every time this year
We've got a huge studio audience. Let's hear it
Wow
Today is Sunday September 28th
2014th where we are live call-in public access atheist television show based in Austin, Texas
Dedicated to promoting positive atheism and the separation of church and state
We're available through live streaming at you stream. TV the official atheist experience website is
www.atheist-experience.com
You can provide feedback by commenting on the official show blog free thought blogs dot-com
Slash AXP or you can email us at TV at atheists-community.org
If you enjoy the show today, please check out our related podcast the non-profits which airs the first and third Wednesday of every month
And as usual the cast and crew of the atheist experience is going to be getting together
After the show at El Arroyo at 1624 West 5th Street. We'll be arriving at around 6 p.m
Now all those people you just heard a bunch of them are going so it's going to be pretty crowded
Just fair warning
So that's it for the announcements and I'm gonna kick it over to Richard who's gonna tell us a few things
Maybe from the lecture we heard yesterday and and about his work
Yeah, right
Yeah, well my latest book is on the historicity of Jesus and the significance of this and I talked about it yesterday
was
This idea that Jesus never really existed as a historical person has been kicked around for about a hundred years and the last 20 years a
Lot of amateur books and websites and things have come out. It even like was a featured topic in religious the movie
And but the problem is that there's a lot of misinformation a lot of bad scholarship
But there's also a lot of good stuff in there as well
It's all sort of mixed up and no one had really gone through the trouble of clearing away all the bad stuff gathering all the good stuff
Doing thorough research on it all and then presenting it in a manner that would pass peer review at an academic press
And so my book is actually the first book arguing that there was no Jesus that it was actually a mythical person that was made up
Or at least the the Jesus of Galilee was made up
It's the first one that's to be published by a university the University of Sheffield and to have passed extensive peer review within the field
And so it's going to get more attention from scholars in the field and since it doesn't have all of the bogus stuff in it that other things have
had
It's actually the first really good case that I think might start to rattle the cages of biblical studies
And I guess maybe we can talk more about that if people call in want to know more about it
But that's just the gist sure yeah
With both Richard and Chris here talking about their topics. This would be a great day to talk about something they know about
But we'll be happy to get the usual kind of calls to anything else
No, that's it actually oh, well, I suppose I should mention for those who don't know my PhD is in ancient history from Columbia University
History of philosophy religion and science in the Greco-Roman era
So that's my main field of expertise for those who are interested in calling in on that subject
Okay
Chris well, I'm good. I'm thrilled to be here
And I worked on a project called a better life
Hundred atheists speak out and join meaning in a word without God
Working on the film version right now as well putting that together
Basically, I wanted to change the way we talk about atheism and talk about atheism from a positive perspective
Instead of talking about what we are railing against talk about what we love what we're passionate about what we value
so I worked on a book put that together and
Now I'm putting together a film and actually brought a clip along to show you a little bit about what what I'm doing
It's coming I'm hearing unhappy noises from the studio
Live public
It'll happen
I
Life is like its own reward
You know this this idea that
Some people have that atheists must be
Nihilists who have no purpose and they're all dull or all the time and oh this life has no meaning and purpose
And why don't we just end it all that I just I cannot grasp that the more I've understood about how the universe works
the more that
Joy rather than it going. Oh, it's just clockwork
The Sun's there and we go around it every year and all that stuff. No, I think that's amazing. How about that is extraordinary?
How that's since we are made of the same
stuff the same molecules that were created, you know in the explosions of the stars and
We ourselves have evolved this
Incredible ability to contemplate our place in the universe
We are away for the cosmos to know itself for some people
You
You
Born and are going to die and you have consciousness that's here now and gonna end
You have instant profound meaning in your life you happen to be alive right now
You should really make the most of it. So you have a about 300 months
to live with passion to live with vividness to live
Trying to do something make something trying to create some significance
People love things that they find beautiful
And it can be a very expensive thing and an exquisite thing or it can just be as simple as I
Used to have that when I was a child
And I can't believe I've seen this now in the thrift store. I haven't thought of this thing in you know, 30 years
And then there's my dogs
Then there's the dog
We love our dogs
You
Thanks, Chris, thank you
So we're gonna go straight to calls now. Nobody has any objections
We're gonna be starting with a local caller from it's Christian from Cedar Park, Texas
Hi, Christian
Good, how are you?
If somebody is
religious and
They have a predisposition towards religion
It seems like that
even if they
Human
Go on
Even if they have
Hey, I'm gonna get a little echo. Oh
Sorry, they're working on it. Okay, so
Even if I had doubts about whether there was an actual God or a supreme being
then I
Still might want to keep being religious just for all these
any of the multiple aspects that come from being religious and
In that sense
And this doesn't really describe me right now. I mean I I have faith
For the time being
And I believe but I did go through other periods where I was you know pretty much agnostic and a
But I
Didn't feel I just always felt like there was something missing. I'm getting a pretty fierce echo
But just just work through it. I'm sorry, okay, so
You know, I like the ritual of religion and I like the
The worship part of it even if it's just, you know, if you're singing the praises of creation ultimately
You know just the idea of Kim's
just kind of the emotional tone of them and
And I like
Church and religion so you're you're saying basically that
You're still firm in your faith right now, but you're you're wondering if somebody who was losing their faith would
ought to feel a benefit from
Continuing to go through the motions and rituals of religion just to get the sort of comfort and fellowship that it involves
Is that what you're saying?
Yeah
Well, he was asking you Chris
You've talked to a lot of people who have
Been through the deconversion process. Do you have a perspective on this?
I would just say that that you don't necessarily have to stop singing
Religious music if you like the music you can still sing music
Even if it has a religious basis
One thing that that is nice though that you know the secular community really is coming together
more so than it used to so
You can get that fellowship and that community from
From atheists, I mean we spent yesterday on the back cruise and it was great hanging out with all these wonderful people and meeting people and talking and
I mean you get that same sense of of community and friendship
From atheists and and I think you can get that from a secular community just as much as a religious one
What is it Richard? Well, there's also Sunday assembly, which isn't my thing, but some people love that
I mean, it's kind of like it's a hymn based
You know ecstatic religious experience except it's not religious
It's for atheists and non-believers
If you just Google Sunday assembly you can probably find websites and see where those things are going around it's kind of like
You know, it's like a little a tent event that goes around the country
And they want to create more of these things
And they do serve a segment of the community that want that part of they just can't believe anymore in the
Ideology or the particular teachings of the religion, but love that particular experience of church of the singing and that particular kind of
Thing and so they've created a sort of secular version of this so people who are into that that might be the thing for you
I don't know right
The fact that religion addresses this
aspect of us that is somewhat primitive and
You know some of it's lost in the past
But it but it forms in kind of a state of innocence
that
I'm gonna have to be the curmudgeon at this table and disagree with that
Religion didn't just form
spontaneously as I see it
It grew organically out of a bunch of social conventions and even today most people
Wind up with the religion that comes from their parents or their culture or whatever
so
Depends
In the same way that when you're a child you can perceive things a certain way
But once you learn a certain amount you kind of lose the ability to go back to that perception
So are you getting at like the idea of the sense of awe and wonder that you can get?
I'm saying that I don't think that you can go to an atheist gathering for fellowship and
Get the same thing that you can get going to a 500 year old cathedral and
being with people who are actually
You know fully fully engaging in the in the original way
But I've been to a 500 year old cathedral and still gotten that sense of awe and wonder and it had nothing to do with God
It had to do with the architecture. It had to do with the space. It had to do most of all with the history
That's that's part of that so I don't think it has anything to do with you know, God or
What I would say what I would say to your point is that every experience is
Unique and a lot of different experiences can be moving in a way
You know the feeling you get from going to a 500 year old cathedral is not the same feeling that you get when you go to the
Louvre and you know and you look at these amazing
Paintings that people have worked on and I think by denying the existence of God. We're not invalidating that there's some really great
Religious art and architecture
and
You're right that you can continue to participate in those things and appreciate them
But at the same time, there's not the feeling that you're required to focus on that one type of thing as the only thing
That can elevate you in your life
Sure
Well, I would add also that I mean that a lot of that of course is marketing campaign, right?
The I mean churches, they're not they don't just want you to come there and sing they want you to vote a certain way
They want you to have certain values. They want you to treat gay people a certain way or they want you to treat women a certain way
They have certain ideology. They're trying to sell
And so you're gonna be socially pressured to adopt that ideology
I know a lot of people that have left the church simply because they no longer agreed with the values and the people the other
Congregation simply wouldn't let them be themselves
They would try to constantly try to pressure them to just toe the party line
And I think that's the main the main problem with that and and you'd have to have like a church like the Unitarian Universalist Church
Which is accepting of all different kinds of beliefs and they don't pressure you quite the same way
But then maybe you won't find I mean they don't have 500 year old cathedrals in the Unitarian Church
They weren't funded as well. Yeah
Well, you'd be surprised they the Unitarians have often some good land and some good churches, but they're they're often more modern
but
Is that the point I'm making when I'm talking about cathedrals and such is that
something is built up. It's a culture is built up around
worship and
relating to God and
daily activities and ways to carry out the religious life and
You know like
whoever said before I
Turned my TV off so that I'm not looking at you guys
Um whoever said it it grows organically and that's kind of what I mean by that
Yeah, but what I'm saying is that is not unique to religion people form all sorts of different cultures
And call it all sorts of different things. I mean, you know, they they form football cultures and gaming cultures
They form fraternity cultures at their college. Uh, yeah, you know and those fill different roles people
Um
People have lots of social groups in their adult life
And I didn't mean to say that it was exclusive in any way
What I'm saying is
It's all those things have been tied together in the religion
And if maybe as you were raised with that religion, but it's not just you found it attractive
Yeah, a lot of it really comes from your upbringing. I wasn't ready for religious and I don't miss it
And it's not just religion like we said let's say before it's history. It's culture
It's all wrapped up in in many of those different things. So you can't just say it's only religion
It's a bunch of different things wrapped together and you can take those those parts and appreciate those different parts
Without having to buy into the religion
Sure, or you might also buy into the religion
You might lots of people do from what I've heard
And on on the issues of believing in god and that kind of thing it seems that even religious people I know
ever it seems everybody I know has some type of
Doubt or goes in and out of periods of certainty. That's very tough. You have no idea how heartened I am to hear that
Oh, sure. No, but it is true. Yeah, but so yeah, I mean, uh, mother Teresa had doubts
Any reason to leave the religion if you find it fulfilling that alone?
No, but the reason to leave religion is that it might actually not be true
And it might be misleading and it might actually be harmful in certain aspects. Uh, and I think that
Uh
There is no reason to jettison the bad part
to jettison all the good parts along with
Getting rid of the unnecessary
thing of unquestioningly
worshiping this infinite being
And taking at face value something that people in authority tell you all your life
But those are what I see is as the negative sides of religion
So but also I don't believe in God. So I don't think that at the bottom level there there is a basis for it
Right, but I'm saying being that there are people
Besides you who may be different at different places along that spectrum
then
you know
Again, what they decide is harmful and what they decide is true or not true is going to be different
So even if somebody has major doubts about the metaphysical God
They may still go on with being religious
Right, they may I think we're in agreement
And I think that you can also but the one other thing that I was pointing to at the beginning is
You can some people have a religious attitude towards nature
Yeah, and so since God supposedly is
Existence comes from God or he's the source of existence then it's it's all there's kind of an overlap there
If you believe in God
Well, no, I'm saying in the concept
There's an overlap in the concept there can be
And so in that sense it may naturally go towards
What you what was worshiping God may naturally go towards an appreciation or a love or a worship of nature
Yeah, there are all kinds of things you could channel that energy into that aren't
Explicitly religious, but I think you can do it a religious way. Yeah, I think we're going to move on to other callers now
All right. Thanks for calling christian. Sure. Good talking to you. Bye
We have a loke in austin
Are you there? Yeah
Hi, what's up? Yeah
I'm pretty cool
I've been an atheist for I think
Three to four four years. I was born in india
I was a hindu all my life
I think in the last five years I've become an atheist
Before that I was a non religious hindu
I believed in spirituality. I
Have a scientific background. I
Went to the best scientific schools in india and us
So I have no I have no questions or our doubts about being an atheist and
um
The stuff we believe in
I I believe in facts and truth
I believe in
Seeing what I believe the only thing I miss when I was not atheist is
um
Emotional avoid
When I was not atheist when when I was uh
When I had when I was going through bad times
I thought uh, I had a god I would believe in
Um, maybe it was a placebo effect
Maybe it was magic or something I believed in
But I think that is the biggest thing which is missing from your show because you talk about
facts and how the bible is wrong and how
everything else is wrong, but
I do not think you're answering the question that
If as atheists we go through bad times
We can talk to our families. We can talk to our wives and sons
And it does not have the same effect like it did before and
You spend so little time on that
and I think that
Is a big reason which makes uh believers not
Not become atheists or make atheists become believers. So
if you
have
Really bad times in your in your life and you you used to have a supernatural power before you believed in
and now you don't
I mean you can be strong and you can be
And you can be confident, but but how do you how do you deal with that?
For myself, it's uh, I mean all of that I replace with good friends
and self-confidence
Um with those three things I know that I can use reason I can use my community
I can use the facts we've established
To try and make my situation better
And if I can't then I have those good friends that I can
Commiserate with and share that experience with
And then I have my own experience of life that I can share that experience with just with myself and that respect
And that works for me, and I know it works for a lot of other people
But I can't really speak necessarily to the experience of others that that might be in different situations in myself
so
I would just say that I mean, I think you raise a good point in a way that um life is sometimes very difficult and
You know working on a project about about her life was was not trying to say that everything is
Hunky dory all the time and we're all happy
life can be very difficult and
There are times where we need other people and
You can you can believe something that's false. That's comforting
I mean you could make up something that's very comforting
You know I could make up that I have a million dollars and that would be very comforting to me
and my bank account, but
It wouldn't be true and ultimately probably wouldn't be very helpful. And so I think
Looking at it realistically and thinking what you know, this is difficult time. How can I overcome this and
finding real answers friends family
Relationships things like that people you can count on who are actually there
As opposed to praying to a god who's not there would probably be
Better, but you're right that it is scary sometimes and I think we have to realize that
You know life can be scary and that's part of
The experience of it, right?
But there are ways to uh to get through it and get through it together with other people
Reminds me of the slogan, you know that that hands that help are better than lips that pray
um people that are in certain specific dire circumstances
Can actually find people in the same similar circumstances band together and find a way to solve this problem or fight it or get
Get activists and you know become activists and get involved
And then you can feel like if you can't solve your problem
You might be able to help make the world better so that other people don't end up in whatever situation
Yeah, whether this is curing cancer or escaping a drug addiction or whatever it is that you you're dealing with or you know
If it's losing loved ones and all kinds of things like this
There are lots of people who are having the same experiences that you can join and together with and bond with
and work together with to actually
Fix it or make it better in some fashion and I think that you can get a lot of
You can feel really good about that that you've made the world a better place
That you tried to make the world a better place and you had you weren't alone
That you had other people who are in the same situation, but also willing to
Bond together and fight together and work together to make these changes
That's all we have really. I mean that's to be honest. That's the the truth of the world
um, so we shouldn't uh
Not avail ourselves of that we that we that's the one thing that does exist that we can create
Uh, and so we are kind of obligated really to to do that if we if we want
something better
I don't think I can add anything to those
Yeah, I think I think I think I get your point, but I'm hurting a lot on this one so
um
I'm talking to my family
my friends, but
I missed I missed the fake magic which I had with thought
I'm I'm really sorry to hear that. Have you I see you're here in austin. Have you tried?
I mean, have you been to any of our meetings?
No, I I just uh join your group a few weeks back
Well, uh, I hope to see you and I mean I don't have any
magic solutions to your
To your problems, but uh, you know, I'd like a chance to sit sit down with you sometime and
Talk about this more especially since I don't know as much about x hindu's as I do about a lot of other x religious types
Okay, uh, thank you so much gentlemen. All right. Thanks for calling and uh, you know, good luck
But
Gary in uh, columbus, uh, mississippi
Gary
Yes, I'm here. Hi. How are you?
I'm doing great. How are you doing? I'm well
Nice to talk to you for the first time russel. Nice to talk to you too. You're a match. Uh, well, I say you're a man
I've watched the idea experience about five years
Uh, thank you. Really enjoyed the show
I'm square in the bubble belt here in columbus, mississippi. I don't recognize the other two guys with you at all
Uh, well, these are our guests, uh, from uh, they just gave some lectures on the bat crews
Richard carrier here is uh, is a historian and and christ johnson
Yeah, yeah, I know of him
There you go
Yeah, that's who I am. Yeah, and christ johnson is a photographer and a filmmaker
Hello, christ. Nice to meet you. Hello. Um, I didn't really have a question
I really just want to make a statement if I could to your viewers. Okay
Uh, I would I would like for your younger viewers. I know you've had many younger viewers
Uh, especially with this one guy that called in about
He was a teacher a scientist teacher
And he had several of his students eighth grade students calling in
And or not calling in uh, just viewing the show but uh
And he was upset about that and I want to tell them just a word to the younger folks
Don't be afraid to lose your fear that religion has instilled in you as a young person
Right. Well, I agree with you. Feel free to lose your religion. It's okay
Don't don't feel fear from that
Okay
uh, you know
It
You know, you might be cheered here that a lot of young people won't need that message because uh, the younger you get
In demographics the more likely it is that people just don't believe in god these days
I know Russell and I love that
In fact, I love the fact that most people who are in universities right now are less religious
I actually have an electrical engineering degree less religious. There's still majority religious
And it seems the more educated a person is
The less likely they are to be religious
Well, that is true. It is true, but uh, don't get complacent
You know as my friend matt dillahunty likes to say just because you've solved the easiest question in the world doesn't make you a genius
That is so ultimately true
right
So, uh, thanks for that message though
All right for the time and I know that most of the viewers want to see religious colors
All right
Well, thanks for calling. Thank you for taking my call. I'll see you
Uh, mario in tucson, arizona
Hi
How are you?
i'm good. Um, so I was wondering
I don't really have a lot of uh christian friends. I mean, well
fundamentalists and I suppose uh, or apologists to kind of like run my ideas
past
Contradictions I find within the bible. Um, and so I was wondering if you could possibly play like devil's advocate in this situation
angel's advocate
So, um
One verse in particular matthew 1231 says uh, and so I tell you every kind of sin and flander can be forgiven
But blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven
and so
This is like the only unforgivable sin, which I find
Ridiculous, um, but doesn't I just want to know what your thoughts were on that
Maybe if you could give an apologist statement and maybe explain where born again christians think that they can find salvation
I don't have a strong opinion on that either of you guys
Yeah, I wouldn't know how to answer the second question
I mean the the issue about blasphemy is that
Under jewish law at the time blasphemy just meant uttering the actual name of god
Uh, and in in a non-reverent way
Um, so blasphemy against the holy spirit is almost an unintelligible statement in the context of ancient
Judaism, so we're not really sure what that statement really meant
And what particular issue the christians who wrote that passage were
Trying to address almost certainly jesus never said those words
That was the invention of the later christian community
They were dealing with some sort of issue in their community that we don't know about because we don't have the documentation of
What kind of problems they were dealing with in their church, but someone just inserted that line in jesus's mouth in in the gospel
To just have him advocate whatever position they were trying to advocate
We don't really know what it was because we don't have the context for it
Yeah, I mean the only thing i'd say to this and questions like this in general is that there is no the christian answer because
With 33 000 different branches of christianity
And a lot of other religions in the world
You know ultimately all this stuff is at best loosely based on
On this book that was assembled over a few centuries
and so
If you read up a little bit on the history of how fundamentalism came to be such a uniquely american tradition
Um
You'll you'll find that people are basically
Constructing their own theologies as they go along and anytime that you branch out
You know anytime that you have a disagreement with your parent organization
A lot of times what will happen is you just branch out into a new sect of christianity
Right, you know
I don't want to like make you go hunting down fundamentalist churches or anything and ask them
But really I think the problem with asking us is that
We don't take any of it seriously and uh, there would be a different answer depending on who you ask
And what they've decided to believe in their own minds
Okay, I suppose it's also furthermore at asks
That or supposes that god is not power all powerful because he cannot forgive unconditionally
Whereas as people people can so if someone gets
Like hits my dog
And gets away with it, you know
Driving um, I could come to forgive that person without them ever needing to ask for it. And so
This then supposes that um, he can I can do more than god, right? Yeah. Yeah
That's a spot-on statement. Yeah, there's a lot of ways you can use that argument
I mean whenever you're trying to use the argument from evil
They'll always come back with trying all these excuses for why god can't fix the world
And you go, but I would fix the world if I had god's powers
Therefore, what am I nicer than god? Can is that even possible? But uh, right?
Thank you. I've seen you in action. I can't argue with that
But yeah, you're absolutely right if there's things that we can actually do that god cannot do
That does mean we have powers that god does not have and that refutes the whole concept of omnipotence
Thanks guys for your input. All right. Thanks for calling
Bye
Uh, we've got uh, jennifer from here in austin
Hello, hi jennifer
Hi, um, I have two questions and the first one is
It seems like a lot of times um, when you talk to atheists, they start from the
premise that personal experience
Has been established to be unreliable
And um, but we rely on personal experience all the time like in courtroom
You know the value of eyewitness testimony. That's like
That's the um
Fundamental evidence
You know the jury can take it and believe it or not believe it
But the value of personal testimony not hearsay what someone else has told you has been their experience
But what you experienced yourself the value of putting it forward is still considered
primary
And it's a foundational principle of the us
And um, and we also rely on personal experience all the time like if you're going to do something like climb the Himalayas
And you've never done it you read about
People who have done that before and they say, you know that whatever else to I experienced this
You don't know but you
you um
You believe them you you take precautions or you prepare based on what they experience
And so it seems like the value of personal experience
is
Has not been proven to be unreliable and then the second question is that um
It it seems like something can be understood or
It can't it's understandable or it's not
And like catholics start from the premise that the nature of reality
Um can't be understood. It's not understandable
And atheists seem to start from the premise that
uh
You know reality of the process that that could be understood
But if it could why why don't we understand any more than we did like 2000 years ago
We have theory, you know the theory of the big thing, but when you look at um, what complexities theorists say
They say that you there's still a lot of uh
Leaps that have to be made in thinking to make the concept work
You know like it's it's not established. We still don't fully understand it. And so if if the nature of reality is
Understandable, why don't we understand more about it today than we did say 2000 years ago?
Well, let's take that one at a time. I probably should have interrupted you before going on to the second one
Two big questions. Yeah personal experience. Is it reliable?
Well, you have to realize it's not binary
It's not like all personal experience is reliable or no personal experience is reliable
It's not like you're choosing to you know deny all experience or accept all experience. That's not how it works
Uh personal experience has a certain probability of being reliable
Uh, and what you're looking at is when the particular claim the person is making is going to have
An intrinsic prior probability. Uh, so if if they're saying they say, you know aliens abducted them
Uh, or they're saying they you know, they saw a horde of demons
Attack them in their room or something like that
We know from past experience that that usually turns out to be hallucinatory or not true
Uh, and so for a personal experience to to overcome that we need a lot more evidence than that. We need a superbly good
Uh personal experience or we need a lot of it from a lot of different sources a lot of different witnesses
Or we need physical evidence and you're talking about like standards of evidence that professional
Historians would take into account. Oh, absolutely. Yeah, and I this is what I do in the book
It's it's Bayesian reasoning where you have to weigh the different possibilities
So certain kinds of testimonies are unreliable or obviously unreliable because uh, they make improbable claims
And so for those claims to be upheld you need more than just someone claiming it
That's why I mean like what about you know people who wrote
Gospels who said, you know, they rubbed it after
They say Jesus died and they say, you know, they witnessed it
Um, but they don't they were close closer in time
Yeah, none of the gospels were written by anyone who says they saw any of the stuff they wrote down
Uh, in fact, they don't even tell us who they are or how they know anything that they haven't they don't tell us their sources
They don't tell us their methods, uh, which is very weird
I mean 50 years and the big scheme of things is not that much time
And so actually it is
I made this point just want to say i'm so excited to get this call with richard
Well, let's let's talk about roswell new mexico
In 1947, uh, this air force officer found some sticks and tinfoil in the desert
And he claimed it was debris from a flying saucer
Within just 30 in 30 to 40 years and this is in the 20th century with universal literacy
Newspapers photographs the whole deal within just 30 to 40 years an entire legend had built up about the government discovering an entire intact
Flying saucer and that they recovered alien bodies from and performed autopsies on
That's just 30 to 40 years. Uh, so it's the exact same timeline that we're looking at with the gospels legends can spring out really fast
It's starting from a
Not an eyewitness account
Well, yeah, it is actually
He said he found something you're well from what you said he said he found something
Yeah, it was it was published in the newspaper
Yeah, I was in the newspaper with photographs of the debris that he found uh from 1947
But you didn't say he said he saw the ship found
No, no, that that was what people were telling just 30 to 40 years later
And so when we look at the gospels, we don't know where these people are getting their stories
They they're not eyewitnesses themselves. They don't claim to know any eyewitnesses
Uh, they don't even tell us what their sources are. Why are they why are they written?
As a description, I mean it's written out that eyewitness description. It actually isn't uh, it's like Jesus
It's like, you know, Jesus was on the cross and he asked for
Oh, no, no. Oh, you know what? I highly recommend then, uh, you can do some more research on this
For example, the crucifixion account is almost entirely based on clips from the Psalms. They just took passages
If I had time I could dig out an example from my but it's but the work but the language
No, actually the language is
Yeah, the language is biblical. We can look at eyewitness accounts
We have for example lucian of samasata wrote an account of him encountering a new religion in what's now turkey
It's called alexander the quack prophet. You could probably find examples of it online
But uh, that's what an eyewitness account looks like. Uh, the gospels aren't written like that at all
If you look at uh, cesar's civil war, he writes it in third person
But it's still an eyewitness account and again, it's written very differently than what we see in the gospels
The gospels look a lot like mythology
We have a lot of examples of other religions that were coming up with documents that are written in the same kind of voice
And there were in fact about 40 different gospels
And then we we we know about 10 to 12 of them that we have mostly intact or largely intact
And we know a lot of those have to be false and yet they they read a lot like the gospels we have in the new testament
So it was actually very common to fabricate narratives in the form that we see in the gospels in the new testament
But but I I can know but I know from personally reading the gospels
That it sounds like a first person
Account, oh, well see I think what you need to do is is you have to understand these books were written 2000 years ago
In a different language in a different culture. So if you want to understand that it was closer in time
It was written closer. No, but my point is you have to you have to look at what literature was like back then
So you can't judge it based on the standards of what you're used to reading today because what people write today is very different
The styles they write the the way they choose words the way they construct stories is entirely different today than it was 2000 years ago
Yeah, and to circle back to your original question about how reliable personal experience is
I mean, you know, you're you're telling us that you have this personal experience of having read the gospels and just knowing
By reading it like knowing and and inherently understanding what's going on in there even though there is this whole system of
uh, historians having read it and compared notes and
Comparing it to things that they already know whether something is written
As a first person to count it on
I can judge that for myself. I'll give read it and I could be about I could be like this sounds like a third person
I'll give you an example like an omniscient point of view
This sounds like a first person like I can make that judgment myself
But they aren't actually they aren't even written in first person by a standard literary theory
Um, uh, so here's the gospel of mark chapter 15 verse 24. It reads literally they part his garments among them casting lots upon them
Now here's psalm 22 verse 18. They part my garments among them and cast lots upon them
It's almost identical word for word supposed to be like prophecy. Yeah, but so if it was true
Mark is writing in the third person the psalms are writing in the first person
The psalms were written hundreds of years before and then and then it was experience
No, but there's a thing you could say that but they're they're using the exact word for word exact same statement
Uh, and it doesn't even say it's a fulfill prophecy to get back to the point more more
I was really asking a question, but it's it's third person. It's not first person
It's just they part his garments among them. I've watched a couple of your shows
and um, you know people will call and they'll be like, you know, my mom said she saw
The demon in a room or you know, my friend and then a lot of times the first responses
Well, you know, I would say I wasn't there. I don't have I don't have your experience and I can't tell whether that really happened or not
But but you said that this sort of thing goes on in courts and I can guarantee you
That if somebody came in as a witness in court and said, uh, and then I saw a demon rise up out of the earth
It's really unlikely that the judge or jury would take that into account as as a serious explanation for let's say a murder trial
Or or embezzlement where where somebody said suddenly this demon made all this money disappear for them the company's account
But the value the value of the experience for it to be judged by the fact finder whether it's a jury or a judge
The value of the person saying it and then the listener interpreting it
is primary
All right, okay
Chris, uh, this really sounds like he's got something
Yeah, I want to jump in here. Um
Yeah, I mean you talk about eyewitness testimony being so reliable and it's the ultimate
You know piece of evidence in in our our you know court system and that's just not true at all
Um, if you look at the reliability of eyewitness testimony, it is terrible
You put a room full of people
And you show them something and then ask them what they saw you'll get many different answers and people have been convicted
Wrongly based on people who were sure this is who they saw and they were wrong
And it's very very easy to fool yourself to think you saw something if you if you don't remember clearly your brain will just make
Up stuff to fill in the gaps and we've demonstrated that
Thousands of times in different studies. So eyewitness testimony is actually really really unreliable one of the leading researchers
It's true. It's true what it's true what you're saying about you know, you put people in a room
and then it's like with the guy wearing a tie and three of them say yes and two of them say no and
But we still hold that as meaningful. Well, they shouldn't Chris was just saying we we don't I mean
We don't and that would be a bad thing for everybody. So we shouldn't do that
Yeah, you have to you have to wait. I mean, I'm an attorney and you know, I I've taken a really um
Unconventional route. I took my studies extremely seriously
um looking at um, you know, the the purpose
of the system and
And the procedure that we've established people from all different backgrounds coming together and deciding like this is
This is what we're gonna do. This this has meaning and this is useful. Um, despite the errors
This is the most fair way we can assess what's going on and we still have
Witnesses we still take in witness accounts and we still say yeah, but you know, witnesses can be replaced
You know witnesses can lie witnesses can be deceived witnesses can misreport badly
I mean, you must know this if you've been in courts
So certainly if you're a defense attorney, you must have actually used these arguments that I'm using myself in defense of your client
Well
The thing is is that sometimes that they they are telling the truth
Sometimes yeah
It's probability. Yeah
Primary is for the
Witness to say what they're thinking for the fact that finder to be like well, I think your mom was lying
Yeah, but it certainly depends it certainly depends
At least as much on the nature of the testimony as the content of the testimony itself. I mean if you
You know if today you were to have somebody walk into court and say I saw this guy die and three days later
Rise from the dead or I saw a ghost show up in my house
That would be one of the least likely things that you were going to accept in court as relevant to the case
I would they depend on what the case was about whether it would be really I don't think so actually
Wow, actually by supreme court by supreme court ruling spectral evidence is not allowed. Yeah by by 16th century
We don't know what's trying to be proved
I mean it would depend on what kind of case it was. I mean you're talking about
A dread case where someone killed killed someone else
And you know, they're saying what they experienced and that's why they killed that person
And it's like was it intentional? Was it not intentional? Are they lying depends on what's being proved?
So I mean to my second question as far as you know, whether whether things
Um, you know everything. Oh, they understand or it's not
I can answer that one because this is right in my field, but you please please go ahead
Do we understand more than we did 2000 years ago? My phd's primary subject is history of science. So
And I studied ancient science. Uh, so I actually a lot of what I've done is certainly in my dissertation
Was compare what we knew scientifically about the world in the first and second century ad with what we know about at the world today
Uh, and it's mind bogglingly vastly more understanding today than we had. I mean just it's it's just bewildering how much
More understanding we have today so much so that what we've thoroughly established over the last since the scientific revolution in the 17th
century
In just the last few hundred years
We've thoroughly established that the scientific method is so incredibly effective that it can take our understanding of the world
And multiply it millions and millions of times. I mean which it has done so since 1600
Uh, so we know what does anything we know is that science works exceedingly well
And the only thing that actually interferes with our our advance that slows it down, perhaps
Is technological access to the data a lot of a lot of the things like the questions
We can't answer today
We only can't answer because we just don't have the particular machine that can see the thing that we want to look at
Uh, or you know in particular ways for example brain science
To really understand how the brain works
We would need a functional brain scanner that can scan the brain as it works
Down to the resolution of individual synaptic connections. We just haven't developed that technology yet
But within 50 or 60 years we may have scanners that can do that and that's just a technological
The thing that i'm wondering about so like with that example you it simply you just gave
We know that it is understandable
But we're not there yet. Sure there
No, what richard is saying though is that there are always more. No, excuse me. I'm gonna put you on hold. I need to talk
What richard is saying is that uh
There we never have all the answers and it certainly isn't going to ever be the case that we're done looking for stuff
Because as humans we like collecting more and more knowledge over time
But to say that because we haven't obtained an infinite amount of knowledge
We therefore have zero knowledge or exactly the same knowledge as we did
A hundred years ago when we lived maybe half as long on average
when uh
When we didn't have immediate access to uh everything that was going on around the globe through like electronic communications
um
When we didn't have as thorough a knowledge of of uh, uh, you know human reproduction for example, uh, or
People still believed that the earth goes that the sun goes around the earth, right?
To say that we've accumulated all this knowledge and yet we know exactly the same amount as we did 2 000 years ago is just untrue
But when it comes to god
Whether
Well, that's actually a really good point with with with all the knowledge that we've been able to gain over all this time
We've learned nothing new about god
With the brain science example, we are aware that it's understandable, but we don't have to talk to technology yet
But when it comes to the existence of god
We are no further along
Yeah, to me that's an indication that there's no
Yeah, to me looking with a fine-tooth comb and right
We've been trying as hard as we can but to me that's an indication
It may it may be that god exists, but it's not understandable like you can you can
Or let me let me add to this if it's not understandable then catholicism is false, right? No, that's the primary premise
You can't but if you can't understand if you can't understand god then you can't actually have any true beliefs about god
That's that's that doesn't make sense. Well, I mean, you know
If you have a true belief about god, you're claiming to understand something about god and therefore god is not
You don't have to understand something for it to exist
For you to understand what it is. That's true. Yeah
If you're gonna make any statement that you it has any meaning that's true about god
That means you understand something about god and therefore god is understandable
Well, then we go back to personal experience. Really good question. We don't think it's reliable non-secretary there
Hey, uh, jennifer, we're running out of time. Yeah, we're running out of time
But this is I mean, it's a great conversation and I'd welcome you to call back anytime. Okay. Thank you. Thanks. Bye
Uh
And uh, I think we've got more for chris to talk about alan in fort morgan, colorado
Alan hi, how's it going? Hi, how are you? We got about uh, three minutes of real show time to fill. So, uh, yeah, make it quick
All right, uh, well, I don't know if this has been touched on because I kind of died me to show a little bit late
But uh, me I'm an atheist. I've been an atheist for about five six years now. Um, and felt very relieved. Um
to get away from religion things like that, but
um
The thing is, you know, when you guys are talking about
Things like, you know, finding, you know happiness in life as an atheist
One of the things that uh, really brings me a lot of joy is my family. However, uh, they're very religious and
They uh, they don't quite like my position as an atheist. So how do you reconcile of being?
um
You know an atheist who sees a lot of joy in life
If the thing of that gives you joy, such as family is
Contrary to your position
Chris, I'm pretty sure you own this topic. Yeah
Sure, Richard doesn't want to take it. No, no, this is chris is for sure
I mean, that's that can be really tough. Uh, if you have a family that's not really accepting of uh, of your way of life
I mean, it's it's like, uh, you know, if you're gay and your family doesn't accept that it's it's a very similar kind of thing
um
I mean just you can create your own community. You can create your own
Family in a way. Um, and you can still be a part of a family even if you disagree on a particular topic
I mean, I don't think anyone agrees 100 percent with uh, with everything everyone in their family
Um, thanks. So, uh, it's not like an all or nothing thing. I think you can still have a relationship
Uh, with your family. I know many people who have relationships with very
religious family members and
They find ways of making it work either just not talking about it or or sometimes
Hashing out and talking about it coming to an understanding, you know to agree to disagree kind of thing
So it is possible. I think trying to find common ground on values
I think is one of the most important things if you can just
Find out where you agree on just basic values human values how humans should be treated what you should think about
Um the way the world the way that you should treat people in the world and so on
When if you can find enough common ground there, you can you can build and maintain a relationship even if you have other different beliefs
Um, I think that's where the problem can arise if you have fundamentally different values
Like you were saying if if you're gay and your parents think you're going to hell because you're gay
Well, now you've got a fundamental conflict and values
And I think there's probably unless they're going to change on that. There's really nothing that you can do
Um, and I mean, that's that's that's a difficult thing. And then if you're in that situation
The next best thing is like he said is to to try and create your own family
Like you can get a you know a group of friends together
Develop friendships in your life that are like family
And just make your own family and uh as a joss as the I guess the resident joss weedon fan. I don't know. Oh, excuse me
Oh, so we have two here at least
Oh, that's the theme just about out of time. That's the theme of joss weedons many of joss weedons shows and things
Yeah, watch more joss weedons
Take one thing away from the show today
I want to thank richard carrier and christ johnson for being incredible guests today. Thanks for being here
And uh our fantastic audience
See you all at el royal and uh tune in next week
