So, hello to everyone, to everyone here and to everyone online, and yeah, well, we are
very happy to have you here for our last session of this Semiosalon series.
And today we have two speakers, and we are very, very happy to have one of them here
with us.
We have Professor Patrick Serio and Professor Angael Tuttein, who will be joining online
from Bern, Bern, from Switzerland, and first we will have Professor Serio, and just for
a brief introduction, although some of you might already have heard this introduction
from yesterday, Professor Serio, he studied Slavic and languages and general linguistics
at Paris in the Sorbonne, and his PhD thesis was an analysis of the Soviet political discourse
aiming at revealing the predicate of relations embedded in nominalized, nominal phrases,
and after that he spent some years as a researcher in the Sénérès, in the National Center of
Scientific Research in France, and eventually he was appointed as an ordinary professor at
Lausanne in 1987.
His main field of research and of teaching is the history of linguistics in Russia, the
Soviet Union, and Eastern Europe from a comparative and epistemological approach, and he has many
books, he has written many books, perhaps the one you might know is this one, Structure
and the Whole, East, West, and Non-Darwinian Biology in the origins of structural linguistics,
which is really a great book not only because of the depth of the research, but also because
the way it is written, and we had actually, he wrote some review about this book, I think,
and there is a Czech translation, so you have no excuse not to read it, it's wonderful,
and yes, and well, we are really, really very happy to have him here, and today he will
talk about the reception of the Soviet Union, and well, without further ado, I will give
the floor to Professor Sudev.
Okay, so yes, now everyone online can see the screen, right?
I'm sorry, okay, so, dear colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, good evening, today we will
show the presentation, and we will talk about the negative reception of the Soviet language
in English, so dear colleagues, you are exactly like the students, you want to sit as far
as possible from the teacher, can you come nearer please, because I have to shout to
you, you are just like students, exactly the same, I know that, okay, so I think that Soviet
linguistics is interesting, at times it is strange, at times it looks understandable, but I do think
that Soviet linguistics is not Chinese or Japanese, it is a part of the so-called Western
intellectual world, just a little bit different, exactly as orthodoxy and Catholicism are two
different variants of the same religion. So Sudev is of course an all-common hero,
he's supposed to be the father of general linguistics, but I think that the negative
reception is important, it is interesting to understand what the arguments were of this
negative understanding of Saussure, because it gives us the possibility to understand more
exactly what are the original features of Saussure linguistics. So Saussure has been
widely read in the Soviet Union, the first time the Russians heard about the book was by
Kartsevsky, in 1917 Kartsevsky had been a student in Geneva, but he never listened to the course of
general linguistics, he went only one semester to sociocourse on Sanskrit, nonetheless he had
heard about it by Bayi and Seche, and he just made, he did not have the book with himself
in Russia, but he gave a lecture in the Moscow Linguistics Circle, this was the first time
that in Moscow they heard about the existence of Saussure, then there was a first translation
of the course by Rom, but Bayi and Seche did not allow him to publish the book, unfortunately,
and the book was more or less read and understood on the manuscript of this first unpublished
translation, and in 1933 was published the first official translation of the book with
a total different terminology which I will show to you. So I think though most of us Saussure is
the father, is the beginning of everything, but not in Russia, why? First of all there is something
which is rather astonishing for us, it is that Saussure in the 1930s in the Soviet Union was
supposed to be the beginning of the sociological school of linguistics, of the French sociological
school, which is extremely different from what we know about Saussure being in fact the beginning
of structuralism, so Soviet Saussure was a social linguist, not but or even a social
thinker in linguistics, absolutely not about structuralism, the word structure and structuralism
was unknown in the 1930s and 40s in the Soviet Union, but Saussure exactly like Antoine Mayet
was supposed to be a social linguist. Now you see that if we begin to read Saussure in Russian
then we will have to wonder about the word speech and the difference between speech and language
and here we begin to move in a very strange atmosphere where the meanings of the words
are extremely unstable, especially when we translate from French to Russian and from
Russian to French. You see in the first translation of Saussure if we have longage,
long and parole, then longage was rich, long was music and there were three different possibilities
to translate parole, gavelierie, whiskerzevenie and slovo. Slovo is interesting, it's just like the
same word in Czech, but slovo is more or less like logos in Greek which has many many many
meanings at the same time. Now in the official translation of 1933 the terminology is quite
different and what is important is that speech also exists, but now it means parole whereas
longage becomes jizegavaierierierierist, that is language activity.
Unfortunately the scientific terminology in Russian has been extremely unstable because
first of all the tradition of Vilem von Humboldt was overwhelming, it was quite more important
than the tradition of Saussure. So you must understand that those people had two ways of
understanding Saussure away from German romanticism, I mean Humboldt, and of course the way from Marx and
Engels, especially from the German ideology and the origin of the family by Engels.
So we get a very difficult to understand reception of Saussure in those years.
Vino Kur was the linguist who was the most open and
positively receptive of Saussure, but he also had the so-called sociological approach
to Saussureianism and he writes that for Saussure the phoneme is a socially significant sound.
Socially significant signifying sound means that a society understands
the sound from its social attitude. Of course this has absolutely nothing in common with
Troubet's choism definition or the phoneme. You see we are inside a sociological understanding
of phonology. Now what is interesting is that in the Soviet Union in the 1920s, 30s and 40s
there was a general idea that science is divided into two variants, the bourgeois
science and the proletarian science. So let's say in the beginning Saussure was a social linguist
and then he became a bourgeois linguist. What is bourgeois science? I think that the idea of bourgeois
science is really interesting. Bourgeois science splits and proletarian science gathers. So we have
this important overwhelming opposition between what is good, I mean gathering and what is bad,
which is splitting apart. And here there is a huge misunderstanding about structuralism and
holism. Holism was very spread, very important in the 1930s. Holism is the idea of the body.
In the body all the organs are linked together, they work together. The organs of the body cannot
exist by themselves, but the organs of the body are not the same as the elements of a structure.
So just try to keep in mind this possibility of confusion of misunderstanding in the difference
between holism and structuralism. We'll speak about the problem of borders.
You see I try to get a list of all the qualificatives of Saussure in this negative reception.
So Saussure for all those Soviet linguists is the man who splits up, who separates.
You see in Saussure for them we get a strict delimitation, absolute isolation and separation,
delineation that limits impenetrable and mutually irreducible fields. That is pure splitting up,
whereas what is supposed to be good linguistics, on the contrary, is interaction, interpenetration,
multilateral approach of language, global and synthetic studying of language in all its complexity.
Blood boundaries and zones of transition and adequacy to the real nature of language acts.
This word is important. There are two key words in this
Soviet negative reception is nature and essence. It is strange that in this so-called
Marxist materialist linguistics, the key words are nature and essence. Very often you will find
sentences like the real nature of the essence of the phenomenon. The real nature of the essence
of the phenomenon is just precisely a platonic attitude, a platonic worldview,
which means that what we see is not reality. The reality is concealed behind what we see.
So keep in mind nature and essence of the phenomenon.
Now I will show you some examples of what has been said about Saussure, just so that you can
believe me. Scherba was a Leningrad important linguist. In 1929, they received the book in
Leningrad. The reaction was clear. Scherba says Russian linguists knew all this for a long time,
thanks to Baudouin de Courtenet. So the general idea that there was absolutely
nothing new, we the Russians knew all that before. We have nothing to learn from them.
Now Polyvanov writes in 1931, this book received by some as a breakthrough
contains nothing strictly new compared with what was established a long time ago by the
school of Baudouin de Courtenet. Of course we don't have time enough to explain what was
peculiar for Baudouin de Courtenet. Nonetheless, please understand that what is important is nothing new.
And how I think common hero is Nikolai Trugetskoy says, I recently reread Saussure,
because all I found in it was old rubbish. So I do admire Trugetskoy's work. It's
so important. So his consul de phonologie is so beautiful to read. But nonetheless,
he did not understand Saussure. He was totally blind to what was new in Saussure.
Now what was understood as a scandal in Saussure was the problem of antinomies.
Antinomies should not exist, because if you accept antinomies, you are a bad linguist.
Voloshinov, who please is not Bakhtin, Voloshinov wrote in 1929 an important book on Marxism and
the philosophy of language. And in this book he says that Saussure is totally assimilated to
positivism, abstract objectivism, while Karl Fosler is credited with at least a little humanity.
This is individualist subjectivism. This is strange, you see. To think that Saussure is a
positivist is a huge misunderstanding, a huge negative reception. And unfortunately, many people
who read this book, thinking that Bakhtin had wrote it, did not understand how extremely negative
this reading of Saussure was in Voloshinov. We'll have to speak about positivism.
Positivism is the way the neo-grandmerians wrote about the history of languages. Positivism is the
examinations of single facts. For instance, the sound art in Sanskrit through the Indo-European
languages, which has absolutely nothing to do with the idea of a structure.
The second reproach that was done to Saussure was the oblivion of history. Of course,
Saussure was interested in synchrony, not in history. But for all those Soviet linguists,
this was precisely what they did not admit. You cannot reproach a baker to not to send
fish. Of course, Saussure was not interested in history. He was interested in dichrony,
which is not the same. Now, what is really interesting, and I think for all the students
of first year, it should be clear that a synchrony is not a short dichrony. You see,
so, Budagov, for instance, was the main linguist in the Moscow University, was a Romanist.
He thinks that at the end of the 19th century, in the Russian language, there was a 30-year
synchrony. So for him, synchrony is a sort of static dichrony, where more or less the language
does not change. For him, this was a synchrony. There was a static slice of 30 years. This has
nothing to do with the synchrony. You see, this is one of the most interesting schemes
in Saussure. On page 125, you will find this. This is a cross-section. And a cross-section
is used to explain what are the different relationships between the parts of the
cross-section. Please understand that it's not a slice. You can eat a little thin slice of carrot,
but you cannot eat a cross-section of a carrot. It's impossible, because two dimensions
is not the same as three dimensions. And once you mix these two dimensions with three dimensions,
then you cannot understand what synchrony is. But if you think that a language is a thing or
a living organism, then, of course, you will not even imagine that you can work with two dimensions,
because you think that a language is something like a plant, like a living organism,
then you will think that a synchrony is like a slice and not like a cross-section.
So it's obvious that a line has no width and a plane has no thickness. It is a difference of dimensions.
Now, all those subject linguists were humanists in the meaning that, for them,
life is the explanation of everything, exactly like in romanticism.
This is the death of man. You see, Abayev was an admirer of Willem von Humboldt,
like so many Soviet linguists were influenced by Willem von Humboldt. And Abayev
writes from 1934 to 1965. So Syrian structuralism is like modern art, which expels man from the field
of knowledge. So Syrian linguistics studies language in and for itself detach from the
man who speaks it. Humboldt, in a still and bryonic form, by studying the internal form of language,
came close to language as ideology. Now, we have many things to comment. First, you have this
detached, you see, detached or splitting or separating is bad and gathering life is good.
But now you have this very important term, which is ideology.
For most of the left-wing thinkers in Western Europe, ideology means false consciousness.
This is the falsche Bebutschein from Marx in the German Ideology, 1846. But ideology here has a
totally different meaning, which means precisely semantics. Semantics is the whole amount of ideas
that the speakers have in the head. It has nothing to do with false consciousness. And you see, if
you think of, for instance, Marxist-Leonid's Gaia Ideologia, the Marxist-Leonidist ideology,
of course, it is not false consciousness. It is a set of absolutely objective ideas.
So please understand that as long as we read texts from other cultures, we have to think that
the meaning of the words can be totally different, although it is the same word.
So ideology is not false consciousness, but semantics, or the content of what we speak about.
So ideology in Voloshinov, in Abayev and in Marx, are both social and etymological semantics.
It is not ideology in Marx, although all those people pretended to build Marxist linguistics.
Now, for one of my heroes, who is Raman Budakov, an intolerable metaphor is the chess gamer.
And why the chess game is a bad metaphor, he writes,
chess knows no national differences. The rules are the same for all nations. On the contrary,
every natural language is based not only on universal categories, but also on national categories.
Now, if you remember what was at stake in Germany at the very end of the 18th century,
when Herder Fechter Humboldt began to refuse the philosophy of the Enlightenment,
the reproach the Germans made to French was that the Enlightenment was universal,
and it did not take into account the national specificity of all the peoples.
So in the Soviet Union, which for many people was supposed to have an international
ideology, in fact, the main reproach against Saussure was that he did not take into account
the national specificity of each language. So of course, in this approach, you cannot
translate from one language to the other, because then you will lose this national
peculiarity and specificity. Another problem is the mere idea of value.
You see, we all know this scheme from Saussure, and this is the
signifier and the signified. Now, you remember the metaphor of the sheet of paper. If you cut
a sheet of paper, then you can, you will have one side of the paper and the other side will
correspond to the third side. Okay, that's all he says. But there is a possibility to understand
this Saussureian metaphor in the Humboldtian meaning, or more exactly in the Neo-Hamboltian
meaning. You see, the Neo-Hamboltianism was very spread in Germany in the 1930s. It is the idea
that the words of our language are the content of our thoughts. So it is unfortunately possible
to make a Humboldtian reading of Saussure to think that the word we use are the content of our
thought. Now, it is obvious that if you accept this idea, if you think that all the speakers of one
language have the same thought, because they have the same language, then of course you lose the
dimension of discourse and you lose the possibility of democracy, which means that people can think
differently inside the same language. Now, we have to go now to an epic epistemological problem.
What do we know and how do we know? So, the problem is the following. Does the object of
knowledge exist before the act of knowing or not? I don't have the solution, but this is a
problem which has been discussed from ages and ages. How do we know what we know? So, once again,
my Buddha, to say that the sole object of linguistic is language in and for itself is
incomprehensible to a serious scientist. The purpose of language communication between people
is incompatible with this definition. Of course, it was the less sentence of the quote by Saussure.
The object of linguistic is language in and for itself. And this is what was not
acceptable for my Soviet linguists. Now, what is at stake here is the confusing properties of the
model with those of the object. We must not forget that language is a profoundly human phenomenon.
This is why it is dangerous to view unilaterally as a system of pure values or of pure science.
You see, it is very strange that for most of us, especially if you're interested in semiotics,
it is obvious that language is a system of science, but for all of them, a language is not
a system of science because it's not a system of pure values.
The structuralists of Western Europe thought support for the idealistic construction
in the logical positivism of the Viet-Circle. Once again, we come back to positivism.
Positivism is the studying of separated facts, which is not at all the same as the structure
for Saussure. Achimayonavad, European structuralism considers that two-sided science consisting of
content and expression exists immanently as an ideal essence. Given in advance, in relation to
this ideal or immanent sign, what exists in the real world, in particular real sound speech,
is supposed to be no more than a shadow of this idealistically thought outside its realization
or manifestation. So we have seen that the reports to Saussure are splitting apart,
and now we come to idealism. What is idealism? It is the separation between idealism and facts or
reality or real life. What they call the cityanists, which is a calc from the German,
die Wirkliche Wirklichkeit. So for all those soviet languages, language is not a system of
science, and I do advise you to read this book by Lenin, Materialism and Empyrocriticism,
where he explains that bourgeois ideology is based on science, whereas materialist
way of thought does not accept that language is a system of science. And if you are interested
in semiotics, you must read this book because it is extremely important. It is the demolishing
of all possibility of semiotics. So Saussure denies substance, therefore he is an idealist,
and therefore is important here. You see, because for them, the language is a substance,
is an essence. It has a nature, and we must figure out what this nature or essence of substance is,
and of course the structure is not a substance. This is an idea of matching knowledge to the
object to be known. The object is complex, so the description must be complex too.
You know that Saussure leaves apart what is not pertinent. Do you say that in English? I saw
pertinent. So he's interested only in what is pertinent for his own point of view. A point of
view does not mean arbitrariness. A point of view means that you choose only you select the elements
which are useful for what you are looking for, not everything. So I must say that perhaps you
remember that Roman Jacobson, my dear Roman Jacobson, said that I am a linguist and nothing
which is linguistic is alien to me. So Saussure is totally different from that,
only opposite. He leaves apart what is not pertinent for his study.
So one of the sentences of Saussure is precisely that the point of view creates the object.
This is absolutely, fantastically interesting. You must have a point of view because it is
impossible to know everything at the same time. It is impossible to have an overview of the reality.
Perhaps as you are Semioticians, you probably know that the Argentine writer Borges wrote
a very small novel which is called Rigor de la Ciencia, where he explained that an emperor
asked his geographers to draw a very precise map of the surroundings of the palace. So
they took a very thin pencil and they drew every stone of every path, every
tree of every forest. But the emperor was not satisfied. He wanted the totally precise map.
So what did the geographers do? They decided to draw a map on the scale one to one,
which means that one centimeter on the ground is one centimeter on the map. So the problem is
that where is this map? It is here. This is precisely the one to one map. It does exist.
So it is not useful. It is totally useless to draw a one to one map because it already exists.
So a map cannot say everything. It is impossible to reproduce reality. A map is less like language.
You have to choose what you are going to speak about. But of course, if you imagine
that the point of view is arbitrariness, then of course Tussier is an idealist, so an enemy.
This sentence only makes sense if it deals with the object of knowledge and not the real object.
This is the main core of epistemology. The real object exists without us. The sounds in phonetics
do not need the phoneticians to exist. But the phonemics in phonology cannot exist without
the phonologists. For instance, for one and the same language, you can have different phonemic
systems. There was a phonemic school in Leningrad and another one in Moscow. There are totally
different ways of explaining the same Russian language. So you see this is important. A phoneme
is not a thing. A phoneme does not exist. The sounds are like mushrooms in the forest. The mushrooms
exist even if you don't pick them up. But phonemes exist only in our head. And this is what was not
understandable if you think that the goal of science is to describe reality.
So we have this failure of knowledge, the overlap of the object of knowledge by the empirical object.
This means that there are people who do not understand the huge difference between a sound
and a phoneme between phonetics and phonology. So to conclude, I will say that you are in front
of the opposition between epistemology and ontology. Ontology is the science of being,
of the real being. Ontology is the core of metaphysics and theology. Epistemology
is the science of knowledge. The science of knowledge is not just opening your eyes and
see or opening your ears and listen to sounds. Epistemology is the way of building a knowledge
of reality. We can speak of Emmanuel Kant, but we don't have time to do that. So I think I'll begin
and here thank you for your attention. Thank you. Thank you very much for a wonderful,
really wonderful talk and do we have questions from the audience or also from our friends in Zoom?
I will stop, sharing. So I see we have two messages, but okay.
Tufi, ahead. Yes, yes, please.
Can you hear me? Yes.
I have a question on Borges. It was really rather nice that you quoted Borges because
Prieto did so in 1970, something when he produced Berlis dans ses pratiques. So I think that great
minds come together on this subject. I have a question on remark rather on translation of
langues, logages, and paroles. I found exactly the same sort of problem when examining the reviews
of the CLG, the course of in general linguistics, in English. And some people call speech paroles,
but some people call speech loggage, which means that it makes things very difficult.
Have you come across the same sort of thing in this sort of field?
Have you heard me? I'm sorry, I've problem with my ears, but I did not understand what you said.
You are right. This is precisely, I do understand what you speak about. Yes, it is true that the
problem is that long and longage are two extremely different notions, which thanks to Saussure,
we began to understand them. And it is true that in English language and in German and in
Russian, the possibility of a great confusion. This is right. But there are always possibilities
to invent a new terminology. So it should not be a problem.
But nonetheless, in Russian, the word язык, and at times лечь, and at times слова,
is neither long nor language, but a strange mixture of both long and longage.
And it is a third notion, which is neither long nor longage. Yes, you are right. This is a problem.
Okay, thank you. You're welcome.
Thank you. And we have questions from the audience here, Conor. Please.
Okay, so thank you very much for your talk.
So I appreciated your explanation of the difference between the synchrony and the static state.
And I was just wondering, because the example that you showed us with the cross cut
is actually a picture of a plant cut across. But then you said that we cannot do like
synchronic research about living beings. And if we understand language as a living organism,
we cannot do the real synchronic. I'm not sure if I understood correctly, but my question was,
if really this is so, because actually, even Saussure, he used the example of a plant,
which is a living organism. Well, you have the right, of course, to consider that language is
a living organism. I think that a language is not a living organism. And then what can we do?
The talk is finished. You see, no, it's not the problem that language is or not an organism.
It is the problem that what is the object of knowledge that we build? Of course, languages do
not need linguists to exist. They just exist by themselves. There's no problem. We are totally
useless for languages. But if we want to learn something, to understand something about how
languages work, so I think that the analogy between languages and organism is a bad analogy.
It's not useful to build a theory of linguistics. Nonetheless, if you want languages to be
a living organism, please do. And now we'll have to compare what are your results and what are
minds. That's all. Please do. Now, I don't necessarily want to use this metaphor of languages as a living
organism, but I was just wondering if we admit that language could be understood as living organism,
we can still do some chronic research. I don't see a necessarily contradiction there.
You see, if we decide to study languages as organism, then we cannot make a difference
between synchrony and a short dichrony. It loses this possibility. So we have to abandon
social and we will be quite nearer, let's say, Humboldt or Fosler or people like that. Why not?
They have a certain charm, I like romanticism. Why not? But it's not the same. And from an
epistemological point of view, I think that the idea that the point of view creates the
object is more useful, that you can understand more than if you, of course, you have the right,
but if that, then if you consider the language, it is an organism. And I must say that this is an
all 19th century idea. Sorry. Thank you. I think Schlegel is the name. Maybe the main Schlegel.
But do we have more questions from the audience or from people in Zoom? I see some people there
in Zoom who could say a big deal about the relationships between linguistics and biology
and organisms, but not maybe I have a small question. Could you elaborate a little bit
on this distinction between history and diachrony? Because also in the course in
Saussure, there is some talk about history as something that depends on human actions.
And then because I think this idea of history was also used by Prieto, for instance, and by other
linguists. But yeah, how do you see this difference between history and diachrony?
And how would it relate to arbitrariness? To arbitrariness, if it relates.
So many people have spoken about arbitrariness, that I shouldn't there begin this discussion.
Arbitrariness has been understood as a sort of fantasy, as a sort of subjectiveness. But arbitrariness
is just the idea that there is no motivated relationship between the signifier and the
signifier. That's all. Unfortunately, our hero Saussure makes a mistake when he explains that
ox and buff are different signified. They are not signified. They are objects of reality. And
this has been the source of many, many misunderstandings. Now, history and diachrony.
Diachrony is a point of view, whereas history exists without us. Diachrony belongs inside
a specific science. Diachrony does not exist. Asynchrony does not exist either.
They are points of view. But history does exist. This is absolutely, this is real life.
And once again, the object of discussion is between epistemology and ontology.
So let's forget history. History was the main objective of the neogrammarians.
They were inside history. And the whole 19th century was fascinated by history.
And it was all from Heber, Fischer, Schlagen, Schleicher, all, even Antoine Mayer, all were
fascinated by history. And they thought that real science must, cannot not be historical.
Now, what was revolutionary in Saussure was not at all that he dealt with static
situation. Not at all. Synchrony is not static. Synchrony is a point of view. When you select
especially what you want to speak about and nothing else.
Thank you. We have a raised hand from Professor Joseph, please.
Hello, Patrick. Thank you very much. It was a great paper. And I was particularly happy.
I suppose relieved. I don't know. I was, I was anyway intrigued to hear you refer to,
you said, my dear Roman Jacobson. And I've never been sure, especially since reading
your book Structure in the Hole, which I made, I was very lucky to be able to refer to in my
talk to, to this group at the start of the semester. But you are ambivalent about your
dear Roman Jacobson, aren't you? I mean, I'm ambivalent about my dear wife and children.
So it would be a normal thing to expect. But I just like to hear you say a little bit about
your view of Roman Jacobson. Can you review it? Yes. I didn't hear.
He said he was impressed about you hearing, referred to Roman Jacobson as your dear Roman,
Roman Jacobson. So he would like you to expand on why is it dear for you, Roman Jacobson?
I like, you know, Roman Jacobson, because Roman Jacobson was perhaps the only linguist with a sense
of humor. Once a journalist asked him, Mr. Jacobson, how many wives did you have? And he said,
do you mean in dichrony or in synchrony? So that's why I like Roman Jacobson. Now, he had
a whole fantasy. And of course, I know that he was a slavophile, that he did not understand
Saussure, that he was the invented Russian culture, which did not exist. But nonetheless,
we are all thankful to Jacobson for his, for bringing fantasy into linguistics.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. And Professor Kallavi, hello, hello.
Do you, do you, do you have something to add? Because we were wondering.
So that's so nice and so good to see all you have there. Again, arbitrariness, you said you don't
want to tell about that. But you may know that Israel has formulated the definition of semiotics as
studying everything. What is arbitrary? More or less like this, yeah? Israel can confirm
all aspects of arbitrariness. That is the, the objects for semiotics. But here, the same
thing, how arbitrariness and motivativeness are related. I still think that when Saussure
first says that principle number one is that language is arbitrary. So, and only, and further
on, he just somehow becomes sort of not so clear anymore when he's starting to speak about
motivativeness. Motivatedness should be understood as just some kind of restrictions or, or constraints
to arbitrariness, but not really opposite to it. I think that is very, very important
difference now, whether arbitrariness and motivativeness are opposites or this
motivativeness is simply restriction for arbitrariness. So, yeah, if you comment on that,
would be nice. Otherwise, we just will have this discussion later.
So he was talking about the distinction between motivativeness and arbitrariness,
and what saying motivativeness as a sort of restriction of arbitrariness, and whether you
could comment on that. Can I be, I don't agree with you. I think that arbitrariness and motivation
are extremely different. Motivation, it means that you have an intrinsic link between a
signifier and signified, and motivation does exist in some parts. For instance,
not to paint, paint a painting, it's obvious that those three words have a
relationship of motivation, but painting has absolutely no motivation with the act of painting.
So arbitrariness means the total absence of a possible link. So no, I don't think that motivation
is a part of arbitrariness, not at all. Nonetheless, nice to see you.
Thank you so much. Thank you. Thanks to all of you. And now I think, yes, we can thank you.
So now we will stop recording.
