On the one hand, I see that James is afraid
of the weaponization of Christianity
in his attack on Christian nationalism.
But on the other hand, I see him doing the exact same thing
in trying to get the Christians on board with him
so that he can create his democratic secular enlightenment
utopia, which doesn't exist, which is not possible.
And so that's why I do believe that the only solution
to our predicament is a true return to Christianity,
like not a pretend one, and that's why most of my interactions
are not political at all.
Jonathan Pajot, you have risen in prominence
over the last couple of years, in part, I think,
because of your work with J.B.P.
What is the message that you're sharing with people
that is getting through, that's cutting through,
that's connecting briefly?
So what are you saying that's getting through?
Well, I think that we're in a situation where people
are finding that the promises of the enlightenment
or the promises of the scientific revolution
are, although they have brought some great success in terms
of material wealth and in terms of comfort,
all of this is actually quite wonderful,
that there seems to be something missing, which
is a connection to meaning, to purpose.
And we also struggle to understand how and why it is
that we exist together.
And so it seems like it's an interesting time
to be able to speak into this and to help people
re-understand our religious stories, the mythologies,
the images, the icons, the structures of meaning
that informed our ancestors for thousands of years
and how they can actually help us, first of all,
understand why it is we need that,
why it is we need purpose and meaning and cohesion,
and how it is that these stories, and also especially
the participation that comes from them,
can help us reconnect and find meaning again.
Brilliant. There's a huge amount in there.
Now, just for our viewers and listeners,
your background is as an icon maker.
What's the verb? How do you describe yourself?
Yeah, I mean, I guess you could say, I mean, icon carver,
icon maker, but it's really important to understand
the icon making as an application of a worldview
that I embraced a very long time ago.
And so it, I mean, I'm happy to take that title,
but it isn't so much reductive because the, like I said,
in some ways it was discovering a cohesive worldview
and embracing it and participating in it
that led me to want to apply that in my life
at different levels.
And one of them ended up being professionally
as making images for churches.
As I understood the images,
and as I kind of understood this web of meaning
that is there in the Christian tradition,
it was a way to apply it practically,
and not just it'd be like a mental game that I engage with.
Right, but you were an artist before that, right?
Yes, I studied art in school,
and but then I kind of abandoned art
and then, you know, went on a long,
a long arc of studying, of reading,
and ultimately coming back to traditional art.
Okay, gotcha.
Now, Jonathan, about a month ago,
we had James Lindsay on the podcast.
We had a fantastic discussion.
And you had a bit of a disagreement,
which I think is really cuts to some of the core issues
in the public debate at the moment.
So let's get into that.
On Twitter, you wrote,
the future is religious,
and no one can stop that anymore.
The question remaining is what that religiosity
will be turned toward.
Do you want to just unpack that for us
and give a sense of the way in which Lindsay
disagreed with you?
Yeah, I don't even remember exactly
how the argument started.
I mean, he came after me for something I wrote,
but I think he identified me, first of all,
with something that he had in his mind,
which is Christian nationalism,
and kind of identified me with that,
and therefore framed the things I was saying
in that perspective.
But it's related to what I said at the outset,
which is that we're noticing the religious crash
back into our story, you know,
whether it's through woke ideology,
whether it is through worship of the environment,
whether it is its worship of the state,
and whether it's going to be worship of AI.
It doesn't really matter.
There seems to be different ways
in which this is coming back,
or whether it is like your uneducated aunt
that goes to the New Age shop and has crystals
and has all this kind of stuff in their house.
The idea is that people are looking for ways
to make sense of their world, which is beyond reason.
It is beyond reason because it also has to encompass
the manner in which there's coherence,
the manner in which we come together,
the manner in which we align ourselves with our purposes
and the purposes of others in the world,
and that ends up looking like religious participation
or religious affiliation,
because it has to do with celebration.
Like we actually follow that which we celebrate.
We live in that which we celebrate,
and that ends up looking like religion.
It's like, what do you worship basically?
What do you put as the highest?
And what do you celebrate?
And so without traditional religions,
we end up with weird things like Earth Day
and LGBT Month and just this constant desire
to have insert holidays and celebrations
that are re-injecting religiosity into the world.
So my contention is that this is happening to us.
The enlightenment model, the enlightenment idea
that we could all just be rationalistic individuals
like that live next to each other is not working.
That gives the suburbs, it gives the urban sprawl,
it gives the breakdown of the family,
it gives the breakdown of communities,
and it turns us into these little consumers
that live next to each other but don't know each other
and don't interact with each other.
And everybody's feeling like that is not sufficient
because people are depressed, people are miserable,
and they're looking for something more.
Now the question is, what is that going to be?
There's no, like I said,
I don't think there's a way around it.
Is it going to be Islam?
Is it going to be all these weird new kind of
religiosities that we see in globalism?
You know, I do believe that Christianity is our best bet
as Westerners and as, let's say, people who want to
be able to preserve the best of what the enlightenment
has given us, because the enlightenment has provided
powerful things, but it's insufficient.
It's not enough to hold people together.
It tends towards, well, it tends towards
the problems we're seeing now, so.
Okay, so how are we understanding the word the enlightenment?
We're talking about the sort of 17th, 18th century
movement in Europe.
We have in mind figures like Kant, David Hume, Newton.
Do you want to expand on what you have in mind there?
Yeah, and so, I mean, the enlightenment is properly
understood as a continuation of a movement
that started, let's say, in the Renaissance
with the Scientific Revolution.
In some ways, it is the winning of,
like, the notion that human beings are reasonable
and that reason is the way by which we're going to exist
and then applying that thinking, that reason,
and also the methods of scientific exploration
and analysis to the world.
And, you know, so we have a method in order to be able
to predict phenomena, to be able to understand phenomena.
We have a method by which we can analyze things
and that method is very powerful and it yields power.
Like, it's the best way to understand it.
It yields more capacity to control and to manage reality,
manage physical reality, you know, make spaceships,
make all the things that we enjoy, which are quite wonderful.
But there's also a blind spot in that.
There's a blind spot in this enlightenment,
especially as it moves towards secularism
and especially as it moves towards atheism,
because there's a sense in which we start to believe
that this reason and this capacity for reason is ultimate
and that it's sufficient.
And then we apply it, we apply it, we apply it,
but the problem actually happens
when we start to then turn it on ourselves.
When we come to the point where we now have to understand
ourselves as agents, as conscious beings, you know,
then reason starts to become loopy.
It starts to not completely be enough,
especially when understanding how identities function.
Reason does not provide identity.
Reason provides analysis for identities
that are already given, but the identity is seen
to be a given or to come, you know,
to use religious language, they come from heaven.
Like, you knew the identity before
you can apply the methods of science.
And so because of that, it leaves humans
with something missing in their experience,
that they know is real, that they experience all the time,
but that cannot be contained by this process.
Yeah.
So one thing, one descriptor that's used
for the enlightenment is the age of reason.
You know, I really just like this
because I love the medieval figures.
And of course, the medieval figures like Aquinas,
Scotus, Occam, early medieval like Anselm,
I mean, these guys use the reason.
So in what sense is reason really triumphant enlightenment?
I mean, some people say that it's reason
plus the throwing off of authority.
Yeah.
Religious authority.
Alistair McIntyre thinks it's reason
plus throwing off the fixed sense of human nature.
Yeah.
It's religion and pride.
It's the pride, sorry, it's the pride of reason.
It's the best way to understand it.
And so the manner in which the medieval's understood reason
was that it was derivative and manifested
by something transcendent.
Like a mystery, which is beyond understanding,
which reveals itself in reason.
And so there's always an aspect of the real
which it cannot be probed.
And you'll find that in all the medieval,
you know, whether west or east or west,
there's something beyond reason that cannot be probed
and it gives to reason and reason flows out of it.
And what it does is that it means
that reason is not sufficient.
Reason does not contain all things.
And what it also, how can I say this?
It also eliminates the problem of the pride of reason.
And so in the Enlightenment, the idea is like,
we can do this, we are the ones, we have it.
We try to contain reality within reason.
In some ways it's the beginning of a revolutionary trope.
It's the beginning of the revolutionary structure
where the human tries to take from God, right?
The top of the hierarchy tries to say, no, we are the top.
We are the ones who can, with our reason
and our mind can analyze the world.
But as soon as that happens, then things start to devolve
and you find yourself, at the end of that process,
you find yourself in a situation
that is not reasonable at all,
that is actually completely unreasonable,
but not unreasonable in the sense
that God is beyond reason, unreasonable in the sense
that our passions and our desires and our whims
end up ruling in the end.
And so this, in my conflict with Lindsay,
I quoted Goya's famous statement,
here's a print by Goya,
which says, the sleep of reason produces monsters,
or the dream of reason produces monsters, right?
And that is the situation that we find ourselves in,
is that having insisted so much on reason
and having pushed to the margin
the things which are not reasonable,
they at some point, that unreason just crashes back in.
And like you said, in the medieval world,
that unreason or that which exceeds reason
would in some ways have been pushed up
towards the glory of God, right?
Would have been something like the excess of a church
in a village, like the golden,
all of this kind of unreasonable excess
that we experience in reality,
we give it up as glory to God,
but if you don't do that,
then it turns into the hybrid demons
that come in poke you at night,
like all these freaks and intermediary beings
that start to appear in the world
and will try to destroy reason that way.
Interesting, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, it certainly doesn't seem to me
that this sort of standards of racial inquiry
got much better with the Enlightenment.
It doesn't strike me that Hume is any smarter
than Ockham or Aquinas,
but certainly I like your way of describing it
as this elevating reason, the pride of reason.
And I guess I put this actually to Pete Boghossian as well.
Last week, this idea that we need both reason and mystery,
because that's roughly kind of what you're getting at.
And is your criticism, or not even your criticism,
your understanding of Lindsay,
and to some extent, Pete,
is they just want to have reason, is that right?
Well, that's what you see.
And you see that in the Stephen Hicks,
Pete Pinker, Lindsay, all of that crew,
they have this, in my impression, a twisted image,
first of all, of what humans are,
and second of all, of how reality works.
And it can look very convincing at the outset,
because what they're saying is, if we were reasonable,
if we were just reasonable,
then we would have a perfect society, wouldn't we?
Yeah, yeah.
And so it's one of those like,
communism has never been tried problems,
which is that humans are not only reasonable.
Reality cannot be limited to that which is reasonable.
And it just cannot, even like epistemologically,
we cannot access all of reality through reason.
And we're starting to know that even scientifically,
this point is that we cannot quantify all things.
We cannot analyze all of reality.
There always has to be some miracle,
whether the miracle is the Big Bang or whatever,
or something at the outset that is not part of the system,
that is just an inevitable aspect
of how being lays itself out.
And so it becomes difficult because they'll say,
if we were only reasonable and reasonable individuals,
then all things would work, but we are not that.
Human beings are not just that,
they are that to some extent.
And so then again, it has this problem.
It's like, if you have a blind spot,
which is the aspect, unreasonable aspect,
whether you understand it as that which is beyond reason
or that which is below reason,
there's an aspect of reality which cannot be reduced to reason.
If you just keep it on the side as a blind spot,
at some point it comes crashing back in.
And so then you can complain as much as you want
about like crazy leftists or kind of
or intercategories that are smashing into our world
and hybridization and all of this weird stuff
that we're seeing happening,
but that is what's going to happen.
Yeah, and this is what's happened to Dawkins as well.
Of course, he was, I mean,
this sort of rational scientific utopia,
but then what was it, back as 2014,
he lost his Humanist of the Year award
because of something he'd said about men
not being able to become women or something.
Yeah, because he didn't want to play that.
So that's a great example.
Like the great example of what happens
if you don't have the proper mystery at the outset,
at the beginning of your reasonable process,
then you'll have other mysteries that will be inserted,
other dogmas and other aporias and contradictions.
And so someone will say exactly that,
like a man can be a woman straight faced and look at you.
And what they're yearning for,
like what they're desiring for,
it's something like the Trinity, for example,
it's something like there is a mystery
about how unity and multiplicity coexist
and how they infinitely coexist
because we can't completely account
for the man in which one and many function
in our experience of the world.
And so we perceive, we have insight
about an infinite, transcendent way
in which those two are joined together.
And so that's the kind of mystery
that the medieval, for example,
could see as the outlet of reality.
But if you don't have that,
then you'll end up with a man as a woman.
Yeah, so I get unity and multiplicity
when it comes to the Trinity.
How's the man as a woman,
how's the desire for unity and multiplicity
being expressed there?
It's the desire for something to be itself and not itself.
It's the desire for something to be,
how can they say this, to be trans categorical?
Right?
And you can see it, by the way,
you probably know about the trans is sacred
like aspect that has happened over the last few years.
And there was the,
and even when they put on a version of,
what was it?
They put on a play with,
why is it my brain sometimes breaks down?
What's the name of the woman who was a knight
in the 14th century?
Joan of Arc.
Joan of Arc, yeah.
They put on a play of Joan of Arc with Joan of Arc as trans.
And in the beginning of the play,
he, she says,
I am one in many.
I am beyond category.
I am sacred.
I am like God.
I am.
And she literally says I am because she's using
the categories of trans-rational infinite,
but applying it to what is intercategorical.
And so that's the problem that happens.
That's why postmodernism was like an inevitable side effect
of the enlightenment.
And this is obviously something that people like Pinker
and Lindsay and all these guys won't like,
but that he himself said that his project
was the enlightenment.
He believed that his project
was the continuation of the enlightenment
because there's this reaching into the intercategorical.
Do you understand how the intercategorical
is like a trick to make you confuse
that which transcends reason?
Because that's what intercategorical things do,
is that the elude reason.
Okay, so let's just get this clear.
Because through categories,
what I'm hearing is that in the transgender move,
it's this desire to throw off these,
finish this into these rational categories
that have been put on us,
this sort of search for transcendence.
Is that what you're getting at?
It's a desire to use the intercategorical
to destroy the categories.
That's what, first of all, if you want to one simple,
not to destroy, but to undermine the categories.
That is, if you want to understand postmodernism,
you could, that's maybe one definition
of what postmodernism is.
It's the perception that the intercategorical,
the indefinite, you could use the word indefinite,
the indeterminate, you could use that word too,
that all of these categories,
they undermine the hierarchy of reasonable categories.
And so, all the images that you see now,
for example, like even the image of the stranger,
right, the idea of the migrant
as an intercategorical figure,
as a figure that it doesn't have his own identity
based on the place where he is.
He's a kind of exception to the rule.
He's, the migrant is someone that doesn't fit,
that isn't a citizen,
that cannot be accounted for by the system.
Like all of these types,
all of these types of categories
that are used by postmodern thinkers
are there to do that, are there to undermine reason.
Okay, so just to clarify,
because of course, when we're talking about categorizing,
we're going back all the way to Aristotle.
So in what way, because my sense,
I don't know your thought very well,
but my sense is you're gonna have more time
for the ancient Greeks.
So Aristotle was engaged in that practice of categorizing.
So how did the enlightenment go wrong in that sense?
Was it that Aristotle held categorizing
alongside the transcendent?
Is that why it was acceptable?
No, the problem with the enlightenment
is that at least on the face of it,
it wanted to, let's say,
systematize, turn the world into an encyclopedia, right?
You know, like,
that's one of the reasons why the encyclopedia
was such a great part of the enlightenment project.
It's like, we're gonna define everything.
We're gonna measure everything.
We're gonna quantify everything.
And we'll have, we'll basically understand reality.
But it's ignoring an aspect,
which is that there are aspects of reality
which cannot be categorized for different reasons.
And one of that is the intercategorical, the monster.
The monster cannot be categorized.
That is one.
And then the other one is rather the transcategorical,
like, or the supracategorical,
that which gives way for categories,
the infinite being itself,
or the different aspects
that are beyond simple analytical categories.
But what I'm saying is that in removing the religious part,
removing the transcendent aspect, what happened now,
and this is why postmodernism in some ways
is inevitable to the enlightenment,
is that that need for that which is beyond reason
is not going away in people.
It's just part of how humans are,
but they can find it in the monster.
Like, they can find that titillation of the transgressive,
the titillation of that which is beyond categories
in the intercategorical, you know?
And so that's what you find in the, sorry.
So I get that.
I just still, I hear you saying that the Enlightenment
were trying to put everything away in their boxes,
but I'm not an Aristotle expert,
but I mean, he was engaged in that sort of activity
way back then, I say granted,
he had more openness to the transcendent, but...
If there's nothing, no,
but there's nothing wrong with trying to categorize reality.
So as soon as you're getting rid of, yeah, okay.
It's just as you tried, but ultimately.
Now, the problem, again, the issue with the Enlightenment
is not just that, is that the Enlightenment already,
even at the outset, was not completely that project.
There was a dark side to the Enlightenment,
which people call the counter-enlightenment.
And like you said, Kant is part of the Enlightenment.
It's a lair, it's because ask Steven Hicks
if Kant is part of the Enlightenment.
He'll tell you, no, Kant is the counter-enlightenment.
And so it's like this weird idea that the Enlightenment thinkers,
there are aspects to them
that a lot of the modern Enlightenment defenders don't like.
And they put them in what they call the counter-enlightenment,
which is in some ways aspects of what means in
and magic and hermeticism and all of this stuff,
which is like a weird parasite on the Enlightenment
that you can't completely get rid of.
It continues on through characters like Swedenborg
or Jacob Berm or all of these esotericists
in the Western canon that would have,
that are not opposite to the Enlightenment.
They're the same people.
It's like they can't spend a lot of his life
trying to contact the order of the Rosie Cross.
And it's like, so these are the same people.
They're not different types.
So there's this weird parasite in the Enlightenment
of magic and esotericism and Freemasonry, all this stuff.
Yeah, interesting.
Now there's loads we could get into,
but you brought up Pinker and I was just reading
his Enlightenment now and you were at the RC conference
I was at it back in October.
And it does seem like,
I think people are tired of nihilism.
So that's, there's not many that are good.
There's not many that are going for full on nihilism
these days.
You mentioned Islam and woke,
but it seems at least within the RC crowd,
the main worldviews that are emerging are Christianity
and Enlightenment humanism.
And that's why I think your discussion with Lindsay
was so revealing because it,
well, it revealed this crack
and it'll be very interesting to see
where that goes over the next couple of years.
Now that's a speculative question,
but do you have any thoughts on that?
Well, I want to say, first of all,
that I really admire James Lindsay.
Like I wanted to be careful that, you know,
I mean, he went after me quite aggressively,
but I don't feel the same about him.
I think that the work that he's doing is really useful
and that all the effort he's putting
into helping people see the kind of
communistic stuff is amazing.
So I think that's important to reiterate
because I actually don't have a problem with James Lindsay
at all, you know, but what I do have a problem with,
let's say, I agree with him in terms of his attack
on communism and all the stuff,
but I do not believe that we can have
a fully secular society,
that I don't think that that's possible.
And I also, and I really do believe
that the kind of secular humanism
that the Enlightenment proposed ran aground.
It is not sufficient to hold societies together
and not sufficient to hold us together as people.
Now, the danger is we also cannot weaponize religion
or you can try, but if you weaponize religion,
then you turn it into that which it is not.
That is, if you try to make religion into something
that will help you keep your society together,
then it will become a perversion of itself.
And so the worship of God, you could say,
or the acknowledging of the absolutely transcendent
and our submission to it and our participation in it
is a good in itself.
And downstream from that,
you do have all the gifts of civilization that come with it.
And so on the one hand, how can I say this?
On the one hand, I see that James is afraid
of the weaponization of Christianity
in his attack on Christian nationalism.
But on the other hand,
I see him doing the exact same thing
in trying to get the Christians on board with him
so that he can create his democratic,
so secular enlightenment, utopia,
which doesn't exist, which is not possible.
And so that's why I do believe
that the only solution to our predicament
is a true return to Christianity,
like not a pretend one, not a unit.
And that's why most of my interactions
are not political at all.
Then nothing to do with politics,
it's mostly trying to help people reconnect
with the deepest aspects of our tradition,
to give them the right orientation
for the rest of their other participations.
But the truth is, by the way,
if you wanna know like what we've got,
if you're sure the culture isn't over,
we're gonna see a lot more of the conflict.
But in the end, the truth is that the secularist voice
is going to grow weaker and weaker as things come.
And I don't say that,
I'm not saying that in a celebratory tone,
I just don't see any other way for the future.
And the question, again, is gonna be
which one is, which new religious perspective
is going to be dominant?
And there are several possibilities.
One is a weird new globalist religion
that worships AI and the earth
and all this kind of stuff that we're seeing.
The other is Islam, that is definitely
a real possibility.
And the third is, I believe the possibility
of some kind of like Christian reawakening
to the roots of who we are and what that are,
all our ethics and all that we believe in
are writing on this ontology based on love
that Christianity presents.
Like this idea that the world is held together by love,
that this world is, that that is the mode
of existence of reality.
Those are the possibilities.
I don't see, maybe there are others,
but those are the possibilities I see.
Yeah, so let's get clear on what the concern is.
The concern for people like Lindsay
isn't that Christians are going to say vote pro-life
or something like that.
So try and influence politics in that way.
The concern must be that the Christians
are gonna try and get in charge
and inflict their views on the rest of society.
Is that how you understand
the sort of pushback against Christian nationalism?
That's possible that I don't know if that's his complete,
like what the reason for his such a strong reaction.
Now, this is a, when I say that it's a difficult,
it's a difficult situation that we find ourselves in
because if we realize that that which affords
the type of freedom that you love,
that's a, is based in a non-talk,
like a way of being that is Christian
and it's based on a message and a way of seeing the world
that is basically Christian.
But you also don't want, you don't want,
you want Christians to back off,
then you're going to, you're ultimately gonna lose
the freedom that you love.
And so, I understand that it's a difficult situation
because you also, I understand what somebody would not want
Christians to completely impose their worldview on others.
And so, I, to be honest,
I don't completely know what the solution is,
but in the end, that's gonna happen no matter what.
Like, I don't know what to say.
It's like, if you think that whatever happened
to COVID isn't coming back,
I mean, you have to be so naive.
Like what happened to COVID is going to happen again, folks.
What's that gonna be?
I know you can't say it precisely.
I don't know what it's going to be,
but what I mean is that the capacity to impose the world
on us and to impose the way we live and the way we,
and a kind of social credit system
or some kind of something is coming towards us
at full speed.
Now, the question is, what do we have to mitigate that?
And the, I do believe that
when I look at all the solutions in front of me,
I do believe that the foundation of Christian love
is the best solution,
but I don't know how it's gonna play out.
I also don't have that much hope that it's going to,
this is also maybe the reason why
I don't totally understand Lindsay's thing
is that I don't really believe that Christian,
even Christianity, if it returns,
that at least in the short term,
at least for 150 years, 100 years,
is going to have the power to take over society.
It's mostly a way for people to be able to live
proximately in their families, in their communities,
in their parishes, in their more local settings
in order to be able to live the best life possible
and to make the most of things.
That's the way that I see it.
And in some ways, maybe plant a seed for the future,
but the idea of some kind of Christian fascism
in the United States, I don't know.
It's like, I just don't see it.
Maybe I'm wrong, maybe I'm naive.
I just do not see that as a-
So it's a real drarer sort of thing you know about.
Yeah, it's more like-
It definitely is closer to Rod.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's what Rod and I totally agree on this idea,
like that in some ways that his Benedict option,
not the idea of retreating from society,
but rather being deliberate about your community,
about your choices, about what it is that you want to be,
is the way to go.
But I don't see it,
I don't think we're going to save the world.
Yeah, it's funny.
We had Oliver at Donovan on a few weeks ago.
He's arguably the top Christian political thinker
of the last 100 years.
And we put this to him partly, but he was just like,
look, you have to deal with what's realistic.
And a return to Christendom is just not on the cards.
Now I know plenty of people who are pushing for it.
I sort of knew Christendom,
but certainly in his view, it's not realistic.
Now-
But do you know many people that are pushing for it
legitimately or as an aesthetic?
Like I know there's a meme aspect to it,
which is like the idea of pushing the idea
of a Christian world as a driving,
like as something that drives you, right?
As something that kind of gives you hope
and gives you a vision to move towards.
But maybe it's because I'm not in the same circle to you,
but I don't think I've ever met anyone who really thinks
that we're going to have a Christian emperor.
I don't know, like what exactly they can imagine.
Well, there's integralism from the Roman Catholic perspective.
I'm not Roman Catholic.
I don't know well.
Now in the strongest versions of it, as I understand it,
people like me, Protestants, we can survive,
but we're not allowed to share our views in public.
Again, that's in the strongest version.
But that happening in the United States of America
or in Europe, in like England?
Look, this isn't my view at all.
But I-
Exactly, I'm just naive.
Maybe like there's a Christian emperor over the hill.
Like who knows, I just really do not see
that as a possibility at all.
Yeah, I make a habit of speaking to people
with wildly different views from me,
and this is one of the views that comes up.
But basically, what they'll say is that the problems
are that large, that that's sort of solution.
I'm just going to get very dark
before that solution is available.
I'm not defending it.
I'm just saying some people say it.
So, sorry, do you want to say something?
No, I mean, yeah, if they say it's going to get very dark
in the sense that things are going to get
so completely out of control
that people are going to desire a Christian,
like all the, that the nation will yearn
for a kind of Christian culture, then maybe,
but that's not anytime soon.
And if that happens, then that'll happen.
I mean, it's like, if it happens
that people see how dark our kind of nihilistic freedoms
can become and that they turn their heart to the Lord,
like, you know, that they, like Nineveh can turn,
you know, all of people turning towards the better morality,
let's say, then that would,
I don't see why that would be a problem.
Then that would just be that, that would just be what happens.
But the idea of some Christian like King that comes
and just like imposes it on everybody.
That's ridiculous.
I don't see that's the most ridiculous, you know,
well, they don't, it's not a King.
It's sort of a, it's a new elite they have in mind.
Again, it's not my view.
It's not my view.
So McGillchrist, just brief, few final questions.
McGillchrist, we had Ian on a month or two ago.
I'm reading, I'm in the middle of his, the matter of things.
So I read Master and the Mystery years ago.
I'm in the matter of things now.
I'm gonna go as far as say I'm almost a disciple of him
because I'm so obsessed with his thought.
And I think he's, he's, he's on point.
And he just seems to be saying something similar to you
that we need reason and intuition, reason and mystery.
No, I totally agree.
I definitely agree with, with McGillchrist.
I also interviewed him once on my, on my own channel.
I think that we are very similar in terms of our,
our perspective and, you know,
a lot of the cognitive psychologist types,
you know, John Revekey as well and in our,
Bernardo Castro up and there are several right now
that are just showing the inevitability of this question.
Like the, the, that we cannot,
that the idea of that analytic processes
and this kind of, that is not sufficient
to human experience, that there is an entire other aspect,
which is the grasping, which is the intuition,
which is the, the, the seeing of the, the shining meaning
that is beyond the, the multiplicity, this holistic,
let's say vision of, of the world.
This is, you know, not only is it accounted for
in every single religion and tradition
from the beginning of time, but now, like I said,
it's, it seems from the cognitive psychologist
that they're realizing this is inevitable.
You know, and, and I think I'm not, I'm not,
I don't have the courage to get into the matter of things
because even when I contemplate the, the brick,
like even I get, whoo, whoo.
I know, I felt the same way, but it's amazing.
It's, I'm just obsessed.
I've, I've put a copy that I'm giving it to everyone
in my department.
We're going to read and discuss it.
It's, it's, it's really quite something.
I think, so I'm, I'm really on board with, with McGillchrist,
but I do think though that in terms of the analytic tradition,
as you know, there was something of a renaissance
of Christian philosophy of religion in the last 60 years,
Alvin Plankton, Richard Swinburne, Eleanor Stump,
William Lane Creeks, the big popularizer.
I do think though there is, there's a lot to be said
for the work they've done and they can at least present
the Christian faith in a way that connects
with the sort of Lindsay Boghossian outlook.
Now I put it to Pete last week and he was like,
yeah, I just don't think their arguments are good,
but I mean, their arguments are being taken seriously
by really top analytic philosophers.
Once you're, you aren't even theists.
Yeah. Well, maybe I'm not, I'm not a, myself,
I'm not a big fan of that type of, of argumentation,
but it's also because I'm a, you know,
I really come from a more mystical tradition.
Like I, Orthodoxy, I think I have a beauty first approach,
let's say to, to the question and I think that that's why
I'm closer to the cognitive psychologists, let's say,
in terms of the, of a phenomenological point of view,
you know, the idea that there are certain ways
in which reality, you know, lays itself out to us
that have this dance, right?
That have this pattern in it and we can't completely,
we can't ignore it because it, it is the,
it is the structure of our experience.
So I tend to go there more to kind of outlay
the structure of our experience and show how it is captured
in the, in the, let's say the liturgical life of the church
in the, the aiming towards mystery, right?
This idea of that there's something, you know,
there's something hidden behind the veil
that is making everything exist
and you can't completely capture, capture it, right?
You know, it eludes our, our capacity to analyze it.
Anyway, so that's been my approach, but I'm, I mean,
I'm happy that if that type of argumentation
can help some people, you know.
Yeah, yeah, I got that.
I think the final point is,
because we always have this problem with false teachers
and false prophets in my own history is a complicated one.
As a teenager, I was mentored by a guy who claimed
to be a prophet and he turned out to be a,
I think a sociopath.
He was, he was exposed two years ago
when he, he stole a church worth $60 million
and blamed it on the Holy Spirit
and it was in the newspapers and everything.
But so I've seen these guys that appeal to mystery.
And of course, he, he, this guy appeals even now.
He's appealing to the Holy Spirit
as to why he, he necked this church.
And I think one thing that we can do with reason
and one of the reasons I've benefited
from, from being trained in the analytic tradition,
even though I'm very aware of its, its weakness,
the sort of McGillchrist like weaknesses
is that you can, you can spot the BS.
Yeah. Basically.
Well, you, you definitely need to spot the BS.
Like one of the things,
that's one of the reasons for tradition, you know,
tradition is there to help you also,
let's say spot the BS because there's a manner
in which the, the people that say their prophets,
they, they, they can't just fly off the handle.
Like they can't just do whatever they want
because they, they have to be down in a certain way
of being in a certain, in a certain tradition.
And so tradition helps to prevent that kind of,
that kind of stuff.
There's a method of discernment, let's say, you know,
let's say I'm not Catholic,
but in the Catholic church, for example,
they actually have a quite a method of discernment
to be able to know if someone's visions are legitimate.
And I think it's a little, maybe even two, like,
let's say rigorous, but it's, it's pretty rigorous.
You know, if you want to have some kind of recognition
to someone who has visions,
they, they, they'll like send someone to study you for months
and like they'll, they'll ask you all the questions
and they'll try to figure out like, you know,
what intentions you have and what it is
that's motivating you and they can discern the,
they try to discern the spirits, let's say,
but you're right that for sure,
the world of religion has always been a world of bullshit.
Like there's no way around that,
but the question is, this is again,
this is the problem again with the whole thing.
It's like the world of religion has always been
like available to those who want to, to, to trick others
and use bullshit.
But so then what?
So now you just cast it aside,
you just say that because some people use mystery
to trick people, therefore there is no mystery
or because some people are dishonest
in their religious approach
and they use people's desire to follow, for example,
it should deceive them and use that to make,
to make money or to get sexual favors or whatever,
but you're not going to get rid
of people's desire to follow.
And so, so either they follow the stupid idiotic guru
or they follow Taylor Swift
or they follow like whatever nonsense on TikTok.
So, so what are you, what are they going to follow?
And that's, that's again, it's like,
it's one of, that's one of the blind spots again,
is to say, well, if people could just all just be reasonable,
reasonable like me, then, then, then we would be,
they would have no problems,
but that's just not how it is.
Yeah, it's throwing the baby out with the bath water.
Yes, you have, I mean, it's a,
you have holy oils coming from saints
that are recognized as being virtuous
and true to, to, to, to the transcendent.
And then, you know, if people take them
and they sometimes use them in ways
or maybe a little superstitious, that's possible.
You have that, or you have like the new age shop
and people go and get crystals
and we don't know what it's related to.
Like it has no connection
to the rest of our engagement with reality.
And I know that that might sound like I'm being cynical,
but I'm not being cynical.
I'm actually seeing that people need
these markers of participation.
They just need them.
Yeah, and I believe you're Orthodox,
so you have that sense of tradition.
I think the problem is in a lot of the non-dom Protestant
churches, they just don't have a sense of tradition.
They've got the apostles creed and whatever,
but after that it's, it's just the Bible
and there is no sort of inherited wisdom.
Jonathan Paziu, thank you so much.
That was a very rich and very discussion.
Thank you very much for joining us.
Well, I hope it was, I hope it was useful.
Brilliant, man.
Brilliant, and yeah, to our subscribers
or to our viewers and listeners,
do subscribe, we'll be back in two weeks time,
but for now, take care.
