Hello and welcome, this is Jason Kendall to one of my introductory astronomy lectures
and this time we're talking again about the nature of light.
Light is that thing that allows us to see things from here to there, there to here.
We don't emit light out of our eyes unlike certain kind of superheroes who beams of
light come out of their eyes.
No, light, it comes to us from sources.
Those sources might be hot objects, they're so hot that they glow, or they're so hot
that they atoms in them emit light as they jump between orbits in their atomic shells.
There's lots of ways for light to be emitted, but let's just see what light is as a thing.
And as we've always seen from like the album cover of Pink Floyd, I look like we're looking
out here, when light passes into a from one medium to another, it changes direction and
depending on the medium, it has a frequency dependence for the speed of light inside that
new medium.
But the speed of light that we're going to care about comes up really shortly.
In any event, what is light?
Well, light is electromagnetic radiation, and electromagnetic radiation is a way of
saying that energy is being transported through space without there being a physical connection
between the two things.
There's no actual physical link.
So electromagnetic radiation is a transfer of energy.
Examples where the other two examples where energy gets transferred are conduction, where
you heat something up and the vibrations of the molecules and atoms inside of that object
that you're heating up, they vibrate against each other and eventually all the atoms move
very fast.
And if you happen to be heating up a skillet or a pan on sort of an open fire or a heating
element, then eventually the handle gets hot too.
So that's called conduction.
Convection is the vibration and the collisions of atoms inside a solid object or any object
where the atoms and molecules inside it are close enough together that their vibrations
can impact each other.
So that's physical contact.
Another way that physical contact can occur is through conduction.
Convection is where you take a hot body of some sort, a hot bubble of gas or liquid or
what have you, or even a hot solid, and you move it from here to there by some physical
process.
The heat then is transferred.
The energy is transferred because now you've got something with a greater amount of energy
and you take it from here and you put it there, presumably to a place of lower energy or lower
heat.
Or you could place it to a place where higher energy, but then it would gain more energy.
So that's not really the flow that we think of in terms of convection.
So a good example is a boiling pot.
You heat the pot, the bottom of the pot gets hot, makes a bubble of hot water, that water
then rises in the pot, releases it as steam or heat into the surrounding app, to the kitchen,
and then that cooler liquid then sinks back down.
It makes a boiling pot.
So there's actually a flow of water, a flow of water inside the pot as it goes.
So that's convection.
It also happens with air, that's how we get storms because there's convective cells in
storms and so we've seen that happen all over the earth with the creation of hurricanes
and so forth.
But with electromagnetic radiation, radiative transfer of energy does not require the physical
contact.
Convection means you transfer objects that are physically moving through each other.
This bubble that's hot moves through a region until it gets to a region where it's cool.
Conduction is where electrons bounce against other electrons right next to each other.
But if it's radiative transfer, electrons and protons don't go on and touch you and
move along.
You know it's light.
Light actually transfers its energy from here to there.
So there is no physical contact that the photon does.
It's just a thing that it transmits energy.
And so light is something, but let's get to it in just a little bit.
That's a very complex question.
But light's everywhere.
The reason you could see me now is because light's bouncing off of me, getting recorded
by the camera.
The camera then holds it as an electromagnetic impulse and then I transfer it to the computer.
After I transfer the computer, I play around with it on the computer, manipulating the
electric and magnetic fields on the computer.
And then I upload it using electromagnetic fields to YouTube.
And after I transfer it to YouTube, you then turn on your computer using more electromagnetic
energy.
That creates light that comes out of the screen, which you then see.
Interesting.
But what is this light thing?
This thing that is transmitting energy from me through the magic of YouTube to you.
Anyway, there are characteristics to light that we should discuss before we say what
light is because we can't discuss what it is without discussing its characteristics.
And one of them is this wave motion.
So light has a wave property, meaning that there's wavelength to light.
And light's wavelength is a very important thing.
So what do you mean by wavelength?
If we take some sort of medium, and we have a regular disturbance in it, we get waves
that go up and down, like water waves.
Water waves are a perfect example of wave activity.
When water waves, we see the distance between the crests and water waves and those distances
are the wavelength.
So the wavelength is the distance between crests or troughs in a wave as it traverses.
And so it's a cyclic pattern.
It's just not one wave.
There's many waves in a train of waves.
And the train of waves has a speed with which they move through the medium, say the water
waves move at whatever speed they do through water.
And that speed is important because the speed of the wave is equal to the frequency or how
many waves go by you per second times the wavelength of it.
So if you have a high frequency, then if you have wavelengths of the same type, same length,
and one of them is high frequency, then of course the waves are moving faster by you
if the same frequency is occurring.
But one of the wavelengths is much shorter than the other.
Then the smaller wavelength at the same frequency has a much slower wave speed.
Now we're going to see something interesting about the nature.
We call the period of the wave is what the time is between individual cycles.
So in terms of the speed of light, the speed of light is a constant in vacuum.
It only has one speed.
There is no other speed to light.
It either is not existing, meaning there is no light, or it's going this speed, which
is very interesting.
There's no acceleration or deceleration to light.
Light just simply goes at this speed, the speed of light, which is just shy of 300,000
kilometers per second, or 186,000 miles per second.
But specifically, it's 299,792.458 kilometers per second, which is a very fast speed.
That means it gets to the moon and back in two seconds.
That's why those pings in the Apollo missions, where they have that little ping sound, because
it's rude to talk over people and you actually want to know, so you send the ping and say,
I'm done with transmission, because it takes a second for the light transmission to get
from the earth to the moon.
And that's why they had the ping sound at the end of the Apollo mission transmissions
when they were talking back and forth between the moon and Houston.
So what does that mean?
So if you have the speed of light being a constant, then the product of the frequency
times the wavelength gives you the speed.
All right.
So if the speed's always the same, then if you have a long wavelength, you have a short
frequency.
And if you have a short wavelength, you have a high frequency.
And so they're inversely related.
One of them, because the speed of light is a constant.
So once again, if you have a very small wavelength, lambda, which is typically what we use for
wavelength, then you must have a very, very, very high frequency in order to maintain that
speed.
So if you have a very low frequency, then you must have a very long wavelength.
And those are radio waves.
The other one are gamma rays.
So light goes in all sorts of flavors.
But it all travels at exactly the same speed.
All right.
So how do we know what the speed of light is?
Well, the speed of light, as we discussed in a previous lecture, was first investigated
or at least investigated in many ways.
But Oli Romer looked about it by looking at the timing, the timing, the transits of Iowa
across Jupiter over a long period of time, over many months, and actually noticing that
the times that it was expected to be were wrong.
But another more direct way to do it is with Fissot, who actually used mirrors on tops
of mountains, and actually bounced light all the way across and through a rotating toothed
wheel.
And the toothed wheel spun and spun and spun.
And as the light passed through the wheel and bounced off the mirror and came back, it
had to do the, had to make that trip while the wheel was rotating.
And the light had to come back through the same tooth it left, or else it would be blurred.
So Fissot made it a pulsing beam, and that pulsed beam had to have the same speed as
the light going through it, or else it would get blocked.
And so you either get blocked light, or you would let it through, and how you determined
the speed of light was how fast was the gear, how fast was the rotary wheel turning, what's
the length of space between the teeth, and so you could say, well, how long did it take
for light to go all the way down and back, such that you don't have a, such that you
don't get a distortion, you don't get a blurred view.
And that's one way of determining it, how fast the wheel is rotating and the size that
it's rotating through.
In any event, the wave nature of light was determined, because you can actually say,
well, there were some features of wave light, is that light diffracts around boundaries,
just like water waves do.
So when water hits a boundary like a jetty, it curves around that jetty.
It doesn't actually stop.
It doesn't go around it.
When it goes past it, it doesn't not go around it.
You don't see waves not propagating.
Waves have a way of actually spreading out, and so they don't stay constrained on one
place.
They just spread out until they thin out across their breath, if it's a water wave.
But in terms of like a jetty going around, as soon as it passes the jetty, it starts
to spread back out around the jetty.
In any event, you can have multiple, you can have interferences of waves, where waves can
constructively interfere and destructively interfere.
And if the waves constructively interfere, that means the two waves merge together.
And if their peaks match at a given place in space, then they add together.
If one wave's peak matches the same wavelength's wave's trough, then they cancel out.
So you can either have what's called interfering constructively, meaning they add together,
or they can destructively interfere and subtract from each other.
Basically, the waves superimpose and add to each other.
And the trough acts like a negative number, and the peak acts like a positive number.
So if it's a wave height of 2, and the other wave height is 2, and they happen to be at
the same place, that the peaks are at the same place at the same time, then the wave
height is not 4.
But if the trough is at the same place as a peak, then the wave height is 0 and it's flat.
So you can't have waves passing through each other and not make a noise.
It's kind of a weird thought, but it can happen.
So constructive and destructive wave interference can be seen pretty easily.
If you look at the trough two stones in a puddle of water, you can see two outbound
ripples.
It helps to have some nice sunshine, so you can actually point out the troughs in the
water and the peaks in the water.
And it's pretty easy to see as you dry it out at home, because it's but the heck.
Everybody's got puddles of water around them, maybe something deep, and you can see the
reflection of water on it and see the constructive and destructive interference.
Another thing to look at is back in 1901 or so, or the early part of the 20th century.
He did a double slit experiment where he put a slit inside a barrier to make an image
of a slit as a single source and then allowed that image of that slit then to spread out
because light spreads out from a source diffractively to impact on two other slits.
And those two other slits then, they each act as sources, but those sources, then what
we see on the far side, are a constructive and destructive interference pattern on the
far side of it.
So you have a continuous source going through a slit, that slit then goes through a double
slit and that double slit then makes constructive and destructive interference patterns, which
could only occur if light is doing a, his light has wave properties.
So Young's experiment actually proved that light actually did have wave properties.
So what are some effects of wave properties?
Well, let's say you were moving towards or away from something.
We've always heard of the nature of the nature of wave properties.
So let's say you're going to see a Doppler effect and Doppler effects occur because let's
say you see a car driving towards you and it's honking its horn, the pitch will be slightly
increased as the car is driving towards you.
And if it's driving away from you, the pitch will be slightly decreased.
And I had the benefit of going to the Indy 500 a long time ago with my good friend and
best man for my wedding, Ralph Patner.
And Ralph got tickets for us to go see it.
And you could really hear the effect of the Doppler effect as the cars flew by you.
You know, okay, so just to say it, when cars in the Indy 500 are driving, they're these
little things and they're extremely loud, they go, oh, right, they're driving like that.
They're driving really fast.
Really fast.
Now that sound is what you hear if you're inside the car.
Now what do you hear when you're seeing them go by in the track?
What you hear is, that's what you hear.
Now inside the car, it's all because that's the sound of the engine.
They're really whiny.
But outside you hear as it approaches you and then as it goes by you and the pitch changes.
So the wavelength of the sound changes to the observer.
So I'm the observer sitting on the stands in the fourth row above the little finish line
going, yay, there's the cars.
And I hear this sound and everybody who's ever watched these kind of things has seen
and heard this sound.
It's a really cool sound.
In any event, that's the Doppler effect, which is the change in wavelength or frequency
as a result of a movement of the source towards you or away from you.
So the Doppler effect is just that.
Of the true wavelength, which is all inside the car, the sound of the engine.
But then there is the perceived wavelength or the apparent way like, which depends on
the relative motion of the source.
So the faster something goes by you or towards you away from you, the greater the Doppler
effect is.
So that's all dependent upon both the speed with which it's moving and the speed with
which the wave travels the sound way.
So for light, we have a slightly different thing, but it works the same way because light
has a wavelength.
So if it has a wavelength, then we can see if there's a Doppler shift and there is.
So light has a wavelength and there's a certain wavelength at which the light is emitted and
there's a certain wavelength at which the light is received.
So if I were to actually take a red light, maybe it's 6,500 nanometers in wavelength,
maybe that's the wavelength that I'm looking at.
And that wavelength source of light, which by the way would be a cloud of hydrogen gas,
if that wavelength of light is traveling towards me, or actually, let's say it's moving away,
if it's going away from me at, say, 90% the speed of light or maybe 80% just to keep it
easy, if the light was going away from us at 80% the speed of light, then the total
speed, then the wavelength change would actually change the wavelength to almost twice its
wavelength, almost twice.
So it would be well into the infrared, roughly about 1200 nanometers, yeah, 1200 nanometers
as opposed to about 600 nanometers.
So it would be well into the infrared and you wouldn't be able to see it.
So if something's emitting, if it's a hydrogen class gas and it's rushing away from you,
whatever reason, it's hot hydrogen rushing away from you at 80% the speed of light, normally,
if we're still, you could see it, but if it's rushing away from you that fast, then the
light gets redshifted down to the infrared and you have to use infrared to see it.
That will be important when we talk about the big bang, but in any event, Doppler shift
is important in light because if the source is moving, then there is a Doppler shift.
And that occurs in every direction, you can have a slightly change of a version away from
it.
If you're looking at it from the side, there's a part of the motion that's towards you changes
it.
So effectively, the light bunches up in the direction of it that it's going, changing
the frequency to a higher frequency and gets stretched out away from the source as if from
things behind it.
In any event, there for wavelengths of light, like it shifts up at the thing with the important
thing about the Doppler shift with respect to say, let's say up that cloud of hydrogen
gas was talking about, is that all the wavelengths get shifted by the exact same proportion.
So the spacing between the wavelengths, that is not dependent on the speed.
So the pattern stays the same, it just gets shifted by the same amount, either blue shifted
meaning if it's going to shorter wavelength or redshifted, it's going to a longer wavelength.
And if something's receding at like, say, 1% the speed of light, if it's receding, then
it'll be slightly redshifted if it's if it's if it's running towards you approaching at
a much faster rate, maybe twice 2% the speed of light, then it'll be much greater.
But on every case, all of the emission is simply just shifted by that same amount to
the left or to the right by the same amount.
And they don't get stretched out or pulled out in any direction.
All right, where can we measure this?
I just said gas cloud hydrogen rushing away.
Well, you know, what if it's rotating?
Let's say you've got some rotating glowing object.
If it's rotating and glowing, then the side that's of it that's rotating, maybe a big
hot glowing ball, that's kind of weird, big hot glowing ball rotating really fast.
When it's rotating really fast, the side that's approaching you would be blue shift in the
side that's retreating away from you would be redshifted.
And so you can have a Doppler shift on a big hot rotating ball of gas, maybe a super fast
rotating star or something, or even a moderately rotating star can do can show a Doppler shift.
In fact, the sun shows a slight Doppler shift from at visible wavelengths, but you got to
be really sensitive to see it.
If you have two stars that are orbiting each other and they're part of a binary system,
then those two stars then also show this Doppler shift because, hey, maybe one of them is approaching
and one of them is receding.
So all of the spectral features of the star that's approaching you get shifted to the
blue and all the star features of the spectral features of the star that's receding away
from you get shifted to the red, and then they swap back and forth as one's retreating
and one's retreating and the other's retreating and the other's receding.
So that's another thing, look for binaries that do this.
And finally, as the earth goes around the sun.
What's even very interesting is that there's a slight Doppler shift as the earth goes around
the sun with respect to all of the stars in the sky.
So that's a very small amount, and that has to be taken into account if you're being very
sensitive with respect to spectroscopy.
So the earth's motion around the sun can cause a Doppler shift in stars.
All right, so is it real?
What's real speed?
So what's the real speed?
I mean, I know I'm going fast with respect to you, but what's the real speed?
What's my real speed?
Well, there is no real speed.
There's only relative speed.
The Doppler shift only carries about relative speed.
There is no absolute speed, meaning, okay, if I could find my reference frame such that
I'm going the absolute speed, then everything is going to be fine.
That sounds like something you might hear about in a comic book, maybe, it's like, oh,
I'm going the absolute speed, kind of a flash thing or something.
So you're going at absolute speed, but there is no absolute speed.
That's an odd thought, but there is one absolute speed, the speed of light, but that's the
speed that the light's going and it only goes that speed.
So that's kind of a weird thing.
So there's really no such thing as a true speed, meaning the speed with respect to the
space and time, because all space and time is relative.
So you have to measure Doppler shift with respect to your speed with respect to the
source or the observer, and if one's moving, the other one could be moving in exactly the
same way.
In the same sense that the Doppler shift would occur if in the Indy 500, everybody in the
Indy 500 stands were simply moving by the car and the car was standing still.
The Doppler shift would still occur for the people in the stands.
That would be very jarring to realize that the car is standing still in the entire city
of Indianapolis is moving, but it would have the same effect in terms of the Doppler effect.
So what do we mean by the wave nature of light and what do we get out of it?
And one of the nice things that we see is that you get pretty rainbows.
And pretty rainbows are part of the wave nature of light, because as light enters a prism,
the speed of light changes and in a prism, in glass, the speed of light is a function
of wavelength and frequency.
So the blue light is bent more than the red light, and so there is a frequency dependence
and so the light spreads out as it passes from air into glass and then from glass back
into air.
The change in medium actually, because it goes through the glass, it actually gets spread
out by the glass.
Anyway, our most important thing is the pretty rainbows that are caused by water droplets
in the air or by pretty prisms hanging in your window is that the visible spectrum,
the visible spectrum, that which we can see is called the visible electromagnetic spectrum
and the visible electromagnetic spectrum is roughly between about 4,000 angstroms and
about 7,000 angstroms or 400 nanometers to 700 nanometers and it spans from the violet
all the way through the deep, deep red.
And if it's shorter wavelength than violet, we call it ultraviolet, and if it's longer
wavelength than red, we call it infrared.
And their frequencies are very high, they're on the order of 10 to the 14th cycles per
second.
The wavelengths, let's look at it with the wavelengths for just a second, 400 to 700
nanometers.
We already know that there's wave properties that about light and since light has wave
properties, it does diffraction.
So why don't we see diffraction everywhere?
Why isn't everything fuzzy because waves of light are, which should make things fuzzy?
I mean, we have eyes and as light enters our eyes, it's an aperture and the aperture
then means that inside your eye, the light must spread out, so why isn't everything
all fuzzy?
Well, because the wavelength is very small with respect to the aperture of your iris
of your eyeball.
So your iris of your eyeball is a couple of millimeters, right?
It's a few millimeters.
That's really big compared to nanometers.
So there is an order of tens of thousands of them.
So if you're looking at like 700 nanometers or 500 nanometers, let's keep it simple.
And that's many thousands of times smaller than the aperture size of your iris.
And so waves don't really notice the diffraction.
So the diffraction effects are not very noticeable.
However, if you wish to see them, take this little experiment, take two of your fingers
together like this and just barely close them.
So they're just a tiny bit of light between them.
Hold them close together so there's just a little bit of light and bring it close to
your eye and look at some bright light source and you'll see in between your fingers dark
and light bands, that's some diffraction patterns happening because of the diffraction around
the edges of your fingers.
So it's really kind of pretty.
You can see that with just your fingers.
All right.
So the fun thing is that the light comes in frequencies and wavelengths and packets of
light called photons do that and that's what we call light.
Well here's the funny thing, because individual packets of light called photons have individual
frequencies, then there's really no such thing as color.
Color is a construct.
It's a biological construct in your brain.
What does that mean?
Well, it means that there are cells in your eye which are receptive to certain ranges
of color.
And if they're receptive to say maybe 50 nanometers from say 500 nanometers to 550 nanometers,
maybe that's the sensitivity of that cell in your retina, in your eye.
And the rods and cones, the cones in your eye are receptive to many wavelength bands
and so if you can see many, many colors and you are gifted to see many colors, then you
have lots of different sensors and they're very fine and they can see lots of different
things and you have lots of ways that you get very narrow bands of frequencies to which
these cells are sensitive.
So your brain then takes this information as the cells are fired off by the light and
they say, oh I can see this, I get a photon, I get a photon, I get a photon, but then your
brain then says, ooh, that's the cell that makes purple, that's the cell that makes green,
that's the cell that makes red.
And where did you get those words from?
Those words came from what everybody called that thing that we call red and that redness
is what we culturally call red.
Isn't that interesting?
So color is in your brain.
You construct it because you add photons inside of a filtered frequency receptor and that
receptor is called a cell and the cells can see lots of different bands and it's the difference
in brightness between your yellow receptors and your blue receptors or your blue receptors
and your red receptors that tells you what the color is.
If your red receptors are really firing off and your blue receptors are not, then you'll
call it red.
If your green receptors are firing off and it needs to be the other two are, then you'll
call it green.
That's how color works and we call that thing green.
Now people who are color blind, they're blue receptors and green receptors are fired equally
so you can't tell the difference and that's kind of sad thing for them because they go,
what the heck is that?
I don't see green, I don't see blue, I just see kind of a gray.
And that's what people who've got what they have color blindness, they can't tell the
difference between the colors.
Alright, so that's pretty good, we'll see you next time.
Hi, this is Jason Kendall and welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures.
We're still talking about light, light, what the heck is that stuff light?
Light is, well, the thing that we see things with.
So we want to know exactly how light does what it does.
Last time we reviewed the concept of the speed of light, we reviewed the concept of Doppler
shift, we reviewed the concept of what the electromagnetic spectrum is and how it varies
with wavelength and what visible light is.
We didn't say what it was and how it's creative, it's kind of weird.
We know that it has these wave properties and it acts like a wave, but what makes it
act like a wave and exactly what is it?
Well to understand that, we need to know how light is created.
So let's take an example, how does matter create light?
Hmm, that's an interesting question.
Let's start and go back and say, well, we've talked about Maxwell's laws and the nature
of electromagnetic interactions, but we also talked about the nature of fundamental particles
like electrons and protons and electron and proton has a charge, like an electric charge.
A proton is how the electric charge is distributed inside it, it has quarks inside it, but really
from the outside far enough away, meaning about 10 to the minus 10th meters, it looks
like a point charge with a plus sign and that's pluses by convention, we just call it a plus
it could be a minus, it could be a plus, it doesn't really matter, it's just what we call it.
But then the electron has the exact opposite charge, the same exact amount with exactly
this different, exactly opposite sign.
So two like charges plus plus will repel each other and two opposite charges will attract
each other and that's the nature of it.
But what do we mean by charges and why do they retell each other and what's going on?
Well let's think about this concept, an incredibly important concept to all of physics and in
fact the incredibly important concept to the element of what we call electromagnetism is
the idea of an electric field.
An electric field is the influence in space by an electric charge to everything around
it and it doesn't have a limit, it just keeps going, there's no limit, it's just its intensity
drops off as the distance squared but there's no real limit where it says well now I'm done
and it stops and it's the end of the line.
So really this picture of an atom that is out there or a plus charge that sits there
and that plus charge just has these what we call field lines and if you place something
say another plus charge at a location on a field line the total number or density of
field lines at that location determines how much it's getting pushed away.
So the field says give me a test charge, I'll tell you what force I'm going to exert on
another due to the charge at the source.
So I placed a little test charge at the field line and we can place another test charge
maybe once plus once minus but if it's plus it gets pushed away and if it's minus it gets
attracted towards it.
So the field lines also determine the direction of motion that the test charge will go and
from a plus charge we can think of it as being outbound and a minus charge you can be considered
inbound.
By convention it doesn't really matter what direction but we can just do it that way.
So a plus charge if you place another plus charge on a field in an electric field next
to a plus charge and the test charge is very tiny so incredibly tiny or positive to be tiny
that it actually is the thing that's moved and not the source because they're pushing
against it remember Newton's equal and opposite forces one of them just has to be a big enough
charge that it doesn't get affected by the other charge as much.
So the test charge can be infinitesimally small and then it just gets rocketed out on
those field lines and it goes very very far away but if you place it closer then the field
lines are denser and that means it gets a harder push and if it's an electric if it's
a negative charge then it'll be attracted in the same way it'll be attracted not as
much if it's far and the closer you put it the more attraction it shall be.
So it gains energy as they fall towards each other because they're pulling on each other
and the closer they are the harder they pull each other because the force of attraction
is increased as their distance is made small and the force of attraction or repulsion is
decreased as they're farther and farther apart and so at some point they can be so far apart
that the electrostatic or electromagnetic force between them the electrostatic force
between them can be minuscule and not taking into account however if you have loose charges
around there they really true this the electric force is very strong and it's going to really
try to actually make it so that there's that the charges get neutral in any event opposites
attract light charges repel and if you've got one you got the other so that's really
what we're talking about so plus charges repel against plus charges and minus charges repel
against minus charges protons have a plus charge electrons have a negative charge they
have exactly the same amount of charge they're just opposite and equal magnitude the electron
has a much smaller mass the proton has a much larger mass than the electron so the proton
tends to stay still where the electron tends to whizz about alright so distant charges
feel the effect of other charges so all charges feel the effect of the other charges through
the electric field that they generate so really space is permeated by the electric field due
to charges and if they're all standing still all these electric fields are don't move they're
just kind of sitting there if everybody's held in place they're all pinned down let's say all
the charges in the universe are pinned to one place to wherever they're at doesn't matter
where they're at they just pin then everything would be pushing on it but then they're pinned
down so they can't move but they're pushing with the electric field or they're pulling
depending on their charges and or the signs of their charges and that tells us how they're
going to move alright now let's do something very strange we then jiggle one of them if we jiggle
them then the then the field must change and how does the field change the field may change in a
regular way let's say you instead somehow take an electron and put it between let's say you
staple it between two springs and if it's between two springs it might go up and down between the
two springs or it's stapled to between two boards on two strings and so it can go up and down and
as long as you don't touch it it's not going to vibrate just like anything that's held by two
strings between two boards right but if you come along and flick it then the electron will bounce
up and down right now if the electron has an electric field that's associated with it and the
electric field is inbound by convention and the field lines are drawing towards it so let's use
a proton so this outbound like the outbound errors so a proton is staying but and it's staying it's
held between these two springs between the two boards and you kick it now it's going up and down
and if it's just going up and down bouncing up and down like this what do we notice the field
doesn't stay fixed in space the field follows the proton so the proton was here in the field
radiates out from wherever the proton is at that moment so then the way those on the field lines
are fixed in space they're moving they have to be moving up and down wait a second if you make
something move up and down then you've got a wave now what does the problem what happens to that
well then there's a disturbance in or disturbance or a wave motion of up and down of the proton so
now the electric field is going up and down now how long does it take for something very far away
a distant charge to feel it huh well those changes in the electric field propagate at a particular
speed the speed of light so really what is light light is a disturbance in the electric field
of a charged particle that makes a disturbance it vibrates it moves it accelerates it changes
and as it changes the electric field disturbs and that disturbance propagates along that disturbance
is called a photon that's light light is that disturbance now why doesn't it propagate forever
like these like these vibrating strings that we see or like you can pluck a string and have a
standing wave well photons propagate from here to there in the same way that if you take a jump rope
and you flick the jump rope when you flick the jump rope it bounces and if you if the jump rope
bounces then the you see the pulse go up down the jump rope and the pulse comes back from the jump
rope now you can make it so there's a nice regular pattern to it you can do double dutch by having
two the jump ropes go around you can make it have a nice even string where you have wave patterns
in the rope but really if you flick the rope then the disturbance goes down the rope and back the
rope and that disturbance in the electric field line as it propagates due to the previous motion
of the proton is what the photon is it's a disturbance in that electromagnetic field
that's really something so a photon is a disturbed magnetic field that was disturbed say some time
ago by a very distant thing and then that distant thing that propagation of that electric field from
there to here gets to us eventually isn't that weird if that's what light is if that's what light is
and that's probably a very close analogy to what we call it from from from great from deep studies
of the nature of space and time are then light then the when you look at some distant galaxy
maybe millions of light years away there was some electron that shook just a tiny electron or a
tiny proton a very very very lightweight object shook created a disturbance by its shaking that
made a disturbance in its electric field and that electric field disturbance propagated out
through space on the electric field of the proton and eventually reached your eye three million light
years away wow that's interesting so it propagates through space radiatively carrying the energy of
the disturbance that created it across space vast to areas of space as a packet of as a packet of a
disturbance there's a wave packet a disturbed wave packet in the electric field lines as it propagates
through space that's an interesting picture of a photon and that's what we call that so that
packet of waves that disturbance is called a photon and electrons don't vibrate forever
protons don't vibrate forever they take a certain amount of time and then they stop vibrating and
when it's done vibrating then guess what that's the end of the wave packet train and there it goes
the photons on its way all right now that's essentially a very meat and potatoes sort of
elementary way of talking about photons photons have a certain amount of energy that amount of
energy is related to the frequency or the wavelength whichever you like to use in order to say how much
energy the photon has so the wavelength of the photon determines its energy the short wavelength
photons have high energy the long wavelength photons have low energy radio light has long
wavelengths it's low energy gamma ray light has high wave and a short wavelength so it has high
energy um next because it's a wave motion and if you do something really interesting if you take
because we we learn this through electromagnetism if you go take an electro statics class you learn
about Faraday's law you learn about the nature of the of the of the Beelzebub art law you learn
all these interesting things where if you take a current take a current of of electrons which is
now an electric flow a flow of charges in a circle make a circular charge flow you create a magnetic
field and magnetic field flows through the charge so if you want to start your car you use what's
called a selenoid and a selenoid is a many many many turns of electric coil you then put a charge
back and forth you change an electric current back and forth through that selenoid and it moves a
piston that then that then starts the engine running and that start and that forces gasoline
into the into the engine and then starts the engine up so you can take an electric force from the
battery and do an alternating current through it that then shakes the selenoid and shakes and
it creates an alternating magnetic field and starts a car so an electric field going in a circular
motion creates a magnetic field likewise if you take a magnetic field a fixed magnet a fixed
magnet that has a magnetic field like a like an iron magnet or a bar magnet and then you spin it
it will create an electric field that's part of the way that we get electricity out of hydroelectric
dams you create fixed large bar magnets that then as the water goes over the waterfall it turns
turbines and the turbines then spin magnets which are which are which wrap around coils of wire
and those wires then have an electric current that is created out of them by the by the twisting
by the spinning magnetic field wow so there's a link between the electric the motion of an electric
field and the creation of a magnetic field and the motion of a magnetic field and the creation
of an electric field we've just learned that when you vibrate an atom you create an electric field
you always have an electric field but if you vibrate an atom then it creates a disturbance
in the electric field that disturbance is called a photon but if you have it but the photo but maybe
you're accelerating it and you then have if you have any kind of motion that can be determined to
be cyclic with respect to an electric field then there is a perpendicular magnetic field to that
so it is predicted that the that the photon has a magnetic field that runs perpendicular to the
electric field in the direction of propagation so as the magnetic as the photon propagates maybe with
the direction with with a wavelength like that going in that direction it will also have a magnetic
field that goes this way as it propagates in that direction so electromagnetic fields magnetic fields
are linked to electric fields for the earth that is another example the earth is a has a liquid metal
iron core and as the earth spins that magnetic that liquid iron core has a strong magnetic
property because of ferromagnetism and that creates an electric field which then creates a magnetic
field we have a dynamo effect and thus the earth has a protect a protective magnetic field around
it really set quite interesting so magnetic fields are created by the movement of current
and the movement of current creates magnetic fields and they're linked all right and that's
the nature of a photon is that a lot oscillating electric fields create magnetic fields and the
same thing an oscillating magnetic field creates an electric field and as that propagates through time
we call that a photon as well so the wave packet of a photon isn't just an electric field there's
also a magnetic field component to it as well so the direction that we call that magnetic field is
called polarization so there might be the photon might be oriented up and down the electric field
might the vibration might be like this because of how we shook field proton it might be going like
this and so the orientation the polarization of the light might be in that direct might be up and
down this is also a reason why when you wish to have good sunglasses for the summertime you wish
to see the road while you're driving you use polarized sunglasses because when light reflects
off the road it reflects off of a flat surface and when it reflects off a flat surface it bounces
off that flat surface and all the vertical components of the polarization are gone from the
scattered or randomly oriented light in its polarizations to only having the ones that are
parallel to the road so all you need to do to have good glasses to derive with which are called
polarizing sunglasses is to have something that blocks out the light that goes like this and
how can you do that not too difficult you think of a picket fence picket fences you can throw a
frisbee through on its edge because the slats are vertical and so there's a hole that's vertical
between the slats and you can't throw a frisbee between the slats of a picket fence however you
can throw it on the angle throw it when it's on the side through the picket fence but not flat
through the picket through the picket fence well if you want to change if then take that principle
aside so like polarizing sunglasses are simply very small slats that are printed inside the glass
that then block the light and how can you see through it because the size of these slots is on
the side is on the order of the size of the wavelength of light and so the polarized light
that's coming up and down it's going side to side is blocked because all the slats are vertical so
you get to see only the vertically oriented light which is minimized because of the reflective
property of the asphalt so light comes as polarized as well as being as well as being
electromagnetic and it has an orientation to electric field an orientation to the magnetic
field 90 degrees to the electric field it has a direction of motion at the speed of light that
we talked about so what is light light gets emitted in copious quantities by hot objects by electric
fields that are being made by vibrating electrons and protons inside of atoms and molecules inside
of dense objects or inside of hot objects or inside of inside of things that are simply energy and
we see that energy coming off of them so the light's really there and it's all sorts of different
frequencies and it's all sorts of different wavelengths from very very high energy to very
low energy and how it propagates from one medium to another whether it can penetrate a wall or
penetrate only air or whether it gets absorbed by water or whether it gets absorbed by nothing and
passes through everything is all dependent on the properties of the material through which it passes
so light is everywhere it bounces around the room knocking about and as it hits a wall it
reflects off how does it reflect off a wall it goes a little bit in and it shakes the electron
inside of there and the electron says no I don't think I'll need that sandwich today and shakes back
and the photon comes back out so really what happens in a reflection is it goes in and gets
turned around you can think of it as getting trapped in a in a turn style the light gets pulled in
and swung around it doesn't actually it gets absorbed very briefly and then re-radiated back
out the same direction it came and these kind of ray tracings were done by Newton a long time
ago so we have predictions and in fact quantum electrodynamics actually accurately predicts
by by some really interesting arguments that'll leave to Richard Feynman if you go look up at
his videos about this exactly how that works which is really fascinating um you can look that stuff
up this is not really for an introductory level thing but you look up a quantum electrodynamics
and I'll tell you exactly how the nature of the phase shift of the frequency of light interacts
with the phasing with how the electrons move inside of inside of a material so it's a very I
won't be able to do it justice in a short video so I'll just leave it to to others who have done
that I'd like to Richard Feynman videos go look his stuff up it'd be fantastic you'll love it
but be that as it may the study of how light actually interacts with material is an incredibly
important element to all of astronomy and all of physics um in fact it's central the because
one of our more key ways to understanding the nature of materials and physics is actually
through spectroscopy all right so let's finish with the electromagnetic spectrum the electromagnetic
spectrum is the all the possible wavelengths of light there are many different wavelength
regions from radio to infrared to microwave to visible to ultraviolet to x-ray to gamma ray
and they span an enormous number of wavelengths and frequencies the total number of wavelengths that
we call infrared is as I think about almost a thousand times bigger than what we call visible
light in radio light is pretty much everything shorter at longer than like a centimeter or so
ultraviolet light is shorter than 300 nanometers and goes down to a few tens of nanometers when
we get into soft x-rays and soft x-rays go up to go up to angstrom level time go up to single
angstrom sizes and even harder when you talk to gamma rays which are on the size scale of 10
to the minus 12 meters in terms of wavelength so the higher the energy of the light the shorter
the wavelength and the higher the frequency and there's no real theoretical limit to the
lower limit to the wavelength of light but there is kind of a theoretical upper limit to the total
energy of light that can occur in terms of energy because at a certain point the light becomes so
energetic that it can actually fall apart and become other particles like it actually can just
turn into matter if the energy is great enough and that's a study for nuclear physics so the
electromagnetic spectrum is simply all the different forms of light in all their different
wavelengths but the total amount of light and different kinds of light that exist in the electromagnetic
spectrum is vast and the best way to the best analogy for it is look at the key of the keys on
on a grand piano and if we could only look at the sky in visible light like we had for centuries
all the way up through the night uh the early 1960s when we finally got the technology to look at
radio light and when we finally launched satellites actually to look at ultraviolet and gamma ray
and x-ray and infrared the analogy is almost completely accurate that looking at the light
looking at the universe with only one in the visible range is like playing a piano concerto
by only listening to one middle c one note middle c on the piano and that's what it's like
so imagine hearing a gorgeous symphony and somebody some crazy composer says well this is
a symphony this is this is so-and-so symphony but i've removed all of the notes except for middle
c and so you might hear this 25 minute um kikap you might hear this wonderful piano concerto
that lasts for half an hour and all you ever hear is when they play middle c that's what it's like
almost you're missing the whole thing if you don't see in these other wavelengths of light
so the electromagnetic spectrum looks at so many look at things and we get to see so many more
things so many different processes that occur as a result of it and what are those processes
that's what we'll talk about next time
hello this is jason kendall welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures
great to have you back we're now going to start diving deeply into technical aspects of astronomy
and how they relate to the physics of astrophysics so to this time we're going to be talking about
the nature of stellar brightness and luminosity and luminosity distances so let's start with the
concept of what we mean when we say the words how bright is the star usually when i take people
outside to go to a telescope they're gonna say wow look at that bright star what they won't say look
how bright that star is let's say look how big that star is and people mean big but they really
mean bright and so what do we actually mean by the word bright and so brightness is a thing that we
actually try to quantify brightness is an amount of energy we receive in terms of photons per second
and given what brightness is um and so that can over in a detector such as an eye or a camera or
something like that so when we talk about that we're really talking about the nature of brightness
is a perception but really if we want to know about the nature of the object itself we need to
talk about luminosity and luminosity is the intrinsic amount of energy the object such as
a star is putting out every second over whatever wavelength band we wish to care about so how
bright is a luminous a source how bright is it well that's the number of photons that arrive at a
detector and so that's what we call the apparent brightness and frequently in the literature we
call that B capital big B is the apparent brightness and what we measure that in is some
some really odd units but strictly speaking everything that we ever measure brightness in
is essentially either photons per second in a surface area or energy per second in a surface
area photons per second we already know what the energy of the photons is so we can just deal with
that so our real question is we want to know the energy that we're receiving per second over a
surface area and that's what we call the apparent brightness the thing we're trying to hunt for though
is what we call the luminosity that's how bright something really is so we're getting these two
words brightness and luminosity a little mixed up but we're going to resolve that shortly luminosity
is the entire luminous output of the star when we say luminous output that's where it comes from
luminous means light so luminous output is the total amount of energy output by a star in the
form of light per second now we can measure that in energy per second or more commonly we use the
word watts such as light bulbs light bulbs have a hundred watt light bulb or a 500 watt light bulb
etc etc the sun's a lot brighter than the average light bulb so the energy we met the units we
measure luminosity in our energy per second and that's what the production amount of energy is
happening by that object so these two things are of course related because brightness is how bright
you see it to be and luminosity is what it's actually putting out and how bright it appears to
you is actually the depends on the luminosity divided by four pi times the distance to the
object squared because let's assume that the light is being spread out uniformly across a sphere
such as like a bulb light so if it's a bulb light we expect it to be going across a sphere
and so it spreads out evenly and so the brightness drops off as the distance squared to the object
so the luminosity gets dimmed by the distance squared so that's where we get the units of
energy per second per square meter or watts per square meter if we're using si standard units
and when we're talking about that that's where that four pi comes in from it's not just the
distance squared it's the four pi because it gets spread out over a surface area and it drops as it
goes so if something's twice as far it's four times as dim if it's three times as far it's
nine times as dim if it's five times as far it's 25 times as dim it's 11 times as far as 121
21 times as dim and so on so the four pi comes from the fact that we're assuming it spreads out
evenly over the surface of a sphere so what do we mean does the star look bright simply because it
is intrinsically very luminous or is it faint but nearby so we have to measure the distances to
things so distances become a very important thing luminosity is not distant distance dependent is
a distance independent property it's a property of the object itself whereas brightness is dependent
upon our perception of it so we need to be able to know how to measure brightness and that science
is the thing we call photometry and we express a photometry is really the measuring of photons
photometry the measuring of photons so we're counting the total number of photons we receive
and there's there's a couple of ways we talk about it we can express it in terms of the old
familiar thing that we learned from parkas a long time ago in stellar magnitudes or we can express it
in absolute fluxes meaning the energy that we receive in the detector per second on top of
the surface area and in astronomy we use both of them interchangeably so the magnitude system
is something that you'll hear very commonly if you go outside with a bunch of amateurs astronomers
all up in the sky that's a fifth magnitude star this is a great night we can see down to sixth
magnitude and you'll hear things like that or wow the brightest star in the sky is a zero
magnitude star and you'll hear such things well the tradition of magnitudes dates a very long time
ago it comes from parkas which was was a greek philosopher and he actually of nicaea and he
lived roughly about roughly roughly in the second century bc he lived about 70 about 190 bc 220
and he classified stars and ranked them into magnitudes he said the first magnitude stars
the brightest the second magnitude stars the second brightest and the other ones are dimmer
than that so he ranked them into three groups later on ptolemy of the almogast who gave us the
ptolemaic system of the cosmos which is the sun centered ptolemy came along and made it more
qualitative and added them into six separate buckets so that the magnitudes can be divided
in the first magnitude rewrite all the way down to the sixth the sixth brightest stars sixth magnitude
being the sixth um the sixth brightest type of stars so these were all relative brightnesses
and they were done by eye there's no detectors there's no photometric detectors no cameras in
100 bc so that was kind of a tricky thing so you had to say well this one's a little bit
brighter than that one this one's brighter than that one that one's brighter than this one this
one's brighter than that one so they ranked them in terms of their apparent brightness and that was
called their magnitude system and magnitude simply meant to them it looked bigger because
magnitude means size so my goodness it's actually not a size thing stars stars are so far away
that we can't actually perceive their size from earth very easily only a few stars have actually
been measured in such a way but the point is is that magnitude means size but here we're using
it as the word for brightness and magnitudes are a measure of relative brightnesses between stars
now the modern magnitude system was developed in 1856 by norman poxson and norman poxson at
oxford who was a also uh who's considered to be uh he's also from he went to india i believe he was
from india originally um and he developed what we call the modern system magnitudes and he codified
this ancient idea of haparcus into a separate set of definitions he said well every five steps of
of these stars if every five magnitudes is a set of 100 brightness and times now he actually was
able to quantify this because it's very close to the truth in terms of the old idea so haparcus's
idea modified by ptolemy was actually very close to the eye and the eye acts logarithmically in
terms of their brightnesses that we can measure and so he said that if a difference in five magnitudes
is a hundred times brightness and so he also said the standard star of brightness was vega which is
zero of magnitude so for example a ninth magnitude star is a hundred times brighter than a fourth
magnitude star and a zero of magnitude star is a hundred times brighter than a fifth magnitude
star and so forth and so on so the faintest stars that we can possibly discover with any aspect
aren't really necessarily stars they're probably galaxies or quasars that's about 30th magnitude
and those have been detected by the Hubble space telescope um ground-based equipment the best
ground-based equipment by amateurs is roughly in order 15 16 maybe 18th or 19th magnitude on the
ground so you can get some pretty faint stuff remember every difference of five is a hundred times
so zero magnitude is a hundred times brighter than five which is a hundred times brighter than
ten which is a hundred times brighter than 15 which is a hundred times brighter than 20
so a difference between zero of magnitude and 20th magnitude is a hundred times a hundred
times a hundred times a hundred or ten to the eighth that's a hundred million times brighter
a zero of magnitude star such as Sirius in the sky is a hundred million times brighter than a
20th magnitude star and there are 20th magnitude stars that have been observed in the Milky Way
they're just really dim and really far all right so Poxton's definition it can be codified
numerically by saying the ratio of the brightness is equals 100 to the difference in magnitudes
divided by five and so the difference in five magnitudes gives us a hundred times brightness
and that allows us to define the magnitude system but still it's a relative magnitude system it's
always relative what's nice though is that it actually allows us to codify if we get the brightness
in energy per second on a surface area we get the brightness of one star and then we can actually
translate brightnesses between each other that this also allows us to roughly guess by eye the
brightness of something and then allow us to get very close to what we actually get with it with
some sort of formal detector nicely enough the standard star is Vega and Vega is prominent to
most people in the sky and the standard for Vega is a little tweaky because Vega is a variable star
but in terms of things Vega was defined in many magnitude systems to be zero and so you can you
can basically start from Vega and go everywhere and you compare and compare and compare oh how
am I right am I to compare to Vega I'm brighter I'm dimmer I'm brighter I'm dimmer Vega is useful
because it goes across the zenith for most of many North American and Northern European and
and North Northern Hemisphere observers doesn't go across the zenith for people in the South
Hemisphere so they got to use secondary standards of some kind because the entire system has been
centered around Northern Hemisphere so we can codify that and so basically we can say the star
compared to Vegas brightness could be a hundred to the stellar magnitude divided by five and that
allows us to actually compare a star's brightness with respect to Vega and give us a numeric value
if somehow you can get the energy received per second at Vega from Vega as you can perceive the
energy per second on top of the surface area that gives you that thing now you can do that both ways
because your detector detects in energy per second that's how it detects so you're going
to translate this into magnitude so magnitudes tend to be a pretty handy system because they're
something visual also they're logarithmic so therefore the apparent magnitude system ranges
from from negative 30 which is well negative 30 which is roughly around the sun the sun's a
little bit dimmer than negative 30 but the apparent magnitude of the sun is negative 27 goes all the
way to full moon which is about negative 12 or a half or so naked eye limit is about six binoculars
go down to about 10 the typical one meter scope is around magnitude 18 or 20 and anything bigger
in the meter class scope that's called that's almost out of amateur astronomy land there are
some amateurs who have bigger scopes than this there's not many of them they're expensive equipment
to use and work with but what then we're talking in terms of large-scale observation the observational
qualities and you get to four meter class scopes which can observe down to 26 magnitude
and the Hubble that can observe to about 30th magnitude so the science of flux photometry
and what's what we call flux not the flux capacitor from back to the future but flux
photometry is the total amount of of of energy meaning flux flux is another name for brightness
is the total flux that we perceive on top of it through a detector sometimes you wish to use
fluids where fluency is the total amount of energy not just energy per second but total
energy on a detector so it's energy per second and that's been integrated over time you know we
call the fluids so flux photometry says I'm going to measure the brightnesses between various stars
using various standards and I'm going to use a filter wheel on top of this thing and check the
differences of brightness between various filters and then I'm going to start from Vega or whatever
standard stars I have perhaps anything in the land ults that that'll send me over to uh to
brightnesses of stars so the science of flux photometry then says good I'm going to try to
get these brightnesses as accurately as I can and I'm going to difference them against known
standard stars or if not this not Vega then standard stars are agreed by the entire astronomical
community in order to say this is how bright a star is with respect to this so these standard
stars have had their energy output carefully measured and repeatedly measured for non variability
so they can be called standard stars and that's how Vega was discovered to be a variable star it's
kind of it's a slightly variable star so it's harder to use the sun the slightly variable star in
terms of if you were looking at it from a distance in fact this is a variable star so we have to
take into many accounts when we're doing the science of flux photometry we have to do we have
to detect whether there's clouds in the sky how high the object is in the sky where the if there's
a there's a lot of things the detector itself how the how your your camera works how your telescope
works um whether or not you have you have your the readout of your camera is good or bad the
temperature of your system there's a whole bunch of things that can affect the brightness of your
measurement so that's for another day and i'll allow you to go dig around the internet to walk
down that very deep rabbit hole to see what you have to do in order to calibrate to to your telescope
but in very general terms we can then say the luminosity of an object measured through some
brightness so is simply equal to four pi times the distance squared to the object times that brightness
and you just need two brightness you need two measurements in order to get the actual luminosity
you need to know the distance and you need to know the brightness so if you can get one of those
you can get two of those brightness is pretty easy that's just what you get at your detector
but you've got to backplay it and remove all the effects of the earth's atmosphere and many other
effects in order to make sure that you actually get really what you think is the real brightness so
you can say oh there's all these things that took away light darn it and you take that into account
and then you will get the brightness outside your detector and outside the atmosphere and then
you get a distance measurement and guess what you'll have the luminosity so a lot of practical
issues associated with this is a huge number the largest thing i do i describe many of them to you
but one the biggest is distance distance distance oh it's the worst thing in the world but a lot
of distances can be measured using parallax and so parallax gets by the park coast satellite
in the early 90s got the distances to about a hundred thousand stars and the guy emission recently
got distances to over a few billion stars so this is a big big big improvement so using these
distances will allow us to get secondary things such as luminosities based upon appearances that
can be seen without checking distance so distances are incredibly critical and once we get those
things there's a lot of things to go and luckily the guy emission has done a lot of that so this
is fantastic so luminosity is measured in watts or in this unit list thing that we will call
absolute magnitudes absolute magnitudes or luminosity in watts they don't depend on the
distance they all most stars have different absolute and apparent magnitudes meaning the
absolute magnitude is different than what we perceive it to be or see it to be and the lower
the number the more luminous it is in magnitudes right and luminous just as how much light is
coming out so what we'll tend to do is we'll compare two objects luminosities and we see that
they're relative to their brightness and if they're and the inverse of their distance is squared and
that gives us that'll give us what we're going for but we can create this concept called the
luminosity distance meaning how far is it based on how bright it is so let's take as our example
the sun we can measure the sun to a pretty good accuracy a very good accuracy it's roughly 93
million miles um that's a good actually 150 million kilometers so we can use that as a baseline so if
we know the but the distance to the sun and if we know the luminosity of the sun whichever with
that's a very that's also a very well studied so if we got the luminosity of the sun we've got the
we've got the distance to the sun we can make brightness measurements in the sun then that
helps us that strictly speaking we want to go across all wavelengths and that would be called
the bolometric luminosity but we'll talk about that maybe later but I don't think that's totally
critical but that's a real end result this is a total output so we're going to assume that we're
going to we're doing the bolometric luminosity in any event so you figure out the brightness of the
sun across the entire spectrum and you know the distance to it and you know the then if you can
somehow derive the the luminosity across the entire spectrum then guess what you can use that to
find the lumin the distance to other stars because if you can guess somehow their luminosity by hook
or crook maybe there's a way to do that and there is it's called spectroscopic parallax but we'll
talk about that later so if you can get the luminosity of the star compared to the sun or if
you get the bright and get the brightness of that star compared to the sun then guess what you can
get the distance to the star and that's called the luminosity distance or the distance based on a
standard object that you can calibrate against and then get the distance based on how bright you see
it to be knowing how bright it actually is and the the standard way we talk about this in astronomy
is using a thing called absolute magnitudes and absolute magnitudes are a pretend concept that
actually says pretend you take every star or every object in the sky and move it close or far
to a distance from the sun of 10 parsecs 10 parsecs 32.6 light years and then how bright
does it appear once it's magnitude it's visual magnitude it's v magnitude it's i magnitude
how bright does it appear when it's brought by magic or hook and crook or just imagination
to 10 parsecs from home and that's the definition of the absolute magnitude so how can we use this
the brightness we compare the brightness of the sun and luminosity we can rearrange it and to get
to say well how if we then say let's look at one star just one star then if we think ah this when
the star is far it's dimmer than when it's near and if the star but it's the same luminosity
because it's the same star so the brightness only depends upon the distance squared that we have
so the farther star that it will be compared to the distance of the nearest star squared
will give us will that will show us the distance between them remember brightness is defined to be
a difference in magnitudes so we're going to use the magnitude system in order to get there
the brightness versus far is one thing and then we can equate that to apogson's equation for the
magnitudes and then we get the the magnitude of the far star compared to the magnitude of the
nearest star and then that gives us the brightness difference and we work out to this thing where
we find that the difference in magnitudes is equal to a logarithm of the brightness so a logarithm
of the brightness gives a logarithm of the logarithm of the brightness and therefore logarithm
of the distance gives us the magnitudes now if we can get the distances we we're good but we've
already established one thing it's the same star so the magic distance we're going to pretend it is
is 10 parsecs so if we instead of saying look at the two magnitudes we say one of them is the absolute
magnitude and the and that is the magnitude if the star were magically placed at 10 parsecs away
then we end up with which called the distance modulus equation which says the apparent magnitude
subtract and then you take the apparent magnitude they subtract it from subtract from it the absolute
magnitude and that is the same that is equal to five times the log base log 10 rhythm logarithm
of the distance and then minus some number five all right because remember magnitudes have no units
they're really strange they're just relative brightnesses between two stars so there are
relative brightness so they have no units unlike luminosity which does so absolute magnitudes is
kind of a funny thing it's a unitless way of talking about luminosity but if we know the
distance is something and we can measure the measure the measure of the brightness and apparent
magnitudes then we have the absolute magnitude and that's really something we can use so absolute
magnitudes are important if we know the parallax of a star the parallax is the inverse of the distance
in arc seconds so if we know the parallax we can take the base 10 logarithm of the parallax add one
to multiply that by five and then add the apparent magnitude to that we get the absolute magnitude
so now we take two measurable things the apparent magnitude and the parallax and then we do some
magic some mathematical magic some arithmetic on that and we get the absolute magnitude so if we
can get the absolute magnitude of a star and know how that absolute magnitude compares to the
luminosity of the star and we have a way fixed way of doing that then measuring the apparent
magnitude and the parallax will give us the absolute luminosity there's a lot of trickery
that goes into the last step but it is possible and it is doable at the very minimum so as an
example if we take the one of the nearest stars to us one of the actually the approximate centauri
but alpha centauri which has a parallax of seven seven hundred and forty two milli arc seconds
and it has an absolute magnitude of just a little bit brighter than zero it's minus 0.01
then that means it's absolute visual magnitude i have a apparent visual magnitude meaning what
we see it to be that's a visual magnitude and then the absolute visual magnitude is about
4.3 plus 4.3 and that's what the math works out to be so magnitudes themselves are things that also
we measure inside of filters so a filter will actually determine it what we use so we can have
a magnitude in the johnson b or the johnson v the johnson i or the slown i or the slown u
or the slown v or the slown b there's all sorts of things that you can measure them
as long as you have a standard filter system so absolute magnitudes are a really great way to
actually get um a great way to actually give us luminosities and roughly the solar luminosity
and absolute magnitudes is about five it's recently been defined um by the international
astrolateral union and so absolute magnitude system no longer definitively relies on the sun
simply because the sun is slightly variable so you don't want to try to tie a an absolute system
onto a variable thing such as the sun so roughly speaking the sun is about an absolute luminosity
of plus five give or take a little bit and that corresponds to a new solar luminosity of one so
if we then go up and down if it's a hundred times the solar luminosity then it has an absolute magnitude
of zero if it's 10 000 solar luminosities then it has an absolute magnitude of minus five if it has
a hundredth of a solar luminosity then it is about a magnet an absolute magnitude of about 10
and if it is 10 000th one 10 000th of a solar luminosity then it has an absolute magnitude of
plus 15 so this kind of helps us kind of get around because this you'll notice that the luminosity
was whereas the uh whereas the magnitude system is linear the luminosity of the magnitude system
is is uh exponential that's the nature of a logarithmic relationship so that's how bright
we can look at it and it's another way of thinking about it so brightness then becomes
luminosity as long as we know the distance and the best thing we can get for distance is called
parallax so parallax then gives us distances in parsecs which is a geometric distance so we can
play a lot of games and say oh something's 20 parsecs away what's the magnitude if you have
an apparent magnitude of four and if it's like five distant parsecs away the apparent magnitude of
four what's the what's the absolute magnitude etc etc lots of games you can play so you'll
and so what we find is that we can is that the relationships really lead us down a lot of different
places and we're going to use these relationships over and over and over again with respect to
luminosity and brightness and magnitudes and the distance module's equation will come in many times
in the future. Hello my name is Jason Kendall welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy
lectures today we're going to continue the idea that we did last time when we discussed the nature
of magnitudes and brightness and luminosity but now we're going to formulate it in terms of an
important thing that we call color color is an incredibly important thing to astronomy because
well things have different colors so we need to actually know how we can quantify this concept of
color but first what we need to do is understand a little bit about where color arises and how light
interacts with matter so let's discuss that first before we get into the nature of what color is
with magnitudes all right so light and matter interact and if you've ever been alive you know
that light bounces off walls reflects off of things comes from light sources like light bulbs
things that are hot glow and so forth so what matter can do to light is it can allow it to
pass through it such as the glass that's passing through the lens that I'm looking at you with
it can also reflect light light gets reflected off of various surfaces and it can then bounce from
one surface to the next matter can gain this energy by absorbing light so if you go out on a
hot day the light from the sun you get absorbed the light that light in the form of infrared
radiation that reflects that goes into you and absorbs in your skin so also is the ultraviolet
light does the same thing and then you absorb the energy of that light third matter can lose
energy by emitting light so if it's warm or hot or hotter than the surroundings then light will
spontaneously come off of matter that is warmer than its surroundings and radiate to the surrounding
environment and that's called radiative transfer of energy okay so there are two things that are
important with respect to color and temperature and temperature relates to the internal energy of
the matter so the internal energy of the matter is what we would call temperature so the internal
energy can have multiple forms one is the structure of the material itself that would be the phase of
the matter and the other is the average random motions of the material inside the matter and
that would be the vibrations of the matter of it if it's a gas how fast it's moving around the room
so the internal energy is a function of temperature all right so let's look at the how color relates
to temperature so first and foremost color is a funny thing what is color I mean I'm wearing
a little checkered red white and blue shirt how do you know what I'm wearing is a blue shirt
blue checkers and blue and red checkers on it with a white shirt and some fun red and blue
and yellow things in the background here how do I know what color is well color is a funny thing
because it's defined inside your head color is actually a concept of relative brightness between
sets of things that do reception of light what do I mean by that okay so your eyes are filled
with cells on the on the backs of your eyes it's called the retina the retinal cells there's the
cones and the rods the rods are for nighttime and the and the cones are for color and daytime
so the rod the cones of the color rods have various receptor cells and there's maybe let's just be
over it for an oversimplification we know that there's maybe three let's just call it three
so you've got a set of cells inside the cones that are red receptors that receive
and a green receptor and a blue receptor so a red receptor would only say fire off if red light
lands on it or what light in a specific wavelength region let's say then a green receptor only fires
off if green light or this wavelengths of light in a specific wavelength region same with blue
so then the relative brightnesses of these two these signals from the various cells the pieces
in each cell determine the color if it's bright if more of the red cell got fired than the green
then we would call it red if more if the green and the blue got fired then we would call it yellow
compared to the red so even the red color then gets constructed in your brain and then we culturally
decide to call red red and blue blue and yellow yellow yellow but that's cultural we want to quantify
it so what was done a long time ago is the johnson filter system actually tried to mirror
roughly what your eye sees except it extends it into the infrared and the ultraviolet so the primary
filters that are used astronomically or at least the easiest ones or some of the oldest ones to use
that are still standardized are the johnson ubvr and i filters so we've got a blue filter which is
b we've got a v filter which is kind of yellow green and then we've got a an r filter which is red
so the r filter covers a wavelength region about 6000 to 7000 angstroms the v filter covers roughly
about 5000 or 4500 angstroms and the blue filter covers roughly about 4000 angstroms so these three
filters together allow light of only a certain wavelength to pass through to the detector notice
how that's similar to what your eye does but your eye doesn't automatically the retina has these cells
that only detect the light instead now we make a nice photo detector some sort of camera and what
we do is we put in front of the camera a filter so it blocks out all except the blue light or the
green light or the red light and therefore what falls on the camera is either blue right or green
light or red light that's different than the than than what happens in your eye we don't have filters
in our eye that filter things out we have cells that receive the certain things so we can think of
of the cells as kind of like inverse filters they absorb only specific wavelengths of light
but a filter transmits only certain wavelengths of light and it's the specialization of this
transmission that allows us to actually determine color all right so the johnson's cousin's filter
response system goes has a very specific wavelength transmission frequency transmission
wavelength dependency so we don't expect to get pretty much any light that is more that is more
blue than say 3000 angstroms in the b filter and we don't expect much like longer than 5000
angstroms to pass through the b filter and that's what we mean by these transmission curves so the
sun itself has a certain brightness in each one of these filters and we can actually then look at
things and do relative brightnesses of the filters typically astronomy is done with relative brightnesses
so you say oh this thing is brighter than that thing and that thing's brighter than this thing and
this thing's brighter than that thing and the filter system like this makes it very easy because
then you can use the magnitude system which itself is a relative brightness concept so the visible
light bands are only covered by the b v and r sections of the johnson's cousin's filter system
the u section you're going to have to go way up in altitude in order to use it and same with the
i section you need to be at maybe a high altitude in order to use these because the earth's atmosphere
strongly absorbs ultraviolet infrared light so what we got is we have these wavelength regions
which the which the filter system allows through all right once again just like we defined with
poxson's system last time poxson originally said that every filter system in any filter system
including the johnson's cousins is the definition of zero magnitude is the star vega so we start
with that idea and then say oh how bright or dim is the object with respect to vega and the reason
we use vega again is because vega it goes across the zenith for many observers in the northern
hemisphere all right so what do we really mean by color in your eye is the difference in brightness
that you perceive in the red cells versus the green cells versus the blue cells in your retina of your
eye likewise in an astronomical sense what we have is three filters so the filters then say well
what is the we can then make so we can determine the magnitude of the object and that's our brightness
magnitude here is brightness is the apparent brightness in the u filter the apparent brightness
in the b filter the apparent brightness in the v r and i and so what we do is it's kind of funny
like we've defined magnitudes before where we have the distance modus little m and big m for absolute
magnitude here we define the apparent magnitude of an object to be the capital letter of the filter
that you're using so here we say the the magnitude in the u filter and the magnitude in the b filter
and the magnitude in the v and the r those are just the letters so we take those values of the
magnitudes the brightness in magnitudes on these six not brightness in terms of watts per meter
squared or or that's not how we do it we use magnitude system because we can easily do differential
brightnesses between them so the magnitudes become our reference point in astronomy not
necessarily flux we will translate that eventually into flux but we start with magnitudes all right
so color then is defined in astronomy to be the difference in brightness between two filters that
are adjacent and you always take the short wavelength filter minus the long wavelength filter
the magnitude in the shorter wavelength minus the magnitude in the longer wavelength and it's
typical that you only that that you look at adjacent filters and not necessarily span across
but there might be a science reason why you would actually do that but typically you might take the
difference in brightness between say the u and the b and the b and the v and the v and the r and the r
and the i and then call those the colors so a standard color that is used frequently throughout
all astronomy is an observation in the b filter and an observation in the v filter and then you
take the difference in those observations meaning the magnitude difference between b and v meaning
what is the what is this if you take the magnitude of b and subtract from it the magnitude of v
that is the color kind of a funny thing so there's lots of different ways we can call color and so
therefore we can quantify color it's not just calling it magenta or red or pews or aquamarine or
any of the names that you would find in a crayon box from crayola on those 64 colors with all those
pretty names we don't care about those names those names are really nice and everything and they're
very fun to have but really what we want to do is we want to use the definition of color in order
to get us data and understanding all right so the blue star the blue color of say the star
serious so serious is by definition well by not by definition but by your eye you can see in the
sky as being a blue star so therefore it must be brighter in the blue magnitude in blue magnitudes
than in v magnitudes and in fact it is so if you take and likewise it must be brighter in the v
than the r so if you look at these numbers the b number the b magnitude of serious must be closer
must be lower in in value than the v magnitude because remember magnitudes the larger the magnitude
the dimmer it is so the more negative it is the closer towards negative infinity it is negative
the larger negative number or the smaller positive number the the brighter it is so if you compare
a tenth magnitude star to a fifth magnitude star the fifth magnitude star is brighter than the
tenth magnitude so let's say that a star like serious might happen to be in the b magnitude
it's pretty bright so i'm just going to make up a number here and the number i'm going to make up
is that it is a b magnitude of say uh one let's call it a b magnitude of one but because it's
dimmer in the v magnitude maybe it would have a v magnitude of two so the color two c2 which is
the color two which in the johnson's filter system b minus v is minus one so there's the color of
serious in the b minus v b minus v color equals minus one and let's say the r magnitude is four
because it's a very strongly blue thing so then v minus r is minus three so c sub three which is
another color definition in the johnson's color johnson's system that would be a minus three so
b minus v color is minus one and v minus r color is minus three now i pulled all these numbers out
of out of thin air so don't bother looking them up they're wrong so but anyway i invite you to
actually go look up what the b minus v magnitude colors are of serious and the v minus r that are
standard and if you look at the american association of variable star observers you should be able to
actually see that all right so let's take a different star also in say uh in in the winter sky
beetle juice which is in the constellation of ryan very beautiful red star so therefore the b
magnitude would have to be dimmer than the v magnitude so and we also know that beetle juice
is also roughly a magnitude one ish sort of star and visual so let's say the b magnitude is say
three because it's much dimmer in b than in v and we'll say that v is say a one all right
so that makes sense so b minus v for beetle juice would be three minus one is plus two
so now we see that a color that is in b minus v if it's positive it's red if it's negative the star
is blue so a positive c2 color b minus v means the star is pretty much red if the if the b minus
v color is negative it's probably blue and if it's zero it's probably kind of whitish yellow
like the sun which is makes sense anyway so with the same thing with v minus r maybe the v minus r
color is more significant for beetle juice but our magnitudes tend to be a little bit tweaky for a
lot of reasons then we tend to see b minus v as roughly as a pretty big standard in the american
association variable star observers all right so the b minus v color will be more positive the v
minus r color will be more positive for a red star so we can construct all of these colors
and this is like an extraordinarily low resolution spectroscopy what is spectroscopy spectroscopy
is where you take the light from a star say and you pass it through a prism and when you pass it
through that prism the light then gets broken out into a rainbow and you see how bright it is it
gets at various frequencies so you really care about how bright it is at various frequencies
that's what you really care about when you're doing spectroscopy but the nice thing about doing filters
like this filter photometry is that pretty much everything you look at is pretty bright so you
know spectroscopy it can be pretty dim you need a lot of light in order to make a decent spectrum
but you can do pretty well at lower at lower resolution spectroscopy with uh with johnson's
filters with with such b minus b v r i and filters u b v r filters all right so this color is important
because it does relate to temperature so let's find out how that is in general if we look at the
types of stars we break out their spectra remember that's what annie jump cannon did at harvard back
in 19 the 1910s and 1920s with her team of computers under pickering um the spectra of stars were
classified according to their temperature and their temperature was guided by the by the prominence
of hydrogen lines so okay but if you look at the nature of how how spectral lines look we see that
o stars in general are much brighter well in general always o stars are by definition brighter
in the blue than they are in the red and m stars are brighter in the red than they are in the blue
sometimes when we look at stellar spectral classification we forget that o stars are
inherently much much much much brighter than m stars but we'll talk about why that is shortly
in any event right now what we can do is look at the temperature of a star and we see that
as the temperature decreases it gets it goes from being bright in the blue to bright in the red
and that's why we can say that a blue hot object is much hotter than a red hot object red is pretty
hot to eyes if you're thinking about flame but don't want to get close to a blue hot flame that's
very very very hot in any event so real spectra real stars show that hot stars look blue because
they're brighter in blue than they are in red so let's say we put a fake bv filters on top of some
spectra and see what the impact of that would be um we can easily see that the brightness in b
filter for an o star that's kind of bv o right the brightness of in the blue filter for an o star
is the b magnitude is much greater than the v magnitude for the o star so therefore the color
will be uh negative and if we look at an m type star the b magnitude will be dimmer and therefore
larger than the v magnitude where the v magnitude will be brighter and therefore a smaller value
so a big value minus a small value equals a positive value so the color the b minus v color
for m stars is is positive and the b minus v color for o stars is negative right so that's kind of
what we were talking about the o and b stars stars are all over the place and in general a star like
the sun the g stars right in the middle their b minus v colors tend to be roughly about zero
because the magnitude difference between the two filters is roughly nothing there's almost nothing
so there is a transition point and that is roughly around the middle of the spectral sequence and
roughly at the g's okay so let's say we instead instead of looking at it from like a pretty picture
rainbow type of things we decided to look at it from a spectral sequence where we actually
measure the total brightness of a star numerically instead of using like uh like our eyeballs or
magnitudes but we start with say flux which is watts per square centimeter that's flux
falling upon a per square yeah per square watts per square meter oh you know i could have a meter
sized detector but anyway the uh we then say well what's the absolute what's the absolute flux or
the amount of light that is the luminosity falling on our detector and count the real energy that was
being deposited by that light and we get what we call a spectrum so that spectrum can be numerically
related to the johnson color system and we could say well what is the b minus v colors for the
various objects and then we see that o stars are of course brighter and in exactly the same way that
we discussed with them when we looked at simple spectra so the next question that we have is a
rather interesting one and so we see that stars are organized by their temperatures and o stars are
hot and m stars are cool how do we know this why do we know this and the answer is in the spectra
themselves so the spectrum itself determines the temperature of the star and we just are lucky enough
to be able to use the johnson's filter system to actually determine that much more easily
all right so when we're looking at the spectra of a star notice the shapes of the spectra in
in general the shapes of the spectrum of a star the blue one looks kind of nice and sloppy it starts
off in in during in the visible part of the way of electromagnetic radiation it is bright in the
blue in the ultraviolet and dim by the time it gets to red and infrared and the situation was
reversed for the m stars so what do these curves mean what do these these plots of of intensity
as a function of wavelength mean well they just mean that is that is what we're seeing is if we
look at a star it's really far away so we're not taking the image of a particular patch of a star
we're looking at it averaged over the entire star so we're looking at the average say temperature
and the average spectrum of all the regions of the star some might be a little hotter some might
be a little cooler that's what sunspots are in the sun sunspots are slightly cooler areas
prominences are a little bit cooler the sun radiates in x-rays but if we took the sun and
put it really far away maybe tens of parsecs away then we wouldn't be able to resolve the sun
but we would still be able to get the average spectrum of all the light that is that comes to us
from the sun the most important thing though about a star is that no matter how far away it is no
matter how tiny it seems in the sky it is a big thing stars are enormous objects they're much
bigger than planets even little m dwarf stars are bigger than the planet jupiter so if we take
something like the size of the sun the sun itself is a hundred the earths could fit across it and a
million earths could fit inside it so these are enormous objects and an enormous hot dense body
is opaque and an enormous hot dense body that is opaque means the light bounces around inside it if
light is being generated inside of there and it bounces around inside it until everything becomes
the same temperature once everything's the same temperature inside the star then it's at the
same temperature and what we see at the surface of the star is that average temperature of all the
light then all the material being all the same temperature at the surface so that's interesting
because it's opaque everything gets to the same temperature so temperature is a funny thing because
it's measurement it is a measurement of the internal energy of the object when the solid it's
just the things vibrating in place and how much vibrational motion it has inside of the structure
of the solid if you give it enough heat then there are bonds that must be broken down in order to
churn it from a solid to say a liquid or a solid to a gas but we'll ignore that for just a second
because that's a that's a that's a different kind of heat of temperate of different kind of change in
in heat latency and heat latency but if you have a gas that's much easier and stars are gases
they're not solids so a gaseous ball a starry gaseous ball the higher the temperature the higher
the average motion of the molecule the atoms that make up the star so they move faster so temperature
itself in a gas is related to how fast the atoms are moving inside it or ions if it's too hot
the way we can then relate temperature itself as a measurement to the speeds and therefore energy
because speed is like kinetic energy it's the energy of going fast so therefore the temperature
must be an average measurement of all of the speeds of all of the objects in it it's not
everything's going exactly the same speed that would be kind of weird but what we see is it's an
average speed over the entire over over the entire set of molecules and atoms so we can relate it to
the average kinetic energy of an atom inside of there and that thing that we call its movement
is what we call heat and heat has a lot of different things that we can talk about and that would be a
thermodynamics course but let's just start with a relatively easy concept and begin from there and
so heat is something that you measure temperature is something you measure with a thermometer
and heat is a measurement of how much wiggling that air is occurring inside of the atoms a little
bit loose definition there i know but off we go we'll just kind of keep with it for now so
but cold can be defined as the lack of motion so an absolute temperature scale we might want to
say absolutely cold we want nothing moving but we'll call that temperature equals zero and so
as you give it more and more heat it the things move faster and faster so therefore there the
temperature gets higher and higher because not everything's at the same motion it's the average
speeds of the object that determine the temperature so the kelvin temperature scale was defined a
long time ago by lord kelvin and it's related to zero is the absolute zero of it and at that time
there is no motion whatsoever on the part of anything that's inside an object that is at absolute zero
the cosmic microwave background is at three degrees above absolute zero which means it is
very cold but still there's some actually an incredible amount of energy associated with
that but we'll let that go for a second the pure water boils at 207 it freezes at least
if you cool water below 273 degrees kelvin it becomes a solid if you warm it above 273 kelvin
then as it first does it was a funny thing first when it becomes it's a solid and then there is
heat as you can apply heat to ice and it'll change phase from solid to liquid at the same temperature
until you've given it enough heat to break down the bonds that make it go from a solid to a liquid
and then once it becomes a liquid then the temperature again begins to rise because when you
apply heat to a to a phase that is in the phase transition mode you actually that's what phase
transition means is that you could have the same temperature but yet there you don't change the
relative the relative average motion of it a phase change simply changes the arrangement
or the the fundamental arrangement of the atoms and molecules inside of it so that's a pretty
loose definition too but once we get to 373 kelvin then it boils which then the bonds that make up
a liquid that are broken down and you add heat into the liquid to make it become a vapor it stays
at that temperature 373 until you've given it so much heat that all of a sudden nothing's left in
the liquid state it's all a vapor state and then the temperature can increase again and temperature
then becomes and it still is in all of these cases a measurement of the average motion of the objects
but heat is as you can see slightly different because heat can be applied to something and
it doesn't necessarily raise the temperature which is interesting and that's about phase transitions
and that should be done within a separate video but for our purposes for this all we really want
to say is that at the kelvin temperature scale for gases which make up stars that is in measurement
of their average speed and the kelvin temperature scale has some basic things we already talked
about water boiling and so forth but then fusion of hydrogen occurs when the temperature is
approximately 13 approximately 10 million degrees or about 10 million kelvin so we don't say degrees
kelvin we say degrees centigrade we say degrees fahrenheit we just say 10 million kelvin because
it's unit like watts or meters we don't say 10 we don't say 10 million lengths meters we don't say
we don't say oh that's uh that's 10 million uh times seconds right because we don't say
seconds are a time we know it's a time we know kelvin is a unit of temperature so we just say
that's 10 million kelvin that's the temperature of that star anyway so light and heat is therefore
a different thing um but yet they're all but they're related so you may receive light from the sun
in the form of infrared photons and those infrared photons can go to doing one of two things that
heat that can go to changing the internal heat of your body and the internal heat then can be
manifested in numerous ways the most common way is to make the atoms and molecules in your body
vibrate or move more quickly it also can change the state from a liquid to a gas or a solid to a
liquid depending on the intensity on the frequent the wavelength of the light so that all depends
on how it absorbs and emits it but from our perspective what we really care about is that
when light falls upon a gas it it we can treat it as a heat input and as it is it inputs that
heat into the system then what occurs is the temperature rises all right now if it's an
average if it's completely opaque and everything inside there is at is at thermal equilibrium
meaning that there isn't a place inside the star that is significantly different again compared
to the compared to another place inside the star well it's kind of a tricky thing because stars
have to be a little bit out of thermal equilibrium because they emit light and emit heat so they
have to have a source coming there but if the source the source of energy inside the star
equals the amount of energy that's coming out of the star then it can be said to be in thermal
equilibrium so as long as the star is in thermal equilibrium meaning in general it's not getting
a lot hotter and in general it's not getting a lot cooler and in general there's no big areas where
there's motion of heat going from one place to another then that we call thermal equilibrium
if an object is hot the same temperature the same temperature throughout and opaque
then it would be called the black body a black body is even a stranger object it's kind of a
theoretical i it in fact it is a theoretical object that absorbs all light that falls upon it and
since it absorbs all the light that falls upon it doesn't reflect anything it reflects no light
it absorbs all light that's kind of a that's kind of a stretch there's nothing that does not absorb
all light so any light that falls on a black body gets absorbed and therefore gets mixed around
inside the black body until then it become it thermalizes with all the other light inside of
that all the other matter inside of that and then read and then the black body then because you can
perfectly absorb it can perfectly emit and it doesn't hold back certain wavelengths of light
if a black body held back certain wavelengths of light then it would also reflect those certain
wavelengths of light which is interesting to say so once so a black body is a perfect absorber
of light and a perfect emitter which means everything inside it gets to the same temperature
that's what we care about so things that are very close to black bodies in mostly every day
parlance molten steel at a foundry the ingots of steel those are those are most certainly
black body objects they're hot they're very hot they're glowing they're all the same temperature
and in fact if you look inside the foundry it's hard to tell the color of the sides of
the walls of the foundry from the actual molten steel itself in fact when they put it in there
you can't see the difference because the steel and the walls and the gas inside of there are all
glowing at the same exact temperature and since they're glowing at the same exact temperature
they have the same exact spectrum because it's a black body spectrum okay the next thing we
can look at this is a very familiar thing is the coals of a fire look deep inside the coals of a fire
and on some camping night that you might go out to and the coals of fire not the fire flame above
but deep inside the coals where the below the wood you can you can't tell where the fire begins
and where the coals end if you look carefully in fact they all have the same temperature
they all have the same color the only reason something has a slightly different temperature
is if it's darker it's cooler but if it has the same exact temperature it'll have the same exact
color so the cool in the hot area that's being shielded inside of the the cavity of the black
body of the of the fire deep down there that's a black body too now a welder's arc is a very
very hot object but what actually is the thing that might happen to be a black body remember the
welder melts melts something else the steel at very high temperature and so not the sparking
stuff because that would be an emission spectrum it would be a gaseous form of it or but the sparks
coming off the actual sparks themselves they're reddish but if you look at the center of a welding
arc's light the light itself is where the metal has been turned to blue hot and now blue hot that
area is very small remember the foundry look is this enormous thing and you can still look at it
it's bright but it's not you can still look at it but the intensity of light goes up here either
rapidly as the temperature goes up so the melted iron that is being focused on by the arc welder
that's the thing that's incredibly hot and incredibly blue and incredibly bright so there's
something about it getting hot that means also getting bright too all right oh no now i get to
throw equations at you so equations are a funny thing so the entire shape doesn't matter if it's
a black body any black body every black body has a theoretical curve that has the shape that kind of
looks like a an off kilter uh normal normal curve or a bell curve take a bell curve and like stretch
one side long and that's kind of what the black body curve looks like the only thing that that make
that can be different from one black body to another is the temperature and so it just basically
scales everything up by a factor of the temperature so as as if it's hotter the the area of the black
body curve scales up by a factor of the temperature of the third power and so as you get hotter and
hotter the but the area gets hot the the temperature gets higher and higher so it's a very well it's
actually the temperature of fourth power is really what it comes down to but but still so the the the
point is is that every black body has the same shape doesn't matter what its temperature is
the same shape but yet whether it's brighter at one frequency or another that's a different thing
so different black bodies at different temperatures peak have peak wavelengths at different wavelengths
when they're very very cool black bodies as we saw in say the iron foundry or even a very cool
star like beel juice it peaks in the red or even in the infrared um and then this gets hotter and
hotter it starts peaking in the visible light like say yellow or green and but if you were to see
such a thing that's like six five thousand or six thousand kelvin to your eye it would look white
because it's roughly evenly balanced across the the the uh the spectrum visible spectrum
but it peaks at specific wavelengths that we would call green if it were if it was peaking
roughly on six thousand kelvin and once you get above seven thousand kelvin uh the peak temperature
the peak location starts going into the ultraviolet so it starts from the red and infrared moves
through the center of the visible spectrum and all the way up to ultraviolet it just so happens
that stellar temperatures stellar surface temperatures range in their peak brightnesses
for most stars in the visible light range all the way up through the blue light and all the way up
through infrared so infrared to ultraviolet that's where stars seem to peak in their ultra in their
black body radiation all right so when we take the curves for black bodies and we isolate only
the sections that are that are that are visible light if we isolate only those sections it just
so happens that the actual spectra of stars very closely match the theoretical predictions
of what a black body curve of that temperature looks like they're really really really close
it's not perfect and the reason it's not perfect is because atmosphere stars have atmospheres
and the atmosphere of the star acts to absorb light from that star and when it absorbs the
light from the star it takes the light away from the star and then we don't see it we see an absorption
feature maybe we see even emission features but typically it'll absorb it in one wavelength
and then that those atoms and molecules will re-radiate it in some other location and it'll
escape in a different way it doesn't hang on to it it just re-radiates in another direction in other
wavelengths so the sun itself was specifically the black body for it would peak right around
5500 roughly right in the middle of the spectrum but yet the actual curve because of this
redistribution is a little bit more blue so that's kind of interesting it's real but even so the curve
for the black the solar spectrum is really close to a black body spectrum so what are some other
astronomical objects that we see that have a black body spectrum remember it has to be dense
and it has to be thermalized it has to be all the same temperature it has to be one object
that's at the same temperature all right that's cool and if it's not and we'll see what kind of
things we have so if we look at dark dark dust clouds deep and interstellar space the places
where stars are being born dense enough so that they're they barely collapse under the gravity
they might be a parsec or two across they're very very cold objects they might be 60 degrees
above absolute zero and so even if it's 60 degrees above absolute zero it can still have
a black body curve because that's the average temperature so if it's an average temperature
of that what's the peak wavelength well the peak wavelength is deep in the infrared deep in the
infrared if not even in the radio wavelengths so when you have something at 60 degrees Kelvin if
you look in infrared light you'll see it glowing so therefore that's why the spitzer space infrared
space telescope has been built and what and why space telescope has been built to look at objects
that glow in the infrared and things that are cool objects very cool objects a dark dust cloud
does not glow in any light in the visible light and therefore we see it to be dark if we then look
at say something like a protostellar object like what let's say now a star is formed inside this
dark dust cloud once it's formed inside there the star itself is pretty warm but yet it's not hot
enough to call itself a star maybe it's a bit warmer than the maybe it's much warmer than the
surface of Jupiter and it might be a few hundred Kelvin therefore it seems to be a dull red but it
peaks in the infrared in the in the near infrared near infrared means just a little bit further red
than the about 7,000 angstroms or 700 nanometers and you'll notice also that something that is
600 Kelvin is a thousand times brighter at the peak than something that's 60 Kelvin so the hot the
warmer it is the much more the much brighter it is so by multiplying by a factor of 10 gives you a
lot lot lot larger factor of luminosity in terms of temperature in luminosity so we go to the sun
now and the sun is about 6,000 Kelvin and so it's about a thousand times again brighter than say some
dust cloud that's at 600 Kelvin and it peaks roughly in the visible wavelength region but it has
significant output in infrared radio well not really a lot of radio but significant infrared
output and significant ultraviolet output the sun's spectrum is pretty close to a black body and we
can use that as a measurement and and what we feel as warmth on a summer day is the infrared light
that passes from the sun through the atmosphere to us as part of the black body spectrum the
the sunscreen you wear is for the intense ultraviolet light that that that drops off rapidly at
a shorter wavelength all right so then the next thing we can look at is something even hotter
say the the accretion disc around a black hole so there's material falling into a black hole
and as it falls into that black hole it gets hotter and hotter and hotter and just before it falls
into the center of a black hole it gets to be tens of thousands of Kelvin actually it gets much
hotter than that but we're talking about the outskirts or maybe we're even looking at an
extraordinarily hot o-star so an extraordinarily hot o-star might be tens of thousands of Kelvin
and those things are even more luminous than the sun thousands of times more luminous than the sun
and they their peak wavelength is way out in the ultraviolet and they emit even more visible light
than the sun does they emit even more infrared light than the sun does but they emit even more
ultraviolet light so in general the hotter something is if it's a black body which is mostly a star
stars are mostly black bodies or really close to black bodies in terms of their spectra then
it's brighter overall wavelength and the peak of the brightness moves to be shorter and shorter
and shorter wavelengths all right so the law for black body says the wavelength maximum the maximum
wavelength of the peak of the curve just depends on some little number b which is a measurable number
and then you divide it's the inverse of the temperature so the hotter it is the shorter
the wavelength is where the peak exists and finally these and how much energy does get gets
dumped out of an object that has a particular temperature in Kelvin if it's a black body
the temperature of an object goes as the temperature the energy output per surface area
on the surface of the object goes like the temperature of the fourth power so we take a
standard sized patch and we take that patch maybe it's a size of your hand or something we put it
on various and things that are hot or cool and we measure the total energy output through a standard
patch say you know it's like five ten centimeters by centimeters or five centimeters by five centimeters
whatever it happens to be the energy output through that standard patch will go like the
temperature of the fourth power so something that's twice as hot as something else will emit 16 times
as much energy something that's 10 times as hot will emit 10,000 times as much energy and something
that's 100 times as hot will emit 100 million times as much energy so the hotter it is the more
energy it puts out and it's a very fast function of temperature so these are our basic concepts of
stellar of stars if and it makes them pretty easy stars are pretty close to black bodies
if it's hotter it's brighter if it's hotter it's bluer that's really what we really care about
so when we take about the when we look at all the stars that we see in the sky and then we
look at their stellar spectra we now have a pretty good firm foundation of what we can look at and
we take the spectra of a star and we see that o stars are bluer compared to m stars so we know
what that means and now then we can use the johnson's filter system to uniquely determine the temperature
of a star all we have to do is calibrate using the spectra on high level calibration what the
spectrum of a star is like an o star and m star g star whatever and we learned what the typical the
average spectrum of those are with their temperatures are according to spectra and then we can step it
down and you do it easier by saying well look at the colors and the b minus v the b minus v color
uniquely determines the temperature of a star so all we have to do in order to learn about something
very important about the star meaning how much how fast the atoms are moving on average at the
surface of the star or inside right at the inside of the star is take a picture in with two filters
in front of it say the b filter of johnson and the v filter of johnson put pictures in front of those
things and difference the brightness between the two and once we do that we know the color index
the color index is uniquely determined by the temperature so this is an amazing consequence
and those colors the b minus v colors transition relatively smoothly from from the hot to the
cold there's some lumps along the way but in general the more negative the color the bluer the more
positive the b minus v color the redder and cooler b minus v negative hotter hotter hotter
bluer b minus v positive cooler cooler cooler redder so we can go on and on with those kind of
stuff and we will so this is a really interesting thing where you take the concept of the magnitude
system and apply it to some deep physics about the nature of how atoms move inside an object
and we'll talk more about that next time
hello this is jason kendall welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures today we're
going to be talking about spectroscopy spectroscopy is the study of how light interacts with matter
and how light the interaction of matter with light betrays itself and gets transmitted through space
to us so we can receive it spectroscopy is simply the way we take the light that's coming from a
distance source and use some method by which we can break it apart into a spectrum to see how the
intensity of the light varies with wavelength or frequency so an easy way to think about this is
allow normal white light to pass through a prism and then you'll see a rainbow effect well typically
a rainbow effect is pretty hard to see unless of course there's a very narrow opening through which
that that passes the light in a very narrow beam and that narrow beam then goes through the prism
if it's a general wave of light that goes through it or an ambient then the prism will not necessarily
create a spectrum well it will create a spectrum but it will be harder to see
so for us to make it better we usually take the source whatever it is send it through a narrow
slit so that it becomes a ray or a beam we don't care about losing all that light because we're
just going to analyze the light that comes to us from there we pass it through a prism the prism
breaks apart the light by because the inside of glass the speed of light is different for different
wavelengths and so it spreads the light apart into its constituent wavelengths or frequencies
and then we take a picture of the incident light on out after it goes through the prism
and that is the study of spectroscopy something divides the light up so that we can see the
intensity at given wavelengths or frequencies and that we know exactly how that thing is interacting
with the light meaning the prism so we don't have to worry about the prisms interaction of the light
we just worry about the origin of the source all right so if we then look at more common things
like if we take a prism just a garden household variety prism or a crystal you notice that there's
always a pretty rainbow that comes off of the sunlight well pretty rainbows from the sunlight
are indicated here in this image from the mcmath solar observatory down in Tucson, Arizona run by
NOAO and this this absorb this rainbow that we always see has actually some darker spots in it
and those darker spots are the shadows of the slit through which we passed the sunlight
so that's what we call them absorption lines because we make a we make a line a vertical line
slit through which we pass the solar the sunlight when that sunlight then passes into our spectroscope
when that spectroscope might just simply be a prism or it might be some other device like
in a shell spectrograph or something like that or reflecting off of the surface but at the angle
what we see is we see a series of dark lines on the spectrum and those are places where it simply
is dimmer than the surrounding continuum so the rainbow itself we call it the continuum or the
continuous spectrum and there are absorption features which are darker than the surrounding
continuum so the sun's spectrum is actually what we call an absorption spectrum an absorbed there
is light that's been absorbed from the continuum all right so there's a different kind of spectrum
as well where there's bright there's bright emission on top of a dark background so perhaps the
material is not emitting light at all frequencies maybe it's emitting light at specific frequencies
and if those if the materials you're meeting it only at specific frequencies not with a rainbow
but with specific wavelengths of light then if we pass it through a spectroscope we see the lines
of emission that that we put here what's funny we call them lines and that's simply because
when we talk about emission lines or absorption lines that's simply because we're using a slit
type opening and so we're actually seeing the image of the slit so in an absorption spectrum
or I'm sorry in an emission spectrum such as these the emission spectrum themselves
that's the image of the slit through which the light is going and so you'll see that the image
of the slit the appearance of the line is the same for each one it's just the color is different
and the wavelength is different so that's interesting and we also notice that they're
that they're kind of distinct well emission spectra are fascinating because what you can
where you can get them is if you take say sodium sodium chloride's table salt and you hold it
in a Bunsen burner and you hold it like a bit of table salt in like a metal is a piece of metal
and you put it over a Bunsen burner and heat it up till it glows then the flame that comes off the
Bunsen burner will have a particular wavelength and if you look at the lights that is coming off
of the burning salt that comes off of there you get a specific set of wavelengths and those are
emission spectrum now you'll get a sodium spectrum and of course since it's table salt you'll also
get a chlorine spectrum as well what really we care about like the sodium spectrum but you see that
a noble gas such as neon will have a different spectrum and mercury vapor has a different
spectrum and ubiquitous hydrogen throughout the cosmos has as a specific spectrum so
what's funny about all these emission spectrum is that it doesn't matter where you get the material
from say hydrogen or helium or neon or sodium chloride or something or when you get it or from
whom you get it it doesn't matter all you have to do is heat it up such that it becomes vaporous
and it will emit the same exact emission spectrum and so therefore everything has its own finger
print hydrogen is the same thing no matter where you get your hydrogen from sodium has the same
fingerprint no matter what and we call these things fingerprints because the emission spectra
is at exactly the same wavelengths or frequencies every single time you measure it which is very
interesting which tells you something about the nature of the matter so what what emission lines
can be done and specifically we're going to be talking about what are called Kirchhoff's laws of
spectroscopy and Kirchhoff it was his full name is Gustav Kirchhoff and in the mid-eight-nineteenth
century he was doing a whole bunch of experimental physics and he worked with the guy who invented
the Bunsen burner Mr Bunsen and they did a bunch of spectroscopy and what he found were the following
three laws Kirchhoff's laws first say that emission lines are produced at single frequencies
up behind in front of a dark background if you're looking at a hot rarified gas that has
no bright emission source or no bright continuum behind it it's just a gas that you see with nothing
right behind it so you get specific wavelengths appearing at specific brightness at specific
wavelengths and that comes from a hot gas and that is one of Kirchhoff's laws of spectroscopy
the next one is if you take a continuous source like a light bulb like an incandescent light ball
which gives a black body type of radiation and that is in front and that is behind a cool gas
maybe it's the same gas maybe it's hydrogen gas that's cooler than the bulb well as the light
from the hot hot bulb passes through the cooler gas the cool gas absorbs the light and it and the
absorption then dims the light at specific frequencies and those specific frequencies
where it gets dimmed then get passed through we see we see it as a spectrum and we see something
like the solar spectrum but when we look carefully we actually see something more interesting deeper
in just a bit and so we can actually relate Kirchhoff's laws to as a trio of things because
a hot a hot opaque body such as a light bulb emits a continuous spectrum something hot and opaque
emits a continuous spectrum something hot and opaque that is behind a cloud of cooler gas
that emits that we see if we look through the cooler gas to the hot source we will see an
absorption spectrum now if we look at a quarter to that and just look at the gas that did the
absorbing of the light we will see an emission spectrum so really Kirchhoff's laws are through
our two sides are three sides of the same situation you can either look straight at the
continue the straight at the hot dense object and you'll see a continuous object a continuous
source you'll look at the cloud that's sitting off to the side of the absorption of the hot
object and look through the cloud at the hot body and you'll see an absorption spectrum or you'll
look off to the side of just the emission line just the hot cloud that will cooler cloud compared
to the hot body and you'll see an emission spectrum so they're all part of the same thing
and that means that as we look at these objects that the emission lines and the absorption lines
are at exactly the same wavelengths and that makes sense because the like let's say it's a hydrogen
cloud gas and hydrogen will absorb and emit at exactly the same wavelengths it's not like it absorbs
at one wavelength and emits at another no it it emits at the same exact wavelength that it absorbs
that's interesting so it's telling you something about the nature of matter the nature of matter
itself and Gustav Kirchhoff did all the work in spectroscopy well before the advent of quantum
mechanics and the model of the the Bohr model of the atom so as we look at the nature of what
matter is he didn't know about all this stuff so he derived these laws empirically and these
observations then had to be accounted for with the advent of quantum mechanics which they were
so most importantly is that the setup of the spectroscope tells us an enormous amount about
the nature of the material so we can tip it depends on what you how you wish to view things or
what is possible for you to view you can set up an experimental apparatus in many many ways
in order to do spectroscopy but it's typically pretty easy and dirt well it's not easy typically
it's helpful to start with an emission spectrum in order to identify exactly what material you're
looking at and then hopefully through some chemistry you can determine really what you're looking at
but spectroscopy itself is considered to be probably one of the most prevalently used
science device scientific tools at our disposal to understand exactly what makes up an
some kind of object so Kirchhoff's laws were were were developed in the mid early 19th
mid 19th century and refined until the early we're not understood of why they behaved until
the mid 20th century now what can you get out of spectroscopy well the first thing is because
every chemical element has its own particular fingerprint or signature every single element
that must be present in there must emit light or absorb light so you can tell the composition of
what's in the what's in the gas that you're absorbing or what the nature of the cool gas in
front of the hot body is in addition the spectrum changes a little bit if you're looking at ionized
gas so if you ionize a gas meaning the electron gets blown out of the atom and if it's blown out
of the atom then the electric field changes a little bit which changes the spectrum just slightly
and so not only do you have to make all these fingerprint catalogs of emission spectrum but
you also have to try to get the emission spectrum of ionized gases as well which really becomes
kind of a pain because the more you ionize a heavy element the the actual the spectrum itself changes
considerably and then if you then take it and we're just talking simple atomic spectrum atomic
elements if molecules are involved like such as water or carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide or
deoxyribonucleic acid or RNA or anything if you used to do spectroscopy on complex molecules
or even simple molecules every single molecule has its own individual spectrum and some of them can
be incredibly complex and then we know that poly aromatic poly aromatic cyclic hydrocarbons
are actually present in space and can be observed because of their spectrum in fact
ethyl alcohol has been found in space and some extraordinarily simple amino acids have been found
in space so this is really interesting we can know something about the nature of which molecules
are present not even having to go there it's really fascinating now the other thing that's
interesting about the nature of spectroscopy is that because it takes energy in order to we
had a hot memory in a hot bulb in front of a cool gas that hot bulb provides energy into the gas
and that gas then reacts to it well if the temperature of the gas is not hot enough then
it might not react or it might not absorb certain we might not might not get the wavelengths of
light it needs in or it doesn't get the energy it needs in order to hop up and down or we can also
then determine that by looking at how the gas is absorbing or emitting in different wavelengths
of frequencies we can actually determine the temperature of that gas so if you have a gas
full of hydrogen and it's in front it's above a star if that gas is above right above a star
maybe it's the atmosphere of the star and the atmosphere is cooler than the star then we might
see a big absorption feature for say hydrogen but let's say the star is extremely extremely hot
and the electrons are ionized off of the hydrogen atom then you won't get any absorption at all
even though hydrogen is present or maybe the star is very very very cool and you don't get
any absorption of hydrogen because the star doesn't have enough energy to kick the electrons out of
the lower orbits of the of hydrogen into higher orbits well this could also and spectroscopy
the spectroscopy can tell you something about the temperature of it if you then look at the nature
of the lines themselves we can find that sometimes the lines are not exactly as narrow as we think
so maybe you in a laboratory you measure the frequency of hydrogen the emission lines of
hydrogen and then what you do is you take that hot gas and put it under extraordinary pressure
if it's under extraordinary pressure you're going to find that the lines themselves these
emission lines will be broader because as it's under pressure the atoms the hydrogen atoms are
moving at a higher speed which means that some some of them are Doppler shifted towards you away
from you from your emission which means that as the energy goes into and out of the the energy
as the small as the atoms of hydrogen are moving fast as they're emitting then that can Doppler
shift it either towards you away from you and thus broaden the lines when it's called pressure
broadening and the same thing happens with density so if you have a high dense atmosphere
you get different kinds of broadening so each of these things can be studied inside of the spectrum
of the star and different kinds of broadening or different profiles to the line meaning not just
that the line is like okay it's totally dark and then bank i've got this one bright thing like a spike
maybe it's shaped like a like a funnel and we have funnel type shapes maybe you've
got wings and then a funnel there's all sorts of ways that this that matter can interact with light
and the profile of the line meaning exactly how does it vary around that particular wavelength
can tell you a lot about the nature of the star itself or whatever you're looking at
and there's an incredible amount of information that gets carried along with it and that gives us
physical data about what's happening at the conditions of the matter when the light was emitted
and because now we can understand the elements of such as pressure and density and temperature
and composition now we can do physics and the physics then allows us to understand what's really
going on and that's what we that's what so spectroscopy and the invention of the spectroscope
and if the the invention of Gustavs laws as they began introduced the concept of astrophysics to
astronomy because up until the concept of astrophysics up until the concept of spectroscopy
really took hold we could never really know anything about what was going on in the stars
all we could learn is that this thing's moving it's going across the sky it's bright but we didn't
really understand the spectrum so it took some time before we said well look if there must be an
absorption spectrum coming from that star well stars are very dim so it took a long time for
the technology to come around such as you could actually make a spectrum of a star
photographically at least but once we understood the nature of the spectrum of a star we now then
could transform astronomy into astrophysics and that allows us to learn exactly how something
is happening even though it's hundreds of light years away or thousands of light years away or
millions of light years away because we trust that all of the physics that happens here in
the laboratory and this is a really big assumption this is one of the most important underlying
assumptions about all astrophysics due to spectroscopy is that since all the laws of the
physics are the same everywhere in the universe at all times of the universe's existence meaning
from all the way ago to all the way today that the laws of physics themselves are the same
then we can trust spectroscopy because we only get a messenger of light so that's a really
interesting assumption that all of light and all of matter is the same here as it was there and as
we measure the laboratory wavelengths of hydrogen and then we look at some distant quasar and that
distant quasar emits light and it absorbs light and there's absorption of light as it travels to
us through the intergalactic medium then we can trust that we can actually understand what's
happening between us and the quasar and even at the quasar that emitted the light say 10
billion years ago and the light traveled for 10 billion years so the universality of the laws of
physics is what we trust because we've never been to the stars we probably never will be to the
stars but the physics of light interact with matter allows us to reach with our imagination
out to the stars and learn about what is happening over there and we'll see the effect
of spectroscopy everywhere throughout all of these courses and that's how we actually know what's
going on over there. Hello this is Jason Kendall and welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy
lectures today we're going to be talking about the nature of matter itself what is the matter with
matter matter is that stuff that makes up the universe in fact let's even make a more interesting
definition for matter matter has mass and as mass it must be pushed around by forces
so anything that can accelerate a mass through a force is how matter interacts with other matter
kind of weird way of thinking about it but that's old newtons laws so we just go all the way back
to newtons laws and say there's some stuff that we'll call matter and matter may be accelerated
or decelerated and the thing that does that accelerating or deceleration is called a force
and so there are four different ways the universe has of pushing things around and they're called
the four fundamental forces of nature one of them is gravity and gravity obviously attracts every
mass attracts every other mass and causes it to accelerate that's the nature of gravity well we
also we know by by uh einstein now and just newtons laws work very well but we know einstein's law
einstein's version of gravity says that matter curves space time and it falls inside of that
curved space time but what we can think about let's go back to newtons laws newtons version of
gravity we have two pieces of matter that then gravitate to each other and they accelerate
towards each other that's what we really care about is the acceleration of matter well what's
the other thing well we could put a pair of charges on top of well we could have a plus
charge and a minus charge an electric charge and they get if they're the same type of charge they
repel if they have the opposites then they'll attract each other and that will cause the matter
to accelerate the electromagnetic force causes an acceleration and the thing that we call the
electromagnetic force that which transmits transmits the force in the case of gravity it's the
curvature of space time but with the electromagnetic force it's the transmission of light photons back
and forth between the charged particles as they move and vibrate they change the electric field
and that vibrating moving electric field then indicates how that thing should be pushed or
pulled by the charges that as the light is receiving them all right so the electromagnetic force
is another way that matter can be accelerated or moved and the next one is the strong and weak
nuclear forces the strong nuclear force holds holds protons together inside of the nucleus of an atom
and holds neutrons and protons all inside a nucleus as well as holding the constituent quarks
but we'll talk about that shortly so the strong and weak nuclear forces only really come into
play when we talk about nuclear particles or the centers of atoms all right so what do we mean by
matter all right so I just said it's the thing that gets pushed around when their force is
acted upon it all right so you have to have some way of interacting well gravity says that if it's
got mass it will you have something to do with the gravitational force if it also has charge
then the mass that has the charge will then be accelerated if it has if it interacts via the
weak nuclear force by the exchange of w or z bosons or it exchanges or interacts by the by the
strong nuclear force the interchange of blue odds then the matter then will accelerate because of
these interactions but what makes up matter well matter in the universe is comes in from very big
things to very small things and we'll start with the tiniest like quarks and leptons which are
fundamental particles you can't break them apart any further when there are subatomic particles
like protons and neutrons which are composed of quarks and then you think about electrons which
are fundamental particles themselves the fundamental particle called a lepton is an electron and it
can't be broken apart and then you can take protons and neutrons and smash put them together
and then you get a nucleus of an atom and if you put some electrons around it you've got an atom
if you put atoms together with next to each other and you've got molecules if you have
multiple huge molecules you can have a bucky ball or a bucky chain or carbon nanotube or you can
have a crystal of iron or or a nice little quartz crystal of amethyst or something or you can have
deoxyribonucleic acid or just water H2O any many of these things complex molecules and simple molecules
and then you could take all sorts of molecules and pump them together make crystals out of them
or make glomerations on them put some over here and some over there and pack them together and
you might get a person or an elephant or a giraffe or a car or a planet or a star or a galaxy
you know all sorts of stuff you can make out of atoms and just think of atoms as your building
blocks of everything and that's what you can make it out of so the ordinary matter in the
universe is what we call atoms and it makes up all the stuff that we know so what's an atom
all right so an atom has a nucleus and a nucleus has some electrons swarming around it and the
cartoon thing that we always see and always have seen for a long time that's a really helpful
visualization but it really doesn't look like that we'll talk about what we mean by that next time
but we'll look at it sir but we'll kind of go with this cartoon for a little bit and the cartoon says
that in the center of the atom there is a nucleus and the nucleus is composed of protons and neutrons
and the neutrons are uncharged and electrically neutral they don't do anything they're a little
bit more massive than the proton uh but the neutron itself just a tiny bit more massive
than the proton but the proton has a positive charge so the proton's positive charge is part
of the nucleus and the neutron's positive charge can be in a nucleus and they're surrounded by a
cloud of electrons and there is if it's a neutral atom then there's one electron for every proton
that exists in the atom so you got one in one uh if it's ionized then there will be fewer there
will be fewer electrons than there are protons and you can also have ions where there are more
electrons that's kind of weird you'd have to have a very strange arrangement so the electrons don't
fully screen the protons or it might be a dense environment where the electrons are being forced
upon the atom but in general we can think of that electrons and protons come one to one with respect
to each other and when they go one to one we see a cloud of electrons and we have a neutral atom
i what's funny is is also that we talked about the fundamental particles so an electron is a
fundamental particle and a proton is not it is a subatomic particle it's composed of quarks
but a proton is about 1800 times the mass of an electron and if we think about how much mass that
is a typical person college students say here at william patrickson the typical student is about
if they're eating ramen on a saturday night as they're studying for their finals
then they'll meet be like 140 150 pounds because they're losing weight they're all stressed out
so but now you take 1800 of those and that's approximately 100 tons so an electron let's
say a normal person is the mass of an electron then the mass of the proton would be 100 tons
i'm just trying to think of what exactly would be 100 tons i mean dump trucks a huge dump
trucks well we'd have to look at earth mover dump trucks those enormous things that are in mining
operations or or strip mining operations those are hundreds of tons so there's some big things
that are hundreds of tons and we can think about wow me compared to 100 tons and what is okay so
some pickup trucks or some large trucks that you might go by are about a ton so 100 pickup trucks
or 100 suvs or 100 large cars and compact them together and call that one object is equivalent
is the mass of one thing the best the proton compared to say you if you are an electron
kind of interesting all right so now how are they distributed in space according to this
cartoon it makes it look oh everybody's all happy and joyful and the electrons are really big and
the protons are really big and the neutrons are really big but they're not they're incredibly tiny
the typical size scale of of an atom is on the order of 10 to the minus 10th meters we're about
an angstrom or so and most of the of the atom itself is empty space in fact only one part in 10
to the 15th of an atom is actually taken up by the matter of the atom the rest is the fields of
electromagnetism between the electron and the proton the disturbed field that actually keeps the
electron in place and the protons where it tells the electrons where they are in any event this is
really interesting because we think well how empty is it if we were to say take a relatively
decent size building or a house and a typical house might be say 30 meters across specifically if we
go to the museum of natural history we see the Hayden sphere is exactly 30 meters across that big
glassed-in ball at the Hayden planetarium in New York City so at the museum of natural history
in fact there's a really fun exhibit in there that shows the size of a proton compared to
the atom and in fact the 30 meter wide which is 100 feet wide 100 feet foot wide ball compared is
say the size of an atom somewhere in the surface of that ball is where the electron is for hydrogen
it's called just plain old hydrogen hydrogen atom which only has one proton and one electron
so if we're looking at that a typical atom of hydrogen we'll have one proton and one electron
the electron is somewhere on the surface of that ball and the proton is at the center of that ball
how big is the proton it's about a six point font of a printed a six point printed font so
it's the size of a mote of dust so that's how small the proton is it is a mote of dust compared
to something a hundred feet in diameter that's amazing so most of the of all atoms is completely
empty space electrons are really tiny so and the electrons are about a hundred times smaller than a
proton in terms of size which is fascinating so an electron is a tiny tiny tiny thing and even
still the mote of dust compared to where the electron is on the surface of an atom anyway
so well how do we distinguish atoms well we we can have multiple protons in the nucleus
so let's say we have multiple protons and these protons tend to be well they're always at the
nucleus but if you have one proton we call hydrogen you have two we call it helium three we call it
lithium four we call it beryllium and then nitrogen carbon oxygen and so on the name of the element
tells you how many protons it has in it and so the atomic number is the number of protons
and every single atom every single atom every single element which is is chemically distinct
and operates and each of the chem the chemistry is different between each one so right now we
know that there are 118 elements that have been made about 24 of them have to actually be made
in laboratories and they only live for like microseconds or nanoseconds before they fall apart
but 87 of them are metals meaning they have the capacity to to allow electrons to flow off of them
into and they valence electrons so they can easily be stripped off 11 of them in in naturally well
like normal human circumstances not too hot not too cold good enough for a human not too high in
the atmosphere not too far below the ground that 11 of them come as gases two of them occur like
as liquids like mercury is one of them and bromines another a bunch of them are radioactive about
25 or so and these are the chemical elements and only the most the most massive ones are only formed
in in in particle accelerators so when we look at the name we look at that we've seen periodic
tables in the past so let's look at how we read the name of the elements always the number of
protons the atomic number describes the name of the element and so if it's got one proton it's
always hydrogen if it's got 23 protons it's always vanadium if it's got 19 protons it's always
potassium if it's got 11 it's always sodium if it's got two it's always helium if it's got six
it's always carbon that's the name of it and so all of the names are exactly what the atomic number
is now the funny thing is is that the names themselves then become abbreviated so hydrogen
is age beryllium is be lithium is li sodium of course is na gold is of course au oh my goodness
potassium is k what's going on here so basically most of them are deviations but some of them
derive from greek and latin so we don't necessarily have a one-to-one with their with their deviations
and the names that are common in in say english but they would be common in other languages
so but the name is always no matter what language they're spoken in the name of the thing describes
the total number of protons and so there's a whole slog of them and the periodic table of
elements is is broken up into similar chemical behavior such as hydrogen and lithium and sodium
readily readily readily give away their their electron and fluorine chlorine bromine and iodine
readily grab an electron and so they're not filled electron shells so they will take an electron
so the most reactive elements come on both sides of the periodic table so that's kind of how they
go and the farthest right ones are the noble gases and they hardly react to anything because they're
like they're electron shells are filled so when the the most abundant elements out of all of the
elements in the universe almost 75 percent of all the matter all the elements of the universe all
the matter of the universe is hydrogen and 25 percent of the matter in the universe is helium
and then oxygen carbon neon nitrogen silicon iron magnesium and sulfur come next and so all of the
things beyond hydrogen and helium make up only about one percent of all the matter in the universe
so if we want to say what is the matter of the universe is hydrogen and it's helium that's pretty
much it all the other stuff the things that we're made out of the things that everything else that
we encounter that's made out of that's just really rare stuff and some of it's really rare compared
to the rarity of it is so hydrogen and helium is everything in the universe and where's the
helium on earth well it's embedded inside of natural gas deposits and it comes to us as a result of
of emissions by the sun all right so remember we talked about the total number of protons to
get with this is the atomic number but remember we also said that neutrons can be in the core
in the in the nucleus of an atom so when neutrons are in the nucleus of an atom if they're differing
numbers we call them isotopes so the isotope meaning isotopic meaning the the topos is the
number of protons and so the number of protons is always the same so hydrogen plain old hydrogen
has none no neutrons but if it has a neutron it's called deuterium and there's deuterium
has two objects in the core and it's called tritium if it is hydrogen with two neutrons attached to it
in the nucleus so tritium though is radioactive and will readily decay that that neutron will
readily decay away but in every case there's all to make an atom with deuterium it only takes
even though there's two things in nucleus there's only one electron because the proton has one charge
and the neutron has no charge so if we look at something a little bit bigger say carbon
carbon 12 has six neutrons and six protons carbon 13 has six protons and seven neutrons carbon 14
has six protons and eight neutrons and once you get too many neutrons tends to fall apart so isotopes
with lots and lots and lots of neutrons tend to fall apart if they have far and if they happen to
have fewer neutrons than protons they will also fall apart fall apart too so radioactive carbon
is very familiar we call it radioactive carbon dating and carbon falls apart and what does falling
apart mean we mean that it's radioactive and radioactivity is a decay of a subatomic particle
from one type of thing to another so tritium as I said was radioactive tritium will spontaneously
decay at some random interval a random atom a random nucleus of tritium will spontaneously
one of the neutrons will go I don't think I want to be a neutron anymore and turn into a proton
and in so doing the the nucleus will spit out an electron and also spit out a neutrino and those
things will go away but now it's helium because there's two protons and one neutron so it's light
helium so that's we call light helium or I see it's got one neutron less than the number of protons
that's light helium and likewise carbon 14 decays to nitrogen 14 by one of the neutrons
transforming itself into a proton and so carbon then which has six protons becomes nitrogen which
has seven so now we have seven and seven and the the nitrogen is happy and in so decaying
and switching from a proton from a neutron to a proton an electron gets spitted spot out
and a neutrino gets spot out and that in if a neutron is also all by itself it'll spontaneously
decay in about 11 minutes or so so these neutrons really don't know how to stay together because
the electron the proton and electron really want to fly apart and the the thing that's holding them
together is the weak nuclear force and that's the reaction if you have a neutrino coming out you've
got the weak nuclear forces which are we talked about earlier part so these things are all called
beta decays you can also have an alpha decay where a full helium nucleus of two protons and two
neutrons gets spat out by a very massive very massive nucleus like uranium or something like that
you can also gamma decay where the nucleus itself is in an energized state and emits a very high
energy light particle a very high energy photon in the form of a gamma ray so wait a second that's
where we get the gamma ray idea from is gamma rays are high energy light so we have alpha beta
and gammas alpha particles are heavy nuclei beta particles are electrons and gamma particles are
photons of very high energy and these things were given their names during the early years of studying
radioactivity back in the turn of the 19th century right around the turn of the 20th century
in that area so people name them that way and sometimes you'll always be hearing alpha particles
or alpha decay or alpha this that always means a helium nucleus and we consider beta decay or
beta particles and those are always electrons and the gamma rays what we know about gamma rays
they're like and that's where that comes from so why we care about all this is because when we're
looking at astronomy we can't actually reach out to the stars and take a bucket of a distant star
and bring it home and see what's cooking in there we can't do that so we want to learn what is going
on in those distant stars and what's happening to the matter over there we used to identify what
kind of matter it is and that's where we get Kirchhoff's laws of spectroscopy because every
single element on the periodic table has its own spectrum when it gets excited or gets collided into
any mitz light if it it'll absorb specific lights light energy and it'll emit those things exactly
those wavelengths so every single chemical element in existence has its own individual spectrum and
those spectra are always the same no matter what because every hydrogen atom is exactly the same
in the entire universe every carbon atom is the same in the entire universe different isotopes
but they're the same they're always the same because they're just because protons are the same
everywhere in the universe and neutrons are the same everywhere in the universe and electrons are
the same in everywhere in the universe so every atom is just like any other atom if it's the same
isotope and even if they're different isotopes they're almost the same because they just differ
by the total number of neutrons so and there's no difference between them other than the number of
neutrons but what's a neutron what's a proton what's an electron they're the same things
everywhere in the universe and you stack them together to make atoms and each individual
atom and all the molecules associated with them well let's stick with atoms because we're talking
about elements for a second the atomic elements each one of them has their own individual spectral
signature and that can be discovered in fact it was first discovered that these things existed
as objects spectroscopically because we'd have to say oh what do we have in this gas if we have
some rarefied gas that we cannot see but yet it glows because of the energy we're putting into it
if it glows with that characteristic pink it must be hydrogen if it glows in a particular
different way it's helium and we break apart the spectrum and we look at the spectrum of the thing
as it's glowing or maybe it's cool and we've got something behind it that's hot that passes through
the cool gas the absorption lines are exactly the same as the emission lines and that's what we
talked about with Kirchhoff's laws of spectroscopy so every single element every single atom is the
same in the cosmos in terms of what they are meaning one carbon 12 atom is exactly the same
as every other carbon 12 atom in the universe and they all have exactly the same spectral
fingerprint that fundamental statement that that the spectra of all of these are identical says
that the light interacts with the matter interacts with carbon 12 no matter how it interacts every
all light interacts with everything and that is part of an incredibly important idea called the
Copernican principle which means the cosmological principle says that there is no special place
in the cosmos and that all laws of physics are the same everywhere and we will rely on that idea
to get us out to the stars and and learn what is out there but what's funny is is that this whole
thing that I discussed about the nature of these things it's not been known forever so
let's see next time how the history of the atom developed through time
hello this is Jason Kendall and welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures
today we're continuing on the history of the atom where we talked last time about what an atom is
what elements are how they have protons and electrons and neutrons and how they're arranged in
these orbits around them and there's isotopes and so forth but where did this concept of the idea
of the atom ever really come from so that's what we're going to talk about right now
so the history of the atom is an interesting one because it develops out of natural philosophy
natural philosophy is is basically a way of talking about the world philosophizing about the world
in a way that is consistent with how you perceive the world and so natural philosophy
is a way of conducting science without having the tools to actually be able to gather the
evidence or analyze it but you do it as rigorously as you can so let's take a couple of ideas about
the nature of what we mean by matter because stuff is in existence and so stuff does things to other
stuff so you might want to say well what exactly is matter and some of the earliest recorded ideas
about what the nature of matter are come from democratists which was who was a pre-socratic
philosopher in ancient Greece and his goals are out of 400 a bc or so thereabouts he came up with
the concept of an indivisible unit of matter meaning you can cut something and keep cutting
things and it doesn't divide and that's where the word atom comes from a tomos meaning not
divisible not cuttable not sliceable that's what tomos meaning to cut or divide a meaning not
so the atom is that which cannot be cut um democratists himself was uh was his reference
throughout much of antiquities literature however a lot of his works do not survive because he was
kind of on the outs with respect to medieval medieval theology and he disagreed with uh
Plato and Aristotle and some key ideas so his work was excluded throughout history but we know
that he came up with the we that he alluded to the concept of the atom we also know that he alluded
to the idea that the milky way is a series of stars that are incredibly distant that they're so
distant that they actually look like one thing and that kind of is it goes along with this concept
that the atom uh and let's see what that is right now the concept of the atom that democrat has had
is that imagine you had a block of clay or anything but let's just use clay for this instance um
actually i'm going to diverge away from i'm going to say clay i'm going to start with a tree and if
we start with a tree uh and you cut the tree say in half well which half of the tree is it well you
know you're going to get some half whatever it happens to be let's say we cut it vertically
and so you've got a half of the tree that's vertically cutting so it still has a big chunk
of the branches a big chunk of the of the root um a big chunk of the leaves and so forth but at
some point as you keep cutting this tree in half depending on how you cut it eventually you're going
to have to get to a point where you're going to cut the tree and you're going to divide the bark
or the or the wood of the tree from the leaves of the tree so therefore the tree was one thing
and now you're cutting into two things and each of those things is different from the other
all right so now you're pairing away the thing that is not the same as it so we get rid of the
leaf and so we're left with the wood and so now we cut the wood away and we say oh there's the
meat of the wood the wood that's below the bark and we have the wood that's above the bark the bark
wood and so we cut away the bark and now we're left with the with the wood which has the grains
and it's that nice yellow uh nice yellow tone as we cut further we find that there's water
inside of the bark we find that they're inside of the wood we find that there's sap inside of the
wood we find that there's dark and light little striations of the wood so we keep cutting those
things eliminating the bark eliminating the sap eliminating the water trying to get down to the
essence of what is wood and so at some point you can philosophize that you would get down to the
point where you say ah I've cut away everything that is not wood and I found the tiniest element
of something that is wood and if I cut it I will no longer have wood I might have something else
but but then I just keep cutting until I get down to the thing that I say that this is the
element of wood so the concept of the atomos then says there must be some fundamental building block
out of which you can no longer cut because how can you cut anything in infinitely posed
democratist and so this is an interesting concept not likewise that's his that's where his concept
of matter comes from it doesn't matter whether it's clay or water or anything there will eventually
be some point at which you cannot cut any further because that is the atomos the indivisible unit
well this has some ramifications and uh there was no real evidence for it because like I said in
400 bc it's philosophy it's not science yet so the thing is is that uh other philosophers
disagree notably Plato and Aristotle who disagreed with him uh entirely and thought that matter like
space is continuous so you'll notice that there is no gap in space or gap in matter between say the
tree and the air that surrounds it or when the tree is submerged in water the water goes right up to
the trees there must be a transition between tree and water that's a very sharp transition but we
notice that there's water in the tree that the sap is made from tree and water that when you burn a
tree the fire comes out of the tree and so it's very interesting to think that maybe a tree is
made up of fire maybe it's made out of some sort of earthy element maybe it's made out of some sort
of airy element because the fire lifts the the smoke is lifted out of there maybe it's made out of
some sort of water well we know that so all of these things can combine together and if you combine
them in just the right way alchemically an alchemist would do this then you would get tree so the
proper combinations of fire earth water and air according to Plato and Aristotle give you tree
or gold or iron or what have you all of the various things that exist according to Plato
and Aristotle were continuous matter and this continuous matter it can never be subdivided
and you can't find a boundary to it so it's kind of innately in portion innately linked to the
concept of space as well so why did Aristotle disagree and what happened and where did the
concept of this continuous matter and how did Aristotle blast democratize the idea well he
appealed to religion and repealed to divinity and divinity is definitely a part of natural philosophy
and you can actually add it in by saying imagine that there's a spiritual plane a spiritual divine
plane and this this was okay in that time because they've divided the physics of the earth the
materia versus the physics of this of the heavens the celestia and the two really did not behave
the same according to anybody's observations so the celestial realm is the divine realm it's the
unchanging realm it's the it's the permanent realm the material world is ever changing and ever
and ever fluid and so there is a concept which arises from the four elements and the fifth
element is then spirituality or divinity and Aristotle said the following so mr democratus
you're saying that the god Zeus who is all powerful who took the eight legged beast and
ripped it apart to make man and woman you're saying that he cannot rip apart the tiniest tiniest
dust moat the thing that you say is the smallest possible thing how can a god not break that apart
and that's kind of a valid philosophical argument if you posit the the existence of deities so it
really is a big thing and so most of christian thought and most of western thought gravitated
towards the concept of the continuous matter and Aristotle's thinking because it is because of the
heightened element of the divin the divine in natural philosophy all right so it took some time
before people would take uh democratus's idea seriously and john dalton in about 1803 or so
2 000 years after democratus came up with this concept 2 000 years and even 200 years after
Galileo first put some first put some dents in the armor of Aristotle with his with with all of his
work uh so then we have dalton coming along and proposed well hmm we've got some interesting
things that we see we see that if you have if you have water water is always not roughly 98
roughly 88 or 88.9 percent mass oxygen and the rest is hydrogen so we can always have that the
same where the percentages of oxygen and hydrogen are always the same where they're cut where mass
is conserved and mass doesn't disappear or reappear you can say well imagine that there's little
tiny building blocks that have certain amounts of mass and these things then matter then is the
arrangement of these little tiny building blocks and perhaps some of the those little tiny building
blocks are hydrogen some of them are oxygen then it's a process of discovering which they are
and so the atomic theory that dalton revived the he used the word atom atomic theory he said
that atoms can either be created or they can be destroyed they are just there they're pieces of
matter that are permanent in an existence and all chemistry can be defined by adding and putting
together various atoms in various arrangements so the dalton's theory of the atom which is
which is a highly simplified version of chemistry today is that basically well even when you do
elementary first semester chemistry you're going to be looking at dalton's version of the atom
you're not going to look at quantum mechanics just yet but when you look at dalton's version you say
well if you want to make water well you take one atom of oxygen and two atoms of hydrogen and that
is water and if you want to make carbon dioxide it's one carbon and two oxygens if you wish to make
methane it's a CH4 and if you want to make ammonia it's NH3 so you got all these things
where they combine together and the combination thereof becomes the molecule so dalton's theory
of the atom worked out pretty good every element has its own particular properties they all have
the same properties and atoms simply combine in whole numbers you can't break atoms apart nor
to say no there's no half water which is like a half an oxygen and one and one hydrogen that's
not half water there's no such thing as half water so dalton's idea of the atom held sway for about
100 years and about 1903 uh roughly actually more like 1897 uh JJ Thompson or JJ Thompson
discovered the electron the first fundamental particle the when we this is the discovery of
the concept that yes there can actually be fundamental particles meaning things that
cannot be divided anymore the literal atomos of democratus back in 400 bc um so what he discovered
was the electron which had a positive it was a negative charge and it must reside he discovered it
by using cathode ray to and understanding what the nature of a cathode ray is and so what he said
is that well wait a second we know these electrons must exist and so he posited that that perhaps
dalton's concept of the atom can be modified instead of being the smooth distribution of
legobobs or just little things little balls like billiard balls that are smooth perhaps
inside the billiard ball of dalton there are electrons and they're moving around and so therefore
if there's an electron which is a negative charge there must be some positive charged object a proton
that's also in there because every atom is electrically neutral if it wasn't it would be
quickly therefore it would quickly neutralize itself by either acquiring electron or losing
electron so Thompson's concept was is that inside of each of these little billiard balls dalton's
billiard balls there were a plum pudding of electrons and protons in a mash that neutralized
themselves out so this is a good little model of the of the of the atom and the thing is is that
it's it took the concept of the electron said oh it's a piece of the atom and inside the atom
there's this thing all right so this also led him to learn that electrons were about 2000 times smaller
mass than the proton whatever it was these tiny tiny tiny things were there anyway so it didn't
take long for people to say well okay got it what Thompson is saying is that the electrons and
protons are arranged inside the atom all right how exactly are they arranged that's a really key
question it's like okay fine are they moving randomly do they have structure are they set up
like little bricks how are they set up inside of Dalton's little atom and into how is the plum
pudding mixed are the plums evenly distributed in the pudding or are the plums tiny little bits
going through so what sir Ernest Rutherford in 1911 sought to understand this the interior of
Thompson's plum pudding model and what he decided to do is to say I'm going to take a very very very
heavy atom that I can make into a very very very flat sheet an extraordinarily thin flat sheet
and the goal of this extraordinarily thin flat sheet is that if I throw something at a thin flat
sheet things should go through it or bounce off of it and you know that if you take an object that
is not flat and you throw something at it it can things can reflect off of it in all sorts of ways
so if you take a flat surface then you bounce a ball off of the flat surface the angle of incidence
equals the angle of reflection off of flat surface however if the the surface is all
jagged or regular in some way then if you throw balls at that surface at different angles the
angle of incidence at the moment at the location where the ball hit the surface let's say the
basketball let's say you do this off a basketball court which is flat and now you play a game where
it's on a curved surface like this maybe it's got humps and so as it reflects you can actually see
where it reflects from and where it goes to after it reflects and that gives you a map by looking
back where the things came from is to the shape of the object and now that's one way of looking at
things but Tom but but sir Ernest Rutherford why do I keep saying sir I'm I forget if he is a sir
in any event Ernest Rutherford in 1911 said I'm going to take gold which I can hammer down and
make into gold foil and this gold foil can be literally only a few atoms thick just just the
thinnest thing and this is an amazing property of gold by the way and gold itself can be can be
made into very very thin your foils and it's so thin that if a gold atom is one of Thompson's plum
pudding models then the electrons in there have to be distributed in some way and if I throw something
at it and it goes through the atom it might deflect it as it goes through so if you throw
something through something you throw go through something and you interact with it gently it'll
diverge the path of the thing that you threw through it so it assumes that Thompson's plum
pudding model is is porous or at least maybe not necessarily porous but at least kind of some material
something and we don't know exactly how it's structured but let's take a helium nucleus called
an alpha particle and we'll take that alpha particle and send it through the gold nucleus
now here was the expectation the expectation was that as the gold as the helium nuclei went through
they would be gently redirected by the distributions of electrons inside of there because it's been
known that by cathode ray by the interactions of cathode rays and again alpha particles that they
actually interact and they can redirect each other's paths so what happens is is that you send the
elect send the alpha particle through the gold foil and see how it gets bent around and that gives
you the structure of the electrons inside there because the gold must be the gold right it just
must be whatever it is and nicely enough gold does not do much reactions very not heavily reactive
and it's very very thin so here's what taught what rutherford found he found that most of the of
the alpha particles went straight through the gold foil and were detected on a silver iodide screen on
the far side but just to be careful rutherford put at a screen all the way around it and he
found out that a significant number and a non a pre and significant number actually
bounced back so that's kind of weird so you throw something at something very very thin that's
supposed to allow things to pass through but instead it bounces off of something so that meant
that if if with rutherford's concept then he had to reconfigure what he meant by the atom and he
said wait there must be some dense heavy thing that the alpha particles knocking off of because
if you then say let's say you have the protons or the alpha particles are part of the gold nucleus
if you send one alpha particle into the other they're going to hit off of each other but they
won't necessarily bounce straight off of each other they have to be a perfect alignment for
them to do that but what happened is is that the gold foil reflected off of the the alpha
particles reflected off of the gold foil coming back towards the detent towards the emitter
and that as rutherford said was like taking a 15 inch shell an artillery shell such as might
have been used in say the first world war right around 1911 which we're talking about 1911 i and
the 15 inch shell going through a piece of tissue paper and the tissue paper bounces the artillery
shell off of it now that would be surprising and that's a surprise in fact that the energetics of
that are about as surprising as what rutherford discovered with this experiment which meant
that there must be some massive object in the atom that can reflect off of it can reflect something
can push something back that's coming into it at high speed that has some that has some decent mass
to it so he reconfigured the concept to say that at the center of the atom was these was a positively
charged nucleus and that positively charged nucleus has mass as most of the mass of the atom
and the electrons are somehow spiraling around it so the that is the difference between between
the plum pudding model and rutherford's swarm of electrons around a nucleus and this was put to
bed thompson's model of the of the of the plum pudding so now we have this concept that there
must be a dense nucleus this led to some problems though because the if it's smoothly distributed
then it can be electrically neutral but if rutherford's concept is right now you've got this positive
charge thing and you've got these negative charge things flying around it and observationally
experimentally they exist they there is some large positive charge thing and the electrons
are negatively charged and they're clearly not on top of it they're near it but not on top of it
so the question then becomes why doesn't the electron spiral down from its orbit around
this nucleus and fall into the nucleus and become thompson's plum pudding what is the
thing that makes the plum pudding not true meaning it should just spiral together so it's all neutral
and everybody's on top of each other why do the electrons stay away from the nucleus which is
positively charged we get why it should be near because there's an attractive force but why should
all of a sudden it's stop and nobody know nobody knew why that would go why that would be so no
matter what when you did this experiment you found that the nucleus had to be there separate from
the electrons and this became the cut the topic for an enormous amount of research and it spurred
the entire idea because rutherford's atom has a very difficult time explaining the spectra of light
because now we have to say well rutherford's atom says if you have an electron spiraling around
as it spirals it should emit a continuous spectrum of light not a discrete spectrum so rutherford's
atom cannot predict the spectrum however it does predict the the event of collect collisions into
it and it does disprove the plum pudding model so there's a bit of a problem and that problem is
one experiment shows one thing but other experiments demand that that's not the full story
and the full story of what happens to rutherford's atom comes up next time when we talk about the
Bohr model of the atom. Hello this is Jason Kendall and welcome to the next of my introductory
astronomy lectures today we're going to be finishing out the nature of what the hydrogen atom is
and the models of the atom through history so let's take a step back last time we looked at
rutherford's version of the atom which is kind of like little stars orbiting a little planet
a little planet orbiting a little star that's the kind of basic assumption that rutherford came
about when he when he did his gold foil experiment but if we go back just a little bit further back
in time we find that there's a very interesting hint to things to come the Swedish physicist Johannes
Rydberg in 1888 looked at the nature of the hydrogen spectrum and tried to create an empirical
formula this empirical formula had a goal and the goal was to actually simply model the actual
lines that are seen the transitions that are seen or at least the spectral lines that are seen in
the hydrogen spectrum so what he did is he found a periodic pattern to them and he was able to
determine that the reciprocal of the wavelength is equal to some constant some full constant and
then multiply it by the reciprocal of two the in the inverse of two squared integers now this is
really interesting because it highlights a concept that what you sometimes do in science is you just
try to create some sort of empirical formula for what you're observing in nature and after you do
that empirical formula you then try to see if you can understand the underlying science below it
well that's so that's what Rydberg did he made an empirical formula that is only based off of the
data but he had no underlying reason as to why it would be this way he just made a formula that
worked fascinatingly enough the Rydberg formula for the hydrogen atom is extraordinarily simple
so what it should tell us is that we are looking for underlying physics that actually works to
tell us something deeper and that was in 1888 so many things were happening right around the turn
of the 20th century 19th and the 20th century in terms of modern physics it's astonishing but
Rydberg's hint gives us a little bit of a clue all right so and let's go forward in time from 1888
to 1911 and 1911 is when Rutherford came up with his concept for the atom and it was necessitated
it was needed to be done because the Thompson's plum pudding model doesn't work well Rutherford's
model of the atom also cannot work and it can't be the last answer to things because if you have
an electron orbiting a proton and you would the very active it going around in a circle
is an accelerated motion if you have an accelerated motion you're going to emit energy and by emitting
energy the thing will eventually spiral in the electron will spiral in emitting electromagnetic
radiation as it spirals in and it'll crash into the proton and become Thompson's plum pudding so
the Rutherford's model of the atom could not actually be the final answer because well established
extraordinarily well established electromagnetic theory demanded that they would eventually collide
together so something else had to be there in order to make this work well that came along because
in very shortly thereafter in 1913 by Niels Bohr so what Niels Bohr did is he said okay fine we
don't want this thing spiraling fine imagine that the angular momentum of the of the objects
was fixed and so what he did is he said okay every one of these little planets that orbits this
little sun they can only orbit at specific radii so if he said that's his pot that's his
his basic assumption the basic concept is is that they can only orbit at specific radii and they
can't spiral in well why can't they spiral in that's the essence of the Bohr model of the atom
the Bohr model of the atom said basically that the angular momentum had to have fixed values
and these fixed values were multiples integer multiples of some value so that's his idea is that
Bohr's model of the atom said we could have quantized angular momentum and what is angular
momentum well if you take a little planet orbiting a little star the angular momentum of the little
planet orbiting the little star is the mass times the speed with which it's going around times the
radius at which it's going around so if the angular momentum is quantized then well you know the mass
fine you can determine the speed sure but then the radius must then be fixed there must be only
stepwise distances that the electron can live from the proton so the Bohr model of the atom says
let's now take this concept of quantized angular momentum and what we'll do is we'll say what
does the force that is required to keep something going in a circular orbit and then equate that to
the force due to the electromagnetic attraction between the electron and the proton make those two
things equal slide in the concept that that the product of the mass times the speed of the electron
going around in that circular orbit at the radius of the circular orbit is some integer multiple
of some number and that number is the Planck's constant the reduced Pollux constant h bar and
you get out of that by doing some hooks and some crooks and looking and playing around with it
you eventually discover that the energy at a given level that you would have so if you have a potential
energy between the electron and the proton so they're trying to pull on each other so that gives
that gives an energy that is of position and that we call a potential energy so the potential
energy between them is fixed and we can determine what it is and it's dependent on the radius and
how far apart they are and we say okay what is the energy at a particular location and it works out
to be a very small amount which is in the in electron volts about 13.6 electron volts is the
amount of negative energy or energy that's different from when the electron is free so it loses a bit
of energy getting close to it close to the proton so we can only have energy at fixed orbital
radii and these orbital radii have are integer multiples or product of the num the orbital
number squared so the ground state which is the lowest possible state which is n equals one
that is the lowest possible state and then you can have larger and larger and larger ends but
they just get bigger and bigger which means that the energy approaches zero as you have
you have greater and greater distance from the uh from the from the proton so the Bohr model of
the atom but by having quantized angular momentum and using the definition of the potential energy
between an electron and a proton and the definition of a force that's taking some keeping something
in a circular orbit at a particular quantized angular momentum utilizing the four of the Coulomb
relationship which is the force of attraction between two charged particles we can then derive
with with Bohr's concept that they that these the angular momentum is quantized we get a very
interesting set of results so first the electron could only live in fixed orbital radii from the
proton and the nearest one is when the number these fixed number is one or this quantum number is one
and if it's at quantum number one we call it the ground state if it's quantum number two
we call it the first excited state if it's quantum number three we call it the second excited state
so an electron can only jump up and can move between energy levels so these are levels of energy
fixed radii from the proton and so we have an electron either at the ground state at the nearest
radius or at the first excited state which is at the next radius up now something can come along
and smack the electron so let's let's pause it now as we will how we can use the Bohr model of
the atom so let's have an electron orbiting a proton it's a nice little hydrogen atom it's sitting
out there somewhere in space not doing anything it's minding its own business and another proton
comes along or another hydrogen atom comes along smacks into it and gives it a little bit of energy
just like a billiard ball by smacking another billiard ball it makes a little clicking sound
but instead of clicking what happens is a little bit of that collision goes to making the electron
go up an orbital it kicks it up to the next orbit so a collision can do that gives it a little bit
of energy when it gives it a little bit of energy it can jump a little bit further away from the proton
so now it's gotten some energy it's pushed away from the proton which is trying to pull it home
and it says eventually the state can't live for very long and what happens is the electron then
says i'm going to go back down to the lower level from the second from the first excited state down
to the second and in so doing emits energy now i can do this emission of energy by say colliding
into something else but probably the most coefficient way and the most common way is for it to emit
light so when it drops from a from a higher energy level than the ground state down to ground state
it'll emit a light it'll emit photon and that photon will have exactly the energy
of the difference between two levels so let's see what that actually works out to be
at the ground state the energy that you have is about 13.6 electron volts and we're going to call
that a negative energy because if it's at it let's say the electron and proton are not bound
together if they're not bound together we would have we would say they have no energy with respect
to each other so they're free so a free bound a free electron free from its proton would have zero
energy and we call bound states negative states so you can think of them as at the bottom of a well
or the bottom of the hill or something like that so they have to fall into this potential well
once that's where we get the negative state from so the energy we're going to call it is a negative
13.6 electron volts and i'll let you google what an electron volt is because that's a really
interesting subject all of itself so that is n equals one and that has an energy of 13.6 electron
volts so now something comes along it collides into it the electron jumps up to the next orbit so
this is n equals two and that works out to have an energy of minus 3.4 electron volts it then emits
an electron it emits a photon as it drops from the first excited state back down to the ground state
and you subtract the two minus 3.4 minus a minus 13.6 that ends up to be 10.2 electron volts
that's a very small amount of energy it's on the order of 10 to the minus 19th joules so it's a
tiny amount of energy what you'd have to have a whole bunch of these happen don't already even see
it so it's a single photon emitted by a single electron dropping down from the first excited
state to the second so what does that energy correspond to in terms of light because we
know that light has frequencies right so what does the energy of light correspond to well here's the
thing uh now we're going to drop back in time again so neils boar is working on this thing in 1913
ridbert worked in 1888 but smack in between them albert einstein brought us a very very interesting
thing by studying what's called the photoelectric effect the photoelectric effect shows how
electrons are liberated from a metal if light shines upon them and it was found that if the
light no matter how intense it was if it was infrared light it did not liberate the electrons
but as soon as the frequency was large enough then the electrons would be liberated away from the
metal and then they could move so what this meant is that that photons were acting like a particle
just an and a wave uh oh that brings us back all the way to newton's corpuscles of light again oh
my goodness well light has a duality of waves and particles so here is now proof by einstein in 1905
which got him the nobel prize by the way that the energy of a photon is proportional to the
frequency or inversely proportional to the wavelength of the light and it's and the different the
transmogrification of frequency or wavelength into this particle concept of like how much billiard
ball type particle is in the photon is by the plonk constant h so energy of a light of light
is equal to h which is plonks constant times the speed of light divided by the wavelength
and that gives you these the energy of the photon ha but we just saw that the energy difference between
the photon that the energy dropping from the first excited state down to the ground state is 10.2
electron volts and if we say that's the energy and then we see what the wavelength works out to be
the wavelength works out to be 122 nanometers wow okay so when the electron drops from the first
excited state down to the ground state the wave the energy is 10.2 electron volts and that's converted
into 1.22 times 122 nanometers or approximately uh point yeah well 12 yeah 1200 uh 1200 angstroms
so now that we can plug in and look at that and see what the ridberg number is and we say well
wait a second what's the ridberg value well ridberg value says that what's the wavelength and we say
oh n1 n2 squared wow is this interesting it matches ridberg's formula exactly if you put in
n1 equals 1 and n2 equals 2 which is just really amazing so ridberg's formula predicted it or at
least was empirical now we've got something it actually shows it so the wavelengths that are
predicted by Bohr's model of the atom are matched matched directly what ridberg found in 1888
just as another example and a more pertinent one that we're going to talk about later uh electrons
can jump up multiple orbital levels and drop back down multiple orbital levels or it can go up and
down and down and up and up and down and up depending on what's happening in the environment
in which it lives so let's say that the electron instead of going up only one level jumped up two
from the ground state to the second excited state or n equals three so now it's an n equals three
and let's say it's going to drop twice so it's going to step down each level of the ladder on
its way home to the ground state so it's going to drop from three to two and then from two to one
but we just did two to one which gives you an energy of about 10.10 electron volts but let's
look specifically at the one where it drops from three down to two all right so three down to two
we can calculate the energy of the two of them and it starts for the third this n equals three
is the second excited state i know three is second two is first ground is zero oh right
kind of really annoying but let's work with it so if we're going to start from n equals three the
second excited state and it's it'll be a little bit high a little bit closer to zero energy about
one and a half electron volts in the hole and the second excited the first excited state is three
and a half electron volts 3.4 electron volts in the hole and we take the difference of those
it's an energy difference of just under two electron volts or 1.89 electron volts we convert
that using the formula that Einstein discovered in 1905 that got in the Nobel Prize and we find
that 656.3 nanometers and if we look at that that is Rydberg's formula for the transition
between three and two in the Rydberg formula and that is exactly the wavelength of light
that is predicted what's exactly the wavelength of light that you observe in a spectroscope
that is the transition in the red area of the spectrum that is h alpha one of the most common
wavelengths of light to look at for all astronomical species because most of the universe is made of
hydrogen and so when you look out at the Orion nebula which has this characteristic pink glow
and that characteristic pink glow comes from radiation light being emitted specifically
at 656.3 nanometers we now know that's due according to the Bohr model to an electron
dropping from the third excited state down to the second excited state and then on its way
back to the ground state but it's actually gotten some energy from somewhere and it's falling and
cascading back through and it emits this form of light and there it goes it's emitting this light
so now we know we have a model for a very important thing which is we're now can model the spectrum of
light uh and but but let's say before we go there let's go into a little weird place because
we've had a very strange set of things and Bohr's model of the atom assumes a little dot
orbiting another little dot in a circular motion but we've already seen that there's a certain
way but there but physics kind of went a little awry for us and that model works extremely well
for us the Bohr model but let's take it forward just a little bit to determine that that's not
still the end of the story because electrons are not pure particles well what was found in 1924
is Louis de Broglie in his phd thesis he's a he's a french a french physicist and in his phd
his phd thesis he postulated he postulated that every subatomic particle or more specifically
every particle has a wavelength so he could so he said that every particle an electron a proton
you me the chair a building a whole planet the galaxy it has a wavelength and that wavelength
will call the de Broglie wavelength and it's invert it's purport so the probe the we're gonna
take the concept of the of the energy of a photon we convert like just from from uh from
einstein's discovery and we convert that into a uh into a momentum because light even though it has
no mass still carries momentum so if it can carry momentum and matter does carry momentum this is
where de Broglie kind of made the leap he said well if light carries momentum and matter carries
momentum then we should be able to say equate the two so de Broglie said well what is the what is
the momentum of light given its wavelength and so he said fine there it is and so now you actually
then put the weight and then you establish then that there's also a a momentum associated with
with an electron and so combining his concept with general relativity says that there is a speed
with which it's going and if it's not if it's going greater than the speed of zero then it'll
have some sort of wavelength associated with it in any event de Broglie said that there's a as
electrons travel through space they are not just particles they're a packet of waves and what's
fascinating about this is this concept that every element and every subatomic particle or every
particle in existence has a wavelength and we call it the de Broglie wavelength then as if this
concept is experimentally verifiable and in fact in 1927 it was experimentally verified that electrons
do diffraction just in the same way that light does so electrons do diffraction protons do
diffraction even large molecules do diffraction this concept of the de Broglie wavelength is
ubiquitous throughout and apparently there's macromolecules it can even be shown what their
de Broglie wavelength is and actually measure it so we can measure the spread of a particle
that means it's not all in one place it means it's not a pinpoint particle that you can say
at the head of this pin at the point of this pin that is exactly where the electron is you
can't do that because it has a wavelength really weird all right so what does that mean for our
model of the atom we're going to kind of diverge away into it we're going to say de Broglie said
that wavelengths of light wavelengths of of electrons if they're trapped then they have a
standing wave and so he said okay fine what's a standing wave a standing wave is just like if you
tie a rope into a doorknob and you flick your wrist up and down you hold it you can make various
waves against it because your wrist is fixed and the doorknob's fixed so you can make a standing
wave even though the the waves are moving they're in there they're moving up and down like a jump
rope or you're doing all sorts of rope tricks but the ends are fixed they're not flapping around the
ends are fixed so you can have standing waves and the more energy you give to the standing wave the
more nodes there are to the wave so we can then reformulate the Bohr model as having a pit and
so think of the Bohr model of the atom and this is de Broglie's sort of version of it or at least
or at least one way of thinking about it using waves of electrons so the bottom lowest energy
is where it's only one wavelength and the next wavelength next energy level is two wavelengths
the third wavelength is three wavelengths and so on and so on and so on so the lowest possible
energy state in an atom it must have only one wavelength in a standing wave at the bottom of
the pit and so each one of these locations of the at the right at the radius at which it is
it's not an electron circling like a little dot a little planet circling a little sun it's a standing
wave surrounding the dot which is itself kind of a wiggly thing too so now we can think of it
instead of having it fixed on the doors the ends must connect together and so we have a circular
standing wave not a linear standing wave we just take the end of the door and your wrist and put
them together and now you've got a circle and at the bottom of this and it can't they must be circular
waves otherwise it's not going to be in the box so only at these fixed locations where you have
one wavelength doesn't work and then we can equate the the radius to the wavelength of the
using the de Broglie relationship and we get the same exact result as as as Bohr did with his concept
of the little planet orbiting the little sun now we say that the electron is not actually a point
particle it is a standing matter wave surrounding the proton which means where the heck is the
electron inside the atom that's a really interesting question we can't find it because it's a wave so
it's a wave inside of there and the the de Broglie relationship then den gives a very good explanation
as to why this quantization must occur because electrons have wave properties and they must
have fixed standing length wave properties inside of the atom in order for it to actually be bound
inside of an atom if it does not have the standing if it's not a standing wave inside of the inside
there then it's not going to be it simply will not be a bound state so unbound states are states
that have more energy than as well they're more energy than being in the bound state plus they
don't have the right number of wavelengths so you can't you must have the circular standing wave
inside the atom of some kind so this concept these two concepts where we have the Bohr's
relatively simple model of electrons spinning around as a ball that works but then we have
de Broglie's relationship which tells us something even new about the nature of matter both of them
work and tell us everything we want to know about the spectrum of light from the Lyman series and
the ultraviolet showing the transitions up and down the Balmer series in the visible light
showing transitions up and down the Pashen series which is an infrared which starts at level three
or ends at level three or yeah n equals three and then if we then we can then explain all of
Kirchhoff's laws using the Bohr model of the atom the lines that you see in Kirchhoff's spectra
an emission spectrum is due to the huge numbers of atoms jumping up and down electrons jumping
up and down in orbits and sending light out from those in various directions in random directions
there's no one direction that sends the light out so it might as well go to you and so the photons
that you receive you receive them at specific specific wavelengths and therefore that's where
we get the emission spectrum of Kirchhoff which was an empirically derived idea likewise absorption
does the same thing because as the light goes into the cloud of atoms the absorbed specific
wavelengths it makes it a little darker at those wavelengths and because that light's going someplace
else and so if you look through a cloud of gas you're going to see that it's darker at those
locations because some of that light has been absorbed and re-radiated in other directions
and that gives the emission spectrum from the side so the Bohr model of the atom and even
and de Broglie's model of the atom explains Kirchhoff's empirically derived laws about the
nature of what spectra are so we have lots of different ways of talking about emission lines
absorption lines and and this leads us to the incredibly important idea that spectroscopy
is the most key thing that we have in all of of astrophysics it is everything basically we will be
able to determine huge numbers of things about a location because of its spectrum first and foremost
we can determine what elements there are by modeling the spectrum of it by looking at exactly
what we see in the light we've got all this light here we're coming in and out of emission
absorption and so forth but we can also determine temperatures and pressures because of the widths
of the lines because of the Doppler shifts we can determine huge numbers of things from spectra
but it all comes from the very simple concept of the nature of the model of the atom so let's
actually just back this up a little bit and we're going to take it away from the spectroscopy for
just a second and go address something that I was looking at and kind of dodged around but now
I'm going to come at it full force okay so where is the electron inside of the atom so I alluded
that there's some really odd ideas and let's see what we get out of them de Broglie's concept of a
matter wave and having electrons be standing waves inside of the atom changes a lot of things about
the nature of what we think about this of atoms and matter in general so de Broglie's hypothesis
that matter is a wave fundamentally changed a lot of ways the way we think about things so
if the if the electron is in a standing wave inside of the atom then where is it because just in
the same way that we said okay we're going to hook the hook the string up to a doorknob and to my
wrist we can easily make it so it's a nice standing wave we can say though what's the wavelength okay
we can get the wavelength of it and if we flick it harder we can have more nodes on that thing and
we can say it's a shorter wavelength but if we then ask we ask where actually is the wave
on the on the string we wouldn't have a good answer we'd say well I know that it's on the string I
know that it makes up the entire length of the string but where exactly is it where can I pinpoint
it on the string and the answer is no you cannot so in the same sense we now have a very strange
thing where we cannot pin the electrons location inside of a bound atom so once it's in there
it's in a standing wave setup the standing wave does not permit us to actually find the location
of the electron and it gets worse from there de Broglie's concept actually still kept still kept
Neil's Bohr's idea of the little planet orbiting the little sun but now we don't even do that so now
we de Broglie said okay make a standing wave that's orbiting a little sun fine but that's a circular
pattern and we now know by actually then taking taking de Broglie's concept and accelerating
in a bit more and looking at it in 3d space and actually that's the only way to actually look at
it is that we don't see it as a as a circular standing wave but a spherical standing wave
with spherical harmonics and that's a very very very weird thing and the solution to the equations
of what the hydrogen atom really looks like had to wait until uh until Schrodinger made his famous
equation the Schrodinger equation which which codified completely the concept that matter
is a that does behave as a wave and so when we take this concept of the wave nature of
of light of all particles then and filter this through the Schrodinger equation we find that
not only is the electron a standing wave going around it but somehow it's somewhere on the surface
of a sphere that's as a certain radius and so the Bohr radius is not just the radius of the orbit
it's the radius of the sphere that the electron seems to be in and the actual radius itself is
fuzzy and where the electron is on there is fuzzy in fact it's not determined we know it's orbit
we know with the most probable location of it most probable location and then we can actually
say well where should it be in this place still applies the same thing though if you actually
give the electron a little bit more energy it'll go up a level it'll change its standing
wave properties it'll change its harmonic standing waves but you won't be able to find
the electron and why won't you be able to find the electron well take the proton and the electron
and break them apart and turn them into an atom not an atom not a bound atom but have them be
free particles the proton itself is an extraordinarily small object if you if you were to say that the
if we were to take the proton which is on the order of 10 to the minus 12 meters it's on that size
so it's a micromete it's a million times smaller than a micrometer or a billion times smaller than
a millimeter they're really tiny things so if you take a proton and it's on the order of 10 to the
minus 12 meters and let's say we we want to see how big the electron is compared to that well let's
let's blow up the proton not from 10 to the minus 12 meters but now let's make it the size of a
moat of cigarette dust a cigarette smoke a moat of dust a single moat of cigarette smoke
that's a really tiny thing it's just visible to your eye and if we put that somewhere in a box
how far would the electron be in a bound orbit we'll come back to the size in a second so the
electron is about would live on the ground state on the surface of a sphere that's about 25 or 30
meters in diameter so you've got this tiny tiny tiny tiny thing and on somewhere on the surface
of a sphere that's 25 meters in diameter that's where the electron would live and the electron
would live somewhere on that surface it would have a fuzzy radius so it wouldn't necessarily be right
at that surface it'll be somewhere maybe between 20 meters and 30 40 meters it'll be in between there
and so it'd be a wave type property throughout there you can't pin down where it is in fact
saying where it is when it's bound as an atom it doesn't really have a lot of mean
it has a loose meaning but really we know the energy level of the electron but even that is not
well known so the electron itself is a fuzzy object and so is the proton too so the actual orbital
radii are fuzzy but it shows you the size scales um think about the museum of natural history go to
the museum of natural history in new york city you find this enormous huge sphere google the
hayden planetarium to see the size of the sphere it's really big so there's a model inside the
museum that says here's the size of a proton and here's the size of an electron tries to show you
the size of an atom and basically put the proton this this mode of dust in the center of that sphere
and put the electron somewhere on the surface of that sphere and that gives you the concept of how
big it is the electron itself is about a thousand times let two thousand times less massive than
the proton but its size is determined kind of by its interaction so it actually has kind of a
very strange it's very very small its characteristic interaction is a little bit bigger so its actual
physical size is kind of an oddly ill-defined term there are some definitions there are ways
to define how big an electron is but it's a much smaller object than the proton so the pro the
electrons orbit around the proton is fuzzy however we can approximate it with de Broglie's
concept which means is to a circular orbit and we can approximate de Broglie's idea to a little
tiny planet around a little tiny sun that's Bohr's model of the atom and Bohr's model of the atom
had a quantized set of as a quantized angular momentum and we still maintain this concept of
the quantum mechanics that's what we mean the mechanics simply is how do things move under
the influences of forces when they're given energies and speeds and what are their locations
how fast do they go how fast do they accelerate how fast do they decelerate etc while their
directions change that is mechanics and it depends on their masses it depends on their
inertia it depends on their momentum it depends on all these things and those are the study of
mechanics so quantum mechanics says what happens when you take classical mechanics which is just
how things move but apply quantum principles to it such as quantized angular momentum like
Niels Bohr suggested or matter wave concepts such as de Broglie came up with now this idea of the
fuzziness arose of course from uh rose from from the Schrodinger equation which is a relationship
that uh that just demonstrates how all of matter demonstrates wave-like properties even tiny even
large-scale matter displays wave-like properties although the wavelengths are incredibly short
when you're talking electrons the wavelengths are roughly the same size as the particle itself
so now you've got a matter and a wavelength that are roughly the same size and you have to deal
with these quantum mechanical effects we don't in our daily lives don't have to deal with quantum
mechanical effects because our sizes are much larger than our characteristic de Broglie wavelengths
so this is kind of an important set of things in fact the quantum mechanical universe that we're
talking about the the quantum mechanical model of the universe is extraordinarily well supported by
experiment it is considered to be one of the triumphs of 20th century physics and it had the
evidence for this model that matter is behaves in wave-like properties that's enormous enormous
evidence for it such as the nature of the black body radiation uh Einstein's photon and photoelectric
effect demonstrates it there's wave particle duality meaning the dual nature of both wave of
wave-like properties and particle-like properties uh using say Young's double slit experiment but you
can use use Young's double slit experiment for photons and apply it to electrons and you get
the same thing so this was done in 1927 uh and this was was was characteristic proof of de Broglie's
concept in 1924 uh further and foremost you get an electron scanning microscopes which are which
must do quantum mechanical behavior but even more bizarrely is that every electronic device that is
used today must take into account quantum mechanical effects in order to actually operate and we'll
even see that quantum mechanical effects are critical for our understanding of how the sun
works without quantum mechanics we would actually not have any idea how the sun actually shines as
long as it does for the rate of energy that it puts out quantum mechanics is a requirement
for us to understand the the the way that the sun works and the predictions associated with it
tell us how the sun works which is a really fascinating thing and so when we dig deeper
into the nature of what quantum mechanics tells us we uncover what we would call a bedrock principle
and some textbooks on quantum mechanics start with the concept of of the non-community activity
of the of various parameters of various measurements but we can we can summarize that with the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle which says the you simply can't measure uh paired measurements
there's certain sets of paired measurements that you cannot measure infinitely accurately with
at the same time um is specifically two of the most famous are or you can't measure the momentum
of a particle and the position of a particle with equal accuracy or with infinite precision so if you
know exactly where the electron is you have no idea what its momentum is and momentum according
to the Broglie principle is the wavelength all right so if you knew exactly what the Broglie
wavelength was you don't know where its position is and that's exactly what we meant by the whole
string uh wave on a string thing is that if now the electron is a wave on a string between a doorknob
and your wrist and that's the electron where is the electron it's there but where so you can't
find it and that's a fundamental basis of quantum mechanics is that you can't have these measurements
what you can't have infinitely precise measurements of two things of of paired
sets of measurements so another one is the energy difference between a couple between a state between
states or and the time at which they live at that state or the knowledge of the energy level of that
state and that's actually why the second one is actually why the lines have a breadth to them
in spectroscopy and that's a basis of what it's one of the bases of the lines there's many reasons
for the lines breadth but the width of the lines can be attributed to the fact that we really can't
actually know the energy level inside of the atom so we say oh it's three energy level three and
energy level two well those energy levels are fuzzy and so but the very act of the fuzziness itself
creates a width to the line so the frequency at which we observe it and uh is is proportion is
cannot be uh you can't actually measure the can't measure both the energy of of the output and how
long it lives at that location uh in that state which is really fascinating so the concept of
quantum mechanics the basis of it is that there's these fundamental bedrock principles and one of
them is the Heisenberg uncertainty principle that says there are there are two separate
measurements or paired measurements that cannot be measured with equal or infinite precision
you can't measure one of them without having complete lack of knowledge of both
with the other one so you basically get fuzzy on these things it's like i kind of know it to this
well and i kind of know that one to that well and that's all i'm never going to get and there's no
thing you can do to circumvent that that is a fundamental axiom of quantum mechanics people
say well if technology gets better then they'll figure it out well this is having been figured
out and this is how nature works which really is weird it's not something that'll be overcome by
somebody building a new widget or something like that no this will never be overcome because it's
a fact of nature it's the way nature works which makes it even more interesting so so if we think
about the nature of way that nature works we find that uh we find that the heisen that the solution
for the schrodinger equation for the hydrogen atom has all sorts of funny waveforms and they're
based on spherical harmonics and the appearance of the thing so it's not the simple spherical
orbits these circular orbits it depends on there's actually three quantum numbers there's the primary
quantum number we also have what was called the azimuthal quantum number the magnetic quantum
number and they're kind of weird but they're all interrelated and yet these three quantum numbers
which are associated with electrons and matter waves or waves of matter because we're now we're
looking at three dimensions we have three quantum numbers i guess you can do it that way but let's
just keep it that for simplicity but there are three quantum numbers that determine the appearance
of the that determine the appearance of the waveform of the electron as it orbits the proton
at various energy levels which is interesting and some of those quantum numbers don't change the
energy uh the magnetic quantum number does not change the energy they're degenerate it was called
because they're the same energy but they have different configurations so we can have the same
configuration at different configurations at the same energy in any event the hydrogen wave
equation is the only atom for which we can solve the schrodinger equation to actually give us the
appearance to analytically show with an equation what it is everything else is too complicated
and must be done numerically um finally what's very strange my memory mentions like well what's
your what is your quantum wavelength well it's true is that if you could somehow over an extraordinarily
long period of time live let's say you could potentially live for 10 to the 70th years let's
just say you could do that that's a long time to live if you could live for 10 to the 70th years
and every day you cut you punched your hand at a wall you just went pop pop pop punch your hand
through a wall at some point your hand would go through the wall not because you're punching a hole
in the wall but because the probability for you to do that maybe you punched your hand at the wall
10 to the 12th times a second for 10 to the 60th years there's a lot of times to punch your hand
on the wall and you're going to be doing like a super hummingbird and so whatever in any event
if you could do that eventually your hand would go through the wall and come back because you're
pulling your hand back through and it will be okay so the quantum mechanical world says that you
can't necessarily know the position of things and these are what we talked about macroscopic
objects like people their wavelengths are incredibly small so the probability that they
go through things like that is catastrophically tiny and so therefore you don't have to worry
about tunneling through walls and things like that but if we lived in a quantum mechanical world then
cows could go visit dolphins so long as they as they had dolphin jumped out a cow could then
drop back as soon as it got back to the ocean uh will be it that's okay so long as the cow
lands on the ground remember the concept of of quantum mechanics says you can't know the position
and the momentum of something with equal accuracy if we lived in a quantum mechanical world things
would be appearing and disappearing all around us trucks buses buildings everything other people
friends would just simply appear and disappear we have no idea where they came from or where
they're going next and that's the quantum mechanical world it's like well what's the
probability that you're going to see your friend over here downtown you would not say hey meet me
downtown at six o'clock you'd say well what's your best chance you'll be downtown at six o'clock
you get you'll calculate the the the the joint probability of you and your friend being downtown
at the same time in any event um quantum mechanics is how we actually discuss the nature of the world
but when we talk astronomically we tend to use the Bohr model of the atom because it's really
simple to understand and that kind of gives a really good visualizations very hard to visualize
all these other things um so we do is we we try to think that we know that there's that that basically
electrons must live in fixed orbital radii away from their nuclei of their atoms and that concept
that leads us to the nature of what spectroscopy does and helps us to understand how Kirchoff's
laws arise and so when we look at we look at distant astronomical objects as we will in the
future then we will see that we can model an atomic process to the light that gets emitted
to what happens when it arrives at our at our telescope and our detector so next time we'll
talk about telescopes and how they work
