One trend we've seen a lot in programming in recent years
is the attempt to replace C.
And I think that's both wise and terrifying.
It's wise because C is about 50 years old,
and being old doesn't make it bad,
but it has given us five decades to think about what works
and what doesn't work in programming language design.
We've got 50 years worth of techniques
we really ought to be putting into practice.
And putting them into practice is the terrifying part,
because C is everywhere.
You may not write C, but I guarantee you're writing something
that runs on something that runs C and was written in C.
It's in the compilation stack for everything we install.
So if languages like Go and Rust want to become the new C,
they've really got their work cut out for them.
All of which makes this week's topic kind of breathtaking.
We're looking at ZIG.
It's a language that's not only trying to take on C
and C++ and Rust and Go for that systems programming crown,
it's also trying to replace the infrastructure
that C itself gets built on, things like LLVM.
So it can hopefully become the best way
to build systems-level software across all different architectures.
ZIG ends up being a project with a huge scope.
And if you're a fan of programming languages,
there is a lot to chew on this week.
We cover cross-platform compilation
to memory management techniques
to new thoughts in compile-time metaprogramming.
As well as when you've got these huge long-term ambitions,
how do you structure an open-source project for long-term funding?
There is a lot of ground to cover,
so this is a bit of a longer episode than usual.
And we best get started.
I'm your host, Chris Jenkins.
This is Developer Voices.
And today's voice is Loris Crowe.
I'm joined today by Loris Crowe.
How are you doing out there, Loris?
Hello. Hi, Chris. Pretty good. Thank you.
Good. Good. It's good to have you here.
I always love it when we do a language deep dive
because I'm a particular fan of the world's programming languages.
And you're going to tell us all about ZIG,
which is a language I don't think I've heard of
until we had Joran Dirk Grief on the show from Tiger Beetle,
who said they've written a new database in ZIG.
And I thought, well, we have to do something about ZIG.
I have to learn about that.
So let's start here.
I always think new programming languages come into being
as a reaction to what's missing in the marketplace, if you like.
There's a burning reason why ZIG needed to exist.
Do you think that's true? What's ZIG's raison d'être?
Right. So I guess a way of answering this question,
like actually, is maybe to look at how it was created originally.
So the original creator, Andrew Kelly,
wanted to make a digital audio workstation software.
For making electronic music and that kind of thing.
Exactly.
And he tried a bunch of different languages,
and he was unhappy with all the solutions,
with all the trade-offs that each offered.
So I think he started with higher level languages
and then quickly found out that to do real-time audio processing,
you can't use a language with automated memory management.
And languages that don't give you precise control over the hardware.
Yeah.
Because it's one of the places where we're talking hard real-time.
Exactly.
You have to be there on time.
Yeah.
And but on the other end of the spectrum,
at the time, the main languages that did give you
full control over the machine were like C and C++.
And each had its own, if you will, baggage of issues,
which some of it is also up to personal taste.
But for example, C is very low level,
but it doesn't have good metaprogramming facilities.
C macros are very well known for being not particularly good.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They're not much anything string mungent, right?
Yeah, exactly.
You mess around with strings and you have a lot of unwanted side effects.
Oftentimes.
So it's a food gun.
That's how we usually think of it.
Yeah.
On the other hand, you have C++,
which I don't know if he actually did attempt to use,
but in general, C++ exists in a space
where the language is very powerful.
It's very complex.
And it's a type of language where you are heavy with abstractions oftentimes.
And that kind of detracts from what you're trying to accomplish.
Or rather, some people can definitely make it work for them.
And that is their preferred way of programming.
So that's good.
But for some other people, C++ doesn't really,
you know, it doesn't feel good in your hand
as a tool for some people.
Yeah.
And I can see how people, we're not going to start a language war,
but you can certainly see how people would feel that way about C++.
Absolutely.
And to me, you know, this is not really a thing of language war at all.
Like I can fully appreciate how somebody who likes that way of doing things
can make it work for them.
And but on the other hand, like for me personally,
that doesn't that way of doing things doesn't really click.
So ultimately, I can totally see how somebody would be productive with C++.
And I wouldn't.
So I need a different tool.
Right.
And I think that Andrew also shares, generally speaking, this perspective.
So he wanted to make a language that was low level.
So they gave you full control over the machine that would be suitable for an audio workstation.
And that on the other hand, it wouldn't be overly complicated.
And there's like a sentence that you can you can find in like Ziggs on the website,
where we say it's one of the first things that you can see on the front page.
It says focus on debugging your application rather than debugging your programming language knowledge.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
So that's kind of, I know people any time you write something that's sort of competing
with C in the low level world, someone says, why not go and why not rust?
But you, you begin to demarcate those as I'll let you answer it.
Why is it not go or rust?
So the reason why it's not rust, I would say is like the answer is very,
in a very general way, it's kind of the same answer as why not C++?
I think that rust is another language that likes its own complexity.
And it gives a ton of power from that for sure.
But, but the complexity is there.
And also, when it comes to like giving you full control over the machine rust,
it's not entirely of that opinion.
Like rust for good reasons, for safety reasons, rust wants to
relegate certain things inside unsafe rust, which is a part of rust that you are not supposed to
use lightly.
So that means that you will find out their libraries that when choosing between maximum
performance and safety, they will choose safety probably over performance oftentimes,
because you do get audited if you have unsafe or not.
So in general, rust is going for something slightly different than what Z is going for.
So both in terms of like tradeoffs between performance and safety, but also in terms of
obstruction.
And I would argue also like readability in terms of like the complexity,
because writing abstracted code makes it harder to understand and to read for a consumer.
When it comes to to Go, I think that Go and Z both share an appreciation for simplicity,
although Go is not just simple, it's also very minimalistic.
So I would say that there are like some parallels between Z and Go,
but we don't have the exact same take on everything.
And I can get more into detail if you want later.
But ultimately, Go is not as low level as rust and Z are.
I am not sure if Go would be the best choice for an Audi workstation, for example,
or for an operative system, because Go has a runtime, has a garbage collector.
Also, interoperability with Z is a bit complicated in Go, because well, first of all,
anything, any language that has a runtime, that makes interoperability with Z
a little bit more complicated, because you need to give information to the runtime
of your language to the garbage collector about what's going on with memory.
And so that sometimes makes things a little bit awkward.
But with Go specifically, I do think that for the Go team, interoperability with Z
was never a priority or something that they really liked.
So Go can call Z functions, for example, but you cannot do the inverse easily.
So you cannot make a Go function that can be easily called from Z.
And I think basically this is like a philosophy of the Go team.
Like they basically said, no, we want to do something different.
We don't want to do something.
We don't want people to rely too much on, like we want to be able to consume Z libraries,
but we don't want to do the inverse.
If you're in Go land, you use Go.
I think that's kind of their philosophy there.
Yeah, yeah, it's like we want to be able to reuse existing Z,
but we're not intending to live in the same ecosystem quite.
Yeah, exactly.
I would say that.
And you can see that also in a bunch of choices that they made also with how
compilation works in Go, like in terms of the compiler.
I think it's a reasonable choice.
It's a choice.
It makes sense.
Very different from what Z is going for.
Yeah, I don't think we need language wars because there's a huge design space to be
explored and there's plenty of land for everyone.
But okay, so that demarks what you want to be.
What's Z's answer to this set of design constraints?
I think the most interesting part about the answer to let's say systems programming,
like lower level programming in general, is to rebuild it from scratch.
All these other languages that I, well, not all these other languages, but it is common
to consider kind of like see the bottom layer of abstraction of what you're building.
So for example, there are programming languages that compile to C code.
I think NIM is an example of this.
And Rust itself, Rust doesn't compile to C.
But for example, Rust depends on the C standard library of the platform that you're targeting.
So if you're writing a Linux program, like a Rust program that you want to deploy on Linux,
Rust will use the libc of your Linux distribution.
With ZIG, the idea instead is to really, really build everything from the bottom up.
And this is a big scope.
This is not like for the faint of heart.
It's a lot of work.
But it does yield some very good results, like some very good things that you can do
once you are willing to do that work.
I would say that the most interesting thing about ZIG is that it really is a language
that allows you to build for every target from any target, meaning that if you want to target
not just normal computers, but also very tiny embedded devices, you can do so easily.
And that's also cross-compliation, because you're compiling on a Linux machine, probably,
which is going to be maybe x8664, and you're targeting a very tiny ARM V8 embedded device.
So you're compiling for different architecture there.
But this is also true from computer to computer.
So with ZIG, it's a very, it's considered fundamental the ability to build your program for
macOS, Windows, Linux, from any of those other devices.
So from Linux to Windows, from Windows to Mac, et cetera.
That's surprisingly rare for a very nice feature.
And it doesn't end here, because we can do this for ZIG applications.
And to be fair, I think that Go can do it for Go, Rust can do it for Rust.
But they cannot do it for C.
Well, we can do it also for C and C++.
So the idea is that if you have a project that has ZIG code in it and also a C dependency,
not only you can cross-compile the ZIG part, but you can also cross-compile the C part.
Really?
Yes.
And that is, I think, the huge thing.
And it's so big that actually you can use ZIG as your C, C++ compiler
when you are trying to cross-compile a Rust, a mixed project between Rust and C or a Go and C one.
So for example, Go people have been using the ZIG compiler to enable, to complete the,
to close the circle, to enable complete cross-compilation of C Go programs.
C Go is basically what you call a project that has both Go and C in it.
C Go is like a component of their, of the Go compiler.
That's how they compile in a link to C code.
So, people having, using Go projects, they are using ZIG to cross-compile.
And same with Rust.
Even AWS is using ZIG to cross-compile Rust lambdas for their lambda engines
because Rust depends on the libc of the target.
And their machines running lambda functions are running a specific version of Linux with an older
libc. And you need to be able to target the correct version of the libc to make sure that
everything runs smoothly.
Right.
And that's not something that normally compilers can do.
And Rust itself, which doesn't concern itself with C compilation at all, certainly cannot do.
So, they have, there's a package called Cargo ZIG build that allows you to use ZIG to basically
link against the correct libc version that works on lambda.
How on earth is that working?
Are you telling me that ZIG also has a C compiler built in or?
Yeah, it does.
It straight up does.
And Andrew started out trying to build an audio workstation and ended up building a
language that also includes a C compiler.
Yeah, pretty much.
That's legendary.
Yeah.
And this is like, I would say we're halfway through the journey because we want to get
even more hardcore than this.
So, I mean, if you want, we can change subject.
Otherwise, I can keep going.
Oh, I'm fascinated.
Keep going.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, do you remember when Apple released the M1 architecture, right?
Yeah.
They went from Intel to ARM.
And that was big news because, well, it turned out it's also pretty good CPU,
like pretty good architecture, Numex, I would say are pretty nice from,
like, they're powerful.
They overheat less.
They're nice.
So, when Apple released the M1, ZIG was the first compiler that was able to cross-compile
for M1 from another target, from another machine.
So, Apple, obviously, when they released, well, not only when they released, but also
while they were developing the M1, obviously, they had a tooling to compile for the M1.
But they never released, or rather, when everything came out, they had not released
any tooling for compiling for M1 from another machine.
So, you had to buy the new Mac in order to build for the new Mac?
Exactly, because what you would get was, when you have Mac OS, you get a clang.
You get a fork of LLVM, which is, I would say it's kind of pretty much LLVM,
except with, like, private patches that Apple makes specific to their system.
And when the M1 came out, they had patches specific to the new architecture.
So, you could compile, obviously, from M1 to M1.
But LLVM itself, the open-source project, did not support M1 yet, fully.
And so, you could not get LLVM, like, on Windows or Linux,
and then use that to compile for Mac OS.
We were the first ones.
And that was because not only ZIG is a C compiler, and to be fair,
the C compiler stuff right now, I would say, at its core, it's not super impressive.
The idea is that ZIG uses LLVM.
And LLVM is, like, this library that allows you to...
It's like a unified framework for optimizing, for generating optimized machine code.
So, the idea is that your compiler reads the program that it's trying to compile,
builds a data structure in memory, does semantic analysis,
all the useful stuff that a language has to do.
But then the final step is to give some of that information to LLVM,
which will then take care of selecting which exact instructions to use for the CPU that you're targeting.
Right. So, it's... I suppose...
I want to say it's almost a little bit like WebAssembly.
It's like a very low-level language that's actually going to generate the final machine code.
Yeah, that's...
It's possibly a bit of a stretch, but...
That's... I think that's fair.
That's what... That's the... That's called the LLVM IR intermediate representation.
Yeah.
That's what you create, which is a bit code of some kind and...
Bite code, sorry, of some kind, kind of like WebAssembly.
I think that's a fair parallel.
Yeah. So, we give that to LLVM.
And since we're already bundling all of LLVM,
it doesn't take much to also add Clang,
which is the C compiler that runs on LLVM.
So, that's what's allowed us to build C.
There's more than it does, but at its core, it's not super complicated.
But... But...
A compiler is just one step necessary to create a final executable.
There's also a linking page at the end.
So, the main problem with the new M1 Max was that linking
needed to be different than it was in the past.
And the reason why we were the first ones to be able to cross compile
four and one was because we had our own in-house linker.
There's a core team member in the project.
His name is Jacob Konka, and he used to work in Microsoft,
and we kind of approached him to work...
Well, I guess he approached himself.
He wanted to work on linkers.
I think at Microsoft, he was not working on anything even remotely as exciting.
And so, he decided to jump ship and join the ZIC project full-time.
So, we have our own linker, and most of the work is done by him.
And so, my point here is that by having our own linker,
we were able to reach, to have a feature even faster than LLVM could.
And LLVM is considered in general like a very good project, and it is.
But the point is that we did not consider LLVM the baseline.
We were willing to get past LLVM and do some of that work ourselves.
And now, going forward, and this ties back to my point
that we are only halfway through our journey,
now going forward, we plan to make LLVM a completely optional component.
So, that means that we have our own implementation of some of what LLVM does.
So, we have what we call them backends.
So, we have our own implementation of what reads the internal representation
of the compiler, the internal data structures,
and decides which instructions to output.
That's a lot of work, because you have to build one of those things
for each architecture that you want to support.
So, you want to support X8664?
That's one implementation.
Arm32-bit, another.
Arm64-bit.
X86, like 32-bit X86, that's another one.
There's more architectures out there.
So, for each one, you have to write a specific one,
and then you have to write another bit based on the OS that you're targeting.
So, X8664 Windows is a little bit different than X8664 Mac,
not in terms of the instructions of the program, but the packaging,
like how an executable is structured,
all the surrounding metadata, the framing, in a sense.
And we're doing it.
Now, the work that we're doing in that regard right now
is not to replace LLVM in terms of optimizations.
So, the bulk of what LLVM does
and what it's considered the state of the art for is optimizations.
We are not doing that yet.
What we're doing right now is basically do the work
so that we can have debug builds, which are not optimized,
happen without needing LLVM at all.
That's our starting point.
But the plan is going forward to basically have a competing optimizing backend.
So, you will still be able to use LLVM if you want.
How it's going to happen in practice doesn't matter much.
I think it's going to happen that you basically will need to get LLVM
through the package manager.
So, you will use the ZIG package manager to get LLVM instead of
getting it bundled in the compiler itself.
But then you will be able to get an LLVM optimized final executable regardless.
But we're going to work on our competing version.
And you will decide which one you like more.
And over time, if we do a good job, it might even be
that our competing backend becomes compelling enough
that people will use that one over LLVM.
Crikey, you're not kidding about going all the way down to the lowest level, right?
Yeah, geez.
Okay, that's...
What's your timeline for that?
That's got to be a multi-year project, right?
100%.
Yeah, for sure.
Honestly, I don't know what the timeline is going to be.
The reality is that the timeline of these things can vary dramatically,
depending on the amount of talent that you attract.
One thing that people usually say when we first tell them,
yeah, we want to get rid of LLVM, they start by saying,
oh, you're insane.
You're never going to be able to do it.
There's a bunch of geniuses that work on LLVM.
Fair.
Fine, let's assume that that's right.
I mean, I'm sure that the people working on LLVM are smart.
But it's not like they are bound by a blood contract to work on LLVM.
And if we...
And working on LLVM, it's a humongous C++ project that takes forever to compile,
and it's in some ways, it's messy.
What if we were to be able to present to people working in that field
another ecosystem where they can research the same exact kind of optimizations
that they are researching and implementing on LLVM,
but the compiler, instead of taking four hours to build, it takes 20 seconds.
I imagine that would be very seductive.
And I think you're deliberately trying to seduce people over to the zig side,
which is fair enough.
And I mean, we already have people in the core team who have pushed access to LLVM.
So it's not like we are like...
Well, I don't know anybody who is part of the leadership of LLVM,
so I wouldn't say we are like insiders.
But we already know people who do this.
So there's a potential for both knowledge sharing
and maybe some more kind of sharing out there.
Absolutely. And absolutely.
And if LLVM also ends up benefiting from this, it's great for everybody.
Sounds like one of those whoever wins, we all win situations.
Absolutely.
Okay. This is getting very low level.
Maybe we should try and pull it back into a user space.
Love the ambition, though. Absolutely.
But I do want to get a sense of what it's like to write zig.
What am I going to find as a programmer?
What am I going to like?
What am I going to need to learn?
Right. So the hardest part about the zig is not zig at all.
Zig as a language is very, very simple.
The most complicated part of zig right now is comp time,
which is the ability to run code at compile time instead of runtime.
And if you're not used to thinking about the two different lifetimes of your program,
the two different phases of its life, then you might get a little bit confused about
what it is that you can do at comp time or what it is that you cannot do at comp time.
But overall, the core principle is, in my opinion, kind of straightforward,
where things get complicated is once you get into systems programming more in general.
So if you were like a JavaScript or a Python developer,
and you never had in your life to think about stack versus heap,
or maybe people told you, but like if you're a Python programmer,
this is something that also happened to me like in university.
If you do Python and people told you about stack versus heap,
that's like philosophy to you because that's right.
You don't have control. Fascinating, but you'll never use this knowledge.
Exactly, like you don't have control over it and yeah.
But when you're getting to low level systems program,
suddenly this becomes a real concern, right? Exactly.
And so people, so the hardest part is, for example,
understanding the difference between an array of which of whose length you know,
statically, like this is going to be a six element array and it's always going to be six,
or maybe you need up to six slots.
Maybe at some point in time you use fewer than those,
so you have like a counter that tells you how many slots you're using,
but six is the limit.
So and if you know this statically at compile time,
then this can be put on the stack.
And there's some things that you can do with this memory,
thanks to the knowledge of the fact that it's bounded to six elements.
Yeah, you know exactly how much memory it's going to need for the whole lifetime of the program.
Exactly, and that is critical information for the compiler itself.
Like the language, lower level languages are like designed around these very critical concepts of
like what you know statically and what you do not know statically.
So if, for example, instead, you have a program where you ask the user to tell you
how many items they want to enter and they are allowed to enter 10,000 if they want,
or more realistically imagine parsing a JSON file,
like a JSON file can be arbitrarily deeply nested or big in general.
So at that point you need to concern yourself with heap allocation,
which again is something that in Python and JavaScript you don't do directly
because the runtime manages that for you.
So that's one example. Another example is things that your platform, like APIs that your OS
operative system gives to you, which people sometimes are used to think about as in terms
of capabilities that the language gives to them, even though the language can only act as an
intermediary. So for example, sometimes people ask, how do I get the size of the terminal window
in ZIG? And the answer is, well, the real question is, how does your OS allow you to get
that information? And that's going to happen through a syscall of some kind.
And then I guess the secondary question is, well, has somebody written the boilerplate to access
that syscall and where is it in the ZIG standard library? So the question of how you do this kind
of stuff in ZIG or in each specific language, it's not completely wrong. It does make sense.
But understanding what is the actual API below you can be a little bit annoying,
especially when the language wants to show you precisely what that is and it's not trying to
give you a sugared interface that it's overly simplified, because sometimes you do also get
that in other languages, which might make sense. Like a higher level programming language, it
makes sense that it doesn't give you necessarily low level access to everything.
So I would say these are the biggest challenges. People need to learn systems programming. They
need to have this mindset where they have to think, okay, for another example,
people sometimes ask, how do I print, call, or text in the terminal? How do you do that in ZIG?
And the answer is, ZIG doesn't concern itself with this. These are escape codes. It depends
on which terminal editor you're using and a bunch of other related concerns that really are
pretty much transparent to ZIG. But people don't have this mindset. So I would say that is the
hardest part about learning ZIG. And connected to this, there aren't a lot of good learning
materials in my opinion. So this sounds like the usual kind of young national language problem,
where maybe there isn't a library for everything yet. So there isn't documentation for everything
yet. Yeah, for sure. But also, I mean, it's not like ZIG has invented systems programming. So
it would be nice, right? If there was some good piece of like a good book that taught you
the core principles without too much fuss. And in fact, there are plenty of books that
try to teach you these things. It's just that in my experience, most of those that I've seen,
they tend to conflate C specific stuff with the OS. So for example, you have this book that it's
trying to teach you systems programming. And it starts by telling you about how the C compilation
model works. And how that intertwines with like how libraries are certain files are like
laid out in your system. And this is all real and concrete. And it was especially real and
concrete and concrete like 40 years ago. But those concepts are like in other things like
macros and where things are usually in the system library. But those are things that are
specific to C. So if you're not doing C, a lot of these things are not as timeless as the book
thinks they are. While instead stock versus heap, that one is much more timeless. So personally,
I think that we're missing learning materials that can discern between really timeless systems
programming concepts like stock versus heap versus C isms that are not relevant anymore.
Yeah, yeah, that's sort of a long life cycle, but not
mathematically pure, you could almost say. Okay, but so I would like to talk about how the
C interop works. And maybe this is the way to do it. So if I'm actually looking to get the
size of a terminal window, am I going to go looking for a sysop call and find I actually
have to do it through an OSC library? And how's that going to play out when I actually start coding?
So, well, I guess it depends on the US. Let's assume the US is Linux. Okay, first simplicity.
So if the US is Linux, you're in luck. Because in Linux, the syscalls are considered a public
API of the US. So you are not forced to use the C library of your OS. You can invoke the
syscalls directly. And in the case of ZIG, since we like doing things from scratch,
you will find in the ZIG standard library that we do implement the syscall, which I think it's
IO CTL, the syscall that you can use to get that information from the US. So in the case of ZIG,
so yeah, in the case of Linux, that's how you find that out. But in other platforms, yes,
you would have to use a C-lib, although we do have also bindings to the C-lib. So in practice,
you wouldn't have to do everything yourself from scratch. When it comes to like these very
common things, but let's imagine that instead you want to use like a C library. Okay, let's imagine
that you want to use, I don't know, SQLite. By the way, SQLite is a perfect example of a very popular
library used, for example, by Go. There's a lot of Go projects in the bundle SQLite,
but SQLite is a C project. So that's one major use case of people using ZIG to do cross compilation
when they also want to bundle SQLite. Anyway, you want to use SQLite. So at its baseline,
here's what you want to do. The way this stuff works in C is that you have C files that contain
implementations of things and have header files, which are like files with a .h extension. And
those files contain definitions. So they do not contain the full implementation. They only contain
like the signature of a function, for example. Yeah, the original kind of API docs, right?
Exactly. The original API docs. Is it called OpenAPI, I think? The thing that used to be
called Swalker, it's basically like it's a system to document like RESTful APIs, right?
That's kind of the idea, except systems programming. Yeah, so the way this works is that then
SQLite comes with a bunch of C files and one header file that you are supposed to include
in your project to get access to the public API. With ZIG, you can do that directly. So in ZIG,
you can import a C header file and it will work right away. Like you import that and you immediately
get access to all the definitions in there. Oh, interesting. Okay, so there's no kind of bridging
file that you have to write? Well, the bridging file, in a sense, gets auto-generated. That's the
idea. Right, okay. So you don't see this. And actually, if you do want, you can do that manually.
Like you can take the header file, translate it to see definitions. And in case there's like the
need to tweak something manually, you can do that if you want. But the happy path, like the most
common way you will want to do this, is just straight up import the header file and have ZIG do
that bridging internally. Okay. Then at that point, you can just straight up call all the SQLite
functions that are defined in there. So you can just like go read the SQLite documentation
and they will tell you called, I'm making this up. I don't remember how to use SQLite.
That's going to be maybe SQLite. This is a test of the SQLite header API syntax, don't worry.
Okay. So there's going to be some kind of SQLite init function. So you just call it and it works.
There's also a couple other things that ZIG does that help you with the interoperability
with C. So for example, C uses non-terminated strings a lot. So basically, when you want to
give to a function a string, you give it a pointer to the beginning of the string. And the pointer
doesn't carry information about the length. The length will be discovered by the function
that you're calling by iterating through the string until it encounters a zero character,
once it like a zero byte. Once it finds a zero byte, it knows that the string is over.
Modern languages don't like to do that anymore. Modern languages very much prefer something else.
I'll tell you my age. I can remember when we didn't like to do it at the time.
So in ZIG, for example, normally a string, it's not just a pointer to the beginning of some data
without null in the end. But in ZIG, we use slices, which other languages sometimes call
fat pointers. So what you call the pointer is a pointer, but also a length. So you have both
informations. And to be fair, sometimes in C, you also have APIs that want a length. No,
they don't want to discover a null byte at some point, but they want you to pass in a length.
But those have always to be two separate arguments, two separate values that you
need to move around in parallel. Anyway, so how does ZIG help with C interpretability? Well,
string literals in ZIG are null terminated. So basically, when you write, I don't know,
hello world, and you want to use that string literal in ZIG, that's going to be a pointer
plus a length. I don't know how long a hello world is. Ten characters, nine characters, whatever.
Depends whether you include the traditional exclamation mark at the end.
Okay. So you do have this information, but there's also going to be a null byte
past the end of the string. So you can take a C, a ZIG string literal and pass it to C
transparently. No need to do anything else. And it's always going to work.
And more in general, ZIG does have a bunch of functions in the standard library that allow you
to deal with null terminated strings, which are not the preferred type of string in ZIG.
Like you don't treat strings as null terminated normally, but
null terminated strings are a reality because not only because of C interpretability,
like in terms of SQLite, but also because of C interpretability with the OS, like
OS APIs, the lib C, that's C, but also the C's calls often time inherit some C's and some
like some ways of communicating data that are like mirroring what C does.
Yeah, unsurprisingly, often the OS is written in C.
Exactly, because the OS is written in C, because that's maybe how people used to do things at
the time. And so these things are still there. Yeah. And okay, so to conclude, you have string
literals. You have a lot of other like operators in ZIG that you can also use with C functions
very easily, kind of transparently. But just to name one, I think it's really cool,
you can use defer. So defer is almost the same concept as goes defer. There's like some minor
differences. But the idea is that basically, if you want to free a resource, while when exiting
the function, instead of making sure that you call free or like file close, for example,
like the whatever resource release function you need to call, instead of making sure that
you copy paste that call at every exit point of your function, what you can do is on one line,
you open a file. And on the line below, you defer close it. Oh, okay. Yeah. So you have basically
cleanup that you can put immediately after the creation of the resource. And whenever you leave
that scope, no matter how you leave it, whenever you leave that scope, that function will be called.
Yeah, because it's always deeply dissatisfying that you have to remember to stick the close
call, the free up call at the end, and it just screams this is going to get forgotten one day.
Yeah, absolutely. So defer saves you from having to be too careful about like branching paths in
your function. And if you look at it from a maybe it's not as handy as you know, what C++ can do
with RAI with the structures that run automatically, you don't even have to write defer. But C++
destructors only work with C++ defer in zig also can be called on C functions. It's completely
transparent. So there's this funny end result we were basically zig in a sense is better at using
C libraries than C. Because the same cleanup routine in C would require you maybe to even
use go to like it's not uncommon for people to use go to and have like a label like a section of
the function with all the cleanup functions, but it gets really messy. Like I don't think I am able
to fully convey how messy cleanup can get in C, because it doesn't have defer. I can believe.
Yeah, absolutely. That's interesting. That's interesting still being in C but building on it
with new syntax. I have to ask before we leave this particular thread, what about pointers?
The pointer does pointer arithmetic come into zig pointer arithmetic can come into zig. By the way,
that's a great point. I was forgetting that's another great improvement overseas that also
helps beautifully with interpretability. So you can do pointer arithmetic in in zig if you want to,
because that's what the machine allows you to do. And maybe occasionally some OS API will require
you to do so. But in general, you do not do pointer arithmetic in zig. And specifically in
zig you cannot do so in the type system, you are not allowed to do arithmetic on pointers. What you
have to do is take your pointer, convert it to an integer, which is not like an operation that
there does anything at runtime. It's just like a type system thing, like you have to be explicit
about taking a pointer, interpreting it as a number, apply the math to the number,
and then convert it back to a pointer. So you can do it if you want, or if you need,
probably if you need, you shouldn't want. But the language is not going to make it easy
or very comfortable to you. There's a little bit of friction introduced there. And on the flip side,
it helps identify very quickly where these kind of shenanigans are happening.
Right. So it's mainly there for the sake of C interop rather than writing zig day to day.
Exactly. And I mean, we say C interop, but I don't know. There might be other things out there,
like I'm thinking of firmwares, like your programming tiny embedded device, and you need
something like this because of the very low level stuff that you're doing, which is not really
necessarily specific to see anymore. But it's like low, super low level bit fiddling. Maybe
at that point, you need something like this. But otherwise, you normally don't. And still
related to pointers, there's another crucial thing. Pointers in C are very underspecified
in the sense that you see a char star. So you know, it's a pointer. And when you dereference it,
you get a character. But then the question is, can the pointer be null or not? You don't know.
Maybe documentation tells you, but you're not sure normally. The second question is,
okay, am I I'm getting a character at the end of this pointer? Assuming it's not now. Now,
is there going to be just one character on the other side? Or is this like a string?
Is this like expected to have another character afterwards and another one afterwards until I
encounter a null? Is there going to be a null or am I supposed to know how many items to get
because of another variable? This is not encoded in a type system at all in zig. All of these are
different type of pointers. So if a pointer can be null, it's an optional pointer. So we do the
thing that all modern languages are doing where you have like the concept of optional,
and then you need to unwrap the optional. And we use that to represent more pointers.
But then we have types for so you have normal zig slices, which are a pointer and a length.
But then you have a C style pointer that can be that there's going to be a pointer either to one
item, one specific item. So you're explicitly saying there's going to be one character,
one chart at the end, not many. Or there's a syntax for saying, no, this is like a pointer to a
unknown number of characters. So there's specific syntax that is going to tell you,
yes, this is a pointer to many items, but the pointer itself doesn't tell you how many.
And then there's a pointer to an unknown number of characters with a null terminator at the end.
And this is in the type system. So for example, if you by mistake think that you're trying to
create a string off of another string, and so like you maybe take a tiny slice from the middle
of the string, and you try to pass it to another application, and you forget that that API is
expecting an alt terminator at the end, which is not going to be there because you just split
off like a tiny like two characters from the middle of a string, right? So there's not going to be
an alt terminator on the other side. The Z-type system will tell you, it will give you a compile
error because it will tell you, I'm expecting an alt terminated string, but the operation that you,
like the slicing operation that you did on the other string does not yield an alt terminated
string. So you will get a compile error right away instead of having your program read random
garbage and maybe sometimes crash. Yeah, yeah. That's one other question I have to ask you then,
because I can see right now this appealing to people that need to use C, don't want to use C,
got into Rust, didn't make friends with the borough checker. Yeah. And now have could find ZIG
being the ideal place if I want more type safety around C, particularly around strings. Yeah. What
about memory management? Because that's the other big sticking point. Right. Yeah, agreed.
So in general, so if we want to talk about ergonomics, what I described earlier,
like the first statement, that really helps a lot with memory management,
because you allocate a resource, defer, free it, and you're good to go. You need to remember to
explicit like malloc free call in ZIG land. Exactly. And to be even more concrete about this,
ZIG does not have a global allocator. So in C, you have malloc. And malloc is like the allocator.
And maybe different projects use a different implementation of malloc. There's like a few
competing implementations. But in ZIG libraries, there's this idea that in C libraries, there's
this idea that you have malloc coming from the ecosystem that allows you to allocate memory.
In ZIG, allocators are always passed around explicitly. So if a function wants to allocate,
it needs to accept an allocator as input. Interesting. Yeah. So this makes it more
easy, dramatically more easy to audit what it is that's allocating memory or not.
If a function doesn't accept an allocator, or a data structure that bundles the allocator in it,
like it's also like, for example, we have an array list, which would be like equivalent of a C++
vector. So like it's a growable array. When you make an array list, you give to it an allocator.
And then when you pass around the array list, the array list will be able to allocate because it
bundles a reference to the allocator inside of it. That's for convenience. But in general,
you can very quickly audit if a function can allocate or not. Does that help you audit if
a function is forgetting to deallocate? That by itself, no. What it helps is that the
doing that is that the what we call the general purpose allocator, the main allocator implementation
that you find inside of ZIG in the standard library, that allocator in debug mode has leak
detection. So you cannot check statically if all allocator allocations are freed. Or rather,
you can't unless you're willing to become Rust. Rust can. With all the limits, they also have
limits on the type of like memory management strategies that the borrower checker can understand.
But they can. We can't. But we can instrument the default allocator with checks for leaks
in the bug builds. So when you run your tests, basically, the allocator will fail the test
if at the end of it, you have like still memory allocated.
Okay. And that's default built in part of the tests we don't have to specifically instrument.
Exactly. You don't have to do anything. That's nice. Yeah. There's another angle to this also,
which is that it is correct for programs to want to leak memory occasionally. In this sense,
I'll use the Z compiler itself as an example. So the Z compiler, when built in the bug mode,
will make sure to free everything. When built in release mode, it will not free
once it's about to leave. It will not free memory once it's about to close. Because the OS will
clean up that memory anyway. And there's no point in freeing every single item that you've
allocated if your program is about to exit. Like making sure to free tiny things makes
perfect sense when your program is going to use a ton of memory or it's going to be super long
lived. Like otherwise, it's going to consume more and more memory over time until it eats all
the available memory and everything explodes. Yeah. But for like, let's say one shot programs,
kind of like a compiler is like you run utility, you run studio and then it closes.
Cleaning stuff up at the end is just wasted time. So have you ever used like visual studio?
Not for so long. Yeah, I can't believe. Yeah.
Thankfully, I haven't had to use it in a while now. But a few years ago, like seven years ago
or something, I had to use it consistently. And it drives me nuts that when you close it,
not only it takes forever to load, that that is already not okay. But when you close it,
it takes forever to close. Why? Why is it taking forever to close? Because as it's closing,
it's trying to free and run the destructors of every single component and sub component and
sub component. I have a vague memory of doing this with Eclipse and just getting into the habit
of force quitting because who cares? Exactly. Exactly. And Eclipse is another in Java. I think
it's another language that has destructors. And so kind of makes people want to use them a lot.
But then there's moments where you actually really in terms of like functionality that you're
offering to the user, you don't want to do it. Like you just want to close it right away. Yeah.
So long story short, I made this point because in reality, it is a legitimate behavior to have the
program in specific circumstances, like memory, if you think about it. Because like for real,
like the user experience would be generally significantly improved in both Eclipse and
Visual Studio, if the thing just exited right away, of course, you do want to have a toggle,
like a flag, to make sure you free all the memory cleanly so that you can guarantee that you do not
have unwanted leaks. Like Visual Studio, for example, is a long running program in Eclipse.
So they should not be leaking memory in the normal operations. So it's not. So you still want to be
able to test for that. There are at least two memory management strategies. One is be very
careful about what you're using because it's a limited resource. But for the long run,
you know, whatever memory you're using at the end, you can just drop on the floor, right?
Exactly. Yeah, yeah, that makes perfect sense. There's one other big thing that you've talked
about a little bit, but I'm tempted to run over our usual time slots. I'm fascinated by this.
Go for it. I'm not in a rush, for sure. Good. Okay, so comp time, you talked a bit about that.
And as an old list programmer, this is a concept that makes sense to me, but I think it's never
really gone mainstream. So why don't we talk a bit about the separation between runtime programs
and compile time programs? Sure. So let me tell you about how Zig does this more specifically.
So comp time in Zig is interesting because
Zig as a language doesn't have runtime type information. So for example, in JavaScript,
Python, also in Go, you can ask questions to the program running at runtime about its types.
C programs, on the other hand, don't have a runtime, and they don't have runtime type
information. Usually it's not always the case, but usually runtime type information
tends to go hand in hand with an actual runtime of the language. So for example, in Python,
you can create new types at runtime. You can do introspection. And so having a runtime that can
yield those dynamic properties to you usually benefits from having runtime type information.
C doesn't have those facilities because a struct in C at the end of the day boils down
to offsets in memory. Oh, the struct is, I don't know, 16 bytes long and eight bytes in,
and it contains two fields. The first field is at offset zero, and the other one is at offset
eight. And that's the end of it. So everything else has disappeared.
But it is useful to be able to inspect types and reason about types at least statically. So
that's what ZIG does. ZIG does not give you runtime type information, but it does give you
com time type information. So you are not allowed, you're not able to create new types at runtime,
but you are able to create new types at compile time by reasoning on other types and the way
you reason on other types. And then, by the way, this is also what generic does in other languages.
It's just that this is usually done in other imperative languages. This is usually done with a
funky declarative syntax and a bunch of diamond brackets where you use diamond brackets to denote
like the generic type and then to put constraints on it using like some kind of declarative
syntax. Like I want type T to be, I don't know,
to conform to interface A or interface B, etc.
Okay, so you're using, you're saying you're using com time to do things like I want a list of As,
but now I need to pin it down to be a list of eight bit integers.
Yeah. Yeah, okay. Because you can, because the idea is that you are creating a new type
by referring to another existing types, another existing type. And the way you do this in ZIG is
not via these custom syntax, but by using normal ZIG syntax. So literally a list, for example,
let's say you want to make a generic list and you want then to be able to make a list of integers,
a list of characters, whatever. The way you implement this in ZIG is that you create a function
called list that accepts a type as input, which has to be marked as a com time parameter. So like
the signature would literally read FN list, open parenthesis, com time T column type. So it's a
com time parameter named T of type type, you have to pass in a type. And so that could be like integer
or whatever. And then this function returns another type. And in the function body, you
create a function, you create a struct, you return a struct definition that places that defines the
payload field like a struct probably that has the payload field of type P what you passed in,
which is kind of like generic work. But it's normal procedural Z code that gets executed
compile time. So for example, you could create like I said, you're making a simple array,
but the length of that array, you want to be the result of other reasoning, you could create a
Fibonacci function, run it a com time and say that your array is long the 10th Fibonacci number,
which I don't know how much it is, but it's not going to be 10. It's going to be your number.
Right. So you can call normal, run normal Z code, it's going to be interpreted by the compiler
while compiling. And usually you do have some of that in other languages, it's just not fully
general purpose, they give you restricted language to specify properties and have they have their
own special rules. In Z, it's just you run the Z code. And, and the compiler has like a concept
of a execution quota. So that like, for example, if you make a mistake and you try to make,
you make an array that is the 1000 Fibonacci number, but your Fibonacci implementation is
very bad. The compiler after a while is going to tell you I executed like 10,000 loops. And I, and
since we couldn't come to a conclusion, I gave up. And if you really think this is this is not
like an infinite loop, then you can pull up that number, like the number of executions before giving
up. And, and we're going to try again. But so that way basically we, the compiler is how it deals
with like with infinite loops and undecidable stuff. Yeah. So you're protecting it's people making,
accidentally making compile time infinitely. Yeah. Yeah. And Alan Turing has opinions on why you
can't automate that. Yeah, exactly. So and you know what, in our case, I think it's fine in practice
to solve the indecisibility problem by just giving up, because ultimately, like, you're
trying to compile a program and you're not willing to sit there forever or up with radical
long to have it compile. So yeah. Okay. So this raises two natural questions. And the first has
got to be, what's that like as a, as a programmer is because most of us are used to using like
diamond brackets for generics. Do you prefer the zigway? Does it feel natural once you get used to
it? I think it feels insanely natural. Like you mentioned earlier, Lisp, to me, I, by the way,
I also love Lisp. I've never used Lisp professionally, but like in university, definitely one of my
favorite subjects. And, and I also loved writing macros in Lisp. And it feels like writing macros
in Lisp. Or actually, I would say it's even better than writing macros in Lisp. Yeah,
the spicy opinion. Well, so what I think happens with Lisp is that people say macros in Lisp are
nice because Lisp is an almost iconic language. So the language itself is the data structure that
represents it. It's the least the, yeah, it's the world, the small expression that represents it,
which is fair. But I do think that the, the, the actual truth is that
by having the program be a data structure, you are naturally, the language is steering you naturally
towards treating the program as a data structure instead of it being a textual transformation.
And in fact, you can write macros in Lisp that don't generalize really well, that like make assumptions
about a specific like argument being, being or not being a list or being or not being quoted,
for example. In Zig, you are literally, the comp time is more limited than what you can do with
Lisp macros just to be, to be clear. And that's also kind of by design. It's kind of like of a
80, 20 thing, like it gives you 80% of the power, but it saves you from the 20% of really
cursed stuff that people will want to do all the time. Or like, or rather it would 20% of
the complexity, which does save you from cursed stuff. Yeah. In Zig, what you do is like the,
when you look at the time, you literally call a function that like you call at type info and
you pass in a struct. So let's say that you made a struct called named person in person has age
and name. And then you call type info on person. And what you get back
is a data structure that contains, like it's another struct that contains all the info about
that type. Like among other things, it will contain like an array that contains the two fields
with information about how the field is called, what's the type, etc, etc. And so your metaprogramming
is always going to look at the program as data and never as syntax. And I think that's the key
that makes come time weirdly, weirdly natural. Okay. Yeah. Yeah, it does remind me. I mean,
the frustration with list macros was always that they were untyped and you could really
cause things to explode in an even more spectacular way than normal lists. Absolutely.
But the nice thing was that there was absolutely no difference between writing programs that work
to compile time and run time because it was the same tools, same language, same everything.
Exactly. And it's the same for Zigg. Because you do use the same syntax. You like, I have an
example on a blog post that I've wrote, trying to introduce people to the concept of come time.
And my favorite example in there is this idea that which is actually taken from real life
experience. I was writing a Redis client for Zigg. And in Redis, you have commands like the
query language of Redis makes you write commands that are case insensitive. So if you write it
uppercase or lowercase, it doesn't matter. So at some point in my client, I wanted to recognize
some of those commands. So I wanted to check for equality between two strings. And my idea was,
well, to slightly, very slightly improve the performance of the comparison function,
if I know that the constant string, like the string literal that I hard code in my
program that I used to check the user provided string against, if I know that that one is always
going to be uppercase, I can simplify the comparison code ever so slightly. I can just remove one
branch from the comparison. But now I have, I want to enforce that when you call my equal function,
you always pass in the first argument, the argument that you're passing,
like the first argument that you're passing is always going to be uppercase.
Right. So you want some compile time code to check those strings are correctly written.
Exactly. Now, imagine trying to do that with diamond brackets stuff. I have no idea if you
can actually even pull it off. Here's what you do in Zig. In Zig, in the function body,
you open a comp time block. Well, first of all, you have to mark the first argument as always
being available at comp time. So people will be forced to give you, it doesn't have to be a string
literal directly, it can be like a variable name. But ultimately, the value contained in that variable
needs to be resolvable at comp time. It doesn't need to depend on weird stuff like the network.
So you open a comp time block, and in there, you have a for loop that loops over the string
and checks that its character is in the correct range. That's it. That's all you do. Nothing
weird. You just use the language to check the string character by character. And if you find a
character that is not in your expected range, so in my case, it was between uppercase A and uppercase
Z, what you do is that you emit a compile error. And you can emit a compile error that says, well,
you are supposed to give me an uppercase string and you didn't give me an uppercase string because
this character is lowercase. You can even be precise and print the string and point out a
point at the specific character if you want. You can craft the message whichever way you want.
And that becomes the compile error. And so now, users of your API, not only the constraint is
enforced, so if they give you a bad string, they will get a compile error. But the compile error
is also going to be designed by you. So people will get a nice compiler from the compiler that
will tell them, you're supposed to pass an uppercase string, but you didn't.
Nice. Yeah, so you can start doing bespoke compiler extensions, and you don't have to
learn a new language to do it. That's pretty sweet. Okay, that gives me a good sense of the
footprint of the language. So there's one other big topic I think we should talk about,
which is, I thought it was really interesting the way that the Zig project is funded,
right? Because every language, particularly in every open source project, has a problem with
getting enough work done because you've got to give up your day job if you really want a language
to take it off. Yeah. And your approach, Zig's approach to funding is fairly novel. Tell me about
that. So Zig is a 501c3 non-profit foundation, US non-profit foundation, like 501c3 is a
thing in the US legal system. It's been kind of set up like a charity. Yeah, it's exactly what
we normally would consider a charity. So it's tax exempt, and you cannot pay dividends. So all
the money that goes into the organization has to be used to pursue your mission. So basically,
you have to use the money to run the company. You can take it out and buy a yacht with it or
whatever I mentioned. Zig is not the only language that has this legal structure. Python,
I think it's also another 501c3, but not all languages are net. Some other languages are a
different type of, it's still considered non-profit, but it's a different type of organization and
which does have to pay taxes. This is what is, usually it's 501c6. It might seem that there's
not much of a difference between three and six, especially because it's a place where we normally
in like semantic versioning, we would have like the patch number. So you think, oh, c6c3, whatever,
it's like, they fixed the bug in there. No, that's a huge difference. We're not always consistent
with version numbers, but my god, lawyers, they can really change the rules between versions.
So Zig specifically leaves mainly off of donations. So most of our income comes from people
donating money to the foundation so that we can move forward with the development of Zig.
Some money also comes from other things. So it's mainly donations from individuals.
We do have also a good number of donations from companies, but I think in terms of like,
if you were to do a pie chart and plot them both, they would, I think, roughly be balanced.
So we do try actively to keep a balance between our sources of income because we don't want to
get in a situation where like one entity or like a very small number of individuals end up having
control basically over the foundation, maybe not directly, right, not legally, but if they control
the money flow, then ultimately they do control the destiny of the organization.
Exactly, yes.
Yeah, and we do want to be able to say no to people. We do have support contracts,
or rather we have one with Uber because Uber is using Zig to cross compile. They are cross
compiling, I think, as of today, all their backend services that require cross compilation
because of ARM servers mainly. So like they wanted a while ago to be able to have ARM servers and
not just Intel, well, XAD664, and so they use Zig, and now they did the work to actually make
sure that all their C and C++ stuff cross-compiles correctly. So they have a support contract with
us, but then again, it's not a huge chunk of our income. And that is mainly when it comes from
income. So related to this, also, we kind of want to be independent, and we are very serious about
this. We used to joke that, because people sometimes say, oh, if you want this, your
language to succeed, you cannot make a successful language unless you are supported by a big tech
company. And we kind of beg to differ, but also our standard offer is how much money whatever
big tech company wants to give us in exchange for 0% of the foundation and zero seats in the
board of directors. But they do get Zig in the end. So they do get something in the end.
Yeah, yeah, there is some quip pro quo, but no power.
No power, no control at all, zero, absolute zero. And because we really want to make sure that we,
like the Zig is a BDFL run project. So also compared to other languages, we basically
ultimately have Andrew, who is the creator, who acts as like the ultimate decision maker.
It's not only him, there's a core team, there's people, there's a process which is also very
public, like you can read proposals to change the language on the GitHub. And discussion happens in
public and actually anybody can chime in. But for example, it's not a democratic process,
like if a feature proposal has a huge number of upvotes that counts zero towards the decision
of whether to include that feature of or not in Zig.
Right. Yeah, that has some downsides, but usually has great upsides for design consistency.
Absolutely. And it's absolutely, in my opinion, fundamental if you want to have your language
stay small, if you don't want it to eventually devolve into a kitchen sink.
Yeah, that's true.
And there was a talk by the creator of the Elm programming language recently that I think
dove into this general concept, I think in a very nice way. Basically, I'm paraphrasing and I'm
going to oversimplify. The talk is titled The Economics of Programming Languages, I think.
It's from a strange loop. And, well, it was given a strange loop. I highly recommend it.
But the bit that I'm interested about was said something along the lines of
languages that are like 501c6 is like more corporate languages that end up having like
a bunch of organizations come together into a kind of consortium or like a trade association.
They basically look at the language as a marketplace. They look at the shared infrastructure
and all the commerce, all the commerce, all the business that this thing can support.
So, which is reasonable, right? You look at a language like I don't know C sharp or Java,
and those languages do enable a certain type of commerce. So, from their perspective, they want
the commerce to be as much as possible. They want to give the best market to their organization
members. And so, if an organization member wants something because it helps them do their business,
you have a strong incentive to say yes. And whoever doesn't need that feature,
they cannot use it. They can disable it. They don't have to use it, right? So, there's no point
in saying no to people if your goal is to enable the, have the biggest possible market.
But as technologies, we know that, well, there's some downsides from that, right? Once your language
becomes a kitchen sink, then it's like, it's not good over time. So, there's huge value in keeping
your thing small and consistent. And I think that's what you get by choosing 501c3 over 501c6,
or rather not going down the path of making your organization like a trade association.
Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting the thought that that one decision, how you're structured as a company,
or as a financial organization, will influence how you're designed as a language.
Yeah. It has huge influence. People, programmers, don't want to think about this stuff. They like
to think, oh, I just want to focus on the code, which is, it's a sentiment that I can understand.
Frankly, I would like to only focus on the code. But the hard lesson that I learned is that
to have the best technology, you have to get right the business side. Like, the business
side comes first. Every time you make a mistake there, the technology will suffer.
It will, in the long run, it really matters. In the short term, it doesn't. The long run,
it has a huge effect. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. Okay. Well, I'm very glad we diverted into comp time,
but we should probably wrap up and let the listeners go to runtime. How's that for a segue? So,
yeah, if you, if someone wants to get started with ZIG, I know you have LSP support, you have a
VS code plugin, you've got all the quality of life things for a new beginner, but where should
they start learning? My recommendation would be go to the official website, ziglang.org,
and there there's a learn section. The learn section has like a guide on how to
download ZIG, install it, and it also links you to some learning resources.
Personally, among those, the two, actually, the three main ones that I would suggest is,
as a starting point, the language reference, the documentation that tells you about the language,
not the Sunday library. That one teaches you specifically about like syntax of the language,
and it's one page. It's one long page, like it's not an A4 or US letter page, but it's like,
just one page is not huge, and you don't have to read it all precisely. You can scroll through it,
but that one gives you baseline understanding of ZIG. Then from there, I would suggest,
if you don't have like experience with lower level programming and you want like a very
smooth learning curve, ZIG links is the best starting point, in my opinion. So, ZIG links is
like a community project where basically you clone the repo and you get a collection of very
tiny programs that don't compile or that don't behave correctly. And the comments tell you how
to fix them. So, you go one by one, and the comment will go, oh, this program is supposed to print
an award, but it doesn't. Fix it, and that's going to be super simple, right? You're going to
just fix the string literal, but then going forward, the exercises will become very smoothly,
but they will become harder, and they will require you to understand more of the syntax.
You know, I think that's how I learned closure. They had a similar thing called,
I think, the closure cones as like a series of small failing programs that you have to fix,
and you gradually learn the whole language. It's a lovely way to learn a new language.
Yeah, ZIG links is very, very, very popular. I would say it's probably the most popular
piece of educational content in the ZIG ecosystem. And the name ZIG links is also inspired by
Rustlings, because Rust also has it, the same thing, and they call it Rustling.
Right, nice. I will link to both of those in the show notes.
But for now, Loris, thank you very much for joining us. It's a fascinating language with
almost more scope than C, which I can't believe. It has pretty much all the scope of C.
It tries to fix all the things that C, for some reason, never wanted to fix. Think about it.
Why is ZIG able to cross compile C, and a C compiler is not going to be able to give you that
out of the box? We didn't get into this, but you get a ZIG compiler, and you write Hello World in
C, and you can compile it from Linux to Windows. Try to do the same with Clang. It's not going to
work. I'm not even going to try. Yeah, but it's insane. So yeah, the scope is all of C,
all of the things that C should have done that he didn't do. That's a little bit extra.
Nice. That's enough to keep us busy for a while. Yeah.
Loris, thank you very much for joining us. Thank you.
Thank you, Loris. Since we recorded that conversation, I have been playing around with
the ZIG links tutorial he mentioned, and yeah, I can confirm it's a nice way to learn.
I'm also planning to find time to pull out my old Arduino microcontrollers, because I've dabbled
with kind of embedded hardware in the past. I've never really been happy writing C. I've loved
using Rust, but it's been a fight to get things to compile onto the embedded hardware. So hopefully,
ZIG is going to finally make me happy when I'm tinkering with soldering irons and wires and
LEDs and stuff. In the meantime, I leave you with links to everything we've discussed. They're all
in the show notes. There is a wealth of information out there about ZIG, how to learn it, what it does,
extra features we didn't get a chance to cover. And I'll leave you with a funny story. If you
install ZIG and type ZIG Zen, it will tell you why it exists. I'll let you go and discover that.
Before you go, please do take the time to give us a like or a share or a rate or a review.
It is the easiest way to let us know which topics you find most interesting, so we can do more
episodes on those kinds of topics. And if you haven't already, click subscribe or follow to
catch future episodes. And until the next episode, I've been your host, Chris Jenkins.
This has been Developer Voices with Loris Crowe. Thanks for listening.
Thank you.
