Hi and welcome to Global Governance Futures based out of the Global Governance Institute
at University College London. This is a podcast about the challenges facing humanity and possible
global responses. If you're new to the show and you want to get a list of our favorite books,
other resources, listen to past shows and join our community, go to ucl.ac.uk forward slash global
dash governance. We're really excited to have Dr Zach Stein join us today. Zach is a writer,
a futurist, a transformative educator working to bring a greater sense of justice
and sanity to education. Alongside Daniel Schmackenberger, who featured in episode 12,
Zach is also a founding member of the Consilience Project, a non-profit media organization aiming
to improve public sense making and democratic dialogue. Zach received his PhD in education from
Harvard University where he studied educational neuroscience, human development and the philosophy
of education. He's published dozens of articles and two books. His most recent book and one which
really caught my attention is called Education in a Time Between Worlds and Grapples with the
dangers posed by a profound learning and capacity deficit in the face of civilization-wide
transformations. It really is an incredibly rich and thought-provoking work and at the risk of over
simplifying, Zach argues that the world as we have known it is rapidly disappearing and as a result,
radical transformation of our legacy education systems is now an urgent, even existential,
imperative. As he puts it, we can no longer assume, if we ever could, the unproblematic
intergenerational transmission of essential human capacities for reasoning and reflection.
So in the spirit of the philosopher John Dewey, we're going to discuss today why Zach believes
that at roots all current global crises might be best understood as crises of education and why,
as educators, learners and concerned planetary inhabitants, we should all care about that.
So we're super excited to get into this with you, Zach. Thanks so much for taking the time to speak
with us. It's a pleasure to be here. Thank you for inviting me. And before we get started,
I'll just ask the poll crew to say hello. Hi, I'm Jessica. I work on the research and I'm very
looking forward to hearing what Dr. Stein has to say today. Hi, my name is Sam. I do the audio and
video editing and hopefully some of the thinking. Hi, I'm Zoe. I help with the social media and
running up the YouTube channel. Great. Okay. So to open, Zach, perhaps you can help us set the
scene. You describe in the book the years 2000 to 2050 as a critical turning point in the history
of humanity and the planet. So what is so special about this 50-year stretch? And how does this
interregnum, how does this turning relate to the educational crisis? Yeah, so that specific time
period. I took that on the cue of Immanuel Wallerstein, who was the creator of World Systems
Analysis, which is this fascinating kind of approach to doing big history, specifically
long-term stretches of the development of the capitalist world system. And he was actually
following from complex dynamical system theory, like prigazine and things like that. And he saw
this kind of like rhythm of changing in the basic organization of capitalism, this transformation of
the hegemonic structure, as he called it. And so, you know, one occurred when we went from
having capitalism being rooted in basically Venice, to it being rooted with the Dutch,
and then from the Dutch to the British, and then from the British to the United States. And each
time that kind of hegemonic world system transformation, as Wallerstein would call it,
occurred, whole swaths of culture, whole swaths of political life, whole swaths of
the ecology and the humanity were changed. And he saw this in several other kind of like people
doing actually quantitative analysis of large historical swaths of time, like Peter Turchin
more recently have seen these actual, their rhythms, their cycles of historical transformation.
And so Wallerstein says, Hey, we're about to be in one of these, we're about to be in a situation
where, you know, the British kind of and then the Americans and now the Americans and now what
basically is what Wallerstein saying is like the, the end of America as the dominant hegemonic force
in the capitalist world system, he's predicting. And he's saying that for the first time the system
is global. And that means that it's not clear that the hegemon can just move geographically,
that we may be approaching something that looks more like a transformation of a deeper,
more profound nature at the structure of the economic system itself. So this is where I got
the idea. And then I started looking around at other thinkers who are also like even, you know,
new age thinkers and like futurists and, you know, anthropologists and other people pointing
at the same kind of time period, basically. And so yeah, I brought that I pulled that in there
and put it in the book just to make people aware that when I say we're in a time between worlds,
like it's a, it's a technical phrase. Like if there's a, there's poetics in it, but it's actually
a technical phrase and it's referring to this basically almost inevitable historical unfolding
of a very significant transformation in the techno economic and political base of our world.
And the argument that I weave in there is that, hey, don't forget education. Like Wallerstein
doesn't mention education. And my argument is basically that all those other things, economics,
politics, warfare, technology, you don't get those without education. And it's interesting to me
that people neglect that insight. It shows how taken for granted much of the processes of intergenerational
transmission have been. And so that's invisible when they become problem-optized in our society,
because we take it for granted. Each time the capitalist world system changed, the nature
of education itself changed. And so yeah, so that's, I'm pulling that bit out. And one thing
that's interesting is that a great historian, again, of capitalism, Jason Moore, his book,
Capitalism and the Web of Life. It's an incredible book. He talks about not just like
capitalist world systems, but world ecologies, which is to say the way that capital shapes the
nature of the planetary biosphere, literally dams and canals and all of these things. And of course,
now emissions and transformations in weather as a result of this. So we're having, and I know this
in the book, we're having these crazy hockey stick patterns of major ecological transformation.
At the same time, the underlying techno economic base is fundamentally transforming. At the same
time, education is transforming. And I'm pointing at education as the thing that needs to be worked on
basically first or as most primary, or at least not put on the back burner, like it's going to take
care of itself. When in fact, most of the problems, as you mentioned in the intro, that we're looking
at are our issues of skill deficit, capacity deficit, personality disorganization, low grade,
ubiquitous psychopathology. And so it's a complex psychological crisis, as much as it's an ecological
or technological or political or economic crisis. So that's a little bit about that,
where that period came from. And I've been saying we were between worlds for, you know, five or six
years. And then when the pandemic hit, people were like, Oh, that's what you mean? I was like,
yes. I was like, it's everything is fundamentally, we're in a liminal space, we can't go back or
stabilize the prior system. We're going to be in a disequilibrated state. And this is Wallerstein's
notion is getting it from privileging complex, open dynamical systems, right? They go through
periods of turbulence before they restabilize. So we're in that period of turbulence, and we'll
remain in that period of turbulence, I'm saying for, for decades, until something new locks in.
And the concern we have is that what's going to lock in is not going to be good. So there's a
way to solve this problem that looks, for lack of a better word, like totalitarian or authoritarian.
So, you know, the Consilience Project and my work, other workers trying to find a way to solve
these problems that result in an open society on the other side of this kind of reorganization
of the world system. It's kind of like the broadest framing. Yeah, that's super helpful, Zach. Thank
you. So maybe we'll sort of drill down a bit now into a concrete example. So thinking about climate
change, I've been doing quite a bit of research recently on climate change. And there's a real
sort of focus on, I'd even say a fetish for CO2 metrics. We have this kind of war on carbon.
And the solution ontology is really about sort of technology. So carbon capture storage, net
zero, very current at the moment, very lively debate there. But also, you know, state multilateral
agreement. This is a collective action problem. It's a political problem. If we can just,
if we just see our way through that impasse, we can solve climate change. But we're 30 years down
the road from Rio 1992, carbon emissions are yet to peak. And you argue in the book that the climate
crisis is not a problem of pollution or habitat destruction. It's actually a crisis of human
decision making. So if you were speaking to some of our most highly educated elite decision makers,
experts, and there I said academics, what is it that we're not getting right?
Yeah, there's at least kind of two ways to answer the question.
One is that one of the things we're not getting right is the communication and education of those
people who are not academics and who are not high level policy decision makers. So like,
this is in part a decision making crisis and a capacities crisis among those
epistemic elites, let's call them, and decision makers who are laying out this
solution ontology, right, inadequately. So there's something I'll get to that point,
like what's wrong with the highest level models about the global situation and why those are
inadequate. But prior to that, there's actually this issue that the degree of polarization around
climate change, for example, in the United States, the degree of intensity, even though it's low
grade, it will emerge again around escalating economic inequality. Like there's a series of
things that require really complex educational initiatives, not involving the most elite decision
makers, but involving every citizen in an open society's understanding of the global situation,
that we have not provided educational systems that brought people up and into a mature and
complex view of the global situation. At least in the United States, we're being entertained.
We should be being informed and educated by the media, we're being entertained and brought into
basically cultural war as a form of entertainment and catharsis. And so that's the first thing that
these epistemic elites need to consider is that the people, so-called, can't just simply be told
what to do when you figure out what the right policy is. This is the, remember, the scary
lockdown of excuse the terminology on the other side of being between worlds is the option where
we figure out the climate policy that works. We can't explain it to the people, quote unquote,
the masses. So we have coercive legislation that basically mandates their behavior change
without their understanding why the behavior change is necessary. And we saw this with the
pandemic a little bit because of the information warfare around science, right? So you get a
situation where people are being requested to do things that are reducing their quality of life,
but they don't actually have the epistemic insight. They don't have the knowledge they need to have
the law be understandable, justified. This goes way back in legal theory to like
Kant, if you will, you know, and forgive Kant his transgressions. But he did say that if you're
going to have a legal framework in something like a democracy, an open society, if you will,
it needs to be both, you know, have the force of law, which is to say you get punished if you
don't follow it, even if you don't understand it, but you also need to be able to be in a position
to understand that you need to have all the information you need as a citizen to see why
this law is valid, just appropriate. So if we don't solve that problem, which is to say
really educating folks, the everyday person, and that requires changing the nature of the media,
I'm getting at the Consilience Project here, the nature of the media, the nature of how we
understand public sense making, public dialogue around complex scientific topics, for example.
Then we could be in a position where even if the epistemic elite get themselves in order
and start using much more comprehensive, you know, global frames and, you know,
multi cascading decision making procedures with second and third order effects and all these
things we'd like to see, even if they do that, if the people as it were, the masses,
are still in a media environment that's completely saturated with disinformation and
advertising and information extraction, predatory social media, then we're going to end up basically
being a situation where the epistemic elite feel that they have no choice but to coerce
the vast majority of the global population into following the laws necessary for humanities
to survive. And then we have a civilization which may not be worth actually living in,
even though it's sustainable, even though it is within planetary boundaries.
So that's the first place where decision making is key is that it's, yeah, we can be concerned
about the epistemic elites, but until they become more concerned with actually educating
people instead of propagandizing them and entertaining them and extracting profit from them,
there'll be no way that we can actually navigate the crisis in the context of an open society.
If we turn to the epistemic elites, then it becomes clear that we're still dominated by
short term thinking. We're still dominated by certain ideologies that privilege reductive
epistemics over comprehensive and open epistemics, if I can put it that way. So
reducing it all to carbon emissions, for example,
seeking only those approaches that can be measured in quantitative terms,
reducing the problem to a technical and scientific problem. This folds already into what I explained,
that they're mostly being worked on as a technological solution, often somehow a
technological solution that's actually like going to come about as a result of competition
between entrepreneurial forces and the interest of seeking profit. So this is again a high level
frame about the kinds of contexts in which basic research should be taking place to solve the problem
and a lack of coordinated effort, like for example, we had around, let's say like the Manhattan
Project, where it wasn't like, oh, let's let private industry solve this problem. It was like,
nope, this is a problem that needs the concerted effort of everybody. Note that they didn't
solve the basic problem that I mentioned earlier, which was a secret project. So I think
there's those two issues. There's a lot more to say about the kind of absence of comprehensive
epistemics among the elite decision makers and policymakers. And somehow that discourse often
feels captured to me or insincere to me. And at some point, you know, I don't know how to quite
get in there and look at that. But that that's, I think, a deep issue. I remember Jonathan Ross
and my colleague at Perspectiva talking about finance, just finance as the major one of the
major profit centers of our civilization is basically the manipulation of fictitious capital,
right? And the way these things down propagate into how people make decisions about very concrete
things involving the ecology of the planet, or even just local ecologies. So yeah, so there's
some form of motivated reasoning, or kind of a very astute and studied blindness to certain
issues, the like conspicuous absence of comprehensive approaches. So anyway, we have to get more
specific about certain models. And again, I'm not a, I'm an educator. So I'm thinking about
the errors and they're thinking at a deeper level, not about like, oh, they've got these
statistics wrong about CO2, or they haven't thought through the, you know, how difficult
it is to actually make solar panels. And all those technical questions are important. I'm
looking at the underlying structure of their arguments and epistemics, essentially, and saying
these are kind of flawed to begin with. So I'll leave it there. Yeah, I think it's very helpful
to actually dive down and expose those underlying structural assumptions, because it's very easy.
I mean, I find myself doing all the time just getting captured by an interest in
in a part of the problem to compartmentalizing siloing. So to actually step back and to try
and get a sense of what are these larger macro structural forces in play is crucial. And I'm
not sure we're very good at doing that. But I, yeah, I just want to hand over to Sam. Sam,
Sam's got a question.
Hi, thanks, Tom. And thank you, Zach. I just wanted to ask if we say in a perfect word, we realize
the two issues that you very articulately put. And so we have an open society, let's say, for
example, the United States of America, we have an open, educated society, finance capitalism is
the thing of the past. How do we move that out of the confines of a kind of national paradigm?
And could you talk a bit about, obviously, climate change is a collective action problem,
a global collective action problem? And is there a space for more cosmopolitan
education and working in a kind of global capacity or a cosmopolitan capacity to solve
some of these collective action problems so that we don't have one society that is, you know, really
clued up, but then constantly hitting up against brick walls around it?
Yeah, I mean, I would point to nationalism, at least certain forms of nationalism,
as one of those flaws in the highest level epistemic models that are plaguing the epistemic
elites, if I can, it's a lot of epistemics in there. But you see what I'm saying? Like, there's a
bias towards certain ways of thinking about what the world situation is that makes it seem like
the Brenton Woods agreements are still completely relevant and stuff when they're absolutely not,
right? Or as if the UN actually somehow imposed a global order when it completely didn't.
So there's a misunderstanding of what the actual real politic is at the level of what's going to
take to solve these problems. And so this isn't like, you know, we can't be naive and think that
there will be international cooperation. But we do need to think about the forms of judgment,
like as I was articulating, the forms of judgment that allow certain people within certain nations
to be truly cosmopolitan actors, to not say they're acting in the interest of everyone,
but actually be interesting acting national interests, but that certain countries will
actually have to sacrifice their advantages, right? They'll actually have to sacrifice their
advantages in order to secure any possible viable future for other countries who don't have an
opportunity to actually save themselves because of the position they've been put in by those
countries who need to make a sacrifice, right? So there can't be anything like good faith
conversation between the global north and the global south until the global north is like,
hey, we're going to make some sacrifices for you guys. And so, and that story can be said,
you know, east west, like north south, like this is a, it's a very complex situation.
And so it requires a form of, let's just say moral judgment, post conventional, post formal
operational, cosmo centric cosmopolitan moral judgment, which is a rare human trait. I point
to it in my book when I say, I can literally, as a human development expert, I can, I can
point at those capacities that we're going to need, right? We're going to need very complex forms of
ethical self understanding, which position you within a local bio region, within some kind of
national structure within some kind of global structure, probably within some kind of larger
structure of universal value, ultimately. And that is not something you get from the American
public education system as it stands now, for example, like we're not preparing post conventional
dialectically thinking global citizens, we're preparing basically simple minded consumers,
sometimes consumers of cultural warfare so that they can participate in the entertainment of the
culture wars. And so that's obviously an adequate that's going to lead us to further into some kind
of self terminating tribalization. So you're pointing to the cosmopolitan consciousness as key.
And it's going to be, like I said, unequally distributed in terms of the, the cascade effects
of risk, right, and Ulrich Beck pointed this out in his work on the risk society, like that the
risks are unevenly distributed. Some people are kind of safe. Some people are relatively unsafe,
right. And then the need for getting out of your position of advantage and putting your position
in a position of basically sacrificing for the whole, that's going to be on the distributed,
right. So it's it becomes a very delicate situation where we need to avoid the pitfalls of
those prior attempts by the north and the west to try to like help out
in the global south and elsewhere. Well, we're going to, we're going to need a way to flip that
kind of relationship. And so, yeah, some of what's taking place with social justice,
kind of issues of race in the United States, you know, these, these conversations will need
to be expanded. And again, this is part of what I mean by it's, it's fundamentally an educational
crisis, even if we solve the technological problems, we still have to resolve this history of
injustice that we're living with. Or else, who's going to want to join your future sustainable,
super technologically awesome society, like, like it just doesn't make sense, like we have to,
there's a certain healing at the level of culture and a willingness to somehow reengage in good faith
again. And so I don't know the kind of crisis that will ensue that will allow that
transformation of self understanding to unfold with a broad enough swath of people.
But yeah, I know as a human development person that it is, it is crises. It is crises and tragedy,
often that can break the psyche open enough to actually transform. So that would be one way to
think about that. I think it's incredibly helpful and important to bring history into this conversation.
Global history, which is something which has been somewhat missing from, from the international
relations scholarship in recent years. And there is certain, there is a certain resurgence now
of a historical sensibility in the current scholarship. And the importance of course of
acknowledging militarism and economic imperialism. And I think what you just said, Zach, you know,
there's a bracing clarity in understanding the ethical core of the challenge. And it reminds
me of Henry Shu, a prominent human rights scholar, writing in 1992, about the unavoidability of
justice when it comes to climate change, and the crucial distinction between luxury emissions
and survival emissions. And, you know, that conversation has, has sort of crept in from
time to time, but it's really been at the foreground of how we actually deal with climate change,
the climate emergency. But I was curious to pick up on this idea of biases and the way that we see
the world. We're now almost halfway through this 50 year critical turning point. So riffing
on Wallerstein, but also say Gromsky, is there more to what's going on right now in the midst of
COVID as well, than a host of morbid symptoms? You write in the book, or you quote actually,
HG Wells, that the future is a race between catastrophe and education. And you hold out
the prospect of good educational futures emerging out of the present. But it often
seems to me, or feels like there's not much space in the culture for exploring the upside
of risks and uncertainties. There's a certain sort of catastrophism, if that's, that's the word.
And that in itself might be a kind of educational deficit. But I wonder then, how do we, how do
we even get started if our collective aversion to risk closes off the possibility of, of accelerating
in the direction of healthy radical transformation?
Yes, this is interesting, because I think there's two ways that, that there's kind of two reactions
when you start to become aware of the existential risk landscape. I'll call them like techno-optimist
and kind of techno-passimist, basically. And the techno-optimist basically kind of talks themselves
out of the idea that there actually is a risk and puts a tremendous amount of faith in human
problem solving capacity. And this is not an error. Like, we're still here. We should maybe
not be, like, probabilistically on many, like, ledgers. It's actually a question, I think, for
people who study existential risk. Why are we still here? So, but that's a separate, separate
question. So with that, I think is a way to avoid the looking at the risk really, like,
like really just having a overtly optimistic view of our ability to solve these problems,
usually with technology. The other way is also a way of averting looking at the risk,
because you basically say, there's nothing we can do about it. And you go to the techno-optimist
view, which basically says, like, you know, it's over. It's done. Like, get ready, basically,
to die. Maybe we can reboot somehow, like, after everything goes away. But, you know,
technology has done us in. And so those two lenses, you know, and the truth is that when
you look at the probabilities and you look at the extra landscape, it's hard not to be pessimistic.
So there's a huge moment of truth in the views. So there's something about both of those extremes,
which is, like, partially right and partially wrong. And the bit about education is a great
example of this is what I'm doing my thinking. So right now, I believe we have the most sophisticated
communication technologies ever for delivering propaganda directly into people's minds.
Those very same tools could be used to make the most powerful educational infrastructure that
has ever been created. Right. And so this is this notion of we're getting exponential
information technology in particular. It's disrupting the educational dynamics of intergenerational
transmission. It's making us go insane. Right now, we're all going insane because we're being
deeply propagandized by these things we're holding in the palm of our hand that are basically making
us addicted to staring at them. All of that same infrastructure, where we to retool it,
could be used to actually customize the delivery of truly educational material. This is this is
basically the crux of my argument that, you know, we're misusing the potentialities of the digital
and we could potentially wield them in the interest of unprecedented education and unprecedented
kind of capacities for having a complex open society. And so many of the technologies that we
have have this double-sided nature to them. You know, artificial intelligence is another one.
Right. You can go techno-optimist or techno-pessimist on the artificial intelligence thing.
And both of those are right and wrong. And the truth of the matter is that,
yeah, there's always going to be
a lack of determinism around what the outcome of a technological innovation is. So
this is my view, like following Mumford and Marshall McLuhan and others. There are certain
things that are laid out that are that come with the technology and then there's this space of
freedom around the technology as to where and how and when the technology gets used. And so I think
right now we're not even close to doing what the digital could do in the realm of education
because we're using it for entertainment and propaganda because it's profitable.
But at a certain point we're a group to decide like a large like a country-sized group or even
a you know like a city-state where a group decided to retool these things precisely for education.
They would have a tremendous asymmetric advantage very rapidly epistemically over the entire rest
of the world who's using who's misusing the tools. Right. So that's like a glimmer and there's many
of these glimmers of hope like right at the heart of the darkness like right in the place where all
of the propaganda is coming from. It's like right in there that there's actually the potential for
profound educational possibilities. And I end up sounding a lot like a Marxist here. I'm not a
Marxist. But that idea that capitalism builds out this massive global structure of technology
and then right as it's about to lock in it flips and that same technology becomes the
infrastructure of freedom. That's a very interesting idea. And so yeah to that that's one way I think
again just one way to think about that. Yeah fantastic thanks Zach. Hope right in the darkness.
That's a phrase to ponder I think. Okay I'm going to hand over to Jess. Jess please.
Yes thanks so much Zach for everything you've shared so far. Coming off this idea of propaganda
and the tech tools that deliver it to us as a foremost teacherly authority in our society right
now. How and if it is retooled to become a source of mass delivery for education how will it be
established in a culture which is often suspicious of authority claims. I mean as a as a child growing
up when the internet was just becoming widespread we were always told not to believe what you read
on the internet. And I think some kids have maybe lost that as it's become more and more ubiquitous
around our lives. But if it does in the future become something positive quote-unquote or you know
dependable how do you think the population would react to that and will it be a smooth transition.
It's very interesting and yeah I have this term teacherly authority which I use a lot in my book
and it hinges on this. It hinges on what's the nature of legitimate teacherly authority
and how do you know when you've got it in a context that's saturated with illegitimate
teacherly authority. And so the classic example is a school right the school and their students
and teachers right. Students have to be there because they're forced to be there. The teachers
are there because they get paid. The teachers have teacherly authority by virtue of their
bureaucratic position in relation to the student right. So most students experience teachers
as teachers not necessarily because they're super smart and like really good at being teachers
but because this is their job. And so we're in an environment where there's an inorganic let's
call it inorganic bureaucratically mediated teacherly authority right. Now sometimes in those
contexts your high school teacher is a teacher like he's brilliant and he's really good at teaching
you. And you've kind of fallen in love with the idea that like this man can like change your whole
mind. I'm speaking about one teacher I'm remembering this teacher I had in high school right. And so
all of a sudden in this bureaucratically mediated teacherly authority where often you encounter
a teacher who's lazy and you don't understand them and you don't know why they became a teacher
and you think it's bullshit. There is actually a beacon of legitimate teacherly authority
and you can recognize legitimate teacherly authority because one of the main things it's
doing is trying to make itself obsolete. It wants you to be able to do what it does
like by definition a good teacher is trying to get you up to their level and maybe actually get
you to go beyond their level. So one of the ways you know when you're looking at like the media
or you're looking at a pundit or someone who's speaking is are they actually encouraging you
and giving you what you need to detach yourself from being their student forever right. Or are
they addicting to you to them. Excuse me are they are you becoming addicted to them as the only
source of information you can trust and use right. So this becomes a very interesting dynamic when
you look at the media landscape. And when you look specifically at the discussion of science
in the media and the disconnects between the stories the media tell and the complexity of
the science that's happening and their attempt to run interference on readers so that you don't go
to the primary source material that you're not actually equipped to be able to be smarter about
the issue than this random journalist who actually isn't a virologist right. It's journalist not a
virologist it's never studied vaccines right. Are they putting me in a position to actually
understand the issue. Are the actual major institutions involved giving me the information
I need to be truly informed about the issue or not. Or are they just basically telling me what
to do pretending to be a teacher authority. So you're right we've become suspicious of
teacher authority because we have good reason to be. Most of what takes place in the fourth
estate which is supposed to be you know journalism and the press and supposed to be an educational
institution. Most of what's taking place there is not by any definition looking like legitimate
teacher authority. And so but the saving grace and this gets to your point the saving grace is that
when that high school teacher appears he gets a posse like students are like that's the real deal
like that's someone who actually cares and is actually trying to empower us like actually
trying to give us the capacities and the skills that we could become our own teachers right.
So I do think that if you build the system correctly and you have the kind of step wise access
to deeper and deeper and deeper information and empowerment epistemically where there's no
invisible ceiling of a epistemic asymmetry where the populace is like all right on the other side
of this those guys know what's going on which is what it feels right right now most people feel
like no one really trusts the media. We do what the media tells us because we're socially pressured
to use certain words and to have certain beliefs especially in social media but if you look at
the statistics most people just simply don't trust the media outlets they have allegiance to
certain ones because they're useful in cultural warfare but they don't actually really trust
what's being said by the media. And so when you have this kind of duplicity and this deep sense
that well somebody must know what's actually going on and so there's this deep suspicion
and this lays of course the groundwork for much of the cultural dysfunction we're seeing around
you know so-called conspiracy theories and things of that nature which emerge from the
sense of somehow there's a ceiling of epistemic asymmetry that the main kind of media like news
media social media the ways we're supposed to get up and into understanding the world
don't give or don't kind of work in context of legitimate teacher-led authority so there's
so it's a it's a widespread and deep problem because now we're cynical about the idea that
there could even be teacher-led authority. So I think to your point where someone said don't
believe what you read online I don't think it's that kids forgot that I think it's that they don't
believe what they read online which means they don't believe anything because all they do is read
online so it becomes it moves from like there's a true story and then there's this crazy online
stuff to just like there's just crazy online stuff and the idea that there's a true story
somewhere that's not even really an idea anymore I'm telling you like when you look at the epistemologies
of people under 20 what you end up getting is a kind of widely diffuse epistemic nihilism
you know where there's this fusion between entertainment and belief and a fusion between
a need to have in-group membership in a in a cultural war and motivated reasoning to believe
certain things so the the sense of like having an integrist truth and an orientation towards
ongoing learning and having access to stuff that would allow you to do that and that would encourage
doing that these are cultures like that are few and far between right now and hard to find
but they need to be created and I think when they are I do think people will will be attracted to them
because most people don't trust the media but they want to know what's going on
like people want to know it's not that people don't want to know it's that there's a certain
cynicism or nihilism about the prospect of success of knowing that we've been disadvantaged in our
ability to know and there's a lot to say there some of the research I'm doing now is on the nature
and the history of propaganda and information warfare and communication sciences and it's a
long history you know decades and decades and decades we've been working on how to be like kind
of like manipulate large populations through communication science often with a kind of
technocratically benevolent notion that the masses need to be helped in making the right
decision and that brings us back to that prior point I made about the relation between the
epistemic elites and the so-called people. Yes that point really resonated with me
especially it gave me the idea that it seems that true education where everyone can have
access to a primary source is mutually exclusive from control and power I was wondering if you
had any thoughts on on that and whether the epistemic elite or high-level policymakers
would ever be motivated to relinquish control and power that has been designed and fueled through
this structure of propaganda and entertainment media. It's a very very good question yeah the
relationship between power and education and the relationship between power and teacher the authority
in particular in so the it's funny because I say teacherly authority and everyone thinks like a
school and I use that context but actually it's the mother and the child uh or the parent the
parenting one and the child where you get that most basic actually most kind of like anthropologically
primordial case of of teacherly authority and what you see in that relationship is in fact the
the the power like the power of the mother over the child right let's talk about that like what
kind of power is that it's not the same power as what Roy Baskar and others would call power over
like the political power having access to the legitimate use of force or the legitimate use
of bureaucratic mechanism to you know punish basically so so the power of the mother over
the infant is actually the power of care and so it's a it's a legitimate asymmetry the mother's
larger stronger literally provides sustenance to the child and then teaches the child all kinds of
things without even intending to do so the child instinctively puts itself in relationship to the
mother as as teacher and so it's not about the absence of power that you get legitimate teacherly
authority it's about a particular kind of power the power of care or a power of love that binds
people in a relationship that's completely non-coercive it's completely non-coercive
we associate power with coercion and that's what most political power is but there's a there's
actually a power uh Habermas would call it like the unforced force of the better argument that's
an example of legitimate teacherly authority or it's like why do i agree with you i'm not agreeing
with you because you're going to beat me up or because i get in trouble or i get shunned from
my in-group uh i'm agreeing with you because that is a better argument than the arguments i've
heard the force of logic right the force of reason compels me not the force of physical
right so the power of a strong argument is an example of the power that's in legitimate
teacherly authority now when you try to merge teacherly authority with bureaucratic power
that's when you get that situation where now you can't tell am i doing what this teacher tells me
because i respect them the way i might respect my mother and then i'm fiving with them through
love and teacherly authority or is that i have to do this because otherwise i get punished they
have the legitimate use of bureaucratic force over me as a as a student and similarly with
the media and social media things of that nature and of course political speeches and the communication
scientists that kind of roll out political platforms there's always this question about
the form of power that's in play and you know the degree to which we can say that we are consenting
with full knowledge of what our situation is or not and so yeah i think in an ideal world
you would have conditions of education where there wasn't the opportunity to confuse
those two forms of power where you gravitated to particular teachers and you gravitated to
particular courses of study because of the power of the of the teacherly of the power of the the
true argument the power of the curiosity the power of the attraction between teacher and student
the epistemic humility and these kinds of qualities whereas now it's often the case
and has been with the public schools you know that there is a certain there's a certain coercion
that takes place and just getting a kid to go to school you know like it literally you have to
kid like even if you don't want to so yeah so i think those the the kind of like the power over
the political power and then this other form of power which we which we're not as familiar with
like the power gets a bad name and what i'm trying to say is like there's actually this
there is this form of power you know like when you see Martin Luther King speak for example
it's a different kind of power like there's a it's a power of persuasion that's not coercion
or there's a power to educate that's not propaganda and so these kinds of distinctions
are some of the stuff i'm working on for the conciliance project because it becomes essential
as the information environment gets more complex for people to be able to tell what's the difference
here is this person sincerely trying to educate me or are they just doing one of their sticks and
trying to you know basically uh so yeah so this is a good question and again i'm just like touching
on it there's there's a lot of a lot of complexity there yeah fantastic fascinating yeah definitely
this idea of power as protein it's really something which often is difficult to grasp there's a certain
uh allergic reaction to so shifting the focus away from say the the material the the tangible
but clearly it's absolutely vital perhaps just to rip a bit on Jesse's personal reflection
um you know as as an academic as a child of Fukuyama i sometimes do wonder who are we as
educators to tell future generations what to think or what to do with this world that we're
we're sort of leaving them and as educators what if our ideas about the future are no longer
relevant which is a pretty disconcerting thought and i wonder how can we distinguish between
those legacy ideas and frames that must be salvaged and those that really we should consider
relinquishing um and it's disconcerting not only because it because it leaves you disorientated
but also perhaps because it feels disempowering to consider that it kind of undercuts um the
the conviction that you can change things for the better
yeah this is it's a very foundational question in the philosophy of education
which is you know what is the knowledge and skill and capacity even the disposition dispositions
and forms of personality like what are those things that we should be handing on to the next
generation um it's a book by margaret mead um let's say 61 i don't remember exactly culture
and commitment it's the name of the book and then this it's amazing it's fascinating book she
talks about these three forms of culture so which is really talking about three forms of
intergenerational transmission there's a post figurative culture this is what human cultures
were forever that's when what your dad dads did your dad did that's what you're gonna do like you
can just know as an elder like i will hand on to my kids what basically they need and things just
don't change and the kids can be like they really know how the world works uh and it's a post figurative
right uh and then there are what are called configurative cultures uh and that's where you
have some of the post figurative stuff and stuff going on within generations where you're changing
what your parents gave you a little bit right so you're getting peer to peer kind of like changes
in technology which slightly augment intergenerational transmission and so not just the sheer tradition
of the post figurative a certain amount of innovation and that's what uh began when especially it
took off with again back to walrus the birth of the capitalist world system her argument is that
there's a thing called a prefigurative culture um and that's where basically like those bets are off
because things are changing so rapidly that the world that the children will inhabit is not
understandable by the elders today right so it's a very very novel situation in the evolution of
human culture now it happened occasionally in the past when there was an invading army or there was
a massive storm or there was desertification and in a generation or two the entire life you know of
a culture change but that was a rare cataclysmic event our technological development and economic
development and political development is such that now we are generating those types of total
world transformation within a single generation and so what that means is that to your point we have
no idea really what to tell the kids about what tomorrow is going to be like we actually need
to find ways to have them listen to the future and then give them the help that they realize that
they need so and this has been seen by educators since the 60s when it became clear that you all
are preparing these kids for jobs that will not be there in 20 years when they graduate and that
problem has compounded like to the sense of that we can no longer think simply about that
form but at an even deeper level the intergenerational crisis is one of both the children not thinking
that the elders know how the world works right and being skeptical that well aren't you the guys that
messed up this world like why should we learn from you you created this mess but it's also the elders
realizing that is the elders saying we're a failed we're failed beings like we're a failed
species like what have we done how can we teach the kids what to do and so and that's part of
that prefigured of culture like those reflections are correct but they're not quite fair to each
side of the generational gap that there's a situation that's emerged that came unplanned
but has basically left the youth kind of stranded at the edge of history without any elders to tell
them what tomorrow will look like or how to handle it so the elders what they need to do is step in
and hold education in a completely different way and this is kind of the argument of my book that
we need to reground education of the youth in the communities that they live and in the concrete
problems of those communities right which is to say something a little bit more like
guild systems and skill and time-sharing networks and non-age segregated classrooms
and a whole bunch of other stuff that allow the education system to be responsive to the novel
insights of youth who know more about what might emerge in the future than the elders can
pretend to know and so I think that's it's a lot to swallow but it's completely necessary
and it doesn't mean that there isn't a role for intergenerational transmission it means that
of the skills that we have as elders let the kids tell us which ones they believe are relevant
and so that's that's I think I think that's key and then some of it's also the shifting of focus
away from again technical skills and into what might be called skills of wisdom or skills of
ethics that a lot of what is needed from the elders is that like don't tell us how to solve
these problems or how to organize our our future economic lives or anything like that but please
share stories of human suffering of human love of human overcoming difficulty the continuity of
the human is at risk that's a strange way to say it but this is has been reflected upon by
technologists and others that if the generation gap becomes acute enough it becomes almost like a
speciation event where the youth become a new kind of being that almost can't be understood
that we can't like if we were to genetically engineer superhumans this would be the situation we
would have extincted ourselves by virtue of giving birth to a new species and that would be an
intergenerational gap that's unbridgeable so that you know with the rate of technological change
and specifically the information technology and the neurological effects and the cascades of all
those on human physiology yeah the generation a gap approaches almost unbridgeable speciation event
so that means that yeah how do we educate those who will come after us who are not like us
it looks like I said creating very different contexts and allowing more epistemic humility
on the part of the elders uh but it's risky because the kids they're just they're they're
still youth it's not like they're I'm also not making an argument of like you know the indigo
kids are like that they're instantly you know adapting to the technology and that the millennials
are like way smarter than any other generation they're going to figure it out I'm not also not
saying that like there needs to be intergenerational transmission the the prefigured of culture
that I mentioned doesn't just throw its hands up and say let the kids do whatever it wants it says
no it's we're in a fundamentally different situation of intergenerational transmission
it's actually more attention is needed we need to be more careful to pulling out the responsiveness
and the kind of native intelligence of the youth than just giving them
rote curriculum that we've been giving for a decade so there's some asking for more
attentiveness on the part of the elders and the youth more intergenerational transmission
just of a different kind and it's it's not the case that that the youth are prepared or
instantly adapted or evolved for it they're not so yeah the the the nature of our responsibility
as educators has changed I think the the question of differences of generation is such an interesting
one and I was wondering if we think of a hypothetical new generation in a utopian society
that is not a generation of knowers so a generation that's been raised on knowing stuff knowing things
but a generation of thinkers I think we've skirted around and we've addressed as well some of the
real benefits of that you know a generation of thinkers but I just wanted to red team for a
second and think of what are some of the challenges of having a generation of thinkers
because the instruments we have at our disposal are geared towards a generation of thinkers and
I was just really interested to get the kind of red team assessment of a generation of thinkers
and how that might well a diagnosis of that that's interesting I mean there's a long so I've read a
lot of the history of education you know and and some histories of education are triumphant
especially about the American education system that you know we we were made into a society of
thinkers and and etc then you get other people like John Taylor Gatto and like Jonathan Cozel
and others even Chomsky and some moods who would look at the American public education system
as basically doing the opposite right and and so the argument there you know and even goes to
the down a chain right keep the people's bellies full but their minds empty I think that's how you
govern by precisely not really educating and I'm not saying that that view is true I'm saying
there's enough people writing that history to suggest that at least one of the kind of like
functions of the educational system as we have known it is to simplify the range of diversity
of thought in the populace right like you can think about preparing them for the workforce you
can think about preparing them to be consumers but you need to basically be able to predict
what people are going to think and part of that's to weave the culture together
but part of that is to simplify the human side of the equation and so it started happening with
the internet and it continues to happen although the marketers had figured out how to do a standardized
differentiation instead of like the early modern one size fits all homogenization now we have the
late modern or postmodern standardized differentiation where there's two dozen advertising groups
think you're unique but you're not so they figured that out but it's still the case that if you promote
culture of learning and you promote a culture not of ingesting and regurgitating or in a culture
knowing and knowing and and resisting change of thought but a culture where people are truly
interested in learning and thinking then you better have a culture that's ready to have truly
an open society for governance and decision ranking and an economic system that has true
transparency and visibility around commodity supply chains and ethical responsibilities of
corporations and the society that got transparency around law enforcement and the criminal justice
system there's a whole bunch of stuff that you can kind of keep a mess like not in good order
if you've got a society of folks who really aren't equipped to be paying attention but if you equip
people to pay attention then they're going to start paying attention and so that's part of the
arguments that have been unfolding for such a long time around this kind of negative view of
education you know that there's been a manufacturing of consent and kind of an arrangement of selective
inattention which is like a psychological defense mechanism right so if I'm a neurotic person
let's say I'm just not very nice to the people who are close to me I will selectively not attend
to those behaviors which disconfirm my view of myself being a good person that's right so frustrating
to be with someone who has his neurosis it's so clear dude that you're doing this that you can't see
because you're defending yourself it's a defense mechanism selective inattention and so similarly
at the cultural level we're taught not to think about certain things we're taught to to studiously
ignore certain ways of framing problems selective inattention is part of the education system so
if we start to remove those defense mechanisms that's what you're talking about which is what
you want to do in psychotherapy but when that happens you know you get a divorce you change
your job like you move like start having crazy dreams like your whole life changes right and so
and this is what we need we need to call some kind of cultural renaissance if we need the
equivalent of a midlife crisis or a resolution of the adolescent identity crisis for the whole
culture but it will be there'll be a reckoning there'll be a reckoning and so that kind of
has to happen so that would be the downside would be the would be the reckoning
and the that you can't predict what will happen in the way you can predict what will happen when
you're systematically nudging everybody into particular groups and then predicting what those
groups will be which is what's happening
yeah that question what am I studiously ignoring maybe that's one to open up a seminar with
so uh we're rolling I think to the close that so much more we could discuss I hope we might
be able to continue this conversation at some time down the road but I'd like to to hand over
to Zoe to lead us out so I think my questions are still very much percolating in my mind
so if I'm not as coherent or eloquent as the rest of you I apologize um so we've kind of talked
about a society or like a generation of thinkers and knowers um but I'm also quite interested
in pulling on what you mentioned about the power through love and so thinking about generations
of feelers because I feel like I mean even in generations of people or like relatives cousins
and whatnot younger than myself you've mentioned nihilism and it's almost like there's a competition
to see who can care the least and caring and feeling is seen as sort of a weakness and something
that's that should be weeded out um so I guess my question is sort of how do we make those
younger generations feel cared for and loved in a way that they're not going to reject and be like
oh this is this is cringy and I you don't understand me so it's also into tying into
intergenerational gap um but I guess also across you mentioned an epistemic elite and that's
in my mind also uh we are hoarding in the epistemic elites the potential for intergenerational
transmission of these essential human capacities and I do for me anyway I do feel like a lot of
that will come from better handling of your emotions and maybe de-celebritizing actually
caring about things and being very vocal about caring without worrying that you would be seen as
I don't know vulnerable or weak or irrelevant sorry if that's a bit all over the place
yeah that's a very profound question I mean so one thing you said in passing was that the
epistemic elite were hoarding a certain combat that's a that's a like a key insight that and
there has been for a long time a a a false scarcity of cognitive supply false scarcity
of cognitive resources a artificially generated scarcity um and so that's important to get and
some of what has been made scarce are the conditions for the possibility of of love I mean this is one
of the main reasons in my book I talk about these social miracles it's really about creating a society
where people have or don't have to be courageous to love one another right because like uh if you
don't love anyone then you can't get hurt full stop like if I love you a lot and you die I'm
in a lot of pain if I love you a lot and you do something that disappoints me I'm in a lot of pain
so there's a again defense mechanism psychologically too in a world where you can't predict what's
going to happen to the people that you love right well you can't you don't even know if you can get
up to where you want to go to be economically or whatever or to get the skills you want to have
the self-understand like because of the um sense of precarity that many people feel uh there is a
and most of that I believe is economic and politically generated um there is a there's
a tendency yes to to withdraw into the isolated atomized individual and take a cynical view towards
anything that would deepen connection and love because of the risk that's there so one of the
things the elders can do is actually demonstrate the courage that it takes to to love in a world
that's well in a world that in an unworlded world if I can say that in a time between worlds right
and it's when you're in a world it's easier to love because you can say oh here's how the world
works it's safe to love you because I've got this many years before my life is disrupted or whatever
right but right now there's this danger so we need to do the opposite and and and so the um
I do not like the phrase emotional intelligence so I talk about like emotional self-regulation
and emotional self-awareness and the languages of emotional self-description and emotional connection
and these are as essential if not more essential and especially to notions of ethical identity
so right if you think about the situation we're going to end up in as the wheels start to come off
I talk a lot about um you know that parable of the good Samaritan like what do you do when you
meet someone a stranger on the road between civilizations which means you're not behold
into the law of either of those civilizations or on the road or in the wilderness there's no cops
going to show up right no one's going to come and tell you you disobey the laws of the city you're
just a stranger in need on the road just you and him and in the bible god what do you do right
we're going to be confronted with that kind of situation where we're meeting strangers on the
road and sometimes with those strangers that we numerous and it's not a it's not a cognitive
question it's not a calculation or a game theoretic relationship that needs to be taken up it's a
problem of feeling that's a problem of the human heart and the ability of the human to see another
human as a as a human and so yeah those are the deeper the deeper kind of strata of the
personality which are also in play right now so i'm glad you raised that and you know the approaches
that i've seen in this area social emotional skills mindfulness education and things of
like those nature are are good and important but um again to speak to them kind of psychotherapeutic
context we're going to need to learn how to process intense emotion too not just to be calm
but to figure out how to deal with grief sorrow tragedy uh right righteous anger there's a whole
bunch of stuff that we need to be able to work with aside from just like staying calm and i'm
meditating a lot but the point is that you need to be able to to move emotion through you in a
complex way uh so yeah so that's a whole other whole other you open to giant can of emotional
worms there but it's an important one and i can't see a way out of it without and again i'm i've
listed in my book i can't remember which page you know it's but it's post-conventional ethics but also
like um you know these really really uh robust forms of emotional self-regulation and emotional
self-understanding which allow for actual real empathy um so yeah thank you for for bringing
that up well thank you for such a comprehensive answer and just a really thought provoking
conversation it just stirred a lot of things in my mind and i'm sure i'll i'll go in tell my mum
all about it because i feel like she's very much she's very much on the emotional spectrum of
things with with me as so so yeah thank you very much yeah i'd like to echo that uh thanks so
much that it really uh kind of really grounded profound heartfelt conversation uh really appreciated
and you know end on that note that this is also a problem of feeling or of emotion there is this
tendency i know it well to slide into kind of a full sense of objective detachment from these
questions um and of course as complexity science reminds us there is actually no view from nowhere
so also perhaps just to just to end as to where we might go next in future conversations there
clearly are insights and lessons to be drawn from other cultures here and what you just reflected
remind me a bit of martin prectel's um work the Guatemalan spiritual teacher and his impression
of western culture as drowning in kind of atomistic alienation so i think lots more to explore there
and um yeah well there's a beautiful way to end this conversation on on education as
as the core challenge of our time so thank you and look forward to picking this up again thank you
guys this was a blast thanks for tuning into global governance futures to get access to all
of our content and to stay up to date with future zoom calls workshops and events and more check us
out at ucl.ac.uk forward slash global dash governance and if you like this content please
do leave us a comment and subscribe until next time
