Grant, you know, the videos were really inspiring.
Like, you're the reason I'm, like, going into grad school.
And there's this little bell in the back of my mind that's
like, do I want that?
To get more people going into math, PhDs,
math, academia, finance, and computer science
almost certainly have an overallocation of talent.
Actually, I'm quite determined at some point
to, like, be a high school math teacher
for some number of years.
Math lends itself to synthetic data,
how AlphaGo is trained.
You could have it produce a lot of proofs
and just drain on a whole bunch of those.
And the thing that takes, at most, 30 minutes of the teacher's
time, maybe even 30 seconds, has these completely monumental
rippling effects for the life of the student they were talking
to that then sets them on this whole different trajectory.
OK, today I have the pleasure of interviewing Grant
Sanderson of the YouTube channel 3Blue1Brown.
You all know who Grant is.
I'm really excited about this one.
By the time that an AI model can get
gold in the International Math Olympiad,
is that just AGI given the amount of creative problem
solving and chain of thought required to do that?
To be honest, I have no idea what people mean
when they use the word AGI.
I think if you ask 10 different people what they mean by it,
you're going to get 10 slightly different answers.
And it seems like what people want to get at
is a discrete change that I don't think actually
exists where you've got, OK, AI is up to a certain point.
They're not AGI.
They might be really smart, but it's not AGI.
And then after some point, that's the benchmark when, like,
now they're, now it's generally intelligent.
The reason that world model doesn't really fit
is it feels a lot more continuous,
where GPT-4 feels general in the sense
that you have one training algorithm that
applies to a very, very large set of different kinds of tasks
that someone might want to be able to do.
And that's cool.
That's like an invention that people in the 60s
might not have expected to be true for the nature
of how artificial intelligence can be programmed.
So it's generally intelligent.
But maybe what people mean by, oh, it's not AGI is,
you've got certain benchmarks where
it's better than most people at some things,
but it's not better at most people than others.
At this point, it's better than most people at math.
It's better than most people at solving AMC problems
and like IMO problems.
It's just not better than the best.
And so maybe at the point when it's getting gold in the IMO,
that's a sign that, OK, it's as good as the best.
And we've ticked off another domain, but I don't know.
Like, is what you mean by AGI that you've enumerated
all the possible domains that something could be good at.
And now it's better than humans at all of them?
Or enough that it could take over substantial fractions
of human jobs or something.
Where right now it's impressive, but it's not
going to be even 1% of GDP.
But in my mind, if it's getting gold in IMO,
I mean, having seen some of those problems from your channel,
I'm thinking, wow, that's really coming after our podcasters
and video animators.
I don't know.
I don't know.
That feels orthogonal because getting a gold in the IMO
feels a lot more like being really, really good at Go or chess.
Like those feel analogous.
Well, it's super creative.
Like I think anyone, I don't know chess as well as the people
are into it, but everything that I hear from them,
the sort of moves that are made and choices
have all of the air of creativity.
I think as soon as they started generating artwork,
then everyone else could appreciate, oh, there's
something that deserves to be called creative here.
And the creative side of the math,
I don't know how it would look when people get them
to be getting golds at the IMO.
But I imagine it's something that looks a little bit like how
AlphaGo is trained, where you have it play with itself
a whole bunch.
Math lends itself to synthetic data in the ways
that a lot of other domains don't.
You could have it produce a lot of proofs
in a proof checking language, like Lean, for example,
and just train on a whole bunch of those.
And is this a valid proof?
Is this not a valid proof?
And then counterbalance that with English written versions
of something.
And so I imagine what it looks like once you get something
that is solving these IMO level things, one of two things.
Either it writes a very good proof
that you feel is unmotivated, because anyone who reads math
papers has this feeling that there are two types.
There's the ones where you morally understand
why the result should be true.
And then there's the ones where you're like,
I can follow the steps.
Why would you have come up with that?
I don't know, but I guess that shows that the result is true.
And you were left wanting something a little bit more.
And so you could imagine if it produces that on the gold,
to get a gold in the IMO, is that the same kind of ability
as what is required to replace jobs?
Just not really.
The impediments between where it is now and replacing jobs
feels like a whole different set of things,
like having a context window that is longer than some small
thing, such that you can make connections
over long periods of time and build relationships
and understand where someone's coming from.
And the actual problem-solving part of it,
I mean, it's a sign that it would be a more helpful tool,
but in the same way that, like, Mathematica can help you
solve math problems much more effectively.
And tell me why I should be less amazed by it
or maybe put it in a different context.
But the reason I would be very impressed
is that with chess or something, obviously, this is not
all the chess programs we're doing,
but there's a level of research you
can do to narrow down the possibilities.
And more importantly, in the math example,
it seems that with some of the examples you've
elicited on your channel, for example,
the ability to solve the problem is so dependent
on coming up with the right abstraction to think about it,
coming up with ways of thinking about the problem that
are not evident in the problem itself
or in any other problem, in any other test.
That seems different from just a chess game,
where you don't have to, like, what
is the largest structure of this chess game
in the same way as you do with the IML problem?
I think you should ask people who know a lot about Go
and chess.
And I'd be curious to hear their opinions on it,
because I imagine what they would say
is if you're going to be as good at Go as AlphaGo is,
you're also not doing tree search, at least exclusively.
It's not dependent on something as both in that,
because you get this combinatorial explosion, which
is why people thought that game would be so much harder
for so much longer.
There sort of has to be something like a higher level
structure in their understanding.
And then don't get me wrong.
I would be super impressed and anticipate
being very impressed when you get
AIs that can solve these IMO problems,
because you're absolutely right.
There's a level of creativity involved.
The only claim I'm making is that being able to do that
feels distinct from the impediments between where we
are now and the AIs take over all of our jobs or something.
It seems like it's going to be another one of those boxes
that's this historic moment analogous to chess and Go,
more so than it's going to be analogous
to the Industrial Revolution.
I'm surprised you wouldn't be more compelled.
I am compelled.
Or just you don't think that skill of this problem
is isomorphic to this completely different way
of thinking about what's happening in the situation.
And here's me going through the 50 steps
to put all that together into this one proof.
I'm surprised you don't think that's
upstream of a lot of valuable tasks.
I think it's a similar level of how impressed I
was with the stable diffusion type stuff, where you ask it,
give me a landscape of beautiful mountains
but made out of like quartz and gemstones or something.
And it gives you this thing which
has all of the essence of a landscape,
but it's not literally a landscape.
And so you realize, OK, there's something beyond the literal
that's understood here.
And that's very impressive.
And then the same way to solve one of these math problems
that requires creativity, you can't just
go from the definitions.
You're 100% right.
You need this element of lateral thinking,
which is why we find so much joy in finding the solutions
ourselves or even just seeing other people get those solutions.
It's exactly the kind of joy that you get out
of good artistic analogies and comparisons
and mixing and matching.
I'm very impressed by all of that.
It's just I think it's in the same category.
Maybe I don't have the same opinions
as a lot of other people with this hard line between there's
pre-AGI and post-AGI.
I just don't know what they mean by the word AGI.
And I don't think that you're going to have something
that's this measurable discrete step, much less
that a math tournament is going to be an example of what
that discrete step would look like.
Interesting.
Interesting.
OK, applied mathematicians.
Where do we put them in society where they can
have the biggest benefit?
Like a lot of them go into computer science and IT.
And I'm sure there's been lots of benefits there.
But where are there parts of society
where you just have a whole bunch of mathematicians go in
and they can make things a lot better?
You know, I don't know, transportation or logistics
or manufacturing.
But where else do you think they might be useful?
That's such a good question.
In some ways, I'm like the worst person to ask about that.
But this isn't going to answer your question,
but instead is going to like fan the flames of why
I feel it's an important question.
I have actually been thinking recently
about if it's worth making an out of typical video that's
specifically addressed and inspiring people to ask that,
especially students who are graduating.
Because I think this thing happens
where when you fall in love with math
or some sort of technical field, by default in school,
you study that.
And when you're studying that, effectively,
you're going through an apprenticeship
to be an expert in that or a researcher in that.
You know, the structure of studying physics in a university
or math in a university, even though they know that not all
majors are going to go into the field,
the people that you're gaining mentorship from
are academics and are researchers in the field.
So it's hard not to effectively be apprenticing in that.
And I also have noticed that when I go and give talks
at universities or things like this
and students come up after and they're like saying,
hi, there's a lot of them like, Grant, you know,
the videos are really inspiring.
Like you're the reason that I studied math
or that you're the reason I'm like going into grad school.
And there's this little bell in the back of my mind
that's like, cool, cool, I'm amazed.
I don't know if I believe I was wholly responsible for it,
but like, cool to have that impact.
Do I want that?
Is this a good thing to get more people going into math PhDs?
On the one hand, I unequivocally want more people
to self-identify as liking math.
That's very good.
But those who are doing that necessarily get shuffled
into the traditional outlets, like math academia,
I think you highlighted it very right.
It's like math academia, finance and computer science,
data science, something in there in general
are very common things to go to.
And as a result, they almost certainly have
an overallocation of talent.
All three of those are valuable, right?
I'm not saying like those are not valuable things
to go into, but if you were playing God
and like shifting around, where do you want people to go?
Again, I'm not answering your question.
I'm just asking it in other words
because I don't really know.
I think you should probably talk to the people
who made that shift, of which there aren't a huge number,
but like Eric Lander is maybe one good example.
Jim Simons would maybe be another.
Whereas people who were doing a very purely academic thing
and then decided to shift to something very different.
Now, I have sort of had this thought
that it's very beneficial to insert some forcing function
that gets the pure mathematicians
to spend some of their time in a non-pure math setting.
NSF grants coming with a requirement
that 10% of your time goes towards a collaboration
with another department or something like that.
The thought being these are really good problem solvers
in a specific category of problems
and to just distribute that talent elsewhere
might be helpful.
And when I run this by mathematicians,
sometimes there's a mixed response where they're like,
ah, I don't know if we'd be all that useful.
Like there's a sense that the aesthetic
of what constitutes a good math problem
is by its nature rooted in the purity of it,
such that it's maybe a little elitist to assume
that just because people are really, really good
at solving that kind of problem,
that somehow their abilities are more generalizable
than other people's abilities.
Why ask about the applied mathematicians
rather than saying shouldn't the applied biologists
go and work in logistics and things like that?
Because they also have a set of problem solving abilities
that's maybe generalizable.
The back of my mind, I think, no,
but the mathematicians are special.
There really is something general about math.
So I don't have the answers.
I will say I'm actually very curious to hear from people
for what they think the right answers are
or from people who made that switch.
Let's say they were a math major or something adjacent,
like computer science, physics,
and then decided that they wanted to pour themselves
into something, not because that was the academic itch
that they were scratching by being good at school
and getting to appreciate that,
but because they stepped back and said,
what impact do I wanna make on the world?
I'm hungry for more of those stories
because I think it could be very compelling
to convey those specifically to my audience
who is probably on track to go
into just the traditional math type fields
and maybe there's room to have a little bit of influence
to disperse them more effectively.
But I don't know.
I don't know what more effectively it looks like
because at the end of the day,
I'm like I'm a math YouTuber, right?
I'm not someone who has a career in logistics
or manufacturing or all of these things in such a way
that I can have an in tune feel for where is there a need
for this specific kind of abstract problem solving.
It might be useful to speculate on how an undergrad
or somebody who's a young math was might even begin
to contemplate here's where I can have an edge.
I'm remembering actually, it just occurred to me,
a former podcast guest, Lars Dusset,
he was a game designer actually
and he started learning about Georgism,
which is this idea that you should tax land and only land.
And so he got really interested
in not only writing about those ideas,
but also with, well, if you're gonna tax land,
you gotta figure out what the value of land is.
How do you figure out the value of land?
There's all these algorithms
of how you do this optimally based on neighboring land
and how to average across land.
And there's a lot of intricacies there.
And so he now has a startup where he just contracts
with cities to implement these algorithms
to help them assess the value of their land,
which makes property taxes much more feasible.
You know, just that's another example, right?
Where the motivation was more philosophical,
but his specialty as a technical person helped them,
you know, helped to make a contribution there.
I think that's perfect.
Probably the true answer is that
you're not gonna give a universal thing.
For any individual, it's gonna be based on
where their life circumstances connect them into something,
either cause they, you know,
he had an interest in Georgism for whatever reason.
But if someone, I don't know, their dad runs a paper mill
and they're like connected to the family business
in that way and realize they can like plug themselves
in a little bit more efficiently,
you're gonna have this wide diversity
of the ways that people are applying themselves
that does not take the form of general advice
given from some podcast somewhere,
but instead takes the form of simply inviting people
to like think critically about the question
rather than following the momentum
of what being good at school implies about your future.
We were talking about this before the interview started,
but we have a much better grasp on reality
based on our mathematical tools.
And I'm not talking about anything advanced,
literally just being able to count
in the decimal system that even the Romans didn't have.
How likely do you think it is
that something that significant would be enjoyed
by our descendants in hundreds or thousands of years?
Or do you think that that kind of basic numeracy level stuff,
those kinds of thinking tools are basically all gone?
Just so I understand the question, right?
You're talking about how having a system for numbers
changes the way that we think that then lends itself
to a better understanding of the world.
Like we can do commerce, things like that.
Or we can think in terms of orders of magnitude.
It would have been hard to think in,
we have the word orders of magnitude
in a way that is hard to write down much less,
think about if you're doing Roman numerals.
Like is there something analogous to that,
our descendants?
I mean, fluency with a programming interface
really can help understanding certain problems.
I think when people mess around in a notebook with something
and when it feels like a really good tool set,
there's a way that that has the same sensation
as adopting a nice notation in that you write something
with a small number of symbols,
but then you discover a lot about the implication of that.
In the case of notation,
it's because the rules of algebra are very constrained.
And so when you write something,
you can go through an almost game-like process
to see how it reduces and expands
and then see something that might be non-trivial.
And in the case of programming,
of course the machine is doing the crunching
and you might get a plot that reveals some extra data.
I think we're maybe at a phase where there's room
for that to become a much more fluid process
such that rather than having these small little bits
of friction, like you've gotta set up the environment
and you gotta like it in a notebook,
you've gotta like find the right libraries,
that there's something that feels as fluid
as when you are good at algebra
and you're just at a whiteboard kind of noodling it out.
I think there's something to be said for the fact
that there's still so much more value in,
if you and I were gonna like go
into some math topic right now, right?
You ask me something that's a terrible question
for a podcast, but I'm like, oh, let's actually dig into it.
The right medium to do that is still paper.
I think like I would break out some paper
and we would scribble it out.
And so whenever it becomes the case
that the right medium to do that
lends itself to simulation and to programming and all that,
that feels like it would get to the point
where it shifts the way that you even think about stuff.
Yeah, that's really interesting.
What's up with miracle years?
So this is something that happens,
has happened throughout science
and especially with mathematicians
where they have a single year in which they wake up many,
if not most of the important discoveries
that they have in their career,
Newton, Einstein, Gauss, they all had these years.
Do you have some explanation of what's going on?
What's your take?
I think there's a bunch of possible explanations.
It can't just be youth
because youth lasts 10 years, not one year.
So it must have something to do with...
Every 35 year old right now is like...
How dare you?
You know what I mean, 20 years.
So yeah, it can't just be that.
I don't know, there's a bunch of possible things
you could say.
One is you're in a situation in life
where you have nothing else going for you
or you're just like really free for that one year
and then you become successful after that year
is over based on what you did.
Yeah, but what is your take?
I don't know.
So I agree that's probably multiple factors, not one.
One thing could be that the miracle year is the exhalation
and there's been many, many years of inhalation
where often let's say the classic one is Einstein's
where his miracle year were also some of the first papers
like kind of springing onto the scene.
And I would guess that a lot of the ideas
were not bumping around his head only in that year
but it's like many, many years of thinking about it
and kind of coalescing.
And so you might be in a position
where you can build up all of this potential energy
and then for whatever reason, there's one time in life
that lends itself to actually releasing all of that.
If I try to reflect on like my own history
with what I'm doing now,
I think I didn't appreciate early on
how much potential energy I was working from
simply from being a student and in college
where there's just a bunch of ways of thinking about things
or empathy with new learners or just cool concepts, right?
The basic concept behind a video
that in fact, it was many, many years
of like all of my time having learned math
before I started putting out stuff online
that I was able to eat into.
And then maybe it was a little later where,
okay, the well never runs dry.
There's always a long list of things that I want to cover
but in some sense, like I recognize that the well
was at risk of running dry in a way
that I never thought that it could
and without being a little deliberate about
devoting some of my day not just to output and producing
but to stepping back and like learning new things
and touching something I never would have.
That doesn't happen by default.
I don't know if this is also the case
for the people who have genuine miracle years
where they were like letting out all of this stuff
and then it takes a decade to build up
that same level of potential energy.
The other thing, you have everything to gain
and nothing to lose when you are young.
So even if it's not merely youth,
there's a willingness to be creative
and there's also none of the obligations
that come from having found success before, right?
There's certain academics who made an extremely deliberate
effort not to let, what do they call it?
Is it like the curse of success or the some term for it?
But I think maybe James Watson had this standard reply
to invitations for talks and interviews
and things like that.
It was basically like no to everyone
because I just want to be a scientist.
It was much more articulate than that
and he has all these nine points,
but that was the gist of it.
And short of doing that, I think it's very easy
for someone to have a lot of other things
that eat into their mind share and time and all of that
that even if it's just 20 hours a week,
like actually that really interrupts a creative flow.
Were you a student when you started the channel?
Technically, yeah.
The very, very first video was made
when I was a senior at Stanford.
Basically, I'd been like toying around
with just a personal programming project
in my last year of college that was the beginnings
of what is now like the animation tool I work with.
I didn't intend for it to be a thing that I would use
as a math YouTuber.
I didn't even really know what a YouTuber was.
It was really just like a personal project
and it was March of that year.
I think that I published the first ever video
and so it was kind of right at that transition point.
Do you think you would have done it
if you had, let's say become,
I don't know what you're planning on doing after college.
I remember you saying somewhere maybe a data scientist,
but data scientist and math PhD were the two
like 50, 50 contenders basically.
Is there a role in which you started doing that
but then later on made Manum or do you think
that that was only possible in a world
where you had some time to kill in your senior year?
If the goal was to make math YouTube videos,
it would have been a wild thing to do to do it
by like making Manum as the method for it
because it's like so strikingly inefficient
to do it that way.
At the very least, it probably would have built
on top of an existing framework.
If I had, I mean, there's so many things
that I would tell my past self if I could go back in time.
Even if the goal was to make that,
it's like certain design decisions
that caused pain that could have been fixed earlier on.
But if the goal was to make videos,
there's just so many good tools for making videos.
I probably would have started with those
or if I wanted to script things,
maybe I would have first learned after effects
really effectively and then learned the scripting languages
around after effects, that might have even been better
for all I know, I really don't know.
But I just kind of walked into it
because the initial project was to make something
that could illustrate certain ideas in math,
especially when it came to visualizing functions
as transformations, mapping inputs to outputs
as opposed to graphing.
The video output was just a way of knowing
that I had completed that personal project in some sense.
And then it turned out to be fun
because I also really enjoy teaching
and really enjoy tutoring and stuff.
I don't know.
Then again, there's a lot of other people
who make their own tools for math gifts
and little illustrations and things,
which on the one hand feels very inefficient.
Like there's, I don't know,
if people come across a math gift on Wikipedia,
there's a very high probability
it comes from this one individual
who just strangely prolific at producing these
like creative comments visuals.
And he has his own like home baked thing
for how he does it.
And then there's someone who came across on Twitter,
Matt Henderson, who has these completely beautiful
math gifts and such.
And again, it's a very home baked thing
that is like built on top of shaders,
but he kind of has his own stuff there.
And maybe there's something to be said
for the level of ownership that you feel
once it is your own thing that just unlocks
a sense of creativity and feeling like,
hey, I can just describe whatever I want.
Because if I can't already do it,
I'll just change the tool to make it able to do that.
For all I know that level of creative freedom
is necessary to like take on a wide variety of topics,
but your guess is as good as mine
for those counterfactuals.
Yeah.
This is personally interesting to me
because I also started the podcast in college
and it just like was off track of anything
I was planning on doing otherwise.
And this is, you know, many, many orders
of magnitude away from through the one round.
I don't want the audience to cringe in unison,
but I just think it's interesting
like these kinds of projects,
how often something that I don't know later on
ends up being successful is something
that was started almost on a whim as a hobby,
you know, when you're in college
or something like that.
I will say there's a benefit to starting it
in a way that is low stakes.
Like you're not banking on it growing.
I had no anticipation of much less
an expectation of three blown round growing.
I think the reason I kind of kept doing it
was in the fork of life,
if I did the math PhD and all that,
I thought it might be a good idea
to have a little bit of a footprint
on the internet for math exposition.
I was thinking of it as like a very niche thing
that, you know, maybe some math students
and some people who are into math would like it,
but I could sort of show the stuff as a portfolio,
not as an audience, you know,
size that was meaningful.
And I think I was surprised by what an appetite there was
for the kind of things that I was making.
And in some ways, maybe that's helpful
because I see a lot of people who jump in,
they jump in with the goal of being a YouTuber.
So I think it's the most common desire to job
among the youth is to be like a TikToker or a YouTuber,
which think of that what you will.
But when you jump in with that as a goal,
you kind of aim for too large an audience
and end up making the content which is best for no one.
Cause one, you're probably not that good
at making videos yet.
And so you're competing, if it's a general,
a generally applicable idea,
you're competing with like all of the other communicators
out there.
Whereas if you do something that's
almost unreasonably niche,
and also you're not expecting it to blow up,
it's like one, you're not going to be disappointed.
It's like outstanding when a thousand people view it
as opposed to being disappointing.
And then two, you might be making something
that is the best possible version of that content
for the audience who watches it,
because no one else is making that for them
cause it's too narrow a target.
And that's sort of the beauty of the internet
is that there is an incentive to do that.
And I don't know if this is the case with your podcast
when you're starting out for not thinking about,
how can I make this as big as possible?
Actually made it more in-depth
for those who were listening to it.
Is it surprising to you that prehistoric humans
don't seem to have had just basic arithmetic and numeracy?
To me, with a sort of, I guess to us
with the modern understanding,
that kind of stuff seems so universally useful
and so fundamental that it's shocking
that it just doesn't come about naturally
in the course of interacting with the world.
Do you think it's, is that surprising
just the concept of numbers and...
You're right, it's so in our bones
that it's hard to empathize with not having numeracy.
A lot of it's linked to, if you think, okay,
what's the first place that people think about numbers,
most people in their daily lives,
it's linked to commerce and money and such.
So maybe some ways the question is the same as saying,
is it surprising that early humanity
didn't have commerce or didn't deal with money?
Maybe when you're below Dunbar's number
in your communities, like a tit for tat structure
just makes a lot more sense and actually works well
and it would just be obnoxious
to actually account for everything.
The other loosely related idea,
have you come across those studies
where when anthropologists will interview tribes of people
that are removed enough from normal society
that they don't have the level of numeracy that your eye do?
But there's some notion of counting.
If you have one coconut or nine coconuts,
you have a sense of that,
that if you ask what number is halfway between one and nine,
those groups will answer three,
whereas you or I or people in our world
would probably answer five.
And because we think on this very linear scale,
it's interesting that evidently the natural way
to think about things is logarithmically,
which kind of makes sense.
The social dynamics as you go from solitude
to a group of 10 people to a group of 100 people
have roughly equal steps in increasing complexity,
more so than if you go from like one to 51 to 102.
And I wonder if it's the case
that by adding numeracy in some senses,
we've also like lost some numeracy
or lost some intuition in others,
where now if you ask middle school teachers,
what's a difficult topic to teacher
for students to understand?
They're like logarithms.
But that should be deep in our bones, right?
So somehow it got unlearned and then needs to be,
maybe it's in the formal sense
that it's harder to relearn it,
but there's maybe a sense of like numeracy
and a sense of quantitative thinking
that humans naturally do have that is hard to appreciate
when it's not expressed in the same language
or in the same ways.
Yeah, I have seen the thing from Joseph Henrich
where there's still existing tribes
where they're in this kind of situation.
They can do numeracy and arithmetic
when it's in very concrete terms,
if you're talking about seeds or something,
but the abstract concept of a number
is not available to them.
Do you think the abstract concept of a number
is useful to your life?
Oh yeah.
Like in what ways?
It's almost like asking how is the concept
of the alphabet useful?
It comes up so often that it's,
I mean, just like how many lights do I set up
for this interview, right?
Is that the concept of an abstract number though?
Cause it's like two people, two lights,
one to one correspondence.
Did you leverage the abstraction of two
as a object which is simultaneously a rational
and a real and an integer.
I see.
Is in the context of a group that has additive structure
but also multiple, it's like, no,
you just, there's light for you, light for me.
Right.
Yeah.
I'm pretty sure the abstract idea of a number
is important for all of us,
but I don't think it's immediately obvious.
It's more that it shapes the way we think.
I'm not sure if it actually changes like the way we live.
If you're assuming you don't work in STEM, right?
Where like you literally are using it all the time.
Yeah, I'm trying to go through my day
and think through what, where am I using them?
I mean, there's the obvious stuff,
like the commerce examples you mentioned
where you go to a restaurant and you're figuring out
what to pay or what to tip.
But that seems a very particular example.
Do I really use numbers that infrequently?
I don't know.
Yeah, many people listening are probably screaming
out of their heads with like much more apt examples,
but it's hard to say.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, when a mathematician is working on a problem,
what is the biggest mental constraint?
Is it working memory?
Is it processing speed?
Plants are limited by nitrogen usually.
Like what is the equivalent of nitrogen for a mathematician?
Oh, that's a fun question.
I mean, so I'm not a research mathematician.
I shouldn't pretend like I am.
And so the right people to ask that question
would be the research mathematicians.
I wonder if you're going to get consistent answers
as with so many things, there's not one.
Maybe the number of available analogies
to be able to draw connections, like the more exposure you've
had to disparate fields such that you could maybe
see, oh, a problem solving approach that was used here
might be useful here.
Sometimes that's literally codified
in the forms of connections between different fields
as, you know, functors between categories
or something like that.
But sometimes it's a lot more intuitive.
The idea that a general flavor of someone's
doing a combinatorics type question,
and they're like, oh, maybe generating functions
are this useful tool to bring to bear.
And then in some completely different context
of studying prime numbers, they're like, oh, maybe
it could take a generating function type approach.
Maybe you have to massage it to make it work.
And one of the reasons I say this
is one of the tendencies that you've seen in math papers
in, let's say, the last 200 years,
the typical number of authors is much bigger now
than before.
People have this, I think, misconception
that math is a field with lone geniuses who are off,
like coming up with great insights,
like a lone next to a blackboard.
And the reality is it's a highly collaborative field.
I remember one of the first times
that I was hearing from a mathematician, it's like a young
kid, and I was in this math circles event,
and someone was asking this person, like, what surprised
you about your job?
That the first thing he said was how much travel was involved,
that he wasn't expecting that.
And it's because if you're studying some very specific
niche field, that the way that you make progress in that
is by collaborating with other people in that field,
or maybe adjacent to that field.
And there's only so many about them.
They probably aren't at your university,
so you travel a lot to work with them.
These days, a lot of that I think happens on Zoom,
but conferences are still super important.
And these sorts of events that bring people all under one roof,
like MSRI is maybe an example of a place that
does that systematically.
And you could say that's a social thing,
you know, get more ideas.
But I think it's maybe hitting on this idea that what you want
is exposure to as many available analogies.
So the short answer to your question
is like the nitrogen for mathematician is the analogy.
This actually is an interesting question.
I wasn't planning on asking you, but it just occurred to me.
Is it surprising how new a lot of mathematics is,
even mathematics that is taught at the high school level,
whereas with physics or biology, that's also new.
But you can tell a story where we
didn't have the tools to look at the cell
or to inspect an electron until very recently.
But we've had mathematicians for two, 3,000 years
who were doing pretty sophisticated things,
even the ancient Greeks.
It depends on what you mean by sophisticated,
but impressive things.
I don't know why linear algebra is so new, given that fact.
I wouldn't have thought of math as being like new in that way.
If anything, especially if we're talking
at the high school level, I remember
there's always a sensation that it's frustrating
that all of the things are actually
way more than 100 years old in terms of the names attached
to the theorems that you're doing.
None of them are remotely modern.
Whereas in biology, the understanding
we have for how proteins are formed
is relatively much more modern.
And you might be just a couple of generations away.
To some extent, there's a raw manpower component to it.
We're like, how many people did pure math for most of history?
For most of history, no one.
No one was a pure mathematician.
They were a mathematician plus something else.
Or they were a physicist who were a natural philosopher.
And so far as you're doing natural philosophy,
one component of that is developing math.
But it's not the full extent of what you do.
Even the ones who we think of as very, very pure mathematicians
in the sense that a lot of their most famous results
are pure math, like Gauss.
Actually, a lot of the work, a lot of his output,
was also centered on very practical problems.
And maybe since then, that's when
you start to get an era of something more
like pure mathematicians.
And the raw number available that you have,
the manhours that are being put into developing new theorems,
is probably just got this huge spike as, one,
the population grows.
And then also the percentage of the population
that has the economic freedom to do something
as indulgent as academia grows.
Maybe it's pretty reasonable that most of it
is much, much more recent.
That would be my guess.
But some of these things seem actually pretty modern.
Like information theory is less than 100 years old.
That's true.
And it's pretty fundamental.
Like theoretically, you could have written that paper
a long time ago.
That's a really good example.
And maybe this is a sign that the math that's developed
is more in the service of the world that you live in
and the adjacent problems that it's used to solve
than we typically think of it.
On the one hand, information theory
is such a good example, because it's so pure
that you could have asked the question.
You could have defined the notion of a bit.
But evidently, there wasn't a strong enough need
to think in that way.
Whereas when you're doing error correction
or you're thinking about actual information channels
over a wire and you're at Bell Labs, that's what prompts it.
Another maybe really good example for that
would be chaos theory.
You could easily ask, why is chaos theory so recent?
You could have written the Lorenz equations
since differential equations existed.
Why didn't anyone do that?
And understand that there was this sort of sensitivity
to initial conditions.
And in that case, it would maybe be the opposite
where it's not that you need the existence of computers
as a problem to solve or the problems that they introduce
or the problems to solve.
But instead, you need them to even discover the phenomena
in the first place.
Like a lot of original concepts in chaos theory
came from basically running simulations
or doing things that required a massive amount
of computation that simply wouldn't be done by hand.
Someone could ask the question,
but they wouldn't have observed the unexpected phenomenon.
And there, even if it's questions that are as relevant
to a pre-computer world as to a post-computer world,
like the nature of weather modeling
or just the nature of three-body problem,
like all of that kind of stuff,
somehow without the right tools for thought,
it just didn't come into the mind.
And so maybe, yeah, maybe there's other things like that
where those questions or pieces of technology
that start to fundamentally shape everyone's life
will then invariably also shift
like the mathematician's focus.
This actually reminds me,
the first day of Scott Ernst's quantum information class,
he said that what I'm about to describe to you
could have been discovered by a mathematician
before quantum physics existed.
If only they'd asked the question,
we're gonna do probabilities,
but we're only allowed to use unitaries.
And the rest of it is,
you could have just discovered quantum mechanics
or quantum information from there.
I mean, the thing about math, right,
especially if you're talking about pure axiomatized math,
the experience as a student, as an undergrad,
is that you are going through a textbook
and it starts with saying, here's the axioms of this field
and then we're gonna deduce from those axioms
like various different lemmas and theorems
and proceed from that.
And with that as the framing,
you get the impression that you could have just come up
with any axioms, make up some pile of axioms,
deduce what follows from them
and the space of possible like math
is unfathomably huge.
And so you need some process that calls down
what are the useful things to maybe pursue.
And so one of the things that I think is all too often missing
in those pure math textbooks
is basically the motivating problem.
Why is it that this was the set of axioms people found
to be useful and not something else?
The framework for quantum information theory,
it's like you married together linear algebra
and probability and that's great.
But there's all sorts of other things
where you could kind of try to cram them together
and maybe get some sort of math out.
And the question becomes,
is it worth your time to do that?
Not theory is something that emerged
because I think it was Lord Kelvin had a theory
that all of the elements on the periodic table
had structures which were related to a not,
like a not being if you have a closed loop in 3D space,
but maybe if you wanna continuously deform it
without it ever crossing itself,
you ask the question like,
could you get back to say an open loop?
Or if you can't get back to an open loop,
what are the set of all other loops in 3D space
that could be deformed into that?
And you end up categorizing what all the different knots are.
And this was started with a completely incorrect theory
for what's going on at the atomic level
that gives Adams this very stable structure.
Because I think he found with smoke rings,
like if you're somehow very dexterous
with how you create these smoke rings,
you can get them to form knots in 3D.
And they're very stable.
It's like weirdly stable.
And it'll never cross over itself.
And so it has all those properties.
Now, that was irrelevant for understanding
the periodic table,
but it was an interesting mathematical question
and people kind of ran with it.
And in that case, it was an arbitrary reason
that someone thought to ask the question
and then some people ran with it.
And frankly, it's probably fewer people who run with it
than would if it turned out to be a more useful question.
So really you wanna ask,
what are the things that prompt people to ask
what turns out to be a mathematical question
given that the space of what would be mathematical questions
is so unfathomably huge
that it's just impossible to explore it
through a random walk.
Wait, are you saying that Lord Kelvin's apple
hitting Newton's story
was that he was smoking a lot of pipe
and he just categorizes the puffs?
Yeah, I can't remember if it was smoke rings out of his mouth.
I mean, that's a natural place.
We should look into that, I should have, yeah.
Okay, so you've changed how you and other creators
have changed how pedagogy happens via animated videos.
What would it take to do something similar
for video games, text, all these other mediums?
Why hasn't there been a similar sort of broad scale
adoption and transformation of how teaching happens there?
I'm not sure I understand the question.
You're saying where there's been a rise of explanatory videos,
why is there not a similar rise in pedagogical video games?
Yeah.
And well, one thing to understand,
I guess games are very hard to make.
It takes a lot of resources for a given game,
and whenever people seem to try to do it with pedagogy
as a motive, like they're making some game
whose goal is to teach something,
I don't play enough games,
so I can't really speak to it the way that well-versed game
designers can.
It seems to be the case that they are not
fun in the way that people would want them to be fun,
and then the ones that are actually most effective
are not as directly educational.
So there's clearly some of it.
The one game that I actually have played,
because enough of my friends told me,
hey, you should really do this.
It seems relevant to not explanation.
In the last decade was The Witness.
Have you played it?
I've heard about it.
So as someone who doesn't play games and then did play it,
it's fantastic.
It's absolutely well done in every possible way
that you could want something to be well done.
And critical on that is the nature of how problems are solved.
The reason people are recommending it to me
is because the feeling of playing The Witness
is a lot like the feeling of doing math.
It's nonverbal.
You come across these little puzzles
where the simple mechanics of one puzzle
inform you about the fundamental mechanics
that become relevant to much, much harder ones,
such that if you do it with the right sequence,
you have the feeling of epiphany
in ways that are very self-satisfying.
And you come away feeling like, man,
you should be able to do something like this for math.
And maybe you can.
And it's just that it's so hard to make a game at all
that there's just not the rate of production
that you would need to explore,
like get enough games out there that one of them hits.
Because with YouTube,
there's a lot of math videos on YouTube.
It's okay that most of them suck, right?
It's okay because, hey, you just need enough
that when someone searches for the term that they want,
they get one that is good and scratches that itch.
Or that they might get recommended something
that is bringing a question to their mind
that they wouldn't have thought about,
but they become really interested once it's there.
Whereas with video games, I don't know,
you're also spending a lot more time as a user on each one
rather than a five-minute average experience.
It's like a many, many hour average experience.
You ask the question on text.
I don't know if I accept the premise
that there's not the same advances and innovation
in the world of textual explanations.
Like Mathagon is a really, really good example of this.
That's like the textbook of the future.
It's a website.
It's basically an interactive textbook.
The explanations are really good.
And insofar as it doesn't have more of an impact
or more of a reach,
it's maybe just because people don't know about it
or don't have an easy means of accessing
something that recommends to them,
like the really good innovations happening
in the world of textual explanations
in the way that YouTube has this recommending engine
that tries its hardest to get more of these things
in front of people.
And I'm quite sure that in the world
of actual written textbooks,
I mean, there's so many that I like so much
that I think it would be a disservice
to talk about that medium as not,
like making advances in terms of more and more thought
put towards empathy to the learner and things like that.
Should the top 0.1% of educators,
should they be exclusively on the internet?
Because it seems like a waste if you were just a college
professor or a high school professor
and you were teaching 50 kids a year or something,
given the greater scale available,
should more of them be trying to see
if they can reach more people?
I think it's not a bad thing for more educators
who are good at what they're doing
to put their stuff online, for sure.
I highly encourage that even if it's as simple
as getting someone to put a camera
in the back of the classroom.
I don't think it would be a good idea
to get those people out of the classroom.
If anything, I think one of the best things
that I could do for my career
would be to put myself into more classrooms.
I'm quite determined at some point
to be a high school math teacher for some number of years.
I don't know when there's such opportunity cost, I guess.
It's something I would plan on notably later,
as long as there's not other life logistics
that occupy a lot of mind share
because everything I know about high school teaching
is like it just kicks your ass for the first two years.
But I would say one of the most valuable things
that you can have if you're trying to explain stuff online
is a sense of empathy
for what the possible viewers are like that
that are out there.
The more distance that you put between yourself and them
in terms of life circumstances,
you know, I'm not a college student,
so I don't have the same empathy with whether college students
like certainly not a high school student,
so I've lost that empathy.
That distance just makes it more and more
of an uphill battle to make the content good for them.
And I think keeping people in regular touch
with just what people in the classroom actively need
is necessary for them to remain as good
and as sharp as they are.
So yes, get more of those top 0.1%
to put their stuff online,
but like I would absolutely disagree
with the idea of taking them out
of their existing circumstances maybe for a year or two
so they don't lose that sharpness,
but then like put them right back in because,
one, it makes them better at the online position,
but also the other thing I might disagree with
is the idea that the reach is lower because,
okay, yes, it's a smaller number of people,
but you're with them for much, much more time
and you actually have the chance of influencing
their trajectory through a social connection
in a way that you just don't over YouTube.
And I think you're using the word education
in a way that I would maybe sub out
for the word explanation,
like you want explanations to be online,
but like education, the word education
derives from the same root as the word educe,
like to bring out.
And I really like that as a bit of etymology
because it reminds you that the job of an educator
is not to like take their knowledge
and shove it into the heads of someone else.
The job is to bring it out.
That's very, very hard to do in a video.
And in fact, even if you can kind of get at it
by asking intriguing questions,
for the most part, the video is there to answer something
once someone has a question.
And the teacher's job or the educator's job
should be to provide the environment
such that you're bringing out from your students
as much as you can through inspiration,
through projects,
through little bits of mentorship and encouragement
along the way that requires eye contact
and being there in person
and being at the true figure in their life
rather than just an abstract voice behind a screen.
Then should we think of educators
more as motivational speakers,
as in the actual job of getting the content in your head
is maybe for the textbooks or for the YouTube.
But now the job,
like why we have college classes or high school classes
is we have somebody who approximates Tony Robbins
to get you to do the thing.
That would be a subset of it,
but there's more than just motivational speech
that goes into it, right?
There's facilitation of projects
or even coming up with what the projects are
or recognizing what a student is interested in
so that you can try to tailor a question
to their specific set of interests
or you can maybe act as the curator where,
hey, there's a lot of online explanations
for what a Poisson distribution is.
Which of these is the right one that I could serve?
And based on knowing you as a particular student,
what might resonate,
you might be in a better position to do that.
All of that goes beyond being a Tony Robbins out saying,
be the best person that you can be and all of that.
One thing I might say is anytime that I'll chat with
mathematicians and try to get a sense
for how they got into it, what got them started,
so, so often it starts by saying,
well, there was this one teacher
and that teacher did something very small.
They pulled them aside and just said,
hey, you're really good at this.
Have you considered studying more
or they give them an interesting problem?
And the thing that takes at most 30 minutes
of the teacher's time, maybe even 30 seconds,
has these completely monumental rippling effects
for the life of the student they were talking to
that then sets them on this whole different trajectory.
And two examples of this come to mind, actually.
One is this woman who was saying she had this moment,
she got pulled aside from the teacher
and he just said like, hey, I think you're really good at math.
You should consider being a math major,
which had been completely outside of her
like, per view at that time.
And that like changed the way she thought about it.
And then later she said she learned that he like,
did that for a large number of people.
He just pulled them and be like, hey, you're really good at math.
So that's a level of impact that you can have in person
as a figure in their lives in a way that you can over a screen.
Then another one, which was very funny,
I was asking this guy why he winded the specific field that he did.
It was a seemingly arbitrary thing in my mind,
but I guess all pure math seems to be.
He said that he, for his first year of grad school,
was sitting in this seminar and at the end of the seminar,
the professor, who was this old professor,
he had never met him before,
they didn't have any kind of connection.
He seeks this guy out.
He comes up and he says, you, I have a problem for you.
A good research problem that I think might be
a good place for you to start in the next couple of months.
And this guy was like, oh, okay.
And he like gets this research problem
and he spends some months thinking about it and he comes back.
And then it later came to light
that the professor mistook him for someone else.
Someone he was supposed to be mentoring.
And so he was just like the stereotypical image
of like a doddering old math professor
who's not very in tune with the people in his life.
That was the actual situation.
But nevertheless, that moment of accidentally giving someone
a problem completely shifted the research path for him,
which if nothing else shows you the sensitivity
to initial conditions that takes place when you are a student
and how the educator is right on that nexus of sensitivity
who can completely swing the fences one way or another
for what you do.
And for every one of those stories,
there's going to be an unfortunate counter balancing
story about people who are demotivated from math.
I mean, I think this was seventh grade.
There was this math class that I was in.
And I was one of the people who was like good at math
and enjoyed it and would often like
help the people in the class understand it and all that.
And so I had enough ego built up,
I guess to have like a strong shell around things.
And I guess for context, I also really liked music
and there was this like concert that had happened
where I had like a certain solo or something earlier in the day
or earlier in that week.
And there was a substitute teacher on one day.
So she didn't have like any of the context
and she gave some lesson and then had to spend
the second half of the class going over the homework for it.
All of the other students in the class were very confused.
And I think I remember like they would kind of come to me
and I would try to offer to help them.
And the substitute was going around the class in these circles
and basically marking off a little star
for how far down the homework people were,
just to get a sense, are they progressing?
And that was kind of her way of measuring, are they very far?
And when she got to me, I had done like none of them
because I was spending my whole time
trying to help all of the others.
And she like after having written a little star
next to the same problem like three different times,
she said to me like, you know,
sometimes music people just aren't math people
and it keeps walking on.
So now I was in the best possible circumstance
to not let that hit hard because like,
one, I had the moral high ground of like,
hey, I've just been helping all these people.
Like I understand it and I've been doing your job for you.
This was my like little egotistical seventh grade brain.
I knew that I knew the stuff and things like that.
Even still, even with all of that
as like the armor that was put up,
I remember it was just this like shock to my system.
You know, she says this thing
and it just made me like strangely teary-eyed or something.
And I can only imagine if you're in a position
where you're not confident in math
and the thing that you know deep in your heart
is actually you are kind of struggling with it.
Just a little throwaway comment like that
could completely derail the whole system
in terms of your relationship with the subject.
So it's another example
to illustrate the sensitivity to initial conditions, right?
Where there, you know, I was in a robust position.
It wasn't as sensitive.
I was going to love math no matter what,
but you envision someone who's a little bit more
on that teetering edge and the comment one way or another,
either saying, you're good at this,
you should consider majoring in it
or saying sometimes music people aren't math people,
which isn't even true.
Or you know what I mean?
Like that was the other thing about it
that like niggled at my brain when she said it.
Yeah, all of that is just so important
for people's development that when people talk
about online education as being valuable
or revolutionary or anything like that,
there's a part of me that sort of rolls my eyes
because it just doesn't get at the truth
that online explanations have nothing to do
with all of that important stuff
that's actually happening.
And at best it should be like in the service
of helping that side of things
that's where the rubber meets the road.
I had Tyler Cohen on the podcast
and he obviously has Marshall Revolution University,
these YouTube videos where he explains economics.
And he had a similar answer to give.
I think I asked basically why aren't you just replacing
or should we think of you as a substitute
for all these economics teachers?
And in his mind as well,
he was more a compliment to the functions
that happened in the class.
And to your point about the initial conditions,
I'm sure you remember the details of the story,
but I just vaguely remember hearing this.
Wasn't there a case where a mathematician
who later ended up becoming famous,
he arrives to a lecture late?
Do you want to tell the story?
I don't remember it beat for beat,
but I think it was a statistics class
and he was a grad student and he comes in, it's late,
and there's two problems on the board
that the professor had written.
He assumed that those two problems were homework
and so he goes home and he works on them
and after a couple weeks,
he goes to the professor's office
and turns in his homework and he's like,
I'm sorry, I'm so late, this one,
it just took me a lot longer than some of the others.
And the professor's like, oh, okay, yeah.
And just shuffles it away.
And then a couple days later,
when the prophet had the time to go through and see them,
he realized that the student had fully answered these questions.
What the student didn't know
is that they were not homework problems
written on the chalkboard.
They were two unsolved problems in the field
that the prophet put up as examples
of what the field was striving for.
I don't remember what problems they were,
so that would be more fun color to add to the story.
But then, at least, as the anecdote told to me,
however many years ago goes,
the prophet then finds the student's housing
and knocks on the door.
He's like, do you realize that these were actually
unsolved problems?
And then he gets to basically make those his thesis.
So yeah, that idea of just being given something
for completely random reasons,
and it shifts the course of what you do.
Right, right, right.
Or just, you know, it's a thing
where if you know a crossword is solvable,
you just keep going at it until you solve it.
Or the four-minute mile, right?
Right, exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
That's a great example.
Another valuable experience, at least one I had,
was taking Aaronson's classes in college
and realizing I am at least two standard deviations below him.
And that was actually a really valuable experience for me,
not because it increased my confidence in...
I didn't have a moment where I was like,
oh, wow, I'm good at this.
But it was useful to know, you know,
but podcasting is an easier thing to do, right?
So then it's good to know
that there is actual technical things out there
where knowing that you can get really deep into something
and people are just going to be way above you,
having that sort of awareness.
Do you think it's fair to have a mental model
that has a static g-factor type quality here
such that you're two standard deviations below
and that is forever the state of things?
Or do you think that the right mental model
is something that allows for flexibility on
where contributions actually come from
or where intuitions come from that, you know,
through many years of experience
and certain kinds of problem solving,
maybe what seemed like a flash of insight was actually
like the residue of just years
of thinking about certain kinds of puzzles
that he had that you maybe didn't.
Can I tell you a story from that class actually?
Yeah, go for it.
So he's giving some proof about like how one...
It actually wasn't that.
He was giving a proof of that.
I forgot the name of the method,
but it's a very important method in complexity theory
that helped to prove the bounds of the complexity
of different problems.
And he explains it and he says, you know, in 1999,
I proved this myself,
but I realized that six months before,
somebody had already published a paper with this method
and I realized I'm catching up to the frontier now,
you know, but when I was a kid,
I was like doing Euler, that's like 2,000 years
in regress, now I'm six months behind.
And then so later on in the day, I'm like, wait, 1999,
how old was Scott Ironson in 1999?
And I think it was 18 or 19.
And he was basically proving frontier results
in complexity theory that were...
So at that point, you're like, all right,
Ironson's a special animal here.
You are right, he's probably a special animal.
But it's just broadly good to know,
just like have that sort of upper constraint
on your dining cruger that you can...
This exists in the world.
Maybe the thing that I would want to say is that
whatever the scale is on which he's
two standard deviations above you,
that might not be the one scale that matters
and that like contributions to these fields
don't always look like genius insights
and that sometimes there's fruit to be born
from say becoming kind of an expert
in two different things
and then finding connections between them.
And like the people who make contributions
are not necessarily the Scott Ironsons of the world.
Still, you are probably a true that there are...
It's like Von Neumann's another example
of one of these, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay, how much does Gordel's Inclinus theorem
practically matter?
Is it something that comes up a lot?
Or is it just an interesting thing to know
about the bounds that isn't day-to-day applicable?
You've asked me another question
where I'm not the best one to ask
and I should throw that as a caveat to begin.
From what I understand, it really doesn't come up.
I mean, the analogy to make,
the paradoxical fact that it's conveying,
the idea that you can't have an axiom system
that is both...
That will basically like prove all of the things
that are true and which is also self-consistent.
The contradiction that you construct out of that
has the same feeling as the sentence,
this statement is a lie.
Where you think about the statement,
if it's false, then it must be true.
If it's true, it must be false.
It's that same flavor.
And you might ask,
does the existence of that paradox
mean that it's hard to speak English
unequivocally?
Yeah, that's interesting.
It's so rare that you would come up with something
that happens to have a bit of self-reference in it.
There were...
One of the first times
that there was something that came up
that didn't feel quite as pathological in that way.
If the curious listener wants to go into it,
the search room would be Paris Harrington Theorums,
where it's a little pathological,
but it wasn't the realest question that came up
that didn't seem like it was deliberately constructed
to be one of these self-referential things
where it shows itself to be outside the bounds
of whatever axiom system you were starting with.
So it was shown to be unresolvable in a certain sense,
but it was asking a...
I don't want to say natural,
because a lot of these math questions aren't natural
in the sense that most people would want,
but it was asking a question
where you wouldn't expect that to be true.
So maybe at the edges of theory,
there are some times when the paradoxes that are possible,
if the Kirtles and Possibility Theorem shows,
like, do eke their ways in,
the impression I get is no mathematician is thinking about it.
They're not actively worrying about it.
It's not like, oh, God, no.
Like, can I be sure that the stuff that I'm going to show is true?
For all the practical problems,
if it's like the Riemann Hypothesis or Twin Primes,
almost everyone's like, no, there's going to be an answer.
Maybe they turn out to be unresolvable
in one of these ways,
but there's just a strong sense that that theorem came
from a pathology in a way that natural questions
that people actually care about don't.
That's really interesting,
that something from the outside and in popularizations
seems to be a very fundamental thing
where people have definitely heard about this, right?
It's not internally...
A good analogy here is in computer science,
the halting problem.
It's like you take a computer science course,
one of the first things you'll learn
is the proof of the halting problem,
and it's another one of those things
where you don't really need to be able to prove that every single...
Have that sort of program available.
No comments.
No more comments.
Why are good explanations so hard to find,
despite how useful they are?
Obviously, there's many other than you as well.
There's many other cases of good explanations,
but generally, it just seems like there aren't as many
as there should be.
Is it just a story of economics
where it's nobody's incentive to be making...
Really spend a lot of time making good explanations?
Is it just a really hard skill that isn't correlated
with being able to come up with a discovery itself?
Why are good explanations scarce?
I think there's maybe two explanations.
The first less important one is going to be that
there's a difference between knowing something
and then remembering what it's like not to know it.
And the characteristic of good explanation
is that you're walking someone on a path
from the feeling of not understanding
up to the feeling of understanding.
Earlier, you were asking about societies
that lack numeracy.
That's such a hard brain state to put yourself in,
like what's it like to not even know numbers?
How would you start to explain what numbers are?
Maybe you should go from a bunch of concrete examples,
but the way that you think about numbers
and adding things,
it's just you have to really unpack a lot
before you even start there.
And I think at higher levels of abstraction,
that becomes even harder,
because it shapes the way that you think so much
that remembering what it's like not to understand it.
You're teaching some kid algebra,
and the premise of a variable, they're like,
what is x?
You're like, well, it's not necessarily anything,
but it's what we're solving for it.
Yeah, but what is it?
Trying to answer what is x is a weirdly hard thing,
because it is the premise that you're even starting from.
The more important one, probably,
is that the best explanation depends heavily
on the individual who's learning.
And the perfect explanation for you
often might be very different
from the perfect explanation for someone else.
So there's a lot of very good domain-specific explanations.
Pull up in any textbook, and like chapter 12 of it
is probably explaining the content in there like quite well,
assuming that you've read chapters 1 through 11,
but if you're coming in from a cold start,
it's a little bit hard.
And so the real gold nugget is like,
how do you construct explanations which are
as generally useful as possible,
as generally appealing as possible?
And that, I think,
because you can't assume shared context,
it becomes this challenge.
And I think there's like tips and tricks along the way,
but because the people that are often making explanations
have a specific enough audience,
it is this classroom of 30 people,
or it's this discipline of majors who are in their third year.
All the explanations from the people
who are professional explainers in some sense
are so targeted that maybe it's the economic thing
you're talking about, there's not,
or at least until recently in history,
there hasn't been the need to,
or the incentive to come up with something
that would be motivating and approachable and clear
to an extremely wide variety of different backgrounds.
Is the process of making a video, is that mostly you?
Okay. Given the scale you're reaching,
it seems that if it was possible,
it would just like a small increase in productivity
would be worth like an entire production studio.
And it's interesting to me or surprising
that the transaction cost of having a production setup
are high enough that it's better to literally do
the mundane details yourself.
I mean, this could honestly just be a personal flaw.
Like I'm not good at pulling people in,
and I've struggled to do this effectively in the past.
But a part of it is that the seemingly mundane details
are sometimes just how I even think
about constructing it in the first place.
You know, the first thing that a lot of YouTubers
will do if they can hire is hire an editor.
And this will be because they film a lot of things.
And so a lot of the editing process is removing the stuff
that was filmed that shouldn't be in the video
and just leaving the stuff that should be in the video.
And that's time consuming and it's kind of mundane.
And it's probably not that relevant to
what the creator should be thinking about.
When you're not filming stuff,
like the editing process for me,
you know, I start by laying out all of the animations
and stuff that I'll want in a timeline.
And then once I record the voiceover,
the actual editing is like a day.
And it's not like, I guess I could hire someone
and gain a day back of my life.
But the communication back and forth
for saying what specifically I want,
like all of the little cuts that I'm making along the way
are my way of even thinking about
what I want the final piece to be,
such that it would be hard to put it into words.
It's similar for why I maybe find it quite hard to use
like a co-pilot and some of these like
LLM tools and coding where for the animation code,
you know, it can be super great
if you're learning some new library
and it knows about that library that you don't.
But for my library that I know inside it out,
if I'm just using it, it feels like,
oh, this should be the most automatable thing ever.
You know, it's just text.
Like I should be the first YouTuber
who can actually do this better
because the substance behind each animation is text.
It's not like an editing workflow in quite the same way.
But it doesn't work.
And I think it's because maybe it's just because
you need a multimodal thing
that actually understands the look of the output,
like the output isn't something that is consumable in text.
It's something about how it looks.
But at a deeper level, I can't even put into words
what I want to put on the screen
except to do so in code.
Like that's just the way that I'm thinking about it.
And like if I were to try to put into English
the thing that I want as a comment
that then gets expanded,
that task is actually harder than writing it in the code.
And if it's clunky to write in code,
that's a sign that I should like change
the interface of the library
such that it's less clunky to be expressive
in the way that I want.
And it's in that same way
where a lot of the creative process
that feels mundane,
those are just like the cogs of thought slowly turning
in a way that if they weren't turning for that part,
they would have to be turning during
the interface of communication with a collaborator.
Yeah. On the point of working with co-pilot
where we can visualize the changes you wanted to make,
there were the paper from Microsoft Research
that sparks of AGI paper,
had it actually really interesting example
where it was generating LaTeX
and you generated some output and they say,
change this so that the visual that comes up
in the rendering is different in this way.
And it was actually able to do that,
which was their evidence
that it can understand the higher-level visual abstraction.
So I guess I can't do that for Manum.
There's a couple reasons it might not be as fair a comparison.
One would be the two versions of Manum.
There's a split where there's a community version
that is by the community, for the community.
And then mine, the interfaces are largely similar
the rendering engines are quite different.
But because of slight differences in that,
and it might have a tendency,
it learned from one or it saw examples from one
and it's intermixing them.
So stuff just doesn't quite run when there's discrepancy.
I maybe shot myself in the footwear.
All of my code for videos,
like I don't really comment it that much
because it's like a one-and-done deal.
There's also a code for the core library
I could comment and document a lot better.
But the way that I'm making it
feels much more like the editing flow.
If you were to look at the operation history
of someone in After Effects, like written down,
it's a little bit more like that where
there's not a perfect description in English
of the thing that I want to do and then the execution of that.
It's just the execution of that.
And it's not meant to be editable.
And I cite it as much because I'm just in the flow
of making the scene for the one video.
And maybe I could have given it a better chance
to learn what is supposed to be happening
by having a really well-documented set of like,
this is the input, this is the output,
this is the comment describing it in English.
But even then, that wouldn't hit the problem on like,
I would have to articulate what the thing I want is
in the first place.
And the language, the programming language,
is just the right mode of articulation in the first place.
This is something I wanted to,
I was really curious about ever since I learned about it.
I watched many of the summer of math exploration prize videos.
And it was shocking to me how good the,
I mean, these looked like entire production studios
were dedicated to making them, many of them.
And it was shocking to me that you could motivate and elicit
this quality of contribution,
given the relatively modest prize pool,
which I was like five winners, $1,000 each.
What is your explanation of just running prizes like this?
Why you were able to get such high quality contributions?
Is it, is the prize pool even relevant?
Is it just about your reputation and reach?
I do wonder how relevant the prize pool is.
I mean, we've been thinking about this because,
you know, we did it first in 2021,
then we plan to continue doing it annually.
And I probably, if I like, was a mover and a shaker,
could raise much more if I wanted to like,
get a big prize pool there.
I don't think it would change the quality of the content
because the impression I get is that people aren't fundamentally
motivated by like winning some cash prize.
Certainly they're not investing with a like,
expected value calculation on what,
if they are, that's a terrible, terrible plan.
And if anything, like that might be a problem,
like let's say it was $100,000 prize for each of the winners,
then it would be a real problem where someone who,
and you know, people do like to illusionally think
that they're very likely going to be the winner.
They might like actually pour a lot of their own resources
into it with the expectation of gaining it.
And then that's just a messy situation I don't want to be in.
We're like, why wasn't mine chosen as a winner?
Because the whole event is not supposed to be about winners.
In fact, maybe for listeners who don't know,
I should describe what you're talking about,
the summer of math exposition.
Actually, the history is a little bit funny
because it started with an intern application
where I in 2021 wanted to have just like a couple interns
to do a certain thing on my website basically.
And I put out a call for people to apply.
I got 2,500 applicants and somewhere in the application
I mentioned that during the summer,
in addition to like the main task I wanted them to do,
you know, I'd give freedom if they just wanted to do
something relevant to math exposition online
that was their own thing,
I'd be happy to provide, you know, some mentorship
or just give them the freedom to do that one day a week
and give me a little pitch on what your idea would be.
And as I went through, you know, all of the applications,
which is a lot, I felt so bad because so often
the person would have a little pitch
on like what they would want to make.
And in my mind, I'd think, cool, you should make that.
You don't need me to like do that.
Like just spend your summer making that.
Why not?
And people were clearly inspired
by the thought of adding something.
And like I said earlier,
being a YouTuber is the most common job aspiration
among the youth these days.
And so as a consolation of sorts
to those 99% that I had to reject for the internship,
I said, oh, but what we will do,
we're just gonna like host this thing,
we'll call it the summer of math exposition
where we'll give you a deadline.
I'll like promise to feature some people in a video.
Maybe I'll choose five of them to do that.
And if you feel like the thing that you were gonna do,
like with me as your 20% project as an intern
is something you're excited about,
make it 100% project or 20% or whatever freedom you have.
Just do it anyway.
And like I can give you this little carrot
in the form of featuring it in a video
and give you a deadline, which let's be honest,
is what actually makes the difference
between people doing something
and procrastinating on it sometimes.
Later, there was, I think it was brilliant that year,
said they would be happy to put some cash prizes in.
So I said, sure, why not?
I don't think the cash prize is super important,
but it's nice.
I mean, it shows that someone actually cared
and put some real thought into doing something
that wasn't just a made up gold star,
but they put some material behind saying
that you were selected as a winner of this thing.
But all in all, it was never supposed
to be about choosing winners.
It was just get more people to make stuff
and if anything, I'd actually, I love it
when I see stuff from existing educators and teachers
where it's maybe not the youth who want to be YouTubers
pouring their hearts and souls into it,
but it's the educator who built up a lot of intuition
over the course of their career
for what constitutes a clear explanation
and they're just sharing it more broadly.
So to your question on what is it that caused there
to be such high production quality
in some of the entries there,
part of the answer might just be
that like tooling is so good now
that individuals can actually make
pretty incredible things sometimes.
I misphrased if I said production quality.
I might just meant the whole composition as a whole.
Yeah, well, there's a selection filter too, right?
Like there were in that first year 1200 submissions
I featured in the winning video five of them.
So of course, they're necessarily unrepresentative
of the norm by the very nature of who I was choosing to feature.
But the fact that those were even in the pool,
something that high quality was even in the pool.
I think it hits a little bit to your miracle year point
where I think what might be happening is you have people
with a ton of potential energy
for something that they've kind of been thinking
about making for a long time.
And the hope was to give people a little push.
Here's a deadline.
Here's a little prize.
Here's a promise that maybe if you make it,
it won't just go into the void,
but there's a chance that it could get exposed to more people.
Which I think is absolutely played out
and not for the reason that someone might expect
where I choose winners
and I feature those winners and people watch them.
A huge amount of viewership happens
before I even begin the process of looking at them.
And this was an accident too,
where in this first year we got 1200 submissions.
I said expect judges who are reviewing it
to spend at most 10 minutes on each piece.
So it could be longer,
but like don't rely on someone watching it for more.
But realistically, when I'm reviewing something,
I want to watch the whole piece.
I absolutely do not have time to watch that many.
I've learned it takes me about two weeks
of just full-time work to watch 100 of these pieces
and give the kind of feedback that I want.
And to manage that problem
of more than we could manually review,
we put together this peer review system
that would basically have an algorithm feed people pairs of videos
and they would just say which one is better
and then it would feed them another one.
And in the first two years,
we just used a tool that was common for hackathons that did this.
And what that did is one,
it gave us a partially ordered list of content by quality loosely.
We didn't need it to be perfect.
We just needed there to be a very high chance
that the five most deserving videos
were visible somewhere in that top 100, right?
So there the algorithm doesn't have to be perfect.
But what happened, I think, is that
by having this period when a ton of people
are watching the same batch of videos,
so a thing I've learned about the YouTube algorithm
is in theory, you would want to just use machine learning
for everything, right?
Like you have some massive neural network
where on the input of it,
it's got five billion videos or however many exist
and the output decides what seven are best to recommend to you.
That is completely computationally infeasible, right?
I also think, I think this is all public knowledge.
So what you have to do instead is use some sort of proxies
as a first pass to nominate a video
to even be fed into the machine learning driven algorithm
so that you're only feeding in like a thousand or so
or something in the order of thousands like nominees.
So the real difference that it can make
if you've made a really good video
between it getting to the people who would like it
and not getting there, it's not the flaws in the algorithm.
The algorithm is probably quite good.
It's the mismatch between the proxies being used
to nominate stuff to see whether it's even in the running.
So one of the things used for nomination
is understanding the co-watch graph
where if you've watched video A and you've also watched video B
and then I watch video A,
you're watching both of those, gives a little link between them
or maybe you and a ton of other people watching both of them
gives a little link between
such that once I watch video A,
B is potentially nominated in that phase
because it's recognized that there's a lot of co-watching.
That's something that I'm sure still
is like quite challenging at scale
but is more plausible to do at scale
than like running some massive neural network.
And so I think what might have happened
is that by having a bunch of co-watching
happening on this same pool of videos,
all you need is for like some of them
to have decent reach and get recommended, right?
Because then that kicks off,
it's like igniting a pile of kindling
where then if others are good,
if they're going to give people good experiences,
they get not only nominated but then recommended
which then like kicks back in the feedback loop there.
So that turns out to be,
I think as close to a guarantee as you can get
of saying if you make something that's good,
it's a good piece that will satisfy someone,
they come away feeling like they learned something
that they otherwise didn't know and it was well presented.
If you can get it into this peer review process,
it will reach people.
It's not just going to be shouting into the void.
And in this case, there was last year,
I think over 100 videos where
after the first two weeks, they had more than 10,000 views
which I know in the grand scheme,
people think like huge numbers of views and millions out there.
But like for a fresh channel,
talking about a niche mathematical topic,
to be able to put it out and like get 10,000 people to watch it,
I think is amazing, right?
And the idea that that could happen for over 100 people,
I think is amazing.
So that had nothing to do with the prize pool, right?
In that the motive might have been
a hope of like actually getting some reach
and having some sense of a guarantee of there being some reach.
Ironically, the reason to do the whole peer review system
in the first place is in the service of selecting winners.
And so like without something in the service of selecting winners,
if you just said, hey, we're having a watch fest
where everyone watches each other's things,
somehow it wouldn't quite have the same like,
I don't know, poll that gets people into it.
So I think it still makes sense to have winners
and to have some material behind those winners.
It doesn't have to be much though.
And if anything, I think it might ruin it to make it too much.
I'll also say it's $15,000 actually,
because we give $500 to 20 different honorable mentions,
at least this year.
So still pretty modest in the scheme.
There's like how much money you can invest
to try to get more math lessons in the world.
I watched many of the honorable mentions as well
because they were just topics that were interesting to me.
And I mean, it's like the thing that the president
of Chicago University said at one point
where he said we could discard the people we admitted
and select the next thousand for our class.
And there would be no difference.
It was that level of peak.
Yeah, and I really admire by the way,
not only the education that you've provided
directly with your videos, which have reached millions of people,
but the fact that you're also setting up this way
of getting more people to contribute
and maybe get to topics that you wouldn't have time
to get to yourself.
So I really admire that you're doing that.
If you're self teaching yourself a field
that involves mathematics, let's say it's physics
or some other thing like that,
there's problems where you have to understand
how do I put this in terms of a dirt of an integral?
And from there, it's can I solve this integral?
And what would you recommend to somebody
who is teaching themselves, let's say quantum mechanics?
And I figured out how to get the right mathematical equation here.
Is it important for their understanding
to be able to take, go from there to getting it
to the end result?
Or can they just say, well, I can just abstract that out.
I understand the broader way to set up the problem
in terms of the physics itself.
I think where a lot of self learners shoot themselves
in the foot is by skipping calculations,
by thinking that that's incidental to the core understanding.
But actually, I think you do build a lot of intuition
just by putting in the reps of certain calculations.
Some of them maybe turn out not to be all that important.
And in that case, okay, so be it.
But sometimes that's what maybe shapes your sense
of where the substance of a result really came from.
I don't know, it might be something you realize,
oh, it's because of the square root that you get this decay.
And if you didn't really go through the exercise,
you would just instead coming away thinking such and such decays,
but with other circumstances, it doesn't decay.
And not really understanding what was the core part of this high level result
that is the thing you actually want to come out remembering.
Like putting in the work with the calculations
is where you solidify all of those underlying intuitions.
And without the forcing function of homework,
people would just like, don't do it.
So that I think that's one thing that I learned
is a big difference post college versus during college.
As like post college, it's very easy in learning stuff
to just accidentally skip that.
And then it doesn't sink in as well.
So I think when you're reading something,
having a notebook next to you,
just like having pen and paper, pencil and paper, whatever it is,
it should be considered part of the actual reading process.
And if you are relying too much on like reading
and kind of looking up and thinking in your head,
you know, maybe that's going to get something,
but it's not going to be as highly leveraged as it could be.
What would be the impact of more self teaching
in terms of what kinds of personalities benefit most?
So there's obviously a difference in the kind of person who benefits most
in a situation where there's, it's a college course
and everybody has to do the homework,
but maybe some people are better tuned for the kind of work
that's placed there versus all the stuff is available
for you on YouTube and then textbooks for exercises and so on.
But you have to have the conscientiousness
to actually go ahead and pursue it.
I mean, how do you see the distribution
of who will benefit from the more modern way
in which you can get whatever you want,
but you have to push yourself to get it.
There's a really good book that's actually kind of relevant
to some of your early questions
called Failure to Disrupt
that goes over the history of educational technology.
Trying to answer the question,
you have these repeated cycles of people saying
such and such technology that almost always
is getting more explanations to more people.
Promises that it'll disrupt the existing university system
or disrupt the existing school system
and just kind of never does.
You know, one of the things that it highlights
is how stratifying these technologies will be
in that they actually are very, very good
for those who are already motivated
or kind of already on the top in some way.
And they end up struggling the most
just for those who are performing more poorly.
And maybe it's because of confounding causation
where the same thing that causes someone
to not do poorly in the traditional system
also means that they're not going to engage as well
with the plethora of tools available.
I don't know if this answers your question,
but I would reemphasize that what's probably most important
to getting people to actually learn something
is not the explanation
or the quality of explanations available
because since the printing press,
that has been not literally true
because maybe access to libraries
and such isn't as universal as you would want.
But people had access to the explanation
once they were motivated.
But instead, it's going to be the social factors.
Like are the five best friends that you have
also interested in this stuff?
And do they tend to push you up
or do they tend to pull you down
when it comes to learning more things?
Or do you have a reason to it?
There's a job that you want to get
or a domain that you want to enter
where you just have to understand something.
Is there a personal project that you're doing?
The existence of compelling personal projects
and encouraging friend groups
probably does way, way more than the average quality
of explanation online ever could
because once you get someone motivated,
one, they're going to learn it.
It maybe makes it a more fluid process
if there's good explanations versus bad ones.
And it keeps you from having some people
drop out of that process, which is important.
But if you're not motivating them into it
in the first place, it doesn't matter
if you have the most world-class explanations
on every possible topic out there.
It's screaming into a void effectively.
And I don't know the best way
to get more people to know things.
I have had a thought.
This is the kind of thing
that could never be done in practice,
but instead it's something you would write
some kind of novel about.
Or if you want the perfect school,
something where you can insert some students
and then you want them to get the best education
that you can, what you need to do is,
let's say it's a high school,
you insert a lot of really attractive high schooler plants
as actors that you get the students
to develop crushes on the various plants.
And then anything that you want to learn,
the plant has to express a certain interest in it.
They're like, oh, they're really interested
in Charles Dickens or something, right?
And they express this interest.
And then they suggest that they would become
more interested in whoever your target student is,
if they also read the Dickens with them.
They're also interested in learning the physics.
Like if you get that in a way,
you socially engineer this setting,
the effectiveness that that would have
to get students to actually learn stuff
is probably so many miles above anything else
that we could do that nothing like that in practice
could ever actually literally work,
but at least viewing that as this end point of,
okay, this mode of interaction
would be hyper effective at education.
Is there anything that kind of gets at that, right?
And so, okay, the kind of things that get at that,
it would be being cognizant of your child's peer group
or something, which is something the parents,
I think, very naturally do.
Or, okay, it doesn't have to be a romantic crush,
but it could be that there's respect for the teacher, right?
It's someone that they genuinely respect
and look up to such that when they say,
there's an edification to come from reading Dickens
that that actually lands in a way.
And so, taking that as a paragon
and then letting everything else approximate that,
I would emphasize nothing to do
with the quality of online explanations
that there are out there.
That at best just makes it such that you can lubricate
the process once someone's sufficiently interested.
You found a new replica use case.
Yes.
I mean, I'm not saying we should do it,
but think of how effective that would be.
Okay, final question.
This is something I should have followed up on earlier,
but your plans to become a high school teacher
for so many years,
what are you planning on doing that
and what do you hope to get out of that?
I would say no concrete plans.
I would say I wouldn't want to do it in a period
where I also have young children.
And therefore, it would make sense to like,
maybe a lot of people will say this kind of thing,
but there's friends of mine who think
when their child is in high school,
that's when they would want to be a high school teacher.
I think two things I would want to get out of it.
One of them, as I was emphasizing,
I think you just lose touch with what it's like
not to know stuff or what it's like to be a student.
And so maintaining that kind of connection
so that I don't become doler and doler over time
feels important.
The other, I would like to live in a world
where more people who are savvy with STEM
spend some of their time teaching.
I just think that's one of the highest leveraged ways
that you can think of to actually get more people
to engage with math.
And so I would like to encourage people to do that
and call to action.
Some notion of spending,
maybe not your whole career,
but a little bit of time in teaching.
There's not as fluid a system for doing that as, say,
going through a tour of service in certain countries
where everyone spends two years in the military.
So shy of having a system like that for education.
There's all these ad hoc things where charter schools
might have an emergency credential system
to get a science teacher in.
But there's a Teach for America is something out there.
There's enough ways that someone could spend
a little bit of time that's probably
not fully saturated at this point
that the world would be better if more people did that.
And it would be hypocritical for me to suggest that
and then not to actually put my feet where my words are.
Yeah. Well, I think that's a great note to leave it on, Grant.
Thanks so much for coming on the podcast.
And genuinely, I mean, you're one of the people
I really, really admire.
But what you've done for the landscape of math education
is, I mean, it's really remarkable.
So this is a pleasure to talk to you.
Thanks for saying that. I had a lot of fun.
Hey, everybody.
I hope you enjoyed that episode.
As always, the most helpful thing you can do
is to share the podcast,
send it to people you think might enjoy it,
put it in Twitter, your group chats, et cetera,
just splits the world.
I appreciate your listening.
I'll see you next time. Cheers.
