We're live. Oh, okay. Good. That's fine. All right, everybody. Welcome to another episode of the Break the Rules live stream
I'm your host, Lev Polyakov, and we are here today
again with Dr.
Jason Reza Giorgiani
PhD, it is a great honor as always to have you here, my friend
We are going to be talking about your latest book Philosophy of the Future as well as talking about what's currently going on within the
political realm, and I'm sure that there is a way that we can
bring those two things together because I personally think that they are very much
interrelated. And of course, if you guys have not read Dr. Giorgiani's books yet, first of all,
I highly recommend you go into the description right now and get yourself a copy of the latest book as well as look at
Prometheus and Atlas, Lovers of Sophia, so many different books, Iranian Leviathan, the list goes up Prometheism.
So you are going to be
extremely pleased if this is your first time ever discovering Dr. Giorgiani and his
wonderful work. And with that, I first want to ask
Dr. Giorgiani about the Prometheus Titan project, however things go in with that.
So please let us know. And once again, like, comment, subscribe,
super chat $10 minimum today, and let's go for it. Dr. Giorgiani, you've got the floor.
It's a pleasure to be on your show again, Lev, as always. So last time,
I think it was the last time that I was on BTR,
I introduced the American Colossus project to build a monument to Prometheus on Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay and
we talked about the sculpture in general terms, and we also went into
what I described as an NFT project at that point. Really, it's not an NFT project.
It's more like a digital raffle that will use NFT technology and that's going to involve a nationwide treasure hunt with clues embedded in these
raffles and with very compelling
aesthetic imagery and so on and so forth.
So we discussed that a bit last time. I wanted to give viewers some updates regarding the Colossus project,
some rather significant updates.
We are really moving, we're working hard and moving at breakneck speed here on this project.
It's definitely moving forward. We have found a sculptor,
a fantastic sculptor who is an uber-nichien
Promethean in the spirit of his work.
And I think I had mentioned last time I was on that the kind of
fast wave Greco-Roman type sculptures that you see as 3D renderings that are on the website of americancolossus.org right now,
that they're really placeholders and that the sculpture itself will be more sophisticated in terms of its aesthetics.
I think I did touch on that. Well, you can get a much clearer sense of that now because our sculptor
will be a gentleman by the name of Fen de Villiers and you can go to his website Fen de Villiers.
And he
has a fascinating idea of
retracing the history of western aesthetics within the context of an overarching style of modernism.
So in a lot of the works that he has up on his website right now in his current sculpture portfolio,
you can see projects that have a kind of archaic aesthetic
reiterated within the context of modernism.
But as I understand it, Fen is interested in moving now more toward exploring classicism.
But again, within the context of modernism, so probably the sculpture that winds up being erected on Alcatraz
will have somewhat of an art deco feel to it, a kind of
classical modernist, archaeo-futuristic hybrid that
one saw some examples of during the zenith of the art deco era.
And I think that's very consonant with the spirit of Prometheus
because there's a kind of, you know, renaissance
fusion of
art qua craft with craft qua technology in that aesthetic in particular.
It's also a very American aesthetic if you ask me. I mean, some of the greatest American cities, New York included, of course,
were predominantly built in the art deco style.
And, you know, that was the historical moment when America wound up becoming the leading nation on the planet.
So I think that's a very positive development.
And if you're going to listen to some of Fen's interviews with various podcasters,
you can see that
in terms of his worldview,
he is the perfect man for the job. He actually has his own manifesto, his own aesthetic manifesto.
And I think in a lot of ways it dovetails with
with our own vision, with the vision of Prometheus certainly.
Yeah, it's a very interesting that
Fen is being a part of this. I remember first reading about him in Men's World magazine.
And I do see there being a convergence as well as a divergence
apart as far as what you're doing and what, let's say, you know, Bronze Age pervert and people like that have been up to.
Yes, well, look, there is a certain atmosphere which we will come around to discussing today, right?
A certain atmosphere that's been created by the left, which has gone full retard.
And that's going to necessitate a reaction to a certain extent. And, you know, what
what is necessary in order to
regain our footing and
prevent a civilizational collapse may be somewhat different from what I would believe to be ideal.
But we're never going to get to any kind of an ideal Promethean society, as I might envision it,
if our civilization is taken under by these leftists and social justice warriors.
So there is a kind of a degree of reaction that's necessary.
And, you know, for many reasons, I think, you know, Fen is certainly the right man for the job.
And it's a positive thing that, you know, his
that he has connections with those circles because we are going to need to solicit their support.
And we need as broad a coalition as possible to stand a chance in,
you know, basically not just saving, but
resuscitating our civilization and kindling a second renaissance of the West.
So that's a very positive development for the Colossus Project.
But there's another development that in some ways I see as equally positive. And that's that
we are going to make a TV series that traces the making of the Colossus.
And it's going to involve stunning visuals, initially 3D renderings,
but ultimately a tracing of the process that leads to the construction of the Colossus itself.
And we found the perfect director for this TV series.
It's a series that through this director and the work that she's done
will likely also have very significant high-level distribution.
And while I can't reveal, you know, the name of this person as of yet,
I can say that she is absolutely the perfect director for the project.
Really strong, sharp woman who shares a lot of our vision and who frankly is just a really cool person
who I look forward to working with over the coming years.
And I also think that it's great to finally have a woman in a prominent place in this project.
Do you see her in a way as being your Promethea, if you will?
Well, I don't know that, you know, I don't know that she would want to be put in any such a position,
but she's certainly a more than competent director with a deeply shared vision and orientation.
And a person who I think it's going to be an absolute pleasure to work with over the coming years.
And we'll be working closely with her because she's going to basically trace the entire process
and make a historical record of it.
So I was reading and I finished your amazing latest book, Philosophy of the Future.
And what I noticed is that it did require me to have a certain bits of knowledge from all
the other books that you've read in order to, in a way, try and complete the puzzle that is
your latest one, because you throw a lot of references.
Not that people need to specifically read all your other books to enjoy this one,
but it definitely helps to be well acquainted with what happened in the past,
as far as certain questions that I always had in my mind, as far as in Iranian Leviathan,
whether it was the Persians, the dynasty that created Islam, or whether it was these Nephilim.
That is a very interesting thing for me to digest as far as what exactly is the truth
where you are playing the role of the trickster and how exactly that's going to lead to the
conclusions that you wanted to lead to. I don't know if that's a good place to start,
but let me know where exactly you would be interested in.
In a way, frankly, I'd say it's not a good place to start. I'd say it's kind of getting lost in
the weeds, and I would want to push back a little bit on your general characterization,
because you're right that in terms of some very specific questions like what you just
articulated, it's helpful to have read some of my other works, but that's not the main
objective of Philosophy of the Future. Philosophy of the Future has, as its aim,
a general introduction of the reader to the fundamental concepts of my philosophical project,
or it can be read as a summary conclusion of my philosophical project. But in any case,
what's most important about this book are the central ideas, novel ideas that I've developed,
like being bound for freedom, spectral revolution, the world state of emergency,
phenomenal authorization, and aero-sophia. These are the core of the book.
In terms of specific theses that I've argued in various texts, yeah, there are brief references
to them here, and the reader is also directed to the other books of mine where these theses
are advanced with more detailed argumentation. So actually, the book also functions as a kind of
like index or lexicon for my entire corpus, where in any given chapter, there are references to
other books that I've written if the reader wants more detailed information regarding such and such
an argument or thesis. But it's the conceptual structure of my philosophical work as a whole
that's being really showcased by this book, albeit I also have to add that there is a rather
striking conclusion to this book. The last chapter is a very dangerously revealing document,
which includes some lengthy quotations from a journal that I wrote around about the age of
23, 24, and it shows you the matrix for my entire philosophical project
and what it is or who it is that really inspired it.
As far as a phenomenal authorization goes, that is what I'm primarily talking about when it comes
to these various references to you having certain, let's say, mixes of truths with noble lies.
And I'm still trying to understand how exactly this phenomenal authorization would work.
Could you possibly guide us through that?
Sure. Look, the basic idea, because I want to stay here with, you know,
large structures and, you know, general, you know, themes here, the basic idea behind phenomenal
authorization develops certain threads from out of the philosophical work of Nietzsche,
Heidegger, Wittgenstein. I'd say those are the primary ones. Also, to an extent,
it develops certain notions in the work of Charles Ford, who was not a philosopher, but
who had some very interesting epistemological ideas in the course of his study of the paranormal
in the early 20th century. And to a lesser extent, you know, the philosophy of science of Thomas Coon
and of Paul Ferrobin is also relevant here. But mainly coming from out of Nietzsche,
Heidegger, and Wittgenstein, the idea is this. And by the way, Heraclitus was incredibly important,
both to Nietzsche and to Heidegger. And I would say that the ontology and
germinal epistemology of Heraclitus is also very much in the background here, right? So the idea is
this, that the modern representationalist conception of truth, in other words, truth as veritas,
where there's an objectively existent structure of reality out there, and that what it means to
ascertain knowledge, meaning truths about things, is for us to be able to construct
representational statements in our consciousness that propositionally refer to states of affairs
in the world, and are either accurate representations of those states of affairs, or are inaccurate,
meaning they're false propositions, right? That's the basic conception of truth that began to be
developed in the epoch of Descartes, in large part, as a consequence of Descartes dualistic ontology.
And it ultimately culminated in the representational symbolic logic of like Bertrand Russell,
and the early Ludwig Wittgenstein. And Wittgenstein infamously deconstructed that. Having been the
paragon of it himself in the Tractatus logical philosophicus, Wittgenstein turned on that whole
school, including his mentor Russell, and he deconstructed this representationalist conception
of truth in ways that, oddly enough, completely converge with Heidegger's hermeneutics. Because
these guys had no connection with each other whatsoever. They come from completely different
trajectories in the history of philosophy, and yet they converge. And how do they converge?
Well, they both wind up saying that our phenomenological experience of the world,
in other words, the way in which we experience phenomena, and the way in which the world has
any meaning for us, is a function of language. So it's not that there's any objective reality
outside our minds, and that our minds ascertain truth by adequately reflecting an objective
reality. It's that our subjectivity, and what we take to be the objectivity of the world,
are relative phenomena deconstructed and reconstructed from out of how we use language.
And when they're talking about language in this case, they mean it in the ancient Greek sense
of logos. In other words, there is a tapestry of meaning that is primordial in terms of our
experience of phenomena in the world. And it's through this logos that chaos becomes cosmos.
So the chaos that precedes our consciously processed experience becomes a structured array,
namely a cosmos, through logos. And in this relation between these three terms, chaos and
cosmos, cosmos coming to be through chaos being processed by logos, there's also a fourth term,
which is psyche. In other words, consciousness as integral to that process, which we see in
quantum physics. And so in an interesting way, what Werner Heisenberg pointed to in his book
Physics and Philosophy, which is one of the great texts, and I guess what you could call
philosophy of physics, what Heisenberg, Hitler's nuclear scientist, points out in that book about
quantum theory in terms of the integral role of consciousness in constituting a structured
world from out of the chaos that is superposition on a quantum scale, and which Heisenberg
explicitly discusses in that text with reference back to Heraclitus. And Heraclitus' conception of
logos, all of that is already implicit in the ontology and epistemology that Heidegger was
developing and that Wittgenstein, oddly enough, also wound up arriving at by a completely different
trajectory. And so I'm taking these ideas and synthesizing them and augmenting them and using
the paranormal as an empirical, let's say, raw material or convenient set of examples to illustrate
why the world works this way. I'm being very careful not to say why reality is this way,
because the whole point is that what we take to be reality objectively and how we understand
ourselves subjectively are co-constructed from out of this interrelationship between chaos,
logos, cosmos, and psyche. I describe these four as ontologically equi-primordial. It's a term
coming from Heidegger, equally primordial, meaning like the four causes in Aristotle, none of these
is more fundamental than the other. They represent the kind of fourfold causality
that structures our experience of the world. And so, okay, so that's the basis for understanding
what phenomenal authorization is, because what that implies is that we live in something like a
story. We live in a tapestry of meaning, in an account, a narrative. There's a metanarrative
structure to the cosmos itself. And what that suggests is that the world can be written and
rewritten. And if you look at some of the more bizarre and distressing paranormal phenomena
that seem to involve the manipulation of timelines or the use of some kind of time travel
technology, whether it's purely mechanical or whether it's actually psychical, like remote
viewers going back to the past and using telekinesis to influence past events to therefore rewrite
their present, the present that they came from, right, or to rewrite potential futures,
whether it's entirely mechanical technology or whether it's psychical or whether it's some
psychotronic combination thereof, when you look at these kinds of things that are possible,
you realize that we live in a revisible world. And it's rewritable the way the story is rewritable.
Now, the thing, though, is that not everybody's an author. And not all authors have that kind of
purchase on defining what reality is, not just for themselves, but for a whole society. And so,
I developed this notion of people who are phenomenally authorized, meaning at the
diametric opposite pole of what we would call these days an NPC, a non-player character,
in a kind of simulacrum, in a theatrical space, in a game space. On the opposite pole of those
people who are kind of like part of the, they're the wallpaper or window dressing, you have people
whose agency is such that they are actually engaged in defining what reality is for whole
societies through their creative endeavors, whether it's literal writing or whether it's
logos in the form of artistic production or, you know, cinema or music and so on and so forth.
So, you have this idea that there's a relationship between authorship, again, including in all the
arts, all the modes of poesis or creative production. Authorship, in that sense, is related to phenomena.
So, phenomena are phenomenally authorized by these author types. But then, there's also a kind of
authority that that represents, which I argue far exceeds political authority, or you could say is
more fundamental than political authority, where the political leaders of one or another country
are relatively insignificant compared to the movers and shakers who define the Weltanschauung,
the worldview of that culture, who set the standard for what's even going to count as real or
unreal, you know, for a given people. Which, as you mentioned in your book, nowadays, unfortunately,
is in the power of all of these social media gossipers, who back in the day would have just
been relegated to gossiping in the back of the church during Sunday, and now they're the ones that seem
to wield the power and bring people into the lowest common denominator. So, I don't know if now would
be a good time to talk about what that future holds, because I'm still very intrigued by what the
possibilities are here of wielding this kind of authority and authorship. So, whichever direction
you would prefer to go to, please let me know. Well, I think that, you know, it's fair to say
that my philosophical project as a whole, which is reflected in a really condensed and crystallized
form in this book, Philosophy of the Future, owes a great deal to Nietzsche and where Nietzsche did
not serve as an explicit inspiration, it's consonant with a lot of what Nietzsche was doing and represents
a further development of the same trajectory of thought that Nietzsche was pursuing. And Nietzsche
had this vision of what he called, frankly, artist tyrants or artist philosophers who would wind up
defining life on this earth in terms that exceeded the limits of the human condition.
These are his uber mention. And he has this notion that, you know, there are these the highest men of
history who are great geniuses and that basically historical development throughout time should
be seen in terms of these mountain peaks that are each the contributions of one or another
genius and that these higher men are progenitors of the coming over men. Just as the last men
who are increasingly degenerate, lazy people who are feckless and without any particular
motivation, people who become ultimately captured by the event horizon of nihilism,
that these last men are the harbingers of a race of untermention subhumans who are really no longer
going to be human and are going to wind up being integrated into a machinery of production. Nietzsche
has this vision today when you think in terms of the pace at which developments are taking place in
artificial intelligence. And I mean, I don't know if you've seen what GPT-4O can do, but it's
actually unsettling. So even for me, who has written about this for years, like the rate at
which this is happening is astonishing. Well, it was showing your past as well. A possible past,
I mean, when you were using it. Yeah, well, we can come to that too. I mean, so, but then when you
combine AI with gene editing, like for example, there are stories coming out today about how
one of the biggest problems with genetic engineering throughout these years that it's
that it's been worked on by various companies is that a lot of genes have secondary and tertiary
functions, which if you tinker with the primary function of the gene that it is you're trying
to manipulate in a person's genome, you wind up shutting off some secondary or tertiary function
you don't understand well, and that's going to become a problem for the organism. It could even
be potentially lethal. So it requires extremely complex mapping of the multiple functions of
any particular gene. It's been very difficult for us to do that, which is meant that hitherto genetic
engineering has been very dangerous. Well, AI has cracked it. AI has now mapped all of the secondary
tertiary, whatever functions of every gene, and it can do an analysis of exactly, you know,
what benefit and what risks there are to making a particular edit in the genome using CRISPR.
So these technologies are becoming increasingly convergent in ways where you could see how
the vast majority of, you know, people without any particular will or motivation, aspiration without
any capacity to think for themselves or to pursue visions in a self-directed way, they're just going
to wind up being integrated into a machinery of production and at the very best, at the very best
through cybernetic technology. And they're going to wind up serving the purposes of a group of,
as Nietzsche put it, spiritual aristocrats who are renaissance men in the truest sense, renaissance
men and women, who are visionaries, who are geniuses, who have more ideas than they know
what to do with and who will take these emerging technology, first of all, they'll augment themselves
biologically, but then also use artificial intelligence to actualize astonishing visions
that have hitherto been deemed impossible. They're going to make the impossible possible
using these singularity-level technologies. And that's phenomenal authorization, okay? But,
you know, if we just look at the state of the world today, I think it's fair to say that that
phenomenal authorization is not going to extend to the general population. It's going to be
a phenomenally authorized group of individuals who fight for their autonomy and for their creative
power and genius. You don't really see the possibility, like you were talking about, with
zero point energy being able to be in anybody's backyard, this same kind of AI technology where
you could press a button and all of a sudden you're bigger, faster, smarter, you know, you become
the Ubermensch even though you start out as the Intermensch. You don't really see the NPC people
as you were calling them embrace that. Here's the issue left. The issue is that in some totally
unhistorical abstract hypothetical scenario where we didn't have all the ideological baggage that
we have in the world, that would be entirely possible. However, as we'll get around to discussing
by the end of this conversation, you know, in terms of what's going on domestically and geopolitically,
the number of retards who are subscribing to traditionalist, regressive ideologies in the
world today or to forms of leftism that are so nihilistic and cynical that they're actually
dialectically empowering these various forms of retardation is such that the vast majority of the
world population has foreclosed its participation in such a process. We are 10 to 20 years away.
At one point I thought we were 30 years away from the singularity. The rate at which AI technology
is developing today, I can tell you, I don't think we're more than 10 to 15 years away from the singularity.
And we just don't have any time left for these people. We don't have the time left.
When you have a vast majority of people, look, Islam is going to be the dominant
religion on this planet by 2075 if current demographic trends continue. And then we've got
the Russian Orthodox through people like Dugan aligned with these Islamic traditionalists.
And then we have China financing both of them and militarily backing them. I'll come to this
later. It was discovered recently by an independent think tank that the worst of
the pro-Palestine protests in America where they were actually targeting infrastructure,
blocking roads and bridges and taking over university campuses, those were funded by China
through a series of false front organizations. So you've got the Chinese behind these Muslims
and you've got the Russian Orthodox power cabal of Putin and Dugan also supporting them.
And then all the leftists in Europe and America, the socialist parties in Europe and the SJWs
in the United States, they're literally in some cases converting to Islam on these University
Palestinian campments. That's on the left and on the right. You've got people like Andrew Tate who's
also converting young men into Islam because they're very dissatisfied with the way things are
going now. In Europe and then in America, we have the retards of the Bible Belt.
Yeah. Well, there is this new movement right now. I'm sure you've heard about, you know, like the
Jesus's King, Jesus's Lord. It's their way of reaffirming this much more of a warrior type
Christianity as opposed to like the soft Christianity that I'm not a big fan of either as
far as, you know, like the SJW type Christians that I'm sure you've seen a lot of in Manhattan.
Yeah. Well, you know, just because there are dots with one another doesn't make either of
them our allies. They're both enemies. They're both mortal enemies. And look, when you have people
like Steve Bannon, even Steve Bannon coming out and arguing that server farms should be bombed
by the US Air Force, then, you know, what hope is there that any of these Christians in the
Bible Belt are going to support our continued advancement toward the technological singularity
or avail themselves of the opportunity to use this technology in order to become
Ubermanshin, right? I mean, no, that's not going to happen. They're going to band together with
the Russian Orthodox. And in some cases, they're even going to band together with the Muslims
in order to lead some Luddite traditionalist rebellion against the advent of the singularity.
Well, but going back to how exactly there's some noise from the there's some noise from
the outside here. Give me one second. Sure. Absolutely. Is it up? Yes. So that we don't
wind up with any disruption. I'll be right back. Sounds good. And while Jason is away,
I just want to remind everybody here, if this is your first time watching Break the Rules,
be sure to like, subscribe, comment, but also check out the other videos, because I have videos
with thinkers like Curtis Jarvin, Menchus Moldbug, Jason Rezzer, Johnny, as you can see over here,
Uber Boyo, Neil, Gnostic Informant, all kinds of an amazing Stix Hexenhammer 666,
Brittany Venti, who hopefully should be coming back soon as well. So I'm also doing right now these
presentations, these streams in my Manhattan studio in New York City. And what I'm planning on doing
is that if you guys become patrons, patreon.com slash break the rules. And if you become specifically
$20 patrons, and you guys happen to live within the New York City vicinity, then, you know, after
making sure everything is kosher, you know, just so we don't have people from mental institutions
coming in, then I would definitely love to invite you guys over to these taped recordings with the
various interesting guests, including Dr. Jurjani, that I'm going to be having in the coming months.
So once again, patreon.com slash break the rules, go there right now. And you guys are going to get
a lot of good stuff, even if you're not in New York City, you're going to get exclusive episodes,
including a Q&A with Dr. Jurjani, which you guys could watch right now. Once again, that's patreon.com
slash break the rules, go there or be square. Anyway, Jason, we are back over here. And yeah,
let's keep going. So as far as what exactly are the limitations to changing, and I know you don't
like using the word reality. But if we're talking about overcoming the situation we're in right now
with this philosophy of the future, we still have to know what the certain limitations are. Obviously,
right now, I'm not going to be able to just go through a wall. I'm not going to be able to teleport
myself back in time. But what are the things that people are able to use right here and right now
in order to change things, things that may go beyond just, I don't know, just being an interesting
thinker and philosopher and spreading messages. Because obviously, you know, we all know that
we can do that. But as far as going beyond that, what exactly is there?
Well, let me be very practical with you. Okay. And also, I have to say that you have to make a
caveat there in terms of what you mean by people. People can, you know, what can people do? Like,
most people are utterly oblivious and or captivated by one of these aforementioned ideologies that
are responsible for destroying our civilization. And so most people are not going to, you know,
take the initiative to use any extraordinary abilities to potentially make a better future
than the one that we're headed for right now. But what can people with initiative do? Well,
look, this is a bit of a dangerous game. But remote viewing the future, for example,
is a imminently possible thing. It's been done many times. And so there's a case to be made
for training oneself in remote viewing to the point that one could look around the corner
and see some of the challenges and crises that we're going to be facing in the near future
and grasp what caused them so that we can address those causes before they wind up
unfolding into one or another catastrophe that we're headed toward right now. Okay,
so precognitive remote viewing is a thing. It's been used for, oh, I don't know, 45 years at this
point, effectively by various governments, and now by the corporate sector. And so that's one
thing that people could do is to train that ability. But see, that goes back to a point that I've made
throughout my work from the beginning, from Prometheus and Atlas onwards,
is that suppose you're trying to remote view the outcome of the Second American Civil War,
which I'm increasingly convinced that we're headed into, or the outcome of the Third World War.
And your objective is to find out, let's say, whether Russia winds up in a favorable position
at the end of World War III, because let's say France leaves NATO or whatever, or you're trying to
find out what kind of government exists in the United States in 2028, right? But as part of
seeing that future, you also see what happens in terms of your relationship with your wife,
or you see the death of certain of your children. How will that impact your life?
How capable will you be of dealing with that? What changes will result in your immediate situation
as a consequence of that? So, you know, I think many people, even those who have the initiative
to go and train themselves in the use of such abilities, many of those people are not prepared
for the psychological consequences of, say, seeing some things in their own personal future
that might be part of a glimpse into our social or political future.
Even if they have the ability to prevent that somewhat from happening, if they know about
in advance, in a way it's kind of empowering too. Here's the thing about that, Love, is that, look,
just looking at my own life to give you a very personal answer. If you were, let's say 20 years
ago, I had precognitively remote viewed certain things that happened in my life, particularly
involving relationships with certain individuals. I might have, at that time, with the psychology
that I had in the moment, endeavored to prevent those events from taking place, or let's say
certain relationships from deteriorating in certain ways and so forth, right? Well, by doing so,
I would also have prevented myself from reaching the place that I'm at today.
And I can say that, frankly, looking at the big picture and thinking about this from the deepest
level, I have no regrets. And I'm not sure that the Giorgiani of 20 years ago would have had the
insight or the wisdom to understand why it was perhaps important for those things to happen.
So it's a very burdensome thing to see elements of your own future and to think that you'll be able
to handle the question of whether or not you should act to change certain things, right? So it makes
it very hard, it makes it very hard to expect even a small minority of people with great initiative
and motivation to be able to train themselves in these abilities for the sake of averting
catastrophes on a social or political scale. I see what you mean. Does it necessarily need to
be a cultivation of those future-seeing skills if one goes down the path of training their
concentration? Or could a person decide, you know what, I don't want to see the future,
but I do want to be able to do certain things that go beyond being a regular human being,
as I was before. Can people choose or is it a matter of once you start going in one direction,
all of a sudden everything else just opens up like a sponge? I think one, yeah, you know,
I think it's possible to choose, but I think that there's only a certain latitude for control there,
because psi phenomena in general are a function of the subconscious. And so, and this has been a
theme throughout the course of my work, including in my fiction, quote unquote, the idea that
in order to exercise phenomenal authorization, you need to make the subconscious conscious to a
certain extent, and you need to be able to project conscious will into the domain of the
subconscious. So there's a certain deconstruction of the barrier between the conscious mind and the
subconscious that needs to take place, and a certain capacity to will,
will processes that are usually subconscious, like people do in lucid dreams. I mean, dream
states are subconscious states, but there's a phenomenon of lucid dreaming where people exercise
willpower in dreams, and it's not coincidental that remote viewers in certain protocols are
first trained in how to become lucid dreamers. Is there a certain timeline that you can give
to somebody who is interested in taking the plunge and acquiring these skills? How long
would it usually take for someone who, well, would be committed to such a thing?
You know, I don't have the personal expertise to comment on that directly, but I can tell you
what some of the best remote viewers have told me. I mean, for example, you know,
Lynn Buchanan, who I had some level of connection with, Lynn Buchanan has said repeatedly that,
first of all, it's always possible to improve, but that some of the best remote viewers who he's
trained, you know, he was the chief trainer for the CIA DoD remote viewing program for a while.
So he trained all the other guys who were the best in the program, and he was of the view that it
really takes decades to produce an ace remote viewer. Now, you know, with things like AI
and Neuralink type psychotronic technology, and potentially genetic augmentation, because actually
it's been found that there are certain genetic correlates of high aptitude for Psi, right? Psi
seems to be an ability that has a genetic basis to some extent, just like aptitude to become a
virtuoso musician has genetic basis, just like becoming an Olympic class swimmer has some genetic
correlate to it. Some people are going to be more or less genetically predisposed for a high level
of ability in in in these various fields. And the same is true with Psi. It's very similar to the
exercise of sports ability and the trainability of sports ability, right? Like anyone can be trained
to do it to some level. Anyone can, you know, not everyone's going to be a basketball player.
No, but anyone can play basketball, but you might suck, you know. So the thing is,
there's a certain degree of genetic correlation. And if now we bring genetic engineering or gene
editing into the mix, and we combine it with Neuralink, and we combine it with AI protocols
that can develop much more effective ways to learn remote viewing, maybe you could cut that time
down drastically. And it's a question of a few years rather than, you know, a decade or two.
But it's it requires a significant investment of time and energy in any case, that's for sure.
Do you also last question regarding this ascendance? Do you also see a usefulness
of training the body in conjunction with the mind as far as exercises to make the body stronger
to, you know, do certain tantric exercises as well to work on, you know, the chakras as they
refer to that in the event of a danta and so on and so forth? Absolutely. I think that all of that,
you know, should be part of a future Promethean society, no doubt about it. I mean, you know,
I'm a philosopher, where I've chosen to, you know, place my energy in my time in emphasis thus far,
at least in my life, is, you know, very much in line with how people like Heidegger or Jean
Paul Sartre or, you know, I don't know, Wittgenstein lived their lives, right? I mean, we philosophers
are a certain type, right? Yeah. So and then I have a literary dimension to me, which, you know,
gives me an affinity to people like Kafka and, I don't know, Camus and others. So I'm that type
of person. We're not going to be seeing Dr. Giorgiani doing like a deadlifts and squats,
you know, in the gym. Or are we? Or are we? Well, look, I'm at an interesting turning point in my
life, frankly, because this book, Philosophy of the Future, represents a kind of culmination,
right? The fundamental structure of my philosophical project is complete. Now, that doesn't mean that
I won't all of a sudden have a shift of perspective or, you know, new ideas might not dawn on me and
revolutionize my work in some way. That happened with Wittgenstein. You know, Heidegger also had
some dramatic developments in his later thinking. So yeah, sure, that's possible. But I am at a point
of culmination. And also the Colossus project represents in a tangible sense, a significant
development in my life and probably changes of condition in my life, that will afford me the
opportunity to maybe spend time and energy doing some other types of things. How much it, you know,
for example, I certainly would love to go back to skiing. It was my favorite sport
earlier in my life. And so yeah, you know, I might, I might put my energy in other directions. If I
had to guess, though, I would say that if there's going to be a shift of energy and focus to some
extent, a lot of it will go into art and art, most likely in the sense of cinema or a visualization
of my literary work. That's, I think, very likely. But speaking of which, by the way, the cover for
your book and the design of the book, that was all you, philosophy of the future.
That's true. That's true. But I don't rule out, let's say learning remote viewing,
I don't rule that out at all. And you know, there's some people who I'm sure hope that that never
happened. Because if that's something going around in the ether, that might be problematic for some
of the vested interests in the world. But where exactly we go from here, because we were just
talking about psychic abilities, but as far as defining reality itself, as far as this
destructive departure of world review warfare, when it comes to changing what exactly this whole
thing we're experiencing is, I'm very fascinated by what that exactly would entail. But also,
what exactly is currently around us? Because I do recall you were talking about how all of these
galaxies and galaxy clusters and so on and so forth, these are things for us to observe because
we're looking out in order to see them. That may be what they are. But then the question is, well,
where exactly does the real part end? Well, not real. I know you don't believe in real. But where
exactly does the part that we can actually interact with it? And there are other life forms there.
Where does that end? Does it end on Mars? Does it end on, you know, the Oort cloud?
You mean what's the edge of phenomenal experience in this world?
Yes. Yes.
Well, I've thought a bit about this, and I've discussed it in a couple of my books.
To begin with, there are aspects of quantum theory, such as wave particle duality,
and the fact that a probability distribution on a quantum level
never actualizes as a particle with a particular location until and unless it's been
observed, meaning measured by a sentient observer. And I think that the people who push back against
that, you know, that was the position of Niles Boer and Werner Heisenberg and all the great
quantum physicists in the early years. And I think that these people, reductionist materialists,
who are trying to push back against that and say that wave collapses can take place without
sentient observers are trading in a bunch of nonsense. They invent hidden variables and
string theories and all this other bullshit to claim that there are deterministic processes
that underlie the probabilistic quality of quantum phenomena. And there's no empirical
evidence for that. All of these are purely speculative mathematical formalisms that are
just intended to give these people a sense of psychological security.
There was a, sorry to interrupt, there was also a physicist who said that it was the
eye getting hit by something that caused this change to occur, as opposed to observation itself.
Yeah, well, that's moronic, because the eye is a structure made up of quantum particles,
ultimately, just as the brain is. So what's causing the wave collapse, right? I mean,
quantum particles aren't causing other quantum particles, you know, quantum particles aren't
causing wave distributions to collapse into particles. An observer is doing that. And so
you just can't get consciousness from out of the mix there. You cannot, you know, extricate the
psyche from the cosmos as it's manifesting through logos out of chaos. Psyche is an
inextricable element in this process here. But anyway, what I was going to say was that there
aspects of quantum theory like this, you know, wave article duality, or rather the fact that
everything is only a probability distribution until it's observed, which is similar to what we
call conditional rendering in video game programming, where you don't render something
that's not being observed by any one or another player in the game, because it's just inelegant.
And by the way, I have a silent conversation about this the other day,
where, look, someone might think that the reason for that is that there's a limited amount of
energy and processing power. But that's not necessarily the case. If you're designing
a game, you might just employ conditional rendering because it would be inelegant
not to do so. I mean, like when you're building a stage set for a theatrical production, right,
and there's there has to be a house on this on the set. What moron goes and builds a complete
living room that the audience is never going to see any of the actors enter into, right? You
don't do that. That's not the way it's method acting, Jason. That's what that is. You know,
you got to get full immersion into it. But yeah, I understand what you're saying.
Good method actors wouldn't even need that to get into the role. But in any case, yes.
So I just think it's a question of elegance. But features of quantum theory like that,
or quantum entanglement, where, you know, if you interact with it, you take two particles that
have had interaction with one another, and you do a measurement on one of them, it actually
affects the other one that's now moved to a discrete location. And so these two particles
appear to be entangled in a way where anything that affects one of them causes a change in the
other one. Well, there's also a process like that in the coordinated change of pixels in the
rendering of a video game where certain pixels are coded to basically change simultaneously,
change their state simultaneously. And so there are these various features that appear similar
to programming code in the design of Simulacra. And then there are other things that are even
more bizarre, like we've discussed in another episode, that the number 26 keeps popping up at
different scales in the cosmos, whether it's in terms of the distance between, you know, the diameter
of the moon or, you know, the distance between our solar system and the center of the galaxy
or the time that it takes for our solar system to circumnavigate the galaxy.
These are all multiples of the number 26 for some reason. Well, that doesn't make any sense in a
physical cosmos, the way that reductionist materialists think about, you know, the universe
that they imagine us to be living in. Nor, for that matter, does the efficacy of zodiacal astrology,
which is something I've touched on in numerous works of mine, the fact that there's good scientific
evidence, for example, the work of Michel Gauchlan, showing that people do go into career paths influenced
by, you know, the position of the stars at the time of their or position of the at least the
planets at the time of their birth. Well, that suggests that we're living in a kind of symbol
system, that the cosmos is informational rather than physical in nature, that we're in fact inside
of an information processing system of some kind. So, yeah, you know, you can wonder then,
what's the size of the information processing system? You know, is it, are we in something like
what's depicted in Dark City? Is that what's going on here? You know, how, how, what's the scale of
the matrix that we're inside of? Well, the one counter that I can think of giving to you about
that is the idea of the macrocosm and microcosm, where I can imagine there being certain processes
that are going on that are greater than us and in comparison to which we're like the cells inside
of the mind. And I can imagine this going up like some kind of a Russian matryoshka doll, where there
could be like certain higher consciousnesses of, you know, planets or stars or galaxies, like it
never ends. Now, I'm not saying that this is something that I'm that attached to, but it is
interesting just to see like how certain patterns exist in nature, both in the small and in the
high end, like when people observe galaxies, for instance, that makes me think those galaxies
can't all be fake, you know, there must be like some bigger process at work here that we're just
not aware of. I'll tell you why I disagree with you. I can imagine what you're saying very well,
and it's very intriguing. And in some way, I would like that to be true, because,
you know, the vast or the cosmos is the more interesting that the evolutionary development
possibilities are for all of the organisms in it, ourselves included. However, the reason why I,
first of all, there's no empirical evidence that what you're saying is true. We don't have
empirical evidence of that. The empirical evidence that we do have of intelligence
that's higher than ours suggests that actually, maybe sadly, we're incredibly important.
If you look at the close encounter phenomenon, which I've written an entire book about,
and which I've mentioned, I've discussed significantly in several other of my books,
including a bit in philosophy of the future, if you look at the close encounter phenomenon,
let's put these Nordics aside for a minute, right? These people who look like SS officers flying
around in their, you know, Mercury thorium saucers, right? Muscle-bound blonde women.
Yeah, I mean, and they're real. They're as real as you and I are. These are people and, you know,
they don't, I think they have very deleterious intentions for the near future of our world
society. But let's put them aside for the moment. Because I think that actually, as I've argued in
various books of mine, they're as terrified of this other thing that I'm about to discuss as
some of our government officials are. And this other thing, this trickster that seems to be able
to produce polymorphous phenomena of all kinds, and that has access to people's bedrooms in the
middle of the night, and that sometimes abducts their children, and that takes genetic material
from them, and they can shape shift into any number of shamanic forms, often drawing from
the symbolism of owls and mantids and so forth, right? This entity, which I discuss at length
in chapter seven of Closer Encounters, and which I come back to,
contemplating at the end of Philosophy of the Future, this entity seems awfully interested
in human individuals. We are not irrelevant. This thing has tremendous intelligence.
It is superior to humanity. It's probably capable of destroying humanity. It certainly has taken
apart human civilizations of global scale before. This is how Atlantis was destroyed ultimately.
And this entity seems incredibly interested in human individuals. We are not at all like
termites or ants or whatever to this thing. Every time I hear someone like Michio Kaku say that or
any one of these people, Avi Loeb or whatever, it's really aggravating to me because the empirical
evidence from Closer Encounters doesn't support that at all. This entity sends emissaries and
avatars to interact with us in incredibly intimate ways and follows human individuals throughout
their entire lives, gets generationally involved with their offspring. It is deeply and intimately
engaging the human community, and it has an agenda, which whatever else you want to say about that
agenda or speculate about it, clearly sees the human being as central and of vital importance
to its project for the future. So that's why I don't really agree with you that
whatever the forms of intelligence are that are way beyond us and that are operating on a cosmic
scale, we actually seem to be incredibly important to them, which suggests that we're not actually
all that separate from them. There's not such a huge gulf between us and them.
And when you think about the technological singularity and the transformative potential that
it has, that actually makes a lot of sense. We may be very close to a transformation and
mutation of our form of life that gives us parity with this entity.
I guess the only rebuttal I would give to that is the idea that this entity may exist,
but there could be also other entities that are beyond that that we don't know. And again,
I have no proof for that. Look, I am, as I've said to you before,
in our previous conversations, and as is abundantly clear from my philosophical work,
I'm a radical empiricist. I believe in developing ontological and epistemological ideas
that are consonant with phenomena that we can experience and observe and that we can tangibly
make some sense out of, and doing so in ways that afford us opportunities for tangible technological
development and productive artistic endeavors. So I'm very much a radical empiricist.
And why do you say it's one entity, though, as opposed to a multiplicity of entities that
work in a similar fashion? It is a multiplicity of entities, but when you really,
you know, the devil is in the details, quite literally. And when you look at the details of
some of these close encounters, you have to come away with the conclusion that there is some kind of
how can I put it? I don't want to use the term high of mind, because it's not
something like the Borg that we're dealing with. It is not a collective intelligence or a kind of
organic unity that subsumes the individual, the way that the Borg
assimilates and extinguishes the individuality of the people who are assimilated by the collective.
That's not what we're dealing with. In fact, this superorganism appears to want to encourage
individuation and differentiation for the sake of maximizing creative potential.
So I don't want to call it a hive mind, but it appears that these entities
are operating in tandem in a way that suggests the functioning of some higher organizing
intelligence, albeit a very finite intelligence, certainly not anything like an omniscient or
omnipotent God. Well, in Buddhism, the value that you're giving towards human beings is,
in a way, echoed when they talk about human beings, a rebirth within that realm is the best of all.
Obviously, you disagree with the direction the Buddhists end up going to, but their reasoning is
when you're in the realm of the higher end gods or the jealous gods, you're always going to be a
lot more raptured in having all this power to deal with. Same thing when you're in the realm of the
hell beings or the hungry ghosts. So I don't know if that is a concept that is close to you as well,
like that reason for human beings being so special, even if you go in a different direction with it.
Actually, yes, I would say so. You know, someday we should do an entire show just on
what I think of Buddhism, because I've said before, you know, on an ontological and epistemological
level, there's actually a lot of overlap between my work and the thought of Gotama and Nagarjuna
and some of the serious thinkers in the history of the Buddha Dharma from the beginning.
You're right that in a certain way, what I'm saying about this entity's interest in humanity
is consonant with Gotama's valuation of the human community over that of both the devas and the
asuras. You know, Gotama recognized rightly that, I mean, he was a reincarnation of someone
who had lived in deva realms previously, and he was familiar with the asura realms,
the realms of what we call in a Western tradition, the Olympians and the Titans.
And he knew, based on personal memory and amnesis, that
there is more possibility for personal development and the achievement of insight
in the human realm than there is in these other worlds. And I think this entity feels the same
way. But the difference is that Gotama thought that total enlightenment ultimately meant the
extinguishing of individuality, and he has a nihilistic view of suffering as having no ultimate
purpose, that, you know, suffering is futile, and that what we should aim at is the extinguishing
of suffering. Whereas this entity, I think very much, or rather, I should say, Nietzsche very
much shares the outlook of this entity, which is that suffering is absolutely indispensable to any
creative endeavor, and that the great creators need suffering as part of, you know, the generative
process that they act as conduits for in this world. And you can see that very much, for example,
at the core of the myth of Prometheus. There's tremendous tragic suffering in the myth of
Prometheus, which Nietzsche discusses in the birth of tragedy, specifically, Prometheus as this
tragic image of human aspiration, and as the first mask in Greek theater. So the tragic life
affirming view of Nietzsche is much more in line with how this entity sees human evolution
than Gotama's nihilistic will to end suffering by extinguishing individuality.
Before we proceed onwards, there is also the Rudolf Steiner view, which I see as being related,
when he talked about how when you would observe a plant or a tree or anything in your vicinity in
a way you're giving life to it. And that reminds me of what you're talking about this generating
informational computational system that we're in, where our looking out at something in a way does
give more life to it than it may have originally had, because we're imbuing whatever we're looking at,
maybe including another person, or including whatever we would consider to be a god of sorts.
We're imbuing that with a power it did not originally have before we looked at it,
or before we thought about it. Yeah, look, Steiner has any number of very interesting
insights here and there. And he was a very innovative thinker in some ways, and particularly
when it comes to applied fields. He was a polymath who developed innovative educational techniques
and, I don't know, botany and agricultural methods and all kinds of interesting things.
But the essential problem with Steiner is that he's a strange sort of Gnostic who has a basically
dualistic ontology. And this is something that I'm trying to deconstruct in my work with my concept
of the spectral revolution. This idea that, you know, there for Steiner, there's this transcendental
realm, which, you know, is sort of presided over by Lucifer. And then there's this purely
materialistic realm, which is controlled by Ahriman, and that the human experience is kind of a
middle ground between these polarities, right? I deconstruct that kind of dualism just as Nietzsche
does. And I think there's only one world, there's the world of our phenomenal experience. And,
you know, what we frame as the spiritual versus the physical is a question, again,
of linguistic structures, the conditioned consciousness, and that's set in place filters
for our perception and our processing of our experience, our experience of a singular world
of experience. I mean, our experience of a singular world, which, you know, the Greeks
called Fusus, going back to Erycholitis, nature as it were. But within that world, we would also
have, let's say, certain places that people would only be able to observe during the in-between
state of, you know, the afterlife, I guess you could say. So similarly, we could have with the
Japanese, the Buddhists, they have this conception of pure land Buddhism, which is like this whole
other realm that you can go into and like meditate all day or whatever. So I'm not sure exactly as
far as the amount of real estate that we have to work with here, including like going back in time
that you were talking about as well, you know, how much is there to explore? How much is there to
uncover? Or is it pretty much like the earth and however we keep going, you know, expanding beyond
that? Look, I think there's a lot of real estate. Again, though, let me emphasize the fact that it's
question of filters. You know, when people die, filters are removed. Filters that are
integral to this particular form, this construction that we take to be the physical human body.
Filters are removed and other dimensions of experience become perceivable. It's not that
there's another world. We don't go into the other side after we die. Okay, these are
dangerous delusions that are being propagated today as part of a discourse that I think ultimately
is going to be used to implement traditionalism and kind of neo feudal subjugation of humanity
under a sort of kingdom of heaven. And, you know, I think that it's important to acknowledge, first
of all, that there's a singular realm of experience and that our capacity to perceive various dimensions
of it is a question of what filters are operating. Now, drugs can remove certain of those filters,
like for example, DMT, giving us access to these realms where there are apparently these machine
elves. But in the same DMT spaces, there are also these reptilians who rape women. Okay,
so my issue with what you said about the Pure Land is that so far as I've heard in the contemporary
realm of research on altered states of consciousness, nobody has come back and given us a report
about the Buddhist Pure Land as far as I'm aware. Now, of course, there are Buddhist writings where
these monks claim, you know, to have connected with that realm. But, you know, there's a lot
to psychological projection. I mean, you can really like really imagine yourself in a different
milieu with vivid clarity, basically put yourself into a lucid dream while you're meditating.
That's one thing. But in terms of, you know, phenomenological realms of experience that
could be shared by other people, the way that I think the DMT space can be,
I don't see anything like the Pure Land. I don't see any, and I'm making this point very deliberately
because I want it to be impressed upon the listener that there's nowhere to escape to,
that doesn't involve conflict and suffering. The DMT realm involves terrifying shit.
Any, you know, honest, authentic account of that makes it very clear that it is not a safe place
to be. Okay, so I think that, again, you know, this whole notion that we should seek an enlightenment
that involves ultimate peace, tranquility, and harmony, and eventually also the effacing of
our ego and the annihilation of our individuality is completely misguided. And it's the most
sophisticated form of nihilism. Nietzsche saw this, by the way. He said, look, at least I
respect Buddhism because its form of nihilism is more sophisticated than that of Christianity.
Right, if you're going to be a nihilist, be a Buddhist, not a Christian. Right, so
my work very much flies in the face of that kind of nihilism.
Well, speaking of effacing the ego, I think now would be a good time to get to the kind of
effacing that's going on right now with the Palestine protests going on in New York City and
all over. And the general trend that, I mean, we talked about this before, the convergence in
the way that I'm seeing of the ultra-left and certain elements of the further right when it
comes to wanting to embrace this kind of traditionalism, but this kind of like almost like third world
this type of traditionalism, where a lot of those protesters, you know, they have no problem with
China, they have no problem with, you know, whatever's going on in Africa and the Middle East,
they have a big problem with these, you know, 18th, 17th century statues and monuments, you know,
to Western civilization. That's what they want to get rid of. So where exactly do you see this
going right now? Jason, you've, well, got the floor, yeah.
Look, there's so much that I want to say about this, I kind of don't even know where to begin.
And, you know, you know, because we were trying to organize a show some time ago, weeks ago,
that I really didn't want to talk about this subject public. I really tried not to say anything
about this publicly, because we're involved in some very positive, optimistic work with
the Colossus Project. And, you know, I want to, I want to do as much as I can to make sure that
that moves forward expeditiously and triumphantly. That having been said,
it's just gone too far. It's gone way too far. So you mentioned pulling down of statues, right?
Back in the summer of George Floyd, the summer of George Floyd. Summer of love. Yes, in 2020,
right? I love how these fuckers who were, you know,
desecrating our war memorials and want to pull down the statues of our founders,
also do Instagram posts where, you know, it's all about love. It's all about love,
man. That's all that matters in the world is love. And then they go and they burn the American flag or
they raise the Palestinian flag higher than the American flag on flag poles, right? And then they
go and they desecrate, you know, war memorials to, you know, World War One heroes in this country
burn American flags, but no, it's all about love, right? Anyway, what I was going to say was that
back in the summer of George Floyd, we saw them starting to pull down all these statues of the
founders of our country, including this great sculpture of Theodore Roosevelt that was on the
steps of the Museum of Natural History in New York. There's a place that was dear to my heart from
childhood. And they didn't even care whether the founders were slave owners or not. They pulled
down statues of Abraham Lincoln back in the summer of George. So that summer with, you know, what
happened in Minneapolis, what happened in Portland, the whole Chaz encampment and so on and so forth,
right? That was a watershed moment. And I founded Prometheism in response to that. If you look at
when Prometheism was founded, July 4, 2020. What was the context? That was the context, okay?
So that was a watershed moment. We're at another turning point now, okay? We are at another
Rubicon crossing of the Rubicon moment right now.
Where, let me take this angle, where slogans that were devised by Ayatollah Khomeini in Iran
during the hostage crisis, while American hostages were being held in Tehran,
Ayatollah Khomeini and his fellow Molas came up with these slogans like Death to America,
which are now being chanted on the campuses and the streets of American cities. And in some cases,
we literally see agents of the Islamic Republic coming and setting up seminars to teach Americans
how to chant, not just Death to America in English, but Mark Baram Rika in Persian, literally,
teaching them how to pronounce this enchantment. And these same people are burning American flags
and they're passing out leaflets saying the freedom of Palestine means Death to America,
right? Self-described anarchists, self-described communists who are supporting an organization,
namely Hamas, who they characterize as freedom fighters, but who are actually radical fundamentalist
adherents of a religion that endorses slavery, that endorses the enslavement of women
and their total degradation as second or third class citizens, and the religion that violently
conquered and genocided other cultures in the world and deprived them of any freedom of religion
or freedom of conscience or freedom of expression. Self-described communists and anarchists who,
whether or not we agree with their ideology, at least were supposedly advocates for freedom and
liberation, right? And were supposedly struggling against capitalism because it was too oppressive,
right? And that it was too much of a constraint on the human individual and that it didn't go far
enough, let's say, in liberating women. These same communists and anarchists are now supporting
the most regressive traditionalist ideology on the planet, which is being spearheaded by Hamas.
What the fuck is going on here, right? And meanwhile, you have in Europe, for example,
we saw a week ago, I think it was in Germany, mass protests, I mean, tens of thousands,
where did these people come from? Who let these people into Europe? Oh, Angela Merkel, right,
I remember now, right? 2013, 2014. Yeah, well, the chickens come home to roost at this point.
Tens of thousands of people are marching in Germany demanding an Islamic caliphate replace
the German government. So that's going on in Europe, where we literally have Muslim armies on
the street. And then in Britain, Islamic parties allied with leftists are winning elections,
left and right. And they're using their political power to completely strip the British citizen
of all their fundamental freedoms, like we saw happen in Scotland in particular.
And Ireland's having kind of identity crisis, where on the one hand, Ireland traditionally,
you know, with the IRA and such, were supporting Palestine. But now they're also having this
influx of these migrants that are coming in, they want to, it's straight out of Lord of the Rings,
they want to tear down this beautiful ancient tree in order to build a migrant center. And now
there's this war that's going on between the Irish people who live there and the people that
want to tear it down. So I don't know what's going on specifically with those people. I mean,
thankfully, a lot of the Irish people are standing up for themselves right now. But yeah,
they're also supporting Palestine. They're also supporting Palestine. What kind of sense does
that make? You know, it's very strange, Irish, it's a disgrace. I think it's utterly disgraceful.
You know, like for fuck's sake, okay, Israel was a secular, progressive country,
which has demonstrated tremendous capacity in contribution to technological science,
which has fostered the arts, a society where women are respected to the point where the
defense of the nation is also entrusted to them, a society that from the earliest days,
when the Kibbutz movement formed the substrate of Israeli society was based on radical egalitarianism,
okay? And a society that has always enshrined and protected freedom of speech, freedom of the press,
right? And all the, what we consider to be sacred and fundamental rights of the human
individual, on the one hand, you have that society. By the way, a society that includes many Israeli
Arabs, Christians, Druze, Druze, at the left loves to say first society, okay? One devoted to the
protection of the individual, one devoted to, you know, the equality of women, and one that has
contributed with tremendous disproportionate power to the advancement of science and technology,
okay? But the problem is that they're like the adult in the room, they're like the logical adult,
and the kids are like, you know, fuck you, dad, I don't have to listen to you. It seems like it's
that kind of relationship that's going on where people, protesters against Netanyahu, the protesters
against him, but in general, just the anti-Israel feeling, I think a lot of it comes from, maybe
Israel is not Dionysian enough to put it a certain way, because people who are looking at Israel are
just seeing, you know, these very logical people who are trying to explain themselves. Meanwhile,
people want to burn things down and cause all this chaos. I don't know if you've thought about it in
that direction, but at least from people who I've spoken with, they kind of see Israel, I know this
is very beneath you, but they see Israel as cringe, you know, that they don't see that kind of fire
in Israel's belly that would be a commanding force, and maybe that's why we have all these people
online who are also going against Israel, just from an optics perspective. Well, maybe you're
right, Israel might not be Dionysian enough. Dionysus is an incredibly violent symbol,
so maybe Israel should be a lot more violent. I would be absolutely in favor of that. I think
this should be a lot more commanding. There might be something to what you're saying. No,
there really might be something to what you're saying, but who is holding Israel back? Well,
now we know who's holding Israel back, because guess what? It just came out that the United States,
the administration of Joe Biden, sent the representative to negotiate with the Islamic
Republic of Iran in Oman. Oh, man. And the deputy foreign minister of Iran was the one present
at those negotiations. And guess what the subject of discussion was? Bringing an end to the war in
Gaza by changing the government in Israel. So here's Israel, since October 7th, rightly aiming
for regime change in Iran, which would be a tremendous favor to the Iranian people.
And meanwhile, the United States, instead of helping Israel to foment regime change in Iran,
or at least not standing in the way of Israel, the United States is secretly plotting with a regime
whose slogan and maxim is death to America in order to do what? To change the government of Israel.
Before we get deeper into this, I just want to say that about a year ago,
I was at a party in the in the Hamptons, you know, the far far east there of Long Island.
And I met a guy who was introduced to me by a friend as being part of Masad. Okay. And I told
this guy what you recommended, which is that Israel should go into rather than Gaza, you know,
should go into Iran, should decimate, you know, the government buildings, but leave the nukes alone.
And the Masad guy said, Lev, you're absolutely right. We should do this, but we can't because
America won't let us. In order to corroborate that, let me also tell you what someone very well
positioned with a lot of connections to the Israeli government told me, which is that after
October 7th, like, you know, on October 8th, you remember how long it took Israel to go into Gaza,
right? Yeah. It was long. We were waiting for weeks. We were waiting. What? When is this operation
going to take place? You know why? Because actually Netanyahu didn't want to go into Gaza,
because Netanyahu knew what the optics of this were going to be like. Netanyahu wanted to bomb Iran.
He wanted to bomb the Islamic Republic out of existence, rightfully so, because
who's controlling the tentacles of this octopus that's Hamas and that's Hezbollah and the Houthis
of Yemen and, you know, the various militias in Iraq that are against Israel? Obviously,
the regime in Tehran. So Israel wanted to go after Iran. The United States sent those two
aircraft carriers into the Mediterranean, not to support Israel, but to intimidate and threaten
Israel. I know this for a fact. What they told the Israelis was, here, here are these two aircraft
carriers to help defend you. But if you attack Iran, we will publicly withdraw these carriers,
sending a signal to the Iranians that we don't have your back anymore. Okay? So this is horrendous,
especially when you have masses of leftists on the streets in America,
and having taken over tens of our campuses chanting slogans that were designed in Tehran.
When you have masses of people on the streets of America chanting death to America while burning
American flags and desecrating American war memorials, and at the same time, you're doing
backroom deals with the Islamic Republic of Iran, there is no higher form of treason than that.
That these protests were allowed to continue for, what is it now, two months? For two months,
we saw these campuses be taken out, including, by the way, the campus of Columbia University
was a sacred place to me. There is a monument to Athena there that, to me, has always made that
place the campus of Athena, campus in the Roman sense. The word campus actually comes from the
Roman term for sacred precincts, like the campus of Mars in Rome, in ancient Rome. And to me,
that place was always the campus of Athena. I used to go there in the wee hours of the morning
before people showed up and just walked the colonnade there and silently contemplate and
pay my respects to Athena. They desecrated that place. They literally held ceremonies converting
American students to Islam under the banner of the pro-Palestine movement on the campus of
Columbia University in the shadow of Athena. They literally put a banner around Athena,
renaming that place, the People's University of Palestine. They excluded Jews from the campus
at Columbia, at Yale, at any number of other universities. They formed human chains,
backed by the security forces on the campus to prevent Jewish students and Jewish professors
from entering the campus. But there are, from what I understand, also leftist Jews who are a
part of the protest, as has always been in history. People always love referring to Barbara,
Lerner, Specter, or any of these idiots that are talking about wanting to destroy Europe.
And my whole point is that you're going to have Jews who are going to have bad ideas as well as
good ideas. And those are going to be the Jews that people end up paying attention to. And
unfortunately, right now, I'm sure that there are some Jewish students who are so self-hating
and who have this romance, having to do with freeing Palestine and all that,
that they're also going to join the cause. Well, if I were in Mossad right now, I would find a way
to start eliminating these people. I mean, they represent an existential threat to Israel. Well,
I've always said, I've always said this, that Israel will never be defeated by any foreign enemy.
If Israel is ever defeated one day, it will be defeated by traitors from within. The people
within Israel will defeat Israel. Israel can never be defeated by any foreign enemy. That country
has 300 nuclear warheads. And by the way, that arsenal stands between Islam and its ambition
for the conquest of the West. Never forget that. Never forget those 300 Israeli nukes will be used
before Europe is conquered by Islam. So, look, but my point is this, that when you have on the
one hand these kinds of rabidly anti-American protests taking place on these campuses and
in the streets of American cities, desecrating war memorials and so forth, burning the American flag,
raising the flag of Palestine higher than the American flag, all the while chanting death to
America. And at the same time, U.S. government officials are doing backroom deals with the
Islamic Republic to undercut Israel. I don't know what worse form of treason we could see in our
country than that. And so, to me, the ultimate red line has already been crossed. And as an Iranian
American, look, I was born here, okay, but I know a lot of other Iranian Americans. Foremost,
my fiance who spent 13 years living in the fucking Islamic Republic, I can tell you
what it's like for Iranian Americans who fled that regime to come here looking for a place where
individual liberty is honored and to hear the same slogan that they had to live with in Iran,
Marq Bar-Ombriqah, death to America, being chanted by American youth here on the streets
of our cities. The Iranian youth today, 70% of Iran is under the age of 30. Iran may have many
problems, but the natalist problem is not one of them. It's a very useful, vigorous population.
70% of the country is under the age of 30. And the Iranian youth are undoubtedly the most pro-American
population on the planet, okay? At a time when anti-Americanism is on the rise, it's undoubtedly
the case that the most solid future ally of America is the Iranian nation, okay? But what is a
travesty is that the average Iranian youth today, the average Iranian in their 20s or 30s today,
cares more about American culture and has a better appreciation of America's history
than American youth do. And I'm warning you people, right? I'm just issuing a general warning.
This is not going to go to a good place. This is not going to go to a good place. Iran is a country
that has been conquered by Greeks, Romans, Arabs, Turks, and Mongols.
It suffered genocidal conquests at the hands of foreign enemies, and it came back
five times, not just as a country, as an empire, five times, okay? Iran will rise again.
The people of America. I don't even want to use the term United States anymore because
this fucking regime that calls itself the United States government is a treasonous criminal mafia,
to which no one should pay taxes, by the way. It is a treasonous criminal mafia that does not
represent the interests of Americans, but the people of America should be very careful to get
this situation under control soon, and to expeditiously eliminate these vermin who have stripped
themselves of their American citizenship by conducting themselves in this manner that we've
seen over the past two months. Otherwise, if Iran rises again, and we have a population in Iran that
respects American culture and American history more than American youth do, something very bad
is going to happen that I hope I never had lived to see, okay? I'm telling you right now.
Europe is fucked. Europe is fucked, all right? Look at Germany. Look at Britain. France I have
some hope for, but let me be very frank with you, that the latest figures that I've seen
show 25% of the urban population of France is living under Sharia. There are Sharia no-go zones
in France where the French justice system no longer applies. And France has the highest
birth rate, by the way, as well in Europe. Of Muslims. Of the children of migrants, okay?
And so, look, the figures in France are extremely grim. It looks like about 25% of France
is gone, okay? Has been subsumed by basically the fifth column of the caliphate.
But I actually think there's some hope for France. I think that if National Front comes back
in 2027, there is some hope for France. However, let me be clear, there will be no solution in
France without concentration camps. Absolutely no solution in France without concentration camps.
They are going to have to take French citizens, so-called French citizens, who at this point
are citizens of a nascent global caliphate, and they're going to have to concentrate them in
certain places and extricate them from France. And maybe they should take Algeria back and they
should use it for this purpose. In any case, because France is constituted differently from Britain,
and I mean that constituted in both senses of the word, I actually think there's some hope in
France, but it's going to be extremely brutal to constitute what may end up being the sixth
French Republic. It's doable, though. And here in this country, the situation is also not far gone.
There's still hope to turn things around. But it has to be done very soon. And if it doesn't happen
during a second term of Trump, we're going to be utterly hopeless. And a catastrophe will unfold,
which, you know, is going to come out of the bottle that can't be put back in.
Now, if we break down some of the players involved here, one of the organizations that's
currently funding these protests is the Open Society Foundation, George Sars, but more now
his son Alex, who is dating Huma Abedin, whose parents, from what I understand, are involved,
or were involved with the Muslim Brotherhood. So what exactly is going on here? And one more
thing to add to that, from what I understand during Obama's administration, when Hillary
Clinton was Secretary of State, they redid all the manuals having to do with counterterrorism
to completely scrub it of anything related to Islam. So I'm curious what you make of this.
Look, another reason I'm so visibly irate is because I spent a decade in the Iranian opposition
and three years in its leadership. We found that the Democrat Party in the United States
wanted to secure the continued existence of the Islamic Republic of Iran pretty much at any cost,
and they undermined any and every effort of the Iranian people to change this regime.
So this is an issue in particular with the Democrats in this country, and we can see that
reflected just in the last 48 hours with this letter that Blinken ordered his people to issue
expressing condolences for the death of Raisi. President Raisi was a butcher. President Raisi
presided as a summary execution jurist over the mass execution of thousands of political dissidents
in Iran. And people, before it was even confirmed that his helicopter crashed and that he had met
his demise, you had fireworks going off all across Iranian cities that night. Iranian people were
celebrating throughout the night and into the next morning for the death of this butcher. And
meanwhile the U.S. State Department issues its condolences for the death of Raisi, right? And the
U.S. State Department allows the American ambassador to the United Nations to stand together with all
the other members of the Security Council in a minute of silence for Raisi's death in the United
Nations Security Council. The Israeli ambassador put on a fantastic spectacle the other day,
what was it about a week ago, when he walked up to the podium of the General Assembly and he took
the UN Charter and he shredded it in a mini-shredder right there at the podium of the General Assembly
after the UN General Assembly condemned Israel. It's gone too far. It's gone to the International
Criminal Court issuing a request for arrest warrants for Netanyahu, Prime Minister Netanyahu,
and Defense Minister Galant, when at the same time this International Criminal Court
has completely turned a blind eye to all of the other genocidal political leaders in Afghanistan,
in Iraq during the years of ISIS, in various parts of Africa, it's an outrage. And we're
fast approaching a situation which I depicted in my novella Artemis Unveiled, what was it, two years
ago, where Israel and a new Iran are going to wind up a war with the whole world. That day
is coming. We are fast approaching that vision of the future, dark vision of the future, which I
articulated in that novella. And I'm telling you, I'm particularly, the American people
need to change course. And these, look, a handful, a small group of enthusiastic patriots
who went to our capital on January 6th with American flags. See, they came with American flags
to storm the capital. And they're branded as insurgents. Patriots who come carrying the American
flag to the people's house are branded as insurgents and they're tried under the Insurrection Act.
You know what insurrection is? Insurrection is when 40 campuses in our country, including all
the Ivy League and comparable universities, are taken over by a group that actually has its orders
coming from a Chinese front foundation, where a foreign power is organizing these takeovers
and doing it in support of an ideology whose maximum is death to America. And these people
are burning American flags and calling for the destruction of their own country. That is an
insurrection. And these people, as far as I am concerned, need to be rounded up and summarily
tried, not in civil courts because they have stripped themselves of their American citizenship.
They need to be tried in military tribunals under conditions of martial law. That's what has to
happen in this country, under Trump. And if it doesn't, we're fucked. It's over. It's over
for this country. And it's frankly going to be over for the West as we know it.
So look, civil war is a terrible thing, but unfortunately it's going to happen at this
point and we need to make sure that we win it. Well, that's going to bring us to super chats
right there. I think that you said everything that there is to say about our current situation
and what we're going to be expecting. One quick note, by the way, is that the Open Society Foundation
and Jewish source and all that, they, despite, you know, source being Jewish and whatever,
have no love towards Israel or the West in general. And that is something that I think a lot of
people who are watching this tend to forget. They tend to lump Jewish people into this whole
pile where a lot of the horrible things that you're talking about right now, they see them as being
the cause of. Let me add something there, Lev. Let me add something there. George Soros has
ties in his youth to the Romanian iron guard. George Soros has early affiliations
to fascist right wing groups in Europe. Otto Scorzani in the 1970s, late 60s, early 70s,
was doing some things with Mossad in Israel as well. Okay. There are complex business
and military industrial connections here all across the world that point to the fact that
certain quote unquote Jews, look, I know you're of the Ukrainian background and that
you're sympathetic to the struggle of Ukrainian people. But frankly, the same thing can be said
of Zelinsky in terms of fascist, ultimately anti-Semitic right wing groups using certain Jews
in order to accomplish their aims and forward their agenda. And here I would direct people
to the research of Joseph Farrell, which I've quoted and cited at length in some of my books.
Joseph is a, Dr. Farrell is a Russian Orthodox adherent. Okay. So from, and I, you know, I visited
him at his home and we had very nice conversations on so forth. But you know, Dr. Farrell essentially
would consider me a Satanist. Okay. So we are, we are not aligned spiritually and ethically
in many ways. However, his research on what he calls Dishpena is impeccable. Dishpena or the
spider, a nickname for Odessa, the order of former SS officers, which was basically constituted in
1945 and was part of what we have been, what we have been introduced to as Operation Paperclip.
There was a lot more going on in terms of the importation of Nazis post 1945.
They developed a global financial control system and the military industrial network
that ultimately has succeeded in capturing the American deep state. And it is these people,
not the Jews, who are ultimately controlling the kind of policy making that's been detrimental to
the West, including in Germany, where Merkel led in all these migrants. If you look at the tentacles
around the, let's just, let me just say it this way, around the 9-11 operation,
they go back to institutions like Deutsche Bank, the Bank of Germany. Okay. And you had, you know,
Martin Bormann, Hitler's financial mastermind, who supposedly died three different times in
three different ways, still writing checks through Chase Manhattan Bank in Argentina in the 1970s.
Go look at Joseph Farrell's research, the Nazi International, the European Union in the third
way, the people who have undermined the West through mass migration, social justice agendas,
and so on and so forth, are not Jews. They're Nazis. And their ultimate aim is to foment a
backlash. They want a right-wing reaction that they intend to ensure is traditionalist in character.
This is a sophisticated dialectical operation that's taking place. It's what they were always
masters at, Weltanschauungs Krieg, worldview warfare. Okay. So that's what I have to say about George
Soros and his ilk is that their pawns, their pawns of an SS elite that not only survived
the end of the war, it went on to ultimately create a hidden power structure in this world.
And its aim is a traditionalist, neo-feudal hierarchical system that's going to crush
the human individual. And Israel is a bulwark against that. Israel and its 300 nuclear warheads.
The only thing I could say is that to all the Jews who are still working in, you know,
the New York Crimes or any of these, you know, New Republic, all these magazines,
I really recommend them to stop being such idiots, because I really do think that,
unfortunately, because Jews, as you know, they live in the city. And you can get all kinds of
jobs, the jobs you end up getting, the ones that people end up paying the most attention to,
just because of how information is disseminated, would be jobs in the media. So unfortunately,
you have this weird situation where the people, and I wonder, I do wonder if what's going on right
now with these protests are kind of waking some of these people up to their delusions,
that those were the people who ended up rising through the ranks who were disseminating all of
this, you know, anti-Western bullshit, that the unfortunate effect of that is that people look
up their names, and they do all these four-chan infographics saying that, you know, Jonah Goldberg
or whoever, you know, wants white people to go extinct and so on and so forth. So I don't know,
like as my final question before the super chats, do you see any way of remedying that? Because it
seems like until that's remedied, we're going to have all these people coming out of the woodwork
saying like, no, they're secretly against us. They want to overthrow the West.
No, I do. I do see a way to remedy it. I do. And that's that I think that Prime Minister Netanyahu
and people like Defense Minister Galant and the people who are, you know, looking into, like,
how October 7th could possibly have been, have happened within Mossad and Israeli military
intelligence. These, because you see, there were also, look, Israel has been betrayed.
Israel's been betrayed by the kinds of Jews in New York that you're talking about,
Jews and L.A. But Israel's also been betrayed by certain Jews within Israel. And right now,
Israel has to win this war. That's this primary objective. It has to be achieved without hesitation.
Israel has to win this war. But don't think there's not going to be a reckoning within Israel after
this war. There's a lot of soul searching that's going to take place. And there's a massive purge
that's coming within Israel. That's what I think. I think that the right kind of leadership learned
a really harsh lesson. And they know that they have a lot of traders in their midst. And they're
going to clean these people out because these people represent an existential threat to Zionism.
They represent an existential threat to the continued existence of a state of Israel. All
right. And I think they're going to need to be weeded out. And what I also think is that
the right kind of Zionists, right, people who are just looking to defend a state for people of
Jewish descent, the right kind of Zionists are going to find a tremendous ally in the next
regime of Iran, a regime that represents the will of the majority of Iranian people who love Israel.
They love America and they love Israel. And I think that the kind of intelligence and security
relationship that could exist, again, because it existed once between Saba and Mossad,
very close relationship to the point where they were developing nuclear weapons together.
That's a whole other story. But there will be an intelligence and security relationship between
the future Iranian services, whether they want to, I'm partial to the idea of calling it Sabaq
again. I actually think that's a great idea. What does Sabaq mean? Oh, it just means
it means state security and intelligence service. But, you know, it has a horrific aura to it,
because, you know, supposedly they tortured people and, you know, engaged in all kinds of
repression. Well, who were they interrogating? They were interrogating a bunch of Islamist
cockroaches who have turned women into second-class, who are beating women right now for exposing
their hair, right? Islamists who have completely abrogated freedom of the press and freedom of
speech for the last 45 years in Iran. Those are the people who they were severely interrogating.
They were severely interrogating communists who apparently were so faithful to their Marxist
principles, their atheistic, humanistic, universalist Marxist principles that all these fucking Iranian
communists lined up to support a lunatic like Ayatollah Khomeini and to bring a bunch of
Islamic fundamentalists to power. Those were the communists being interrogated by Sabaq,
right? Sabaq was actually doing its job, trying to actually, the Shah was the one who was too much
of a bleak and heart liberal. Anyway, anyway, be that as it may, my point is that the future Iranian
state security and intelligence apparatus will have an excellent relationship with Mossad and
Shin Bet and the Israeli services so that the Iranians, I think, will be able to help
weed out the wrong kind of Israelis and the wrong kind of Jews, even in the United States,
who are undermining the security of Israel. Again, to reiterate what I said earlier,
addressing the American people, understand that the domestic political situation in America
is a vital national security concern of the future Iran. The future Iran is going to find
itself immediately in conflict with China, in conflict with Russia, without a Europe that it
can count on, because Europe is being taken over by Islamists, right? So who is going to be Iran's
ally? Well, America, Israel principally and also America. So the future Iranian state security
apparatus cannot very well allow America to be a stage for protests that mirror the ideology and
discourse of the Islamic Republic. Understand? So the domestic political situation in America
is going to be a vital national security interest of the future regime of Iran. Let me leave it at
that, okay? And that includes whatever misguided Jews there are who are aligning themselves
with these apologists for Hamas. Yeah, they drank the Kool-Aid, just like all these
really beautiful girls that I used to have a crush on. And now you see their Instagram
story, it's all like, you know, pro Gaza, you know what I mean? It's a damn shame,
like the song goes. One last thing I would say is that- Believe me, I know. One last thing I would
say regarding Israel is that I would highly recommend, I'm sure they're doing it already,
for Assad to take a look at people like Romana Bramovich and look at all the
immigrants from Russia to Israel as far as their effect, because Netanyahu himself has had too
chummy of a relationship with Putin. And I think that's one of the things that misguided him.
Keep in mind how often Russia's government, including Putin himself, met with representatives
of Hamas and Iran. Look, I am certainly not in favor of the conflict in Ukraine spiraling into
a potential nuclear confrontation between NATO and Russia. That having been said,
as you remember from our previous conversation, where Vlad was also with us. Vlad Davidson.
Yes, and we were discussing October 7th. I told you that I think that all these Russian Jews
in the Israeli state security apparatus who have ties to the Kremlin, and we know there are a lot
of people in Mossad who do, they are double agents and they work for Russian intelligence as well.
I think something went very wrong that day and it did involve the Russians. And it was
retribution for, frankly, Netanyahu being dragged, kicked and screaming by America to support Ukraine.
But be that as it may, yeah. There's a case to be made that Israel was betrayed by Russian Jews
who ultimately were answering to the orders of the Kremlin. And I can also tell you, I'm sorry
to say this to the folks who are my, I know I have a lot of followers who support Russia,
but I can tell you that the future regime of Iran is going to be an enemy of Russia.
There's no question. And they're right across the Caspian Sea. And by the way,
by the way, for people who don't have a sense of history, the Russians took a quarter of Iran's
territory. They fought two significant wars with Iran, and they're responsible for taking a quarter
of Iran's territory. So there's a lot of bad blood there. And I can well see that there's
going to be a future Iranian-Israeli alliance, even just against Russia.
Hmm. Well, on to super chats we go. So the first super chat is from somebody who
did it last time, but I unfortunately was not able to get to it. So he reminded me today.
As a reminder, my question was, if Jason has seen the MH370 videos, that's the hidden tech
held by the shadow government. And before you respond, Jason, once again, make sure to like,
subscribe, comment, click the bell. The bell is very important. Anyway, Jason, go ahead.
I've seen it. I've heard analyses of it. I have listened to intelligent people who I really respect,
who have in some cases said they think it's legit. And in other cases, other people who I
respect equally have raised questions about the legitimacy and fidelity of that video.
Whether or not that particular footage is accurate, it's showing these three UFOs
circling around MH370 and basically creating a vortex, which the airplane then disappears into,
as footage shows. And supposedly it was leaked by a high-level official,
and the footage was taken by classified satellites who were looking down at the area
that the plane was transiting at the time. Whether or not that particular footage is legit,
I think that technology exists.
Jane Dominic, $10. Questions for Trajani, do you see any room for Bakik Mania,
muse inspiration, Jungian individuation, or some form of serious Promethean divinization in the
future of philosophical inquiry? The hell do you think I'm doing?
I mean, that's the core of my whole philosophical project. Yeah, that's pretty softball. Of course I
do. Yeah. All right, moving on here. Yeah, the ones that we could just answer fast, we could just
answer fast. Austin, $10. Ethnogens have been administered in traditional cultures to aid in
the development of these psychic abilities, especially for individuals who struggle with the
training. Well, comment, any thoughts on it? It should be some combination thereof. I mean,
the right drugs properly used, as the Greeks called them, pharmacaea, the right
pharmacons properly administered together with various psychical training regiments
are probably the way to go. But that's drugs as a tool and a craft rather than as an escape.
No, that's true, because when it comes psychedelics, you don't want it to become a crutch.
Right. Or an escape, form of escapism. Surilean Valley. I don't know if this was a mistake.
$100. Thank you so much, Surilean Valley. Okay, here we go. They, in quotes, are more advanced in
every field you speak of. Loditism will be psychologically healthy for most inhabitants
on this planet. You can't even astral project. It's not your choice, but just accept their
traditionalist dominion over you. You will lose. First of all, I have astral projected.
Second of all, that's perfectly fine if traditionalism is going to be suitable
for the majority of the planet. In that case, I'm interested in eliminating the majority
that are going to subjugate the minority of people who absolutely do not deserve to have
their individuality subsumed by traditionalism. I am a radically anti-majoritarian person.
I'm the furthest thing from a populist you can ever imagine. I am for the individual.
I'm a radical individualist who's totally devoted to the defense of liberty and progress.
So think again, okay? And I can also tell you that as I've had to incessantly repeat every time
someone asks a question, as if this is a question, asks a question like this,
that number one, going back to what you asked me love about Buddha, many of our conversation,
number one, there's another class of beings opposed to the Olympians or the Davas, namely the
Ashuras or the Titans. They're in the mix here and they're very angry people. If you think I'm
angry, just see what these people are like. This is why the Buddhists depicted them as demons. I
mean, they're very angry people, very violent people. They've had nuclear wars in the past.
You look at the Mahabharata and the Ramayana and you look at Libyan desert glass and various
vitrified stones in South America, you can see the evidence for the nuclear wars between the
Ashuras and the Davas in the distant past. So to begin with, the Ashuras are in the mix and
look, their policy is that they don't want to have to come in and solve the problem for us.
They want to see some kind of human initiative. And frankly, it's much better for us if we tried
to determine our own future course and set the conditions for securing our liberty by ourselves
to the greatest extent possible. We don't want to be beholden to some group of Titans or Ashuras
either. Remember, Prometheus is this rather ambiguous trickster figure who initially betrays
the Titans, decide with the gods and then turns on the gods to defend humanity. So looking at it
from a Promethean perspective, I don't want us to be beholden to the Ashuras, the Titans either,
but they're in the mix and they're very powerful. They're very powerful. They're the reason why
there's not a biosphere on Mars anymore. So whoever made this statement is forgetting that.
And what's more important than that is that quite apart from the Ashuras, you have this entity that
I spent some time discussing, which I come around to engaging with at the end of Philosophy of the
Future, this trickster, this cosmic trickster and its various avatars and emissaries, and that force
is so much more powerful than the Davos. And that's why when I talk about phenomenal authorization,
I make the point that, look, this trickster sees the movements of the Davos, not necessarily like
movements of chess pieces across a chessboard, because the game is more like backgammon. It
involves an element of chance, a roll of the die, but it's kind of like a backgammon game, except that
the trickster can win, but the trickster is interested in the game and the possibilities
opened up by the game. So frankly, the person who posed this, who made this statement, is utterly
clueless. Well, he thinks you're a heretic. That's the other thing. Well, I am a heretic. Yeah. Well,
he's right about that. I'm more than a heretic. And I'm a school Muslim. You can be born into
any religion. I was born Muslim. So I'm not just a heretic. I'm an apostate. He gets pretty rude
over here. But if you'd like, I can read you his $5 chat right after the $100 one.
Let's spend more time on somebody, you know, who's
Yeah, yeah, the the cherry on top. Give other people some.
Yeah. Trial size dove. $10 seems to me the birth of humanity is a radically anomalous and finite
event with this entity working to coax as much growth potential from us before that energy dissipates.
It's a question of scale. It goes back to when you were talking about we can imagine that there's
a macronutrient. It seems to me the birth of humanity is radically anomalous. And finite event
with this entity working to coax as much growth potential from us before that energy dissipates.
It's a question of scale. It goes back to when you were talking about we can imagine that there's a
macrocosm that's, you know, has, you know, such vast in such and such a way. And there's all kinds of
intelligences that are potentially so far beyond ours. And, well, you know, you could imagine a
context that would render humanity this relatively unexpected and anomalous
phenomenon, which this trickster is taking great pains to cultivate, right, and to nurture, albeit,
you know, as a very severe mother. That's, you could imagine that. But again, you're imagining
a context for which there's no empirical evidence. And when you look at the literature of close
encounters, that's not the picture that we get. You know, I don't want to repeat myself. Like I
said earlier, the close encounter phenomenon suggests that actually humanity or the evolution
of humanity into a potentially superhuman species is at the center of the cosmos, that it's the
central phenomenon of existence. Chester $10 car car. That is a that is Chester right there.
Great friend of the show. Next we have Ashton Milky Way $50. Sorry, Jason, but how can you look
at the Rothschild history of banking and the history of banking in general
and say that the Jews are not the ones controlling the system? I think you're foolish for believing
in their propaganda. Read Joseph Farrell's books. He also has texts that are specifically
dedicated to the history of banking, like the financial vipers of Venice. And when you read
his work on the development of the international banking system, in the context of his tracing
the genealogy of what you might call the fourth Reich, this occulted Reich, which I've written about,
you can see to what extent various banking families, including ones of Jewish descent,
were assimilated and ensconced by this essentially. I don't even want to call it fascist. I don't know.
Nazi, post Nazi system, right? Joseph's work is what you should look at if you're interested
in actually understanding what's going on here. And so I'll just leave it at that.
That would be the same author to look at as far as Hitler being funded, because it's weird,
like I was watching this gentleman on YouTube named Tick History, and he tries to make, well,
first of all, he makes the case that Nazi Germany was very socialist in how it operated. But the
second thing is that he tries to say, well, Hitler was not funded by any of these rich people. It
was a very grass roots movement. You know, they raised their money from the people.
I mean, look, the Thulegesellschaft consisted of a bunch of barons and aristocrats,
and it's the Thulegesellschaft that set up the NSDAP as a pack, as a political action committee,
to help fight communism on the streets of Germany. So, you know, we know that the
planning, the mastermining of the rise of Hitler came from very rich people with international
banking connections. Though Hitler himself was not a big fan of the aristocracy, at least from
what I understand. There was this lady who I think you met as well at that event that we were at,
who talked about how her father was this German aristocrat, he was a general,
and Hitler used to pin medals on him in such a way as to puncture his skin. And she interpreted
that as being his hatred for this upper echelon. He was a rabble rouser who had a very specific
purpose and mission to fulfill. They used him, okay, and that became abundantly clear to the
sad broken man when he was put out to pasture in Bariloche, Argentina in 1946, and told listen,
Herr Hitler, just paint your sunsets, leave it to us, we've got it all under control. Okay,
I think he lived a very sad last 20 years of his life down there in Argentina, and it became
abundantly clear to him that he had been played and used by people whose machinations he could
not even begin to wrap his mind around. And those people are still in control of our world today.
Damn. Well, over here we have Finn Brown, $10. So we have two remaining here,
unless anybody sends anything else, these would be the last two. So Finn Brown,
$10 thoughts on the concept of a live player, non-NPC types.
Thoughts on NPCs? No, no, no, the live player. So the opposite of what an NPC is.
Well, what about what thoughts? I mean, out of the concept, like what exactly entails a live
player? Well, in your book, you were writing about consciousness and whether you see there being
like this great Asian of consciousness where people who would be more like the NPCs would have
less of it and people who would be more of the players to have more of it, or is it much more
distinctive? Individuality, individuality, personal conscience, self-reflection, critical
thinking, above all, creative vision, right? All the things that these protesters we see in the
streets today lack. And by the way, I just want to make one point that I neglected to make earlier
is that because a lot of undiscerning people will say, oh, but what about the Communists who
took over Columbia University in 1968 and so forth on behalf of the Students for a Democratic
Society, SDS, or let's say the Activities of the Weather Underground? Completely different,
completely different. Look, you don't have to be a communist or agree with communism to understand
why dropping napalm on Vietnamese children was not a just war. The Vietnam War was an unjust war.
At least, at least, one can understand a person who takes that position and protests the war.
And also, if you look at the doctrine of classic communism, going back to Marx, supposedly,
however misguided you may think it is, it's ultimately an aspiration for liberation and
enlightenment and an egalitarian world society where women have more equal. After all, look,
the Soviet Union sent women into space way before we did. So there are things that you can respect
about classic communism and about the Communists who took over Columbia University in 1968.
The cockroaches and vermin and parasites today who have desecrated those places
have also hollowed out anything that was respectable about communist ideology. They've,
in fact, imploded communist ideology by aligning themselves to the most traditionalist and retarded
religious tradition on the planet, namely Islam. And by the way, this is a rerun for me. It's a
horrific rerun because all of us who have some Iranian heritage saw this happen in Iran in 1978,
1979, where all the fucking leftists suddenly somehow forgot Marx and got behind Ayatollah
Khomeini and the Molas. That's why we have an Islamic Republic today. It's the leftists in Iran
who brought the Islamic Republic to power. They were the firepower behind it. They were the
guerrilla fighters who toppled the Shah's regime, not these turbant Molas. It's the leftists who
did it. So look, I don't know what that says. I won't blame Marx for it, though. If you look back
in my work, you see, I actually respect Marx a great deal. The thing is that his followers have
now come to the point where, evidently, they've become the epitome of these zombie NPCs. And so
I don't see a legitimate future for leftists. And the USSR was also supporting Palestine back in
the day. Arafat was an agent of the Soviets. That's not fair because the USSR was also the
first and greatest supporter of the state of Israel. That's true. Well, that's before Israel,
you could say kind of betrayed it. Yes. So the Soviets felt betrayed by Israel because actually
the Soviets were the first supporters of Israel before France. Then France became the second
strongest supporter of Israel. And then the United States only really started supporting Israel after
Kennedy. No, that's true. You have a point there. So over here, although I do remember reading that
the Soviets were also the ones who coined the term Palestinian, but that's like going in a whole
rabbit hole as far as where these terms originate from. Well, one is going to term Palestine.
Well, no. I mean, like Palestinian in the context of what happened after Israel,
as far as the Palestinian people versus the Israelis. Well, no, I wouldn't be shocked that
that came out of some Soviet propaganda office. So here we have a Valholm, $10. How does the world
that results out of the Nietzschean split of humanity into Ubermensch and Intermensch is any
functionally different than what the Davos have constructed with their breakaway civilization?
Because what the Davos are envisioning is a hierarchical caste society where there are
different rungs of human beings in that society. Okay, until you get to the highest rung, which is
a priestly class, the Brahmin, whose sole purpose is to serve the Davos. It's a caste hierarchy.
What Nietzsche is talking about is essentially the destruction of humanity through the
Intervention, becoming a machinery of production. These aren't human beings anymore. We're not
talking about human beings anymore. And by the way, Nietzsche doesn't describe this a great
length because it's right at the margin of what he's really capable of contemplating in terms of
how technological advancement is going to alter the human condition. There are a few notes on this
in the Will to Power, mainly, where you see him describe how the machinery of production, as he
puts it, is going to ensconce and transform the Intervention into a base upon which the
Overmen pursue their own destinies. But the Overmen are not slave masters. The Intervention are not
slaves of the Overmen. Nietzsche really belabors this point. Nietzsche's entire ethical doctrine
is a critique of slave morality and an advocacy for a kind of morality where the individual sets
his own goals and purposes and is not dependent upon basically oppressing and manipulating anybody
else. Okay, so it's a radically different vision. Actually, it's a much harsher vision because to
the extent that most people don't want to be free and most people want to be cattle and most people
are sheep, well then the day of vision is much more compassionate because it accommodates that
majority inside this pyramid. Nietzsche's vision is saying, listen, either evolve or you're going to
be a machine. Next super chat over here we have from Kaleb. Your $10, your thoughts about the
global loss of rest publica and its replacement in the internet, where the public ceases to
check and balance. Richard Sennitz, the fall of public man, comes to mind.
Look, I think that the republic, first of all, the republic was a noble idea, especially if we
take care to discern, you know, to make a distinction between a republican constitutional
structure and a democracy. The kind of republican constitutional structure that the founding fathers
of the United States articulated in our constitution and our bill of rights was a very noble minded
and progressive endeavor in the proper sense of the word progressive, which I entirely embrace
and intend to safeguard against these retarded leftists. But the fact of the matter is that even
by the middle of the 20th century, with the rise of, you know, instantaneous global banking and
military industrial corporations and mega corporations and, you know, supersonic air travel and so on
and so forth, and an attendant global business class and such developments already rendered the
republic an antiquated form of political organization. That is the case. It was already the case in the
1950s, frankly. And certainly, as we approach the technological singularity, we're going to have
to consider a new form of political organization that safeguards the liberty and creative potential
of the individual and that replaces republics and that replaces nation states as we've conceived of
thus far, right? Now, I don't want that to be any kind of world government, but we need to come up
with a replacement for the republic that at the same time, in spirit, safeguards what it is that,
let's say, the bill of rights of our republic was intended to protect. So I don't see the
the obsolescence of the republic of the res public as a necessarily negative
development. I see it as an evolutionary eventuality. And as far as the internet is concerned, I think
the problem with the internet is that the worldwide web is increasingly controlled by mega corporations
and that what we need to do is develop blockchain networks that use the fundamental substrate
technology of the internet in ways that are impervious to corporate and other centralized
control. Absolutely. So here we have Ashton Milky Way, $20. How can we possibly prepare for the
technological singularity and the coming catastrophe in the next 20 years?
Who is we? You've heard me say this before. Yes, yes. One of the points that I always
make is that considering that we have maybe 15, maybe 20 years between us and the technological
singularity at this point, I keep revising my estimate downward. There's no way that the world
can prepare. There's no way. It's simply impossible. The vast majority of people who are either adherents
of Islam by 20, again, I repeat the statistic, given current demographic trend, and by the way,
people should remember this every time they call what's going on in Gaza, a genocide.
The Palestinians are Arabs, majority of them Arab Muslims. There are 22 Arab countries in the
world, all of which, by the way, refuse to take in these Palestinians. And beyond the Arab world,
there are gigantic countries like Malaysia, Indonesia, Pakistan, that are host to huge
Muslim populations. India has more Muslims in it than Pakistan. So we are dealing with a population
bomb here, which is going to result, and by the way, when you think about these people's proposals
that turn the United Nations into a global democracy, well, what the fuck would a global
democracy be in 2075 when the majority of people on the earth are Muslim? So every time these morons
talk about what's going on in Gaza as a genocide, they ought to remember that a Muslim majority on
this planet by 2075 means the genocide of every other culture on earth, because we know, and
especially we who have an Iranian heritage know, that what Islam does is genocide other cultures.
The specialty of Islam is the genocide of other cultures. And we see it just recently in Iraq
with ISIS, what they did to the Kurds. By the way, recently there was a story that made me
absolutely incensed, as if there isn't enough to be incensed about, story of a Kurdish woman
who was raped and held captive by ISIS in northern Iraq. And she wrote this book and she was supposed
to give a presentation about it. I believe it was in Canada. And her book event was canceled,
because they were afraid it would promote Islamophobia. So this poor woman who was tortured
and raped by ISIS doesn't get to tell her story about what Muslims are like, because it might
promote fear of Islam. We are living already in an Orwellian 1984 world. It is as bad as that.
All I could say is that the people who are afraid of confronting these kind of things get what they
deserve, because if you are not afraid and you are willing to accept the consequences and fight
for what you believe in, yes, there's going to be pushback, but at least you could actually
sleep at night knowing that you're not going to be one of these yellow-bellied cowards who just
allow all of this to go on. Yeah, but to answer your question, sure, they're going to get what's
coming, but to answer your question, the problem is this. In the face of the technological singularity,
15 to 20 years from now, how do you expect that the world or people at large, people
writ large when you say that, are going to prepare for the singularity when increasingly
we have a Muslim majority on the planet, and the rest of the people are either Confucian Chinese
who are ultimately as regressive and inimical to change and progress, and we have Putin with
3,000 nuclear warheads embracing Russian orthodoxy, and then we see what's going on in the West.
Where there's mass conversion to Islam in Europe, and there's American university students going
around chanting death to America slogans from a fundamentalist Islamic regime and converting
to Islam under the Palestinian flag. So what world, what world prepare for the technological
singularity? No, no, no, no, no. A small minority of people with Promethean foresight and forethought
who care about preserving their own liberty and maximizing their own creative potential
are going to band together as a group of rebels, like the rebels who set the American
Revolution in motion, and we are going to defend our future, our future at any cost.
Liberty or death?
Austin, $10. Is there any chance that Iran rid itself of the horrific theocracy now in place
and restore its traditional empire and dignity as a great culture and civilization between East
and West? And that's going to be like the final super chat before that cherry on top that we
talked about, but yeah. Of course it will happen. As someone who's worked for that for many years
of my life, I can tell you it will most certainly happen. But there is in that process an absolutely
integral and indispensable role to be played by the state of Israel. And everyone who wants to
see that Iran come into being has to understand that it is inextricable from support for Zionism.
Lastly, speaking of that before the cherry on top, could you please tell, because I know that you
said it before, I want to make sure that I got this because that's the one thing that I missed
when I was talking about Huma Abedin and the Muslim Brotherhood. What was the connection between
what was going on in the Obama administration back then? And obviously I think the Biden
administration is kind of a continuation of that. And what we're seeing right now with these protests
and getting rid of the all references to Islam within the counterterrorism manuals.
Well, I think I addressed it already. I told you that from my years of working in the Iranian
opposition, where we engaged in significant lobbying activities, at one point I was even sitting with
a member of the National Security Council, I can tell you that the Democrats very clearly have a
pro-Islamist agenda. And they want to keep, for example, the Islamic Republican power in Iran.
But what do they get for it? What do they obtain by taking that kind of position at
the end of the day? What's their carrot at the end of the stake? Is it just money? Is it power?
Money and power, they get financed and they get to win elections. It's the same reason why they
bring millions of migrants into our country. They're trying to demographically re-engineer our
country so that they can stay in power. Staying in power means getting more money. It's just
a racket for these people. I mean, they're corrupt. They use political office as a way to
amass wealth. That's all it is. They're a mafia and they don't give a fuck about the future or
our children's future. That's all they are. It's a bunch of looters. Now to Cerulean Valley,
who's been super chatting all of this time. Cerulean Valley. Now, you said before that you
are up to hearing a super chat here, but they do get a little bit spicy towards you.
I don't think that's a good note to end on. I think that a better note to end on would be
yet again for me to direct people to the American Colossus, not just website AmericanColossus.org,
but also to the American Colossus substack. We have an American Colossus substack that features
a number of very interesting articles ranging all the way from commentaries on this catastrophic
domestic political situation. There's a whole piece that I wrote against the Woke
social justice warriors, all the way to a new piece that I've written on the close encounter
phenomenon. There's an essay called The Airships of Prometheus on the American Colossus substack,
where I actually go back and revise. Well, I wouldn't say I revise my thesis. I present an
alternative interpretation and hypothesis concerning the airship mystery of 1896, 1897,
which I know is something that you and I have discussed before, and you took the time to try
to find the families of some of these people. The dentist isn't calling back. I got to try again,
but I appreciate you remembering that. Yeah. So, folks, go take a look at those articles,
and please do subscribe to the American Colossus substack. There will be a lot of good news
coming as learning that process. And you can buy Dr. Durjani's book,
Philosophy of the Future. The link is in the description. And once again, if you want to
see the Q&A, the exclusive Q&A in the New York City apartment, that Dr. Durjani was kind enough to
do with me and Neil Nasik and Formant, go to patreon.com slash break the rules, become a patron
today. Any tier doesn't matter, and you will be able to get that, as well as if you guys become a
$20 patron and you're in the New York City area, there's going to be all kinds of events that I'm
going to be doing on Break the Rules. I sincerely hope that, Jason, you will be a part of some of
those events if you're interested. Absolutely. Yeah. I look forward to the next Q&A we do when I get
back to New York at some point in the summer. Yeah. My plan is that I would want to throw
certain events where obviously I would vet people first, just to get to know who these people are,
just that they're not crazy people, but then get them as an audience in this apartment because
everything is set up so wonderfully there now, Jason. There's no more tripods. All the cameras
are suspended on the ceiling and on the wall, and it's all wired up and no wires on the floor
whatsoever. It's a completely free space to walk around in. I'll be providing white claws. I'll be
providing food. You guys just come in, attend. There's a rooftop. We can party on the roof
afterwards, so it's going to be a great time. Once again, that's patreon.com slash Break the
Rules. I'll invite you guys to some preliminary events before that, just like for all the new people.
But yeah, go there and also the Discord. That's another thing that I don't really talk about
that much, but if you guys go to the Discord link that I do have in the description and I'm
going to show to you as well, then you are going to have a good time getting to know some of the
other people from the Break the Rules universe. Here is the Discord link. So guys, thank you so much.
Be sure to like, comment, subscribe, click the bell. Dr. Jason Rezgerjani, as always,
it is a great pleasure speaking with you. The pleasure is always mine, Lev,
and I look forward to hanging out with you again in New York.
