So good afternoon everybody, if I can have the first slide, thank you.
So this session is entitled Insects and Other Organisms, and I will be telling you about
viruses.
So we've seen this slide before, so we know there's an extraordinary diversity of individuals
in insects, and with all sorts of shapes, they evolved in a long period of time.
And we are particularly interested in the laboratory in the study of the interaction
of these insects with infectious agents, and having colonized all terrestrial biotopes,
of course, insects are exposed to a lot of microbes, often the same as we, so parasites,
viruses, bacteria, and fungi.
And the reasons to study the defense of insects, again, infections, is mainly free-fall.
So the first reason is that they produce anti-bacterial or anti-fungal molecules, and by studying them
we can maybe use them as therapeutic agents, or at least by studying their mode of action,
we can have ideas about new strategies to counter microbial infections.
Of course, we share common ancestors, and so we've heard this in the talks yesterday
on the use of insects and Drosophila as a model, so a number of genes are conserved,
and by identifying important genes in Drosophila we can learn things about human genes.
And the last reason is that a number of hematophagous insects are vectors for infectious diseases,
and these insects are not passive carriers, they are themselves infected, and so they
fight these infections with their immune system.
So in the laboratory we are mainly interested in viruses, and this is another extremely
interesting thing about insects, is that they are hosts of a large number of viruses, and
this is a study that was published a few years ago by the group of Yon Zeng Zeng at the Institute
of Disease Control in Beijing, where they have sequenced 220 animal species belonging
to 9 phila, and they have identified 1400 viruses, and what you can see on the slide
here is that a lot of these viruses are found in the atropods, and in particular in insects
you have a very large number of insects.
And if we look at another study that is this time focused on a particular family of viruses,
the negative strand RNA viruses, what you can see is that you have here it was 70 atropod
species that were sequenced, and they identified 112 viruses, and you have these viruses here,
and what you can see is that insects are actually a reservoir for an extraordinary diversity
of viruses, because you see that these viruses are extremely diverse, and what is interesting
is that these viruses are at the root of many of the viruses that infect other organisms,
including humans, so you can see for example here the flu virus, and you can see that it
shares a root with insect viruses, you have phila virus here, the same, or RNA viruses
here as well.
So it is very relevant to investigate the interaction of insects with these viruses.
And now of course, some of these viruses can be transmitted to mammalian hosts, and this
is an old slide from an article that's related the history of the identification of new viruses,
and you can see that a number of these viruses are atropod-born viruses transmitted by insects,
and as we have seen since 2013, this was pre-Zika for example, there are certainly a number of
other viruses to come, hence the importance to understand why mosquitoes transmit viruses
and why there are these epidemics some years, and then the year after it's gone, and we
don't really understand why.
And so what happens is that we have the urban cycle here where people get infected, and these
viruses sometimes may spill over from a silvetic circle where they are transmitted to wild
animals.
And so one of the parameters we've all heard about the importance of the microbiome in
a number of biological functions, and one component of the microbiome is also the varum,
the viruses, and a lot of insects actually harbor viruses that we've seen in the previous
slides.
So hence the question, could persistent viruses present in mosquitoes be involved in the rate
of transmission of insects?
And so with my colleague and friend Joel Marx, we started to look into that a few years ago,
and so briefly to isolate viruses, so the traditional technique is to filtrate sample
tissue to grow viruses on tissue culture, to use electron microscopy, and each of these
techniques are not very sensitive, prone to bias, you may contaminate the sample when you
work it.
And so there is a direct method now, which is just to use eye throughput sequencing to
identify new sequences, and this is what our Chinese colleagues have done in the papers
I mentioned in my introduction.
And in this case, you isolate RNA, you make cDNA synthesis, and you do eye throughput
sequences.
And then you compare the sequences you have to databases to find if you have viral sequences.
So now I just want to make one introduction to the immune system of insects against viral
infections, and this is a slide that summarizes the finding that we have made in our lab in
Strasbourg, but also a lot of other labs in Europe and the US and elsewhere.
And so basically, there is a major response to viral infections is RNA interference in
insects, and basically whatever the virus you can find that they can be targeted by
RNA interference, and then there are other genes encoding either restriction factors
or signaling pathways, receptors that trigger inducible responses.
And so first I will tell you about in connection to this viral analysis about this first response,
which is an antiviral RNA.
So the principle here is that when you have, so here it's the case of a positive strain
RNA virus that enters the cells, the genome of the virus is like a messenger RNA, it will
be translated, and this will produce the polymerase, which is an RNA polymerase, RNA dependent.
And this enzyme will copy, will use the plus strand as a template to make the anti genome,
the minus strand, and then in turn the minus strand will become the template for the polymerase
to make the plus strand.
And in this intermediate step of replication, you have double-stranded RNA that is generated.
And this is recognized by the enzyme Dysotoo, which is an RNA-free enzyme.
And so Dysotoo will bind to the viral double-stranded RNA, and this RNA-free will cut it, and it
will generate 21 nucleotide long, small interfering RNAs or SI RNAs.
And this duplex will then be loaded on another enzyme named Agotoo, with the help of this
RNA-binding protein called R2D2.
And in Agotoo, one of the two strands will be cleaved and discarded, and the remaining
strand will remain and act as a guide.
So it will provide the information that will allow Agotoo to recognize the viral sequences
by base pairing.
So it's an extremely adaptive system.
The recognition of foreign double-stranded RNA will generate a small RNA that will program
the nucleus to degrade the viral RNAs.
So and to show you how robust this is, you have here the small RNAs that are generated
in two insects.
So this is a virus that is called vesicular stomatitis virus.
It's an arbovirus transmitted to vertebrates, mainly cattle, by insects.
And here, this is what we obtained in laboratory in the fly.
This was work that was done a while ago in collaboration with Carla Saleh at the Pasteur
Institute.
And basically, what you have on the first graph here on the top, it's the size of the
small RNAs.
So basically, we sequence the small RNAs, and you will see that we have a sharp peak precisely
at 21, which is the size produced by Dysotoo.
And the second graph here, you have the abscise here is the viral genome.
And in blue and red, you have the number of small RNAs that were sequenced in blue when
they matched the plus strand, and in red when they matched the minus strand.
And so basically, what you can see is that the whole genome is covered, and you have
the same density on the plus strand and on the minus strand, which is exactly what you
expect if these small RNAs were produced from double-stranded RNA.
And last year, we published with Joe, we repeated the same analysis, but this time in one of
the vectors, the natural vectors of VSV, which is Luzomia longipalpis.
And what you can see is that the picture is very similar with the sharp peak at 21, and
then the coverage, the homogenous coverage on the two strands of the genome.
And so the connection of this to the viral analysis is that this leaves us with a choice
if we want to identify viruses by RNA sequencing.
We have the choice between looking at traditional RNA sequencing, where you just take long
RNAs and you sequence them, or we can make the choice to just sequence these small RNAs.
In other words, what is produced by the immune system.
The advantage of doing this is that then we look really at viruses that are replicating,
and that were recognized as replicating and potentially dangerous by the immune system.
And so with Joe Marcus, we compared with this group in Belo Horizonte in Brazil.
We compared for the same samples, long RNA sequencing to small RNA sequencing.
And for most RNAs, as we might expect, we get more information by long RNA sequencing
than small RNA sequencing.
But when it comes to viruses, the picture is different.
And here you have the size of the viral contigs that we could assemble from this sequencing.
And what you can see is that in these three samples, the contigs are much longer when
we do short RNA sequencing compared to long RNA sequencing.
And as a result, when we try to identify the virus, we have a much better result with the
short RNA sequencing.
So here we have three viruses that were identified in these samples.
And here you have the coverage with the long RNA sec.
And you can see there are lots of holes.
It's very incomplete.
But with the short RNA sec, we basically reconstitute the whole genome, showing the
promise of this technique.
And now I'll show you briefly one application of that.
And this is, again, work conducted against another directorship of Joe.
So where we investigated a small city in Minas Gerais, Karachinga, and where mosquitoes
were collected.
And so a total of more than 700 mosquitoes were collected.
And 31 of them were sequenced.
And so basically we identified viruses in these samples.
So one of them is a phasikowen-like virus, a bunia virus that was identified some years
ago in Southeast Asia.
So it is present in Brazil as well.
The other one had been discovered by Joe and his team a few years before in the neighborhood
of Rio de Janeiro.
And the third one was a new virus, mosquito Karachinga virus.
And using this technique of small RNA sec.
Now this city of Karachinga was not taken just by chance.
It's in a region that is endemic for dengue.
And so now we can ask the question whether the presence of these virus might have an
effect on the transmission of dengue.
And so far the data that we have is that when you look at the presence, first at the blood
of patients that are available.
So you find dengue in a percentage of the patients, but we don't find the other viruses
indicating that they are present in the mosquitoes, but they are not transmitted or they do not
replicate in humans, which fits with the fact that we cannot replicate them and grow them
on mammalian cell lines.
And when you look at IDES Egypti, so you can see first that the prevalence of these viruses
is quite high.
And by contrast, the prevalence of dengue is quite low.
It's expected that people report in a few percent of the mosquitoes are infected by
dengue.
But what is interesting is that if we look at the association of dengue with HTV or
PCLV, we see a correlation and we see a higher prevalence of dengue in the mosquitoes that
contain HTV, this is highly significant, or PCLV even though in this case it's less
significant.
Suggesting, of course, this is only correlation, so now we have to prove this in the laboratory,
but suggesting that the presence of these persistent viruses is not neutral and can
have an impact on the transmission of dengue and maybe other viruses to humans.
And so in summary, for this first part, the information that we can get about biodiversity
through these high throughput sequencing techniques can help us to understand the dynamics of
vector competence.
Possibly it can help to prevent the outbreaks of novel viruses because maybe some of the
viruses that we identify can become new threats infecting humans.
And also when you look at the prevalence of these two viruses, PCLV and HTV, this could
be one day turned into great vectors for manipulation of mosquitoes.
So I will now switch to the second part of the talk, so I've talked to you now mainly
on viruses and how they may affect the immune system of the host.
And I want now to say a few words about the immune defense of insect against viruses.
And again, I go back to this same slide, and so there's the RNA interference.
And then there are a number of genes that are induced by infection, this is something
that we observed and others observed.
And a few years ago, we decided to investigate one gene that we call the DDL, it doesn't
look like anything known.
And the reason we were interested in this gene is that as you can see here, what you
have here is the expression of this gene in flies infected by different viruses that belong
to different families.
And you can see that this gene is induced by four of the five viruses that are tested
here.
In particular, it's very strongly induced by synbis and VSV here, so this is now Josephila.
And so this was one reason to be interested in this gene.
And the other reason was that when we looked at it, at its sequence, it didn't look like
anything that was clearly not conserved in humans, so for a lot of grant agencies, it's
not something that would be that interesting.
So when we looked at the sequence, first we were able to crystallize it and get the structure
in collaboration with Ana Houssel in Marseille, so it's a new fold, it's a secreted protein,
circulating protein.
But when we looked in the database, so here's the Josephila protein, we found that it was
conserved in the genome of several viruses.
And not only that, it was conserved in granuloviruses, so like baculovirus, in ascoviruses, and even
an entomopox virus.
So this means that this did not occur once, it's known that cellulogenes can be hijacked
by viruses, and here this gene was hijacked, but not only once at multiple times.
And not only that, we also identified a related protein in the venoms of some parasitic wasps,
which instillate venom together with immunosuppressive substances in the larvae in which they inject
their eggs.
So this told us that this gene, there was probably something interesting, induced by
virus, hijacked by other viruses.
And so we decided to study infarction in Josephila and to cut a long story short, I'll just
show you the phenotype of the mutant flies.
So we generated null mutant flies for a needle, and what we found is that these flies are
short lived, and especially when we infect them by one virus in this, they die rapidly
compared to the wild type.
Interestingly, the next thing we do in these cases is that we look at the valve tighter
to, because usually we expect that the flies die because they cannot control the virus,
and there's a lot of virus replicating.
And there was not more virus replicating here than here.
So the reason the flies die, it's not because they do not control the virus.
And so then we looked at the transcriptome of these flies, we looked at the genes they
expressed, and here we had a very striking picture.
We had a very strong, I will call it here for sake of simplicity, inflammatory response,
so we had a very strong induction of antimicrobial genes as if these flies were infected by bacteria.
And it's known that these antimicrobial peptides, many of them are cationic, at high doses,
they can have toxic effect.
And all the more so here because it's persistent, it's not a transient response as you would
have in a normal antimicrobial response, but these flies mutant for needle, they make
all the time a huge amount of antimicrobial peptides.
And so we suspected that this was the reason why they died, and so it was easy to prove
it, because there are two signaling pathways that regulate expression of these antimicrobial
peptides.
And one of them, the signature of the genes that we have was really coming from one of
the pathways, which is a pathway discovered by Jules Hoffman and Bruno LeMette when he
was in the lab, that is called the Immune Deficiency Pathway.
And so we combined the mutation of a needle with IKK gamma, which is one gene of the pathway,
but we had the same results with IMD.
And what you can see is that when we combined the needle mutation with a mutation of the
IMD pathway, we have a spectacular recovery of the flies, confirming that indeed there's
nothing wrong with the needle not being there, the needle is just there to control the IMD
pathway, and if you block the IMD pathway, the flies recover.
So the bottom line is that this told us that a needle was a suppressor of the IMD pathway,
and you can learn a lot of things about immunology by looking at viruses, because viruses, when
a pathway is bothering them, very often they find a way to neutralize it, and in particular
by acquiring some genes.
And so for example, it's known that a lot of gene viruses have suppressors of RNAi, others
have suppressors of apoptosis, baculovirus in particular, inhibition of translation.
And so now we describe that several insect viruses have suppressors of the IMD pathway.
So the corollary of this is that the IMD pathway must do something to viruses.
And Akira Goto, a scientist from the lab, looked into that in detail, and he identified
a function, not for the whole IMD pathway, but for two important genes of the pathway,
the kinase IKK beta, and the NFK-PA-B transcription factor relish.
So you can see that when you silence these two genes, there is a strong increase of replication
of the speak-on-alike virus here.
And so to cut a long story short, we identified one gene regulated by IKK beta, which is a
molecule called STING, and that we could prove that STING acts upstream of IKK beta in this
pathway.
And this is very interesting, because STING is a very important gene in innate immunity
in mammals.
STING means stimulator of interferon genes.
And there are no interferons in insects, but yet STING is present, and we show that it
regulates an induced response.
And so if there are no interferons, what are the antiviral genes that are controlled by
this STING pathway?
And Akira and Kyoshi Ogado, who was a postdoc, just looked, undertook a small functional
screen for genes regulated by IKK beta to find genes that are antiviral.
And here you have a loss of function screen, and what you can see that we have two genes
here at the end.
When you silence them, there is an increase of our replication, just as when you silence
the kinase IKK beta.
And here it's the opposite.
It's a gain of function screen, so they over-express this gene alone, and they look if it does
something to the virus, and you can see that these two genes also, they reduce the virus.
So one of these two genes is the factor STING.
And now I'll finish by mentioning the other genes.
This was an unknown gene, and so we call it NAZO, which in Japanese means enigma.
And so what is NAZO?
This is a protein with a single transmembrane domain, and I call it a Jozophila innovation.
What is the reason?
This gene is present in all animals.
In humans, it's called C19 of 12.
It has no known function for the moment.
And the innovation is that in Jozophila, the gene has been duplicated, and so there
are two copies.
And so one of them we call NAZO, and the other one that is more closely related to the gene
in the other animal, so it's probably the ancestral copy we call Father of NAZO.
And what is interesting is that there are a number of species of Jozophila for which
the genome has been sequenced, and so we can exactly tell when the duplication occurred.
And you can see that, for example, the subgenus Jozophila doesn't have the NAZO.
They have the Father of NAZO, but they don't have NAZO, whereas the Sophophora subgenus
have both NAZO and the Father of NAZO.
And what is interesting is that when we overexpressed NAZO, so here it's in stable cell lines,
so we induce expression of NAZO here, and here you have the effect on the virus.
And you can see that in each of these cell lines, each time we induce NAZO, we have a
very strong effect on the virus, we completely nearly completely block the virus.
But if we do the same experiment with the Father of NAZO, so here we induce the expression,
and you can see that we have absolutely no effect.
So it was a duplication and a newly acquired function.
And so I believe that this is something that the insect field can bring, this is a very
fundamental question.
How do you build an immune system?
And with this gene now, NAZO, now we have a very good system to ask how a gene became
an immune gene using these fantastic tools of all the Josephila species for which the
genome has been sequenced.
And what is really interesting, so you have here in bold the ones that we have now in
the laboratory, and you can see what is interesting.
So they all have sting and the Father of NAZO, but then some of them have NAZO, but not others.
And what is really interesting is that here you have the sensitivity to Josephila C virus,
the Spiccana virus that is passed with targets.
You can see that the sensitivity varies, and you can see that even though some of them are
very closely related, but they differ in their sensitivity.
And what's also very interesting is that they differ in their ecology, and so we can see
how the environment maybe helped to shape the repertoire of immune gene in these functions.
And so I will start by this last slide.
So we have on one hand this tremendous variability of insect viruses with common roots to the
virus that plague humans.
And then we have on the other hand this fantastic variety of insects that is not exploited to
the moment.
And genes like NAZO, which is in the one 2% of genes that are specific to one insect,
they can have as I demonstrated some very strong antiviral effect.
And so basically the message is that there is a very important diversity of antiviral
genes and maybe also probably antibacterial, antifinal genes in all these insects.
And this could be a very interesting challenge for future study to pinpoint what these genes
are and how they work.
And with this I'll stop and I'll thank my co-workers who are listed here.
And as I mentioned, this is collaboration with the group of Joe, who now also has a team
in Strasbourg.
Thank you for your attention.
Thank you, Jean-Luc.
So we have a couple of minutes for questions.
Hi Jean-Luc, very nice talk.
I wonder if you already found the counterpart of NAZO in mosquitoes.
So there is a counterpart of NAZO in mosquito.
There is no, but there's no sting, which is intriguing.
And so this is one thing that we would like to know.
So first in the Josephila, we will focus on the Josephilis for that.
So there are species which have sting, but don't have NAZO.
So then the question is, is sting antiviral?
My suspicion is that sting will be antiviral.
And then we want to look at what other genes are regulated by sting and mediate the antiviral
effect.
But in the case of mosquitoes, it will be also interesting to see if NAZO is regulated by
infection or not.
But this we don't know for a long time.
Please use your microphone if somebody has questions.
Yes, I have a question on the first part of the talk.
On the HTV, it belongs to little virility.
It does not replicate in mammalian cells.
And it has been, well, it's not infected in human.
But it's a group of plant viruses also.
So I don't know, I'm not a virologist, if they infect other hosts, the HTV or the little,
if there are other little virility that do not infect non-plant hosts.
And my question relates to the ecology of mosquitoes that are linked to plants because
they are nectar feeders.
And eventually they can also feed on other plants, et cetera.
So they are dealing with plants.
So this is a very good question.
So what the slide was showing is the heat you have in the gene bank.
So one big limitation when you do metagenomics like that is that in the end you have these
sequences and you blast them against the database and it comes back with homology, with the polymerase.
So the fact that the polymerase comes from the envelope or the capsic protein comes from
one virus does not mean that the virus is from this family.
So this is the first element.
The second element is that you're perfectly right.
And this is a big limitation also of metagenomics is that when you find a sequence, does it
come from maybe some integrated sequence in the genome?
Does it come from indeed the food that was taken?
And so this is what's interesting with this small RNA sequencing is that we focus on the
21 nucleotide reads which is produced by the immune system.
So if we detect it, it means that the virus replicates.
And so indeed there's no doubt that HTV is a mosquito virus and is replicating and persistent
in the mosquito populations even when they are taken to the lab.
Thank you very much, Jean-Luc.
And we have to move to the next talk and thank you, Jean-Luc, again.
