One thing that you said during one I can't remember which one you said that you would you should write a science fiction novel
But you you don't want to write fiction. You don't think that you're good. I'm not I'm not I'm not a good fiction writer
Yeah, but I was thinking and
Like in the style of phaedris or a meal or like some sort of dialogue where you're talking to you're talking to the student
You know cuz I yeah
There's I mean
Sure, go on. Well, you talk about like one of your big ideas is this this monarch
But I don't I don't get a sense of who that monarch would be like what it would his character be like you talk about the system
But I wonder like if you get a bad guy in the system. How do you know like from your perspective like what virtues?
this this yeah, I mean, I think I think people try to sort of
There's a lot of
Fear there and people try to sort of overplay
People sort of overplay the problem which is like somewhat
banal in my view
I mean, you know one way to think about it is
If you look at the fortune 500 companies, right, there's 500 of them because that's why it's the fortune 500
and
You know the smallest of them has certainly thousands of employees
And so you've got
Sort of 500 men and women
From that world who are experienced in holding that kind of
Responsibility and if you look at their sets of like virtues and vices
they're probably mostly pretty similar and
You know
Some of the ways I sort of regard people's kind of fear of monarchy is
They sort of
Imagine you're picking the CEO of Chipotle, right? And you're like first great priority is he's not gonna run
Come up and with an evil scheme to like poison the burritos
Because clearly he's the CEO so he could order poison put in the burritos could be a slow acting poison
something right and and it's like the the
executive search team when
They pick the Chipotle CEO
Does not really worry about we got to find someone who's not gonna poison the burritos and
So like, you know, your bar is just a good bit higher than that
And so, you know, I don't know who the CEO Chipotle is. He's probably fine. He's probably I mean, I guess, you know, the thing is that
There are
One of the ways people talk about the job in Silicon Valley is to describe the two kinds of CEOs
Sort of people will say wartime CEOs and peacetime CEOs
That doesn't mean these companies are actually making war. It just means that a peacetime CEO
as the CEO who's
Basically has something that's executing on a smooth keel and kind of needs to keep it forward and moving forward and executing
Sort of smoothly. So if you look like in terms of Apple say Steve Jobs is as a wartime CEO and Tim Cook is more of a peacetime CEO
Right, which is not to say that he's not making tough decisions or tough choices every day, but he's not really
You know someone that you would want in there if their mission was to like entirely change what Apple is
and so
To a certain extent when you're establishing any kind of a new regime
That's a kind of wartime situation. And so you need someone that's a very very dynamic
that's willing to like rip up a lot of pieces of paper and
Like a no sir or a naysayer like somebody. Yeah, like or yeah, I mean, but even even, you know
Would you call even must Elon Musk?
You know a naysayer, you know, Elon Musk is someone with a lot of initiative who basically can make things happen and
You know, the role of a peacetime CEO is sort of more to like preside over something that's working smoothly
Which is why if you put someone like that in a position where large changes need to be made, you don't really have the right person
But you know, the thing is that it's just not like we sort of
Accompany the job with this like mystical air in some ways and it's actually
It's a you know governing is or should be a pretty banal thing
It's like it's gotten sort of a lot of like
you know
Very big romantic ideas associated with it and there's a lot of power there
There's a lot of power there. But but the thing is that you know when when you
when you have
mechanisms for
putting someone in that power that basically sort of
depend on
Like a kind of
Certain like if the sort of the main
Problem with a lot of the
A
Lot of 20th century governance has a very high crazy level and when you look at basically the very high crazy level of 20th century
Governance, you basically see that there are crazy incentives
Driving the way that people both get to make these decisions and crazy incentives driving them when they're making these decisions and
Normally, it's best to see like the
People who wind up in those slots as kind of
Their craziness is in general constructed by those processes or those
You know sort of like their hands are sort of tie. Yeah, the climate or the structure their hands are sort of tied in terms of
How sane they can be and I think that people think of like
sort of
Like people have been exposed to so many
Romantic ideas of governance that they don't
Really even have an idea of what sanity is
I mean, what is sanity for example for the CEO for an organization like Tesla for an organization like Ford?
There's a whole bunch of constraints that sort of immediately tie you
To a vision of the same, you know Tesla is not gonna go out
and
Invade the island of Haiti and like, you know
Re-enslave the Haitians and set them to making sugarcane. It's just not that is not going to happen
That is not within the realm of like saying things that Tesla could do Tesla is not going to say
Tomorrow we're gonna take over the dental floss business
We're gonna become the kings of dental floss like they are not gonna do this and and so
when you're in sort of like a
System and a structure that defines what sanity is whether you're Elon Musk or Elizabeth the first or Louis the 14th
You have like it's sort of
It feels like this much less sort of open-ended kind of crazy problem of like
Oh, we're gonna go crazy and invade the moon or like, you know, and and there's there's like there's a lot of things that
Washington does every day that are as crazy as invading the moon and when you look at the way
Those crazy things happen
It's not because of one or two crazy people actually generally the people involved in these things are like very
sensible and very good and very
You know practical under yeah practical down earth people
Team players, you know, they're just basically in a system that makes them make, you know, crazy decisions
I mean for me that COVID thing because I'm a you know, believer in the in the lab leak theory of COVID is
such a perfect sort of case of like
We're gonna have these crazy incentives that basically leave us doing this extremely dangerous
gain of function research in this very very risky and unsafe way and
the
Because there's the government has taken on too much problems like with the company like Tesla
They have a very specific mandate and with the government. It's so open-ended. Is that where the craziness or the stochastic?
Chaos is coming. That's giving rise to I mean and behaviors the the
Like I
Mean, you know even the question of what the mission of
Government is which seemed very obvious and very straightforward
Sadie the Elizabethans has taken on all this sort of
Chili-astic and messianic kind of you know overtones
I mean even when you look at for example
when you dive into
Say a question like foreign policy, it's sort of dubious as to whether
There's sort of ever been any clear sanity guiding us foreign policy
I mean if you go and look for example at Washington's farewell address
Which you predict, you know the farewell address
I
Could but I'll just I'll just summarize it
You know his farewell address is sort of he's like reminding Americans that their foreign policy should be conducted in the you know
The interests of America and it's that he's expressing
it's it's one of the expressions of kind of what is sometimes called isolationist foreign policy and
he's basically
Sort of painting this picture very 18th century picture of a kind of wise approach to foreign policy and
You know, this is all very well, but you sort of read it and you're like
Why do you have to say this and the reason he had to say this and warned against basically
sort of
being
pulled into the quarrels of others and
Is that already?
Basically many Americans including the Americans who didn't really disagree didn't really agree with George Washington too much
We're very very eager to basically see the United States become the kind of world home base of revolutionary politics
And so right away you had this, you know, we've always been dreamers then or at least there
You had this incredibly wacky event with this guy's citizen Jenae who was the the French Revolutionary Ambassador to the US and basically
Made him made such a news made himself such a nuisance that he actually got kicked out was but was basically sort of proceeding on this plan and
The level of like support for the French Revolution
Even as sort of at its most
Sanguinary days
Was you know, you'll have all these lines from Jefferson where he's like the tree of you know
The tree of liberty must be refreshed with the blood of tyrants or like shit like that
You know where he's basically like, you know, he's like, ah, you know, he reacts to this insane shit in France where he's been
Right, but you got to kill a few people every once in a while, right? You know, it's kind of creepy, right? You know and and
distinctly
reminiscent of
American sympathy for Stalin or for, you know, the Russian Revolution
I mean in 1848 there's this
Of course outright, you know sort of outbreak of almost what we would now call color revolutions across Europe and
This one character in Hungary this guy because sooth becomes the liberal leader of Hungary
Is then chased out by, you know, the Russian Russian troops help the Habsburgs reinstall themselves
Kassuth gets chased out and he becomes this massive public celebrity first in London and then in America
Where basically people are doing exactly the same thing with sort of the Hungarians in 1848 that they're doing say with the Ukrainians now
They're basically found, you know, they're sort of doing exactly what Washington was telling them not to do
They've basically found the sort of foreign quarrel developed an emotionally interested and picked a side and
like, you know
gone
Bananas over it. Do you think there's something to do with our culture then that we like to
Kind of embosom the world or we find a conflict that doesn't necessarily have to do with us
And we just identify with that that make
Yeah, it's like a sick gladiatorial, you know reflex. It's like if you remember the Arab spring, right?
You were probably excited about the Arab spring
That was the bipartisan, you know excitement everyone was excited about the Arab spring and that's cool
The internet was doing it making waves, you know, Twitter and Facebook. I know I know I know I know and and this is like
Yeah, Twitter and Facebook were and you remember like Google guy in Egypt, right, you know
And that movement wound up killing about 500 000 to a million people
It did not cause the civil war in Egypt, which it almost did which certainly would have killed a few more million people
It devastated Syria and Libya
And it was like it was sort of funny watching, you know, sort of the American
Democratic governance machine in a situation where
Public opinion and the deep state are really sort of completely aligned and we feel that we're doing this very clearly
unambiguously good thing
And then it just results in just like
horror and disaster as usual and the
The responsive people
There's sort of one test I use for like sanity in that situation
Which is kind of a good Samaritan test and if you're really acting
as a as a good Samaritan in this case, let's say you
You're walking down the street and you see a horrific motorcycle accident
And you're the first one on the scene you run over to the guy. He's lying there in his motorcycle helmet
You like take his helmet off
Don't do that. You made a mistake
Do not move the helmet of someone who has had a motorcycle accident because it turns out that you just broke his neck and
Or he broke his neck, but you broke his spinal cord and paralyzed him for life
Let the mts handle that one, right? But you didn't right? You were trying to be nice
You were trying to help but you basically just inflicted this
horrendous life-changing thing on these people, right?
And so if you're basically doing that with the sort of the true spirit of charity and altruism
You're going to be pretty beaten up about that. You're going to think hard about wow
I was trying to help but instead I inflicted this crazy level of damage
and
You would definitely never do something like that again
And but we don't as a country we were but with arab spring it was like, oh this didn't work out
It's too bad. Let's change the channel, right? You know, and so there's this sense of like
sort of
Deranged and irresponsible like power in a sense running free, you know, it's like when you compare say
libya
Or the libyan revolutionaries in 2012 or whenever it was to
Sort of foreign policy of the past the thing that it instantly reminds you of
Is say the spanish-american war
Or say the reunification of italy by garibaldi
Garibaldi certainly reunified italy with his like 300 red shirts or whatever, but um
That was reconquer the kingdom of the two sysleys with this 300 red shirts
Which was possible only because he had the british navy right offshore declaring basically a no sale zone
Whatever the equivalent was at the time, right? So it was this sort of act of
Kind of somewhat naked imperialism and the result was
A new unified italy which was to some extent a british client state
Which offered a lot of new commercial opportunities to british merchants
You look at the spanish-american war
It has all of these like
You know all this liberal rhetoric about how you know in the yellow press about how you know the evil spanish generals are
Abusing, you know fetching cuban maidens and so forth. They really laden on extremely thick
And and like just like at a level of like blatancy. That's just utterly comical today
um
But on the other hand, um
So it was sort of this kind of high point of like liberal imperialism or like
An attack on a foreign power that was basically justified by sort of liberal thinking
On the other hand this liberal thinking resulted in basically the acquisition of cuba the philippines and portorico
um
Say what you want about portorico, but these are valuable properties basically
And we're treated as valuable properties and returned much to like american
Colonialist investors and the united fruit company and so on and so forth
And so you basically look at that sort of liberal imperialism and you're like, okay
There's something predatory here clearly
um
You know from the perspective of spain there's something very predatory going on here on the other hand like
what
The us in 1898
killed it ate
And so it was like a dog like there's something ugly about it and there's something beautiful about it
It's like a wolf hunting a deer, you know, like, you know, this is only going to end one way
You know, the wolf was going to take down the deer and then the wolf was going to eat right
And the thing is when you look at sort of the liberal imperialism of today
it's like
It's like a dog killing sheep
Like there's an instinct to like take out gadoffy
There's an instinct to take out Assad
It feels great to have wheeled obama and put it something on his teleprompter where he's like Assad must go bubaric must go gadoffy must go
um
People understate the sort of power of american soft power to the point where
If you wheeled obama out and had him say like merkel must go you could probably start a civil war in germany that way
Um, but
You know just by just by him saying that just just by the moral authority
Just by basically saying we remove the moral authority from this regime that we have established
And if you basically yeah, I mean you could you know, amazing things are possible with that shit. Um
but um
This liberal retric or this this liberal facade of generosity of caring is always hiding some
Sort of power play or you can't separate those two. Would it be better to just it's like it's like can't
It can't it's an interesting question. It's like it's hiding
It's not really an absence of
sincerity
It's that it's sort of
It's a thing that the sincerity kind of doesn't know itself
And so people think that they're genuinely sincere
That what they're sort of doing
is
Caring but what's actually sort of driving them and driving the structures there
Is something where when the effects of the caring
Are extremely bad and counterproductive. There's no caring about that. So in a way, it's like
It's something that really wants to think of itself as kind of a duty of care
But you can also read it as this like perverse gladiatorial fascination
And you know this thing of like
We're using ukraine to weaken putin and we're gonna like fight to the last ukrainian
I mean, it's like if you think you're doing a good thing for ukraine
Excuse me the ukraine here. If you think you're doing a good thing for the ukraine
you're already
several hundred yards
Behind the goal line here like many bad things have already happened to ukraine the ukraine as a result of this
policy of arming it to like basically as an anti-russian power
So you might say we're gonna get the 300 yards back and we're gonna get back to our own 20
But you've got you're you're not even in the stadium right now in terms of the damage you've inflicted on this country
and
You would say well the ukranians are into it. Well, yeah, I mean like
The jedi mind powers of like the american
cosmopolitan ruling class
are extremely great
and
If we went past sort of our current
Enthusiasm into like
Some kind of full-on jim jones suicide cult
I feel like a lot of the chic people in
Warsaw and Kiev and levove would be committing suicide as well
Um, I think that's sort of how powerful that kind of fashion dominance is in a way and so
and that was certainly the case with the
kind of
tiny fringes of sort of liberal elite who
Were very into the arab spring also
It's like wow civil society in libya or civil civil society in egypt is going to get a huge boost
Um, and they didn't but you could see where they were sort of coming from
With that and so
that we just like uh with
I don't know. I don't want to get into european
History or something, but i'm just thinking we inflict that on ourselves through
Wokeness or dei training
It seems like with the black lives matter event like the liberal
Cosmopolitan elite was all on board with defunding the police. We're going to liberate these
These these areas of our own country and now those areas are completely decimated by yeah all of them
Well, I mean, yeah, I mean it wasn't rhetoric. It doesn't actually translate into hoping it wasn't
I mean, it wasn't the the first time. I mean if you look at
basically
60 years ago
Every major american city
Had like a thriving black business district. It had a thriving black upper class residential district
Um, you know in those areas of general are burned out now and that was basically
Something that happened in the late 60s and early 70s
and
you know the connection between
that and
the civil rights movement which um
Americans saw on their TVs and supported with great enthusiasm seems to be sort of rather
Direct in a way. Um
And so you're basically
again
Looking at something where if you're like
Wow
Let's say i'm like flying a drone over urban african-american areas
In like 1962 and 2022 what i'm going to observe with my eyes is that these areas have been like
decimated and so I would basically assume that um
Sometime in the 60s some kind of radical anti-black party had come to power
Maybe the klu Klux Klan had won the election in 68 and that would explain why these areas had been systematically destroyed
Right, and that's not indeed what happened. You know what happened was actually the opposite of that. What happened was that
basically
A set an aspect of america that hadn't gotten a whole lot of attention or sympathy
Or this or you know empathy you might say
Receive that and the result of this emotion was
seemed to be and you know
just to
A physical observer of the people in the places
Seems to be a great deal of destruction
and the mentality of like
Our intentions are good. Our hearts are pure and so we don't really have to think about
The destruction that we're causing or the destruction that results here
is not
the way that people whose hearts are pure think
and
At no point under any of these examples to the people who are taking off the bike helmet
Actually have to deal with the severed spine or or recognize that they're at fault for doing that. It doesn't seem
Yes, that's capable or the system itself
There are the liberal I guess culture just can't see they're they're they're motivated by like
there's something that
Is very similar
To empathy and sort of easily
Masquerades as it but like drives out the real thing
It's like a kind of Gresham's law where bad money drives out good bad empathy drives out good empathy
um
and
So, you know, one of the ways to think about well, you know, you're like, what is this bad empathy?
What is this thing that
is like empathy, but is not empathy and
It reminds me of this etymological fact that I love that I always quote which is the etymology of the word lord
Lord is an old anglo-saxon word and it comes from
Hlawford
which means the cloth is
loaf
as in bread
and the word is word is in guard is in basically so
Your lord is basically he who guards your bread. He who gives you this day your daily bread and um
If you're feeding someone you basically are his lord
Because even if you don't care to tell him what to do you could
And you could say if you don't do this, I'm not gonna feed you
And so the sort of, you know, basically the sense that you have of like
Caring for others is like closely entwined with the sense of being lord over them
and
You know, certainly as a parent like you feel that very closely like the the sort of the care and the dependency
Are all very much tied together
and so
in a way when people adopt these sort of, you know
The mindset that supports these kinds of foreign policies, they sort of
Acquiring or domestic policies. They're sort of acquiring clients in a way
They're sort of feeling themselves become more powerful
Because they're feeling themselves owning others by caring for others. It's it's it's actually it's
represented on twitter the people who put ukraine flags in their bio are kind of claiming ukraine as their own in a way
Yeah, they're claiming ukraine as absolutely. They're claiming ukraine as their as their possession and they don't really understand
Yeah, as their vassal state, right, you know, and they sort of don't understand like
because they've sort of only been exposed to
Imperialism as a caricature
They don't really understand how close this is to
the way that actual imperialists thought
And so yeah, they're basically kind of classic. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah white man's burden, right?
And so basically, you know, they're they're taking up the
You know the the white man's burden when they put the ukraine flag in their
In their thing, I mean, you know, of course raises the question of whether slobs are white, but um, you know, we don't have to go into that
etymology of slave if you want to hey, there you go, there you go, right, right, right, right
And now it's like they wear these track suits. They have this like squat, you know the
I mean, you know, I don't know if you know that like some of the rhetoric, you know, the sort of ukrainian russian rhetoric is absolutely
deranged and the word more deranged than our
Blue-red rhetoric
Yes, because the slur that ukrainians have picked up on that they
um
Use for russian is orcs
Literally orcs. They stole it from tolkin, right?
And so they basically think of them as like subhuman creatures from the east
And and one of the things that triggered the original revolt in the donbass in 2014
Was basically as soon as the kind of western ukrainians got control of the ukrainian state
They started passing all of these like anti russian laws
Like you have to like not speak russian and like change your name to like the funny looking ukrainian spelling
And you'll see pictures on yes, so they did a cultural genocide
Yeah, that's a strong genocide, but it's basically yeah
It's the sort of thing that basically you do to a cultural, you know minority that you basically want to kind of
You know bring into line, you know, you could compare it if you were feeling generous to like the way
That like northern france treated southern france like 500 600 years ago, right, you know, and and and it's like the
And and so you'll see pictures one of the old folk punishments or whatever which gets used a lot
In ukraine is tying people to trees
And so I don't know if you go around you'll see in twitter people tied to trees or telephone poles
And sometimes their faces have been painted green to show that there are orcs
Um, this would be like I don't think that like
Speaking russian is not going to do that
But like basically you're being accused of being a russian sympathizer
So it's just this like, you know, you go into like the inside of this war and there's just like insane shit everywhere, right?
you know and and
Needless to say the people with ukrainian flags in their in their twitter handles
Would probably never tie anyone to a tree and paint their face green for speaking the wrong language
But like that that was probably not really in their like bag of tricks like at all really
But like that's sort of what they're
When they basically sort of picked sides in this like nationalistic balkan basically fight
I'm sure all all ukrainians would be insulted by my use of the word balkan
But you know the the like, you know, you're just doing this like
There's this level at what
Where what you're doing is this kind of
gladiatorial
Spectator thing and like to like sort of step sort of all the way
back, right
It's like when
You know, you look at the foreign policy that's driven this where you know, there were these constant promises made to like not expand nato
And then it's like, oops. Sorry. It looks like we're expanding nato, right, you know and the
like
the sense of
a
Driving force behind this kind of foreign policy, which is not in any way the force of reason
Is like you're just like it's sort of it's just like power is flowing
Into wherever it wants to go and it's sort of reminiscent
There's a lot of this kind of foreign policy that's like very reminiscent of the frog in the scorpion, right?
Where basically it's just sort of
The nature of this whole system, which includes both the
bureaucrats you run it and the sort of supporters of it who basically like
Have these incentives to basically cause trouble and create problems
And they don't see it that way. That is not their framework. They're basically
Trying to like create freedom, but their sense of freedom is basically they see one stone on top of another and they're like
We must liberate the stone on the bottom
And so, you know, sort of freedom is kind of becomes
indistinguishable from
a kind of like destruction and so
You look at basically the like things that
like
When you compare for example, afghanistan to vietnam
you know, basically
First of all afghanistan is run by people who's like
Formative experience was the lessons learned from vietnam
And just in terms of like age cohort. It didn't seem to learn any lesson at all and like
vietnam
afghanistan makes vietnam looks sane
And
Like it made vietnam looks sane. It was just like all we're never gonna get the you know full metal jacket movies
It's never gonna be romanticized or yeah, yeah
And and there's no like, you know, it's like when you look at sort of for example
Like the reality of the south vietnamese government is like much realer than the afghan government
Like the level of like, you know
sort of just like everything about
Vietnam you can sort of find ways to look at the vietnam effort where you're like, okay, there are certain ways
Ultimately in the end this didn't make sense and it didn't work
But you can kind of see
Here are things that made sense that like this was maybe like close to and you can't even find out for afghanistan
and so you have just like all of these things whether it's like
Invading afghanistan and trying to like you know for 20 years we're there
Spending 20 years in this comical ridiculous ineffective attempt to turn it into vermont or something
And maybe we would have been happy with florida
Maybe we could have been happy. Maybe we could have been happy with oklahoma
Maybe we could have been happy with guam, but no, you know, we needed we needed the vermont concept of you know
The bennington concept of human rights, you know, and and and like and so, you know
We had all these bennington grads going and teaching like, you know, very
transgender rights, whatever
Poetry workshops, right, you know, exactly and and um nothing wrong with a good poetry workshop
but you know like everything has its place and and the I mean they love they love I mean in the taliban actually writing
Poems is like a qualification for leadership, right? But is it is that it is it is?
There's a very good volume. There's a yes. There's a volume of like translated taliban poetry
That's actually not too bad if you're into it's all of course from a taliban perspective, right? You know, it's not really
not really gonna appeal
It's like there's this there's this other great book that i'm a huge fan of um called zen at war
Which was written by like a california hippie zen dude like in the 80s or 90s or something where he realizes that
All of these zen masters many of them came over to like california because they smelled a good thing and like
After you know the 40 50 60s, but in like the 30s and 40s these guys are in japan
They're in imperial japan, right? So he's like what is zen like?
um
In imperial japan and he basically finds all these like and he just quotes these things with it's just that rage where they're just like, you know
The feeling of zen is the feeling of my chinese soldier's head dropping from his body as the perfect swords like i mean, right, you know
And like, you know, there's just you know, nothing is more zen than the moment of killing right, you know, or
It just reminds you of the sort of protean nature of this religion which can be sort of like
california hippies and and you know imperial desk wads, uh, you know equally well and and
Yeah
I'm sure these zen and taliban the taliban. Yeah, right. And so yeah, there's definitely
I mean, there's something poetic and beautiful about martyrdom operations or whatever you want to call it
Well, or you have to have a poetic sense of uh reality in order to sure
I mean, and you know, you listen you listen to isis videos. They're all like, you know, nashid's
Which are um, you know acapella singing that you know, uh, salafi islam's like, okay
You can have music but no instruments. Yeah, so you have these basically nashid's which are like
Sort of the taliban al-qaeda equivalent of like the narco corrido
If you know that mexican genre like the drug drug narco music from northern mexico
Like that celebrates like, you know, the the achievements of great drug lords
Um, and they have that for basically martyrs and so forth. And I mean, it's it's beautiful
Anyway, there's this very good volume with have translated taliban poetry, but um
Yeah, you know, definitely like feminist poetry workshops are not really the thing
It's gonna turn kandahar into into bennington
And and so you basically yeah, they had their chance, right? You know, if it was gonna work
It was gonna work. It probably would have worked by now
And and so when we basically um
Kind of pull the camera back and we look at basically
Just like the level of just weird
Insane shit
That dc does that nobody even thinks about like how weird and insane it is
You're at a like, you know, people will be like, well, the u.s. government's
Glorotic and you know slow and bumbling and bureaucratic, but so is ibm
I'm like, yeah, okay. Yes. ibm is like this, but like
What is the magnitude my friends like, you know, like and and so they're just like whole
You know, it's like another great dc example is you remember 9-11 probably
Looks like you were a little younger than me at that time
But um, they came up they came up with this
Really, um, um, you're you're looking good. Um, the um, um
The the keeping that brown hair is very important
He got great locks too
Yeah, yeah, as soon as as soon as I start getting bald, that's all coming off. Um, but um, I will not be one of those people
But you know the um, it's good to get ahead
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, right. Um, but just like the
the sheer
like
The will like the the sheer like the yeah, I mean the example I was thinking of is that
So we have this term national security that was basically
It's a world war two term and what was decided, you know, basically, I think there's this line from roosevelt where he's basically like
Any political events anywhere in the world are relevant to us national security. This is basically this is entity. Yeah, the second
Yeah, this is this is franklin, right? And so
basically it somehow came about that basically
Part of the american kind of political
Creed became that to keep americans safe. We have to rule the world
But you're saying even washington even george washington had already noticed that that is our tendency. There's something and the way we look at the world
Is that there's something there's this sort of weird?
Yeah, there's this weird vicarious like hunger
That basically becomes
People really don't feel it as the will to dominate it
But it becomes the will to dominate and then it's sort of that will to dominate
Enters all of these institutions and becomes sort of part of the unconscious
Creed of these institutions
And then the us is actually attacked in
2001
And so then they have to come up with this term homeland security
Which means national security but not national security because that word is already taken
Right, you know, and so they come up with this weird nazi sounding term homeland
Right, you know homeland, right? At least it's genderless, right?
At least it's genderless, right, you know haimath, right, you know, and and it's just like it's it's and and you're like
You would say national security except that word is already taken for meaning something which it doesn't mean, right?
and so you have all these
incredible like
distortions of like there are all these convoluted ways of thinking that are sort of
Spread to the population
from
You know these assumptions that are hidden deep in our these assumptions that are sort of came out of some weird
historical structure that get embedded in everything, you know, it's sort of like the
You know the
I think people have traced like the six foot social disc both the six foot social distancing thing
And the paper straw thing and people have been like where did this come from?
And they actually found like high school science projects that were basically the source of this shit, right?
You know and and like it doesn't matter anymore
But you still have all you know all these circles on the floor where there's six feet social distancing thing
Which is absolutely and utterly and profoundly
unscientific as like, you know, I mean it took these these just
In like the specific area of the who
Had this bias for bizarre historical scientific reasons
Against thinking of viruses as airborne, right?
And so you basically had this where the six feet comes from was this whole like droplet theory
Which was shown to be completely incorrect like which never made any godium sense
And was shown to be completely incorrect very early in the pandemic
And it took who like a year and a half to be like well, I guess maybe it might be airborne, right?
Meanwhile in japan, they're like, okay, you know, like better ventilation is like the solution here because it's obviously airborne
Right, and they had some sort of native bureaucracy there which could kind of make up its own mind
But the mind steps the point is that basically when you're looking at the way
this system does government
it has
embedded in it a lot of
Extremely bizarre assumptions. Okay. It's like it's like a it's like english language where you have these weird words that are just floating around that mean
Yeah thing like what they what they came from or yeah, or just something strange conjugations like
oxen, you know, and you're just like you can go in the past and you can say oh well this came from
The dynamics of world war two or like this came from like somebody's high school project about plastic straws, you know
and
watch like how
I mean
I guess my sort of point going back to your original question about monarchy is that
sort of people are always like
They sort of believe in the wisdom or not even the wisdom but like the sanity of crowds and they're like
One person could be completely mental and start poisoning the burritos or doing them, you know
um
And then but if you have like a community of the smartest best people making the decision
Like how could that go wrong? Like who?
why should like some king who
However, he was chosen. Maybe he was just born to be king like and he's making the decisions about virology
shouldn't the virologist make the decisions about virology and like, you know
The idea that the virologist should make the decisions about virology seems extremely logical
And sensible a confederacy of experts is what we
Yeah, I want and it eventually gets you to covet 19 because it basically
Creates incentives
In within that network of experts where they basically are in a position position to say well
We need funding to do our work
The more important we are the more funding we get
Therefore it is important for us to find important emerging threats, which could be threatening
So let's basically go and collect all the bat viruses. Well, these bat viruses can't you know
Normally infect people because they're bat viruses, but what if they mutated to jump to humans? That would be very dangerous and scary
Um, let's examine how they could mutate to jump to humans
Well, how could we do that? We could let's create some
You take samples create some examples, right? You know and and basically you're just like not you know, um
Realizing in the process of this process of this that you're doing exactly what the like director of Chernobyl did when he's like
We got to figure out if this nuclear reactor is safe
Our theory is that if we turn off all the safety systems and run into full power
We'll still be safe, right? You know and and and like that's basically what you're doing when you collect these guardian bat viruses, right? And and like
So so scientists
Scientists aren't adapted to power power adapts scientists to itself
So so scientists are focused on on on making science or even even trying to
Solve a problem with regards to health
But power itself exerts a shape onto how the science
Happens and what what decisions each end up coming out of and it mutates
And it mutates the culture of science eventually and so basically
to become
We think of scientists as these people driven by pure curiosity
Puttering around in their labs like some, you know, 19th century like, you know vicar or something that or alchemist studies
studies beetles under a microscope, you know, and
That person is driven entirely by their curiosity and wonder and love and these are the things that cause people to get into science
But the thing is is once you're in science you discover that it's just actually like
very very cut through a bureaucracy and you have to basically be
A good operator in that bureaucracy and the people
Who turn out to be the best at that are often
somewhat mediocre scientists and really world-class bureaucrats
And so you basically sort of everything kind of gets twisted in this direction
of like
creating problems to so yeah, I need to justify my importance and the thing is
most fields are not such that
You can actually create the problems that you're there to solve, but like virology
A virus that goes around the world and kills. Yeah, virology is kind of an exception to that. And so basically
These people were, you know, it's like the the classic dc example is the self-licking ice cream cone, right?
But this was like a toxic self-licking ice cream cone
It's like a self-licking ice cream cone is like
A something whose solution only exists to like solve itself like, you know
Like you don't even get the lick the ice cream that licks itself, right?
You know, but but in this case it was a toxic self-licking ice cream cone and you look at basically
The bureaucratic incentives
Which caused that
To happen or I think caused that to happen because why would there be such a cover-up when there was nothing to cover up?
right and
The yeah, reputation didn't matter. Nobody would have to lie
Yeah, right and and and there's clearly
Yes, there's clearly some bad dealing there and like obviously nobody involved in this research wants to admit that this is what happened
right and and and so in every instance
It's it's power that's directing everything whether it's it's under the guise of saving the world from this problem or liberating this country
Over here. There's always power eventually is always operating under the surface because that's eventually what
Happens is and power and power power corrupts things. And so basically when you had I mean the way we got
to give sort of
academic models of policy
So much power in the 20th century is we started the 20th century in a world
Where power was largely actually held by corrupt politicians
And that like gilded age country worked a lot like the way china works today in some ways
It wasn't a dictatorship
But it was a country in which everything was very very corrupt and was done very quickly in this ugly way
The power was directed specifically toward not necessarily the common good, but doing a work, right?
It wasn't directed to it was something more solid. Perhaps it had a kind of corruption
I mean the kind of corruption that existed there
Or exists in china today was like
If the street gets built it may be cost 30 percent more than it should have cost
But it does get built. Um, and but like the level of um, you know
There was also like there was yeah, and and so what happened early in the 20th century was sort of the beginnings
Of what we call the progressive movement at that time was that basically
america's hereditary aristocracy
looked at this stuff and
basically saw
that
people who
were
Dumber and less sophisticated than them were in charge
And like this is where we get, you know, one of the things I love to cite is this
bizarre
sort of disconnect between
You know, we have if you think about the two words
democracy and politics
You'll notice that democracy has very very positive connotations and politics has very very negative connotations
But they're actually synonyms
And like how do you have politics without democracy or democracy without and specifically I've heard you say this
But what helped me understand it better was when you talk about populism is basically yeah, right or between democracy and politics
So populism is kind of a synonym for like putting politicians in charge
And putting politicians in you know, who?
Appeal to like what the public wants in charge
Is literally the meaning of representative democracy?
and so one of the things that basically
The progressive movement did is it said we're going to treat representative democracy sort of the way
The modern uk treats its monarchy. We're going to still have these elections, but we're going to make sure
That basically it's really traditional and important and constitutional and necessary
For the president to not really be in charge of the executive branch
Because if the president is like can tell doj who to prosecute like yeah, my god, right?
You know and so it's like saying queen elizabeth the second could say off with her head
Right, you know elizabeth the first could be like off of his head
But like elizabeth the second like in theory she has the same job, right?
But in practice it's very very different and so
So the aristocracy reexerted itself or the which would be the oligarchy
Or yeah, right, right and sort of created this kind of institutional oligarchy
You know the word meritocracy has been used
Is that is that a cynical take meritocracy?
That's a whole other discussion. It was originally in the in the original book by michael young
It was sort of meant as a cynical take. Um, you know merit is a tough
Prove yourself in this case to this particular
Organization like prove your intelligence or prove that you have a degree from the right school or prove
Or you can jump through the dei hoops and do your equity statement in the right way, right?
Yeah, right, right, right. It's it's it's sort of drifted, you know drifted away from merit or from any
Um ability to do something in the world that's productive other than be a bureaucrat basically, right, right, right, right? Um
Yeah, so so like the um
Um
Yeah, so so you have this in and you have this situation in which
Whenever you basically take something that hasn't been
You know power corrupts and when you take something that hasn't been
Corrupted by power such as america's beautiful universities
100 years ago and you say well, why not give these smart and reasonable people power
Surely they won't be corrupted by it in any way
and like basically
by giving
Sort of all these sciences of government real power over government
You've basically wound up, you know
Like you needed a valve in that so that the sewage didn't flow up into the drinking water and the sewage has definitely gotten into the drinking water
Yeah, um and and so like even virology it turns out can be corrupted by power
Because nobody got into virology because they wanted to cause a pandemic
Like, you know, this was not done by like evil scientists like, you know
um
Like this was done by people who were doing
What kune called normal science? They were basically being like, oh, yeah
And like covet has only increased the funding that's going in this direction now
They're like see emerging viruses can cause huge problems
We really need to make sure we catch all the pokemon and so we're going to wow and go
We're going to go into the bat caves and get more bat viruses and play with them more and like
It's a sort of there's a counter example to that is the tsa being erected in the wake of 9 11
Like I don't know if that's increased
terrorism itself, but it it the government tapped into this way of uh, you know
Just swallowed this huge
Industry of checking people going through airports, right? And now it's just an institution, right? It doesn't necessarily cause more terrorism
But it's now it's just a waste of time and resources. Yeah, no, no, no
And you're seeing some of that with the the covid control that will will will keep up forever. Basically
um
The yeah, I mean that's that's like that's sort of the self-licking ice cream cone sort of in its
Harmless sense where you have this thing and you know, um, take your shoes off
Take your shoes off because yeah, right, right, right, right and and like the
um, you know, I don't think that
Taking your shoes off and dumping your water is responsible for the like the death of terrorism
Or the death so far never never counted out, right? But um, no, I think that
You know going going around killing people has done a lot of that. Um, but you know, so it's like you can I mean
There's always a sort of defense for like you can sort of be like, yeah, let's you know
Defend the theory that the us needs to be the world's policeman because otherwise, you know, somebody else would or like there are always like
You know, nothing's quite black and white
but the essential point that I sort of want to make is that
If you're talking about a complete reset of like the meaning
and purpose
of government
you're talking about something where like
You have a lot of answers to a lot of questions that basically
Date to are like really old and just happening by inertia or Canada is something weird like the high school of science fair
or like, you know, and the need for kind of
Reconsidering all of these questions in like a reasonable way
is like
the
fundamental driving
force
For imagining a completely different regime. Yeah, and it's sort of hard to know
There's sort of no obvious collective at all in the world that could make these kinds of
Decisions or choices
Collectively
So I I'm bringing this up because I'm pretty sure you're gonna shoot it down
But with the advent of the internet, uh, substack
Let's say that the brief phenomenon of what was called the intellectual dark web just as a concept just as a concept
There could be the case that the prestige makers or the king makers which
Resided in the new york times and in harvard could switch online to these independent content creators that build up reputations and then
bestow
prestige on
various different policies or various different
politicians right if we
Because if you look at like the new york times of the washington post or harvard, they're spewing out all this bullshit
You know all this we call it wokeness, but there's just a lot of bullshit
It seems like they're they're expending their reputation. They're not making sense anymore more or less
So they're their prestige is going down. Well, not the prestige somehow
democratically through the marketplace of attention
Uh, somehow replace that prestige mechanism that gives us the oligarchy that that shelves up the oligarchy
It's a good question. I think the problem is that sort of power is always prestigious
and
The thing is you sort of you want
You really want this kind of level playing field on which sense outcompetes nonsense
And you basically look at this playing field and you're like, why does nonsense kind of regularly outcompete?
Sense and it's because the nonsense is powerful and the sense is not
And if you basically
If you even just take sort of isolationism
via versus internationalism
Um isolation versus globalism if you want to use two pejoratives there
um
What you see is that
There's much much more power in the active thing because the active thing basically is like
We must hire a lot of people to govern the world. We must think very hard about governing the world
Whereas isolationism is the reverse that isolationism is like
Hey, there's 50 000 of america's like smartest people in the state department. Do we need them? Why?
right and
And this sense of and so
Is it really that big it's 50 000 people
Something like that. It's a little smaller. I think it depends. I don't not that many fsos, but there's a lot of
Yeah, it's huge, right, you know, and I mean you're governing the world man, you know, like
The indirectly someone but you're governing the world. So like the sense of
like what it
Takes to
like
There's sort of no situation under which
the
idea that
Is not a source of power is going to outcompete the idea that is a source of power naturally
Or it's like you're like, okay. Yeah
Harvard like
Like you might as an intellectual as a critic
Start to develop a community of people who have a low opinion of harvard
But how is that community of people going to develop the endowment the cultural capital the like regime capital?
like, you know to like
You're not really talking about a private institution when you you're talking about harvard and the new york times
You're talking about if these things were officially parts of the government
They'd be instantly recognizable as the most important and powerful parts of the government
Right and and so the question is while while the government the trust in the government and the trust in harvard the trust in
The washington or the the new york times all these all these legacy institutions. They're they're spewing bullshit
They're spewing the stuff that doesn't make sense. They're but the trust doesn't come from their
Like ability to make sense their reputation
their reputation their prestige ultimately
Does not come from that reputation
There's a lot of things that they have to do to maintain that prestige
And there's certainly a lot of sort of prestige generating things
That happen there and they certainly do select a lot of very smart people
even though, you know
admissions are what they are
but the like
This sort of
There's no way to offshore that to the internet. Yeah, there's there's no way there's no way
Yeah, there's no way for sort of this like 90s dream
of like people
Without any status or power competing with that because basically the
like
The ingredient the active ingredient is basically inertial the active ingredient union is that harvard is harvard and you're not
and like your ability to sort of crack into that business is like, I mean
You know, it's like there's a list of um
You know the top 14 law schools. I don't know why it's 14. It is 14
Why is it 500 fortune?
If you go, I don't know
The length of the original at least it's at least it's the round number the top 14 law schools have been the same top 14 law schools for the last
50 years they're selected by something called
us news and world report which used to be a magazine of some kind and
They haven't changed in the last 50 years. And by the way, if you're going to law school and you're not getting a top 14 degree
useless don't do it and
You'll find yourself doing like discovery work or like shit work, right?
You know, only the top 14 law schools are real law schools, right? So, you know, basically
How do you break into that? Like
It's just no way just think of it as basically part of the government and then you're just like when you ask the question
Of how does this change?
Or how is this shut down?
You will not expect
automatic automatic market mechanisms to do that for you
Because actually the market loves the stenersha
Um, you can bet on it. Yeah, it's like, you know, it's it works, right? There's nothing that makes it not work
Um, even if it's creating bad laws or like, uh, yeah, yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. It's like there's like a just world theory here
That's basically telling you that like when harvard starts
Teaching nonsense people will stop wanting to go to harvard and or people will stop listening to harvard or they will be like
No, it doesn't really work that way. Um, it's like when harvard ends. It's because basically
Somebody upstages it with another thing or they just collapses loses all this or or somebody infiltrates it
or the or or the police, um,
Simply lock the doors and um declare that, um
The campus has been seized of the trademark has been seized
Right, you know and and and so and and so the the thing is that basically and that's the that's the yeah, right
And and so the thing is that that when you basically
You know are sort of expecting
these things to happen
in an automatic way and you basically are like well, this is an outrage but like
God is just and god will fix it in some way and therefore I don't have to
Um, or power doesn't have to know like actually only power can revise power if you look for example at like germany in 1945
Let's take germany in 1945
The occupying regime
American military government
AMG like the acronym has the same powers as hitler, right? Not only can they
You know, they can destroy anything that hitler created. They're not like, oh, well the ss is losing its prestige
He wants to join the ss and you know anymore now in 1946 like no, that's not how it worked
You know when east germany was shut down. It wasn't like the stasi is losing its prestige, right? It was like no actually
There is a new power over this and the new power
Has the power to just force this to cease to exist
And it will cease to exist and so like if you look at the denazification of germany and the sort of level of
There are two things that stand out about that one is
The level of force required to denazify germany and the level of violence required to denazify germany
The level of violence after
conquering germany, which took quite a bit of violence
The level of violence needed to enforce that was almost zero
There was a huge fear, you know of basically
You know, the occupying forces are coming into occupied germany. They're like, this is the most
Propagandized nationalist population in history
Hitler has been filling their heads full of pure crazy for 13 years
Like clearly what's going to happen is they're going to start like these like drilling movements
They're going to go all like werewolf. There's going to be ied's like there's going to be
None of that happened. Yeah, almost none of it same thing in japan
Incredibly fanatical population drilled with all this propaganda
You take absolute power over them and they're like quiet as lambs
And their minds change but that didn't happen in afghanistan and something about no that didn't happen afghanistan
that would that didn't have to happen in afghanistan because basically
the
When you look at the way in which
Like or like the specific directives like jcs 1067 is the directive for occupying germany
You read this and it's basically a document of imperialism and it includes things like
Americans are not allowed to fraternize with germans and are not allowed to make friends with germans
We have to understand get them to understand that this is a conquered country
You know whereas in afghanistan, it's like we didn't conquer you would conquer we didn't conquer afghanistan
We liberated afghanistan. We're here to advise you. Oh, and so we're not in command
We're not telling you what to do
So we kind of basically just pass aggressively want you to do what we say
And yeah, and we're going to give you more money if you do what we say, but we're not in command here
That's imperialism. My god. We would never do that. That's bad. That would cause instant, you know revolutions like absolutely terrible
Right and the thing is so basically
you know
It's only that absolute is total conquering attitude that actually affects change
There's a there's a there's a an analogy that the victorians used to use which is grasping the nettle
A nettle is a plant you'll find it in the pacific northwest a lot and in england with stinging hairs on it
And supposedly if you touch a nettle, I have done this and it's very painful if you touch a nettle it will hurt
But if you grasp it firmly it will like compress the hairs so that they don't sting
And basically the lesson of grasping the nettle, which is something also very relevant in parenting
You know weak parents are the ones who yell at their kids
and the
The the the sense you're not a parent. Are you um, you know, but I'd work with kids for
A few decades now the the but I was just thinking about like the like showing up to school. This is this is why you're uh
constitutionally opposed to showing up to school board meetings or making these little laws against wokeness here and there
Yeah, yeah, that's what it's just you're just touching the nettle
You're not actually you're just touching the nettle. You're not actually grasping the nettle and so you'll basically see
You know in any situation with kids like the nice substitute teacher
Is in a room that is a war zone
Whereas the extremely strict teacher never raises her voice
right and and the the like the the sense of that and that's just a
Basic principle of like governance and management which again of power which again is completely lost here and so basically
um
You know the occupiers in 45 came in with this extremely
Determined attitude which actually in germany was quite rough in japan. It was not rough
But in germany they were quite rough
Well, we were more lenient to japan than to germany. Yes because it was being run by macArthur specifically
um
And macArthur was kind of an old asia hand who kind of you know
Had a sense of what to do whereas there were a lot of like ideological fanatics in the the government of the new germany
You may have heard of the like morgan pal plan or stuff like that. Um, but yeah, it was like it was like it was
There were things like intentional starvation policies and shit, which nobody talks about. Um, yeah
and
um, no, it was I could I could see like psychologically because we're closer related to germans that we would really want to kind of
Beat it out of them. The ideology
Of the time you can go. I always recommend this to people go on the internet. There's a little movie from 1945
This is the seuss one
The yeah, the seuss one hitler lifts hitler lifts. It's absolutely worth seeing. Um, and um, um, um
And and just don't like worry about the fact that you're typing the word hitler lives into a google search box
Historical documentary. It's very anti-nazi
to say the least um
And and your mind will be blown and the um
But yeah, you know, so
I think a better example in some ways is the deconstruction of east germany
Because again, it's like when you're in 89 99 right, you know, because when you have a real regime change in a country
Everyone's life changes
Like there's no like everyone's life changes every institution is different
Anything that remains is reconstructed most things do not remain
and
There's no like there's no sense that like the stasi was going to be turned into like a you know
Something different in 1989 or the ss was going to be turned into something different in 1945
That's not the way it works. And so the thing is that if you basically
Are really talking about a change of regime
you're talking about basically
Taking all of these powerful institutions inside or outside the government and basically
Deconstructing them and your experience just across the board by fiat across the board by fiat and you know
The experience of being because you're basically saying you're declaring that these were unofficial parts of the government
And then you're reorganizing that part of the government. Yeah, and and you know the experience of being
in one of these institutions or part of this sort of ruling class like
That should not
Be a like
Painful experience. It is a little painful when basically, you know, you're a major in the stasi
You put your whole career into this
Like whatever you've served faithfully served the german democratic republic and like one day, you're like, I know there were problems
It wasn't perfect like but you know like what what are you going to do?
And then one day one day one day it's all over right, you know
and the your ideology the day before it's all over is just like
We are the guardians of the revolution
You know if like western imperialists subjugate our country. We are professional revolutionaries
We will conspire in the cafes. We will plant our bombs. We will be just like linen and Stalin
And then you realize you're not like linen and Stalin the day after you're like, oh, I was just a bureaucrat
Guess what happens to you as a bureaucrat?
You get a pension
Okay, you're retired, you know, there's
Are you saying that we have to pay off all the gender studies?
Professors all of them all the critical theorists. Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely because the thing is that basically
That is absolutely because that
Is the only way to respect what they were actually doing what they were actually doing
Was not wrong because they were faithfully serving the old regime
They were okay. Maybe if they did something, especially evil like that could be looked at but it's like
the principle that
this is why like
Germany today still pays pensions. I believe not only the Stasi officers even to some Wehrmacht officers
Right because basically what you're saying is that
If you say to these people
You're an alien force. You're not part of society
Like you're saying
We don't really own you we don't really care about you
You're an outcast you should go and plot your next revolution because that's the only way you'll have a future
Whereas if you're saying to them, yeah, you know what it's like
Yeah, you were a professor of Marxist-Leninist literature at the Moscow University in 1987. Like what is your future?
I don't know was it bad
Read a book read a novel like was it bad to study Marxist-Leninist literature like yeah, okay, you know, you read literature
It's fine. You're smart. You can teach school, you know, like, you know, the there's like the sense of
sort of responsible
Leadership is very much the sense of like
If you have never dehumanize
Never dehumanize if you have a regime that feels that it represents
Only a part of the country
That's like very bad
and so the sense of basically
Any kind of monarchy any kind of new regime of any form
in
This country like one of the things that is going to be kind of its best biggest selling point
Is that it's ending the kind of cold civil war?
And so the sense of basically
You know, what are you if you were like a critical theorist English professor like
Okay
You were someone who's
entire world basically just a preacher
With yeah, if you're someone whose entire world was consumed by the ideology of the old regime
um
The old regime has turned to dust and fallen away
And like you can't go on doing that like there's no world limit to people are going to pay you to do that
but
That doesn't make you a bad person
That doesn't make it just means that you had a bullshit job under the old regime. Guess what?
A lot of people had bullshit jobs under the old regime
Right because like a lot of bullshit was done, right? And so the sense of basically
It's over and like everyone should be fine with that
It's over and that's fine rather than it's over and like
Now begins the vengeance, right? You know, it's just like
So why why do you think that when biden first came in he's like i'm the we're the party of unity
We're going to unify the country and at this point in time
They're he's now more or less actively like saying ultramaga. He's like doing this weird kind of rhetoric
It seems kind of impotent, but it's still kind of dangerous where he's other
Half of the country. Why would he do that? Like if that's not
Because he's you know leaning on
The half that supports him and he is like, um
So he's caught in the trap of his unity his unity is fundamentally hegemonic in in form
And it can't basically
This sense of like I own my base, but I own your base too
Is the kind of unity that's like
You know, that's a dominant
like and of course dominating basically the flyover people and basically
sort of um
You know
Yeah, keeping them keeping this outcast or deplorables or keeping basically
Like them in this sort of frame of mind where they're like you should be good enough to vote for me, you know
In in sort of this like keeping the kind of structure between the aristocracy
sort of blue state aristocracy and the red state bourgeoisie is as like
You know, you should aspire to be one of us and if you don't maybe your children will
and
It's not like that does not
represent like there's sort of no actually like
Oh, I care about red state people and I want them to be able to live their lives in like a red state way
No, do you think that there's something in the system that's causing him to not be able to do that?
Like if you wanted to be the the unifying president and at this point it's fallen apart
I mean
Whether regardless if it's him or not who's making these decisions and writing these talking points like if that was what they wanted to do
What's keeping them from unifying?
Well, you'd have to actually out trumping trump
You know, you you'd because you lose your own
base essentially, it's like you have to give
If you're gonna like basically say
I mean
One of the things that you see sort of American
leftism or many leftisms do is they sort of
Circulate their clients
And so there's always this sort of client population, you know, where a hundred years ago. It's the working class
It's the factory worker, right?
And the thing is that at a certain point
The factory worker is no longer an asset and what we really need is basically
Instead of a class war we need a race and culture war
Or we're like our asset is like black americans. No way. We actually prefer mexicans
Um, they're more of them now and so like we're gonna let the mexicans take the blacks jobs
Right or whatever right, you know and and this sense of
and like
The working class like stuck with these people for
A very long time you have the union
Midwest union people right who basically
Have been sort of voting democratic or we're voting democratic on autopilot for 50 or 60 years
Until they realized that they were actually no longer
The like mascot. They were now the goat. Um, if you look at the populations that
Who voted for fdr?
Well, who voted for fdr was a thin, you know
cream of aristocrats like him and then
The solid south
Though, you know old democratic segregationist regimes who were
Democrats because robert lee was a democrat and i've always voted democrat and i'm robert lee was a good man
You know and then the inner city catholics
Right and the inner city catholics and slavs who you're like what because they don't exist anymore
They all got but what was their attraction to this bill? Um, again
traditional ethnic traditional ethnic power politics, right and so those were ethnic machines and those machines were basically
had always been
You know the democrats where america's sort of conservative party in a way
But they were also the party of like the catholics and the inner city like old, you know
tammity hall
And like the old sort of these old style political machines
And these old style political machines basically like
You know when the solid south
Puts fdr into power
They're setting into motion the forces that would destroy the solid south
They have no idea they don't think of themselves when they vote for democrats is voting for liberals
They think of themselves as voting for robert lee, right? And so they were the same thing with the union democrats
Yeah, they kept on voting for robert lee up until like the 1960s when they're like wait a second
Like this is no longer the party of robert lee, right?
And so it's sort of easy when you have a client base
That trusts you like that
Those are the people that are going to get abused because when you can take someone for granted
you know
That's who you abuse and and so you know like the sense of
You know, there's clearly in sort of voting in the new deal which would eventually bring them the civil rights movement
There's a sense in which you know, the mark cistern false consciousness
Is applicable to all of these segregationists who were voting for fdr
They sort of knew he wasn't really a segregationist, but you know, like robert lee was a democrat, right? And so
When you look at the various like sort of solid
Blocks in um india to have this wonderful term which is vote bank
Which is like a group of like ethnic votes that a politician can count on
So, you know, when you look at basically like the like democratic vote bank or whatever
um, you're basically seeing
Yeah, I mean like certainly like so with biden his there's something about the uh his base his vote bank that needs that
antagonism with this other
Vote bank that he's locked into this party policy. Yeah, he's he's called civil war as you call it. Yes. Yes
I mean blue state america is deeply locked into this cold cold civil war because there's really
Not much they can say anymore
To get, you know, the white working class or whatever. Yeah, right, you know, and and there's but there's still like there's a lot of
Aspirational support out there. There's a lot of people who sort of look up to the upper class
There's a lot of people like there's a lot of that, you know
Even that like, you know, I mean this is where biden came from in the 70s
He's going around Delaware, which is after all a southern state
Basically telling everyone, you know, what a bad idea busing and desegregation are I mean, he's lived that long, right?
You know, and so in the 90s he's talking about super predators, you know
Like I mean, this is a very empty hollow man
Which is just sort of the voice of the power around him. Yeah, exactly
So he's a great. He's a great image of what we're actually dealing with in a while. Yeah, yeah, right, right, right?
I like I mean, I let's let's elect him again in 2024 as he gets older and older
Um, I think it would be beautiful and and the uh, he might actually just start drooling in front of his teleprompter
The autumn of the patriarch if he hasn't done that already, you know, and um
Yeah, so so so like when you
you know
You sort of imagine, you know monarchy this like exotic system of government, which is, you know
The system of government that like 99 of all people in history have lived under
And then you're like, but it could be insane and do weird insane things and I'm like
Actually, there's a lot of insanity there right now. You're just used to it
Well, especially if if you I think there might be three uh, kind of state you said there's a wartime and then the peacetime kind of
Uh
Executive but there could be like a cleanup executive and then kind of a prosperous executive and then a stabilizing executive like there's kind of
Yeah, the cleanup executive is definitely like the wartime
Executive essentially and just being able to explicitly call out power and and to regulate power through one
explicit means rather than having going through this
oligarchical
Institutional process that gets all these weird ideas in it that it can't shake down if you have like one
free agent that
all
Through which all power flows
Then the potential to clean up and then to also make decisions or at least to make decisions cleanly that can then be
held account
One way or another rather than it being lost in all these processes, right?
Is much
Yeah, yeah, it's much more. It's much more. I mean, and it's just like you look at I constantly say this
But like if you look at anything that gets done in the real world today, it's done by a monarchy
Drive a car is made by a monarchy, you know that microphone in front of you
It was made by a monarchy, which is a company in china, which is another monarchy
So like the set of like if you look around you
You see a world made by monarchies within monarchies and and like the
If there was
an effective oligarchical or republican way to run a company
Somebody would have that worked better than that somebody certainly would have found it
and
Because there's nothing stopping you from having a company that's run by a congress and a judiciary and a president and all that, right?
and um
But but that's a way to run a railroad
But in order for us to make that leap there has to be a huge change of view by the american
Populus towards power and and one thing is to expose it like you're doing
But it's another to like try to get people on the same page because everybody that I tell your ideas to recoils
I'm living in washington and portland. So, you know, of course, of course, of course, of course a washington state
Yeah, right and and and and so and and they recoil
in a way
They recoil for a couple of different reasons. They recoil at a sense of alieness and they also feel
um
subconsciously that
A source of meaning in their lives would be taken away
and
The sense of having power
For them is not about having a government that treats them. Well, it's about
mattering in a sense and this idea that they would no longer matter
in that way
Feels emasculating it feels like basically people have a natural power drive
and that sort of power drive is kind of
Being exploited in them to give this them this illusion of mattering whereas it's actually sort of turns into
support, it's like basically
Your desire to matter
This guy, um, this great political scientist Guy Tana Mosca from over 100 years ago had this great term
Which is a political formula
And a political formula is whatever you believe that causes you to support the government
So you might be in ancient egypt and you might believe that pharaoh should be on the throne because pharaoh is the son of
You know the great grandson of god or something and like yeah myth and basically if pharaoh is not on the throne
then the sun will not come up in the morning, right and
That's a political formula
And you know 20th century political formulas tend to resolve around
I feel powerful because I support the government
Or you think or yeah, or you think or you know all of these
Yeah, all of these things giving you a sense of meaning and importance
And the thing is you're sort of trading what you don't realize is that you're trading
that in order for this basically
pornographic feeling of meaning and importance which is pornographic because it's not real
You're not actually in the decision loop when you look at Ukraine
You're not actually like moving ukraine and you know armies around on the battlefield like a chess board
You're just having this kind of pornographic feeling of feeling like you are defending ukraine
Just like when you view pornography, you're like i'm i'm doing it with this girl, but you're not
you know and and so
what that basically
That sort of change of
That myth
That change yeah that myth that formula and what rejecting that formula sort of allows you to do
is basically to change
exchange this
To set aside this delusional sense of power and importance
And replace it with something that actually matters
You can become if you basically can conquer your emotional desire for importance
Didn't you call it like political nofap at some point? Yeah. Yeah, it's like political nofap or it's like, you know
The thing that I always uh, you know the example that I always use I don't think this actually works in real life
But um, there's this um legendary monkey banana trap where you basically
Have a banana and you and it's inside a little enclosure and the monkey puts its hand in the box
And then cannot get its hand out of the box without letting go of the banana
And so and then the hunter comes along and cracks it on the head and eats fried monkey for dinner, right? And and like
And you're like there are a lot of bananas outside the box
but you have to be able to let go of the banana
And the sort of the problem of letting go of the banana if you look at
The capacity here is why i'm optimistic about the ability
For people to solve this problem
Which they clearly haven't been able to do in the past. I'm optimistic about it because first of all when you compare
Americans today and the way they interact with politics
To the way they interacted a hundred years ago. They're much more apathetic
They're sort of much less like they're much less ready ready for example to engage in political violence
Um, they're much to show up to seven hour zoom meetings
Seven hour, you know, or seven hour like riots, right? You know, like you can't you know
like like the um
But the race riots in 2020
Yeah, but the thing is the last time you see like white people rioting is like the 40s for example
Um, or you know, even like january 6 is like this incredibly pathetic thing like it's not
It's pretty well, I don't know
According to the democrats like it's a national holiday now. They have the ceremonies and stuff about it. It's pretty powerful
It's pretty, uh, you know, and and like, yeah, I'll show you right, you know
You want to see you want you want to see a riot, you know, um the um, um
It's it's it's pretty limp
But we're we're expending that in a pornographic way on twitter by doing all this culture war stuff
You're saying it's culture where stuff is just pornographic
It's a pornographic experience. And you know, the thing that can compete with pornography is sex
It's like basically
Whenever you sort of show people how to have actual sex, um, you know
That is the one way to pull them away from their porn and so
The thing is I'm like, no
What you're doing cannot result in any real political change, but actually
Real things can happen and here's how and that's sort of exciting even
If it doesn't have
That's exciting at a different level and in a different sense because you're like, okay
They're not close to happening. It's not about to happen
And what all this sort of pornographic politics is offering me is the sense that like this is about to happen
Well, like elect trump and like amazing things will happen and you know, we're like we'll let you know
And and I'm like, no, none of this nothing will happen as a result of these elections
But the thing is if you want to think in a way that would
Lead if you can get other people to think in this way
Real things to happen
There's something actually more exciting about that
And it's exciting in a like subtle and ironic way
The idea that the way to have real power is like give up your power
Has this ironic quality to it
And the thing is that we are living
We have the most ironic population history
There's never been any period in history when like irony was his mass market
The memes are a flowing my friend never anywhere close and so basically
How is irony a political force like I've
Bring this up, but what is it about it?
It's a political force because it basically allows you to like say like
Fuck it in a really interesting way. There's the none of the episode like, you know, that no not
Do you know the british show black mirror?
Oh, yeah, yeah, if you there's a there's a black mirror episode. I always point people to where
The population alexa cartoon character
As a joke or is it like comment or is this something right?
Yeah, you know and it's like or if you look at something like sort of storm area 51
That didn't come off area 51 wasn't stormed. Oh, yeah, but it kind of gives you a sense of like
that
the sense of
Like there will be whenever this thing comes crashing down
There will be like a ludic a playful sense to it much as there was like especially in like shekel savakia
in 89 with like the the velvet revolution
You know
You had this real sense of playfulness to it like an important aspect the venture of the velvet
revolution was this like
Sort of a band plastic people of the universe. It was kind of velvet underground influence
Like, you know, and so you had a robust love hobble who's just like ironic playwright becomes the you know
It goes from being a dissident to the president in shekel savakia
um
We saw the little bit of that in the trucker uh convoy in canada
There was a communal thing but the weird thing about that was that that's where trudeau like showed the power of the state
To people of their finances, which is really scary and people took it like
Yeah, and people took it like way too
like seriously in a way
And his his his move to tell the banks that no the truckers the truckers took themselves way too seriously
I'm sort of not seriously enough like they didn't like
Like like there was yeah, I mean they were they were kind of larping in the end. They weren't like it was
It sounds like you're you're advocating for larping, but there's like some sort of truth sincerity of this really
Yeah, you know, there's there's like there's like you sort of do it as a lark, but it becomes real
It's like basically
The sense of being a sort of a joke that makes itself real
I think will be kind of part
Of this thing. It sounds kind of like apocalyptic or revelatory. Well, it's in a way. I mean, I mean
We talked about Ukraine Ukraine elected a comedian as president, right, you know, and so there's this
sense of like
It will feel sort of almost accidental. It won't have this sort of like
Patriots rise up to like, you know
feeling it won't it will be like
We can't take this seriously like a carnival, right?
Yeah, it will have it. It will have a very joyous feel
And not a very like a carnival. It will feel very joyous and it will not feel like
And it just feel sort of that image irreversible
Coupled with the outcome of like somebody with absolute power completely
Just liquidating all the institutions and rebooting them, which is like the most serious thing
I mean, it's comedic like like I read I've been reading your sub-stack
We get to the part like well, how are we going to change things and it's so out
It's just so absurd. It's like we're just going to tear everything apart. We're going to take complete authority
It's like what he can't do that like it breaks my brain every time I right and and and and that
the sense of basically like
Voting for that or voting to be like, you know, it's like, you know, one of the ways I sort of picture it is is I'm like
imagine you're in
Like the little room with the astronaut at like the end of 2001, right?
And you're just in this like weird space and like there's like playing food. All right, Dave, right, you know
I'm sorry Dave. I can't do that, you know and and like but there's one difference
There's a red button on the wall and under the red button. It says if you press this button
everything will change
well
Serious sober like a hard-working respectable people
Are not going to grown-ups are not going to press that button because they're like we could just be shot into out into space
That would be a change, but you know who presses the button is basically
Immature people childlike people like people who are
have
A sense of fun, which is much bigger than their sense of seriousness and so, you know
The people of america today are not minute men
They are not like the like paul revere is not in the building like they do not act out of like
a
Every couple months like there's this really stupid group of like supposed white supremacist, but it's totally an fbi sting
It's like there's just footage of them. Do you know what i'm talking about like they're the people's army or something
Yeah, and everybody's laughing at them. Nobody believes that that actually is serious right and and and and so the sense of like
you know
that sense of
like really
Deep comedy and irony like that's so ironic that it's real
Is like really crucial to that sort of spirit
How did you get this idea of any possible regime change? How did you come to this?
conception um
I think that it's sort of part of
of
Kind of being brought up in the american upper class and kind of understanding
it's like spirit
in a way
and it's like when you
A good way to sort of track the spirit is in popular entertainment
It's like imagine if you took a film like inception and you put it in movie theater in 1962
Like people would be like coming out of their theater just like grabbing their heads like stunned monkeys, right?
You know even in like 1992 that would be like a cult film
But like 20 years after that it's like a blockbuster and people are like
Oh, yeah, there's three levels of reality and I fall backward into the bathtub. I mean the next month, right?
You know and it's like their ability to sort of switch frames
Yeah
Is like really really great and it's sort of much easier to just like
They're sort of their attachment when you're in this sort of ironic
Sophisticated state of mind. You're like attachment to the prison frame
Is just not that great
and so
To like move you sort of along the ground is still like hard. It's hard to reason people into something
but like when you're just like no
Throw away everything about the way you see the world and like change to see it in this other way
There's a lot of people who are just like, okay
sure
Right and and that comes out of a kind of frivolousness
That comes out of a like lack of virtue in a sense
But like politics is the art of the possible and the thing is if you're looking for basically
a politics of virtue
to like unite a fundamentally
Unsterious and unvirtuous population, but there's still perfor larping like this bloodbath this civil war on twitter, right?
Yeah, right, right and and it's just like and it's just like you can do
like
And you know the feeling of sort of popping people out of that is very refreshing and like the whole sort of
framework of the debate the cold civil war the like issues or whatever
Very tiresome very uninteresting very unchewy
Your ability to get ahead
left-wing politics was sort of designed to get people ahead
Or it's like works sort of like like up up the classes. Is that we mean like or up?
You know up the like rise and like have a career and a profession
You know it's like one of the ways that I described like the early new deal
Is that it really was like a start-up Washington in a lot of ways
And like you're like life cycle of being in the new deal had this like start-up quality
Like you would graduate from say Harvard with a degree in this new science of economics in like 1935
And you know somebody who knows somebody who knows like Felix Frankfurter or Tommy Corcoran or something
And so you're like make some inquiries and one day you get a call and the voice on the telephone
it's like would you like to come to Washington and
You know work for us and you're like what what would I be doing and the voice will be like we'll figure it out
You know and you get there and you get in an office and your boss is like
Here's three million dollars go electrify Arkansas, right?
You know and that same person like 80 years later like their existence is
They're basically a tracy flick, you know the the great film election
um
Alexander Payne filmed from like 25 years ago or so
Reese Witherspoon
High school student government, right?
You know, so you're like tracy flick and your goal is to get ahead in everything and be like a goody-goody
And you're on the high school newspaper and you go to Harvard and you know
Study political science and then you're like I want to go to Washington. Okay
I'm gonna like intern for like
A house member doing like a constituent service and like, you know after a while
They might let me talk to the lobbyists who writes the legislation and you'd be like see here's a line of legislation
I took care of for that. It wouldn't say that if I hadn't been there. You didn't write it
You got it from the right lobbyist or activist or whatever, right, you know, and so basically
This is a very saturated system
In terms of its ability
To offer the things to ambitious people that ambitious people
They need a lot of like a similar
Simulacra of power, but you don't actually do anything. You don't get three million dollars to electrify
Yeah, and if you actually do something
It's because you worked really hard to get a bunch of status and then after you got that status
you've got some real actual power
and
You know, yeah, it's like a really um
It's like it's really grueling and it rewards like people who are not
As imaginative and talented like people who are really imaginative talented want to it, right?
And and because it fucking sucks, you know, and and so you have like
sort of all of these things are kind of
Right for something different in a way and like one way to think about
Sort of the way that something different exists is to think about
Or to sort of
Define the different thing that you want to exist
Is to think about sort of how it should think about what we have at present
How does the new regime think about the old regime?
What does basically the soviet union in 1987 look like from the perspective of russia in 1997?
How you look back on the old regime and it shouldn't be like, oh man, I miss the old regime
Wow, they could really get that shit done now our garbage doesn't get picked up. It should not be like that
It should be the opposite of that, right?
and so, you know
if you're looking
at like
I mean
sort of the old
America from the perspective of an america where
Even just basic things like you can walk safely anywhere any time of day or night, right?
You know, think about how impossible it is would be to get that
Basic simple feature of like the government monopoly on violence back, right, you know and and like speaking from the west coast
I mean, we're kind of like
Yeah, yeah, you see portland. Did you say portland?
Yeah, portland and seattle and olympia
San Francisco
Sure, sure, sure. I've seen it all right, you know, and you're saying you're saying to get back to my first question
the opportunity or the
This regime is is selecting for madness on a number of different levels and then also selecting for people who have
Lot lack of talent or imagination because they would probably just want to be in a startup
To begin with
so this new
Era or new field will select for itself the leader that has the qualities that would maximize that
Yeah, I mean, I think that really people underrate the extent to which
sort of the structure determines the ideologies and the virtues and so
basically
any sort of
monarchy at all would basically
See that sort of bringing this like
sort of, you know, you know how hercules
Sends the river into the audience tables, right?
You know, uh, he he has, you know, in the myth of hercules
He has all these impossible tasks to do which he does in these impossible ways
He's like i'm gonna clean out the dirtiest stables in the world. So like let's redirect a river through it, right?
You know and and sending
like
It's hard the sort of the course of like
kind of healing and repair in that sense that
Would be the obvious course for any monarch seems to me
like
If you took like j random ceo and made him king, they'd probably are ceo of washington or you know
imperial president or whatever
They probably mostly come out with the same kinds of things. I think it's definitely
sort of like
What is my role?
My role is to sort of write the book on how to do this, right? Which will
I hope help it become more possible
You courtesy arvin. That's your courtesy arvin. You know, my role is definitely not to be king of a possible pick of
Monarchy. I'm a terrible. I'm sorry about that. I'm a terrible ceo. I've been a ceo. I'm awful at it
You really don't want to see you
But I'm I'm a more of a the priest type than the than the warrior type, but
But yeah, I mean like having that blueprint certainly helps or should help a great deal
To make it possible. But yeah
political formulation
The pre pre formulation
Yeah, the you know the like why would you
Yeah, the sort of the
You have to have something both that is a plan that could be followed
and a plan that people can believe in
and
You know and that that belief is going to strike people is extremely on but like
America is the land of
Propagandizing on beliefs
Imagine, you know, sure. I mean imagine how like imagine what people would have thought of punk
In 1963 and now the Brits are going to get mad because they're going to say they invented punk. Yeah, well
Maybe but I imagine what the Brits would have thought of punk in 1963. All right. Well, I should probably
We've been a lot on on the last questions and yeah, well, no
I just want to plug your your uh, your sub stack excellent work gray mirror with an a not an e
correct gray the gray with an a in the american way
And
Impossible to find you on any social media other than I am not on social media. You're a smart man. So yeah
Thank you so much for your time Chris. Thank you so much. It's a terribly great time. This is really fun. All right. All right
I will uh, see you soon online. All right. Yeah. Take care. Bye
You
