Hello, and welcome to Factually. I'm Adam Conover.
Thank you so much for joining me on the show again.
You know, the economic system that we call capitalism
has gotten pretty weird.
Think about the capitalism that we started with.
You know, 100 years ago, when jerks in top hats with monocles
built untold wealth by making things like coal,
steel, and railroads, and colluding to protect their gains.
Well, guess what? The workers had to fight back.
They had to rise up and make sure they weren't being exploited.
The government started regulating those businesses a little bit.
Things got a little bit better.
We still had a lot of problems,
but that was capitalism as we knew it, right?
Well, that form of capitalism seems to be straight up gone.
Instead, we're living under something extremely weird.
The economic system that dominates the world today
is run by massive tech companies
that have a thousand fingers in a thousand pies,
online marketplaces, social media platforms,
artificial intelligence, even TV and film studios.
These companies surveil us in ways that would make the CIA blush,
and then they crunch all of our personal data
through algorithms that are so complex
that even they do not understand how they work,
and they do it in order to feed us manipulative advertisements
and control our behavior.
And here's the weirdest part.
These monopolistic, polymorphous mega-entities increasingly
do not even make anything at all.
Instead, they just sit there,
extracting rent from us, the consumers,
and the people who are trying to buy things from
the actual producers in our economy,
even though they don't do anything other than connect us together.
So what we call capitalism today
increasingly seems to be simply a different economic system
than it was at the beginning of the century.
And it's worth asking whether capitalism
is even the best thing to call it.
Well, our guest today argues that no, it is not,
and that in fact, it has evolved into something far worse.
He's one of the foremost critics of our economic system
from the left, and he's someone with a truly deep
and impressive understanding of our global economic system,
and you know that because he once served
as the finance minister of Greece.
His most recent book is called Technofutilism,
What Killed Capitalism.
This was such a fascinating conversation,
but before we get into it, I just want to remind you
that if you want to support this show,
you can do so on Patreon.
Head to patreon.com slash atomcon over five bucks a month,
gets you every episode of the show ad-free.
We have a community discord
and a lot of other great features as well.
Would love to see you there.
And now please welcome Greek economist and politician,
Giannis Varoufakis.
Giannis, thank you so much for being on the show.
It's a thrill to have you.
My great pleasure.
Thank you for having me.
So let's jump right into it.
You have a new book out called Technofutilism.
You argue that we have left capitalism behind
and that we've entered into something worse.
What is that and what do you mean by it?
Well, before anyone can pronounce credibly
the end of capitalism,
one has to decide what capitalism is.
So for me, capitalism is not just a world
in which people buy and sell stuff in markets.
Capitalism is a very specific system
where there are two pylons
on which the whole socioeconomic system rests.
One is profit.
And not any kind of profit,
but profit that comes out of entrepreneurial activity
out of creating things and selling.
And the second pylon, of course, is markets.
Because before capitalism,
we had a world in which markets were everywhere,
but they were peripheral.
Because come to thinking of it during feudalism
when peasants worked at the hands,
that there was no labor market.
They were, but they didn't sell their labor.
They didn't receive a wage.
What happened was at the end of the harvest,
the sheriff on behalf of the landlord,
the baron would come and collect 60, 70% of the produce
and leave the rest to the farmer, to the peasant.
So there was no labor market.
There was no wage.
And indeed, it was not even profit in today's pylons
because all there was was loot.
Essentially, an anti-extraction on behalf of feudal lords.
There may have been a market in the center of town
where you could go buy and sell shoes or boots or whatever.
But that wasn't the central feature of the economy.
The central feature of the economy was basically forced labor
where you live on my land.
You have to give me most of what you make.
You can keep a little bit for yourself because I'm in charge.
That's not anything close to a market.
That's right.
There were always markets.
Ever since, you know, humanoids on trees
started exchanging bananas or apples.
There was a market.
But most of what humans did until capitalism emerged,
most of what we did did not go through markets.
The markets were very fair, exactly as you put it.
And the two markets that were completely missing
until capitalism was one, it was the labor market.
Then the other was the market for land.
Land, either you inherited it if you were a member of the landed gentry
or the aristocracy, or maybe it was given to you
by a lord or a king that owed you a favor.
But you couldn't buy land.
There was no real estate section in the newspaper
where you could buy and sell land.
Land you conquered, you inherited it.
And if you neither conquered or inherited it,
you never had it.
You were landless forever.
So capitalism brought in markets as the main domain
where everything happened and profits as opposed to rents,
being the fuel that drove the system, the market system.
My claim is that the triumph of capital,
capital, of course, being all these produced means of production.
If you think of a steam engine or a modern industrial robot,
it's a produced means of production.
It's a machine that we have created in order to create other stuff,
not for its own sake.
If you think of capital as having taken over,
as the main source of wealth creation from land.
So once upon a time, all wealth came from land.
With capitalism, it all came from owning the machinery
of capitalism, owning the engines, owning the telegraph poles,
owning the electricity grids, owning the airlines.
All this is machinery, capital produced means of production.
Capital was so triumphant.
It beats organized labor, trade unions,
the political system.
Effectively, it took over the world.
Yeah, it certainly feels as though capital runs the world right now.
It certainly feels that it runs the United States.
It is everywhere, not just the United States, Malaysia, Indonesia.
Everywhere you look, you see the triumph of capital.
But my hypothesis is that capital, because it was so successful,
it mutated and it produced a mutant version of capital,
which I call cloud capital.
Which remarkably, it is not a produced means of production anymore.
It is a produced means of behavioral modification.
So the algorithm that lives inside your iPhone
or your assumption phone or whatever, or your laptop,
is attached to machinery.
So there are cell towers and there are optic fiber cables
and there are server farms and there are pieces of software.
This is all capital goods.
But these goods are not created to produce other stuff.
They are there to modify your behavior and mine.
And this kind of capital, that's my hypothesis,
has become so powerful at modifying our behavior.
That the owners of cloud capital, whom I call the cloud ballists,
no surprise there, have a powerful new power
to make other people work for them.
So if you're Jeff Bezos, you own a lot of cloud capital.
It's called amazon.com, for instance, as well as server farms and all that.
And what do you produce?
Nothing.
But what it has created for you, this cloud capital,
is a fantastically large digital thief.
Cloud thief, I call it, where there's a lot of trading taking place
between consumers and producers.
And Jeff Bezos manages to charge the producers up to 40% of the price
that consumers pay, while at the same time makes you and I
produce free labor in order to replenish his cloud capital.
For instance, every time you post a review of a book on amazon.com,
and you buy anything, or you show your interest in X as opposed to Y,
that increases the capital stock, the cloud capital stock of Jeff Bezos,
which gives him an even greater opportunity to extract rents
from vassal capital, selling their wares on his cloud thief.
So the moment you enter amazon.com, and this is why I'm going to end my
silly looking, the moment you enter amazon.com, you extract capitalism.
Welcome to techno feudalism.
Because Amazon itself is not a market.
Like it sort of looks like a market.
You're buying and selling things.
There are multiple buyers and sellers are selling things.
But it sounds like you'd argue that you are so firmly under Jeff's boot
when you are on amazon.com as either a buyer or a seller
that this is not a free market, certainly.
It's not a market at all.
Only that it's not free.
It's not a market.
You see, the way I visualized is this.
Because there's a lot of criticism of what I'm saying by people who say,
come on, Yanis, it's still a market.
It's monopolized.
It's a monopolistic market.
It's owned by one man, Jeff Bezos.
Well, I beg to differ.
Think of a western movie, a really bad western movie,
where you and I are riding into some town that is owned by one person.
Let's call that person Jeff again.
And we discover very soon that in this western setting,
every shop in the town, the post office, the saloon bar, the bank, everything,
the police station, the sheriff is owned by that one man, Jeff.
Right? Now, that's a monopolistic market.
But that's not Amazon.com.
Amazon.com is far worse.
Because you see, if you and I were to ride into this town,
this imaginary town somewhere in the far west,
when you and I looked to our left in the same direction to a particular shop window,
you and I will be seeing the same thing.
But in Amazon.com, we're not seeing the same thing.
If you and I, as we speak, were to type in Amazon.com,
electric bicycle, or binoculars, or whatever, you would get a different list
to the one I would get.
Because the algorithm that Jeff owns knows me and you very, very well.
They have huge quantities of data on us.
So they know our likes, this likes how much money we're prepared to pay for anything.
And it will match you and me to different kind of vendors,
vendors that the algorithm knows just as well as it knows us,
with one intention in mind to maximize the capacity of just the statistical probability
that Jeff Bezos will extract the maximum amount of rent from that capitalist
who will sell us the electric bicycle or binoculars.
So in a sense, there is a long algorithm that matches every buyer to every seller
in ways that the buyer and seller cannot control.
Buyers cannot talk to one another.
They cannot tell us except any communication that the algorithm permits
in the interest of maximizing the rents extracted by Jeff Bezos.
Now, this is not a market.
A market is a place which has to be decentralized at least on one side.
Even if you have a monopolistic market, buyers can talk to one another.
They can even ideally or in theory discuss with one another a consumer boycott.
When you are on Amazon.com, you can't do that because the algorithm
will never allow you to communicate with anybody.
So a market which is completely totally centralized.
Think of it.
This would be a dream come true for the Soviet Economic Planning Agency.
Because the whole point about the Soviet Union, I really truly believe that.
Because I've started quite a while the way in which the planning ministry of the Soviet Union
worked and what they were intending to do.
And I can tell you, for them, I mean, they had never imagined
the algorithm that Jeff Bezos has at his disposal.
But when I read what it is that they wanted to do, that's exactly what they wanted.
They wanted to know exactly what consumers wanted.
They wanted to know exactly what producers were capable of producing.
And they wanted to make the producers produce stuff that then they would match to particular
consumers in a way that was in the interest of the system.
Neither of the producers nor of the consumers.
That's what Bezos is arguing about.
That's why I insist.
This is not the market.
It's a trading place.
It's a digital trading place which operates like a kind of techno thief or thiefdom.
I call it a cloud thief.
And so as not to give the impression to our listeners, to our viewers,
that this is only pertinent to amazon.com.
Wherever you go, whichever country you go, you go to Malaysia today.
You go to India.
You go to Nigeria.
You'll find that besides amazon.com, there are such digital or cloud thieves belonging to local
magnets.
And you've got this feudal system comprising many different digital or cloud thieves
where about 30% or 40% of all payments are in the end, they end up in the pockets of
not the producers, not the workers who have helped produce on behalf of their companies
and their employers, the products that are being sold.
But they're being confiscated in the form of cloud rents by the cloud journalists,
the owners of cloud companies.
I mean, this is exactly the fee that, for instance, Apple famously takes off of almost
every transaction made on an iPhone or at least every digital transaction of a certain sort,
which they go to great lengths to protect.
And what I find really interesting is that you are comparing that sort of fee or the sort
of fee that Amazon takes to the rent taken by the feudal landlord, not rent that I might pay to
a landlord whose apartment I live in, but the sort of rent that is taken by a feudal lord
simply because of the power that they have.
They're not producing anything.
They're not providing anything to the transaction other than saying,
because of my power, I can take a giant cut of what you have made.
Can you talk a little bit more about that comparison?
Because that's where the connection to feudalism makes the most sense to me,
is seeing Apple's Amazon's pound of flesh as similar to the feudal lord taking the wool
that the poor peasant has made from their sheep.
Absolutely.
You put it spectacularly accurately.
All I need to add is that I'm not suggesting that we've gone back to an earlier mode of
production.
My argument is not that we have returned feudalism.
No, we've moved forward because there is a profound difference between Bezos,
Zuckerberg, all those cloudelists, Elon Musk, and the feudal lords of yesteryear.
The feudal lords of yesteryear did not need to invest anything in order to create that feudal
power of theirs, their power to extract rent.
It's simply the accident, the lottery of birth.
They were born into a feudal society on the side of their aristocracy.
They inherited the land and, hey presto, they could collect rent.
Whereas people like Bezos and Zuckerberg, they are smart entrepreneurs and they put
a lot of work into it.
They were not born with a silver spoon in their mouths.
They invested huge quantities of capital and they ended up with majestic digital capital,
cloud capital, and it is on the basis of that huge investment that now they have the power
to extract rents.
And it is, of course, similar to the feudal kind of rent in the sense that it is rent.
What is rent?
Rent is a payment courtesy of what you own, not of what you do.
But of course, in order to collect that cloud rent, they had to do a lot of investment
prior to that.
But, and here comes a very interesting little twist to the story.
Most of the money that went into the investments that begot cloud capital
is state money.
It's public money.
Really?
If you look at what happened after the...
How so?
90 percent.
90 percent.
You will recall, of course, that in 2008, after Lehman Brothers collapsed
and Wall Street went pear-shaped along with the Frankfurt banks, the Parisian banks,
the city of London and so on, the G7 central bankers and our great and good leaders
gathered together in April of 2009 in London and in a state of panic decided to reflow finance.
Since then, they have collectively all those G7 central bankers
they have printed around 35 trillion US dollars, 35 trillion US dollars.
And they gave it to...
That's got nothing to do with techno feudalists, right?
For big tech or cloud capital.
So far.
It's a totally different fucked up thing that happened.
Indeed.
This is how history works through coincidences and overlapping forces that are developing
and evolving.
So you will recall also that at the same time that they were printing all this money that
they were pumping into the private banks to reflow them.
You will remember Team Guidner and the Guidner Summers Plan that gave certain trillion effective
to reflow the mortgage derivative markets and so on.
Yes.
The idea was that all this money would go to the Bank of America, City Group,
J.B. Morgan, Goldman Sachs and those bankers would then lend the money on to business and
business would employ people and the economy would start running again through investment.
Those central bank money will become investment.
Well, the problem was that at the very same time that they were printing these mountains of money.
They were practicing fiscal austerity, even under Obama, even under the so-called stimulus.
If you look at, if you add the federal government and the state governments together,
where the state governments were, remember, they were entrenching left, right and center,
they were in deep austerity because they were in Pekinius.
All governments together, federal and state in the United States, practice austerity.
Effectively, they cut down on public spending and increased taxation if you put it all together.
In the European Union, we were the champions of austerity.
My country, Greece, we broke every world record when it came to austerity,
Britain practice austerity.
Now, this is a fantastically interesting combination.
You have the central bank is printing huge quantities of money, pumping them into the system.
So there's a lot of money in the system.
And at the very same time, you have the many, the multitudes, the hoipoloid, with very little money.
So imagine you are an industrialist, an entrepreneur, and Bank of America calls you,
says, I've got a billion or 200 million to give to you.
Do you want it?
You are not going to say no when the interest rate is almost zero or sometimes negative.
In Europe, it was negative.
Effectively, you were being paid to borrow money, right?
But you look outside your window or in the window of your imagination and you think,
who's going to buy the stuff?
I'm going to be producing.
These people are there, the many, the riffraff.
They don't have anything to, you know, they can't afford to buy expensive, high value added stuff.
So you take the 100 million or 200 million that the bank gives you and you take it to Wall Street
and you buy it back your own shares.
That drives your share price up.
Your bonus goes up.
You're happy, but that's not investment.
Of all the industrialists in the United States,
who actually received some of that money that was printed under what was so-called
quantitative easing, but just money printing by the Fed.
Of all these investors who got the money from the banker, who got it from the Central Bank,
the American Central Bank, only the Zuckerbergs, the Elon Musk's,
the people that I refer to in my book as Cloudelist, the owners of Cloud Capital,
took the money and invested it in capital and it was Cloud Capital.
My estimation, and I have this on quite good authority from within Facebook or Meta,
90% of the money that went into building up Meta came from Central Bank money.
So this is very interesting, isn't it?
Because you've got a new variety of feudal lords.
I call them Cloudelists or techno feudal lords.
Being financed by the state.
Folks, this is not capitalism.
Yeah, and you also said, by the way, that these men were not hereditary rulers.
They didn't inherit everything.
These are also people who happened to be in the right place, right time,
came from the right backgrounds.
Zuckerberg went to Harvard and they had the access to this large amount of funds.
They did not compete to get ahead in the way that we're told capitalists are supposed to.
There was a lot of advantage given here by the state and by circumstance.
Indeed. So the state gives them the money.
It gives them the technologies as well, because let us not forget,
if you take your iPhone apart, every single technology in your iPhone
was developed by some government fund or research project, everything was.
The touch screen, GPS from the Pentagon, Wi-Fi from the Australian CSIRO, everything came.
So society at states, in a collective way, provided the technologies and the money
to these very smart people.
There's no doubt that these people are extremely smart and worked very hard to create
cloud thieves, not to create capitalist firms that compete with one another on the basis of
products, but to create cloud thieves that are engineered through algorithms that are primed
to modify your behavior in mind, to extract the rents from the actual producers of stuff.
You know, I'm on an ongoing mission to live healthier, and for me, that doesn't just mean
hitting the gym a couple times a week. It means being mindful of the big things and the small
things, down to making choices to bring better quality groceries into my home.
That's why I've been such a big fan of Thrive Market. Thrive Market is our go-to on my house
for all of our grocery and household essentials, and the convenience of getting everything online
and then quickly shipped to my doorstep is a huge time saver. In our house, we love that Thrive
Market carries brands with the highest quality ingredients and sourcing methods.
They restrict hundreds of ingredients across their food and cleaning categories,
and I can use their onsite filters to suit my lifestyle needs.
Whether you're looking for organic kid snacks, low sugar alternatives,
or gluten-free pantry essentials, you can curate your own shopping experience with just a few
clicks. And as a Thrive Market member, I save money on every single grocery order. On average,
I save over 30% every time. They even have a deals page that changes daily and always has
some of my favorite brands. You know, my girlfriend eats gluten-free, and so we're
able to get Bonzapasta. It's a really good chickpea pasta that she loves. I think it tastes great,
and it's always available on Thrive Market. And when you join Thrive Market,
you're also helping a family in need with their one-for-one membership matching program
you join they give. So join in on the savings with Thrive Market today and get 30% off your first
order plus a free $60 gift. Go to ThriveMarket.com slash factually for 30% off your first grocery
order plus a free $60 gift that is a huge savings. That's ThriveMarket.com slash factually. Thrive
Market.com slash factually. I want to talk about how much this trend has also coincided with the
privatization of the internet. These are primarily internet firms that you're talking about, although
I'm sure there are some examples of this that go beyond the internet. But when the internet was
created, it was especially the first few decades of its existence believed to be
a radically decentralized place, the most decentralized possible. Anybody could put up a
website on their own server and sell something to anybody who came by. And now we have all
experienced the shrinking of the internet in a way to three or four gigantic firms through which
everything runs. And that is such a radical transformation in such a short period of time
for us to go from a place that felt like a wild west town, as you said, you know, a true wild west
frontier where anybody can build anything. Hey, look, here's my little shop buy from me to a place
where if you don't go through Mark or Elon or Jeff or a few other small number of people,
you can't sell anything to anyone. Doesn't that strike you as I mean, that happened in
10 years, 15 years, something like that? Yeah, precisely. I tell that story in my book,
the story of how the internet comes. It wasn't just decentralized, it was centralized,
but it was actually more like it was a capitalism free zone. Yes. A market town,
an old fashioned market town, farmers market is decentralized. You've got lots of producers,
everyone is producing their own tomatoes or, you know, potatoes, whatever. And they compete
with one another, no one can control the price because each one of them is a small drop in a
large portion of produce. And that's a decentralized capitalist market. The internet was not even that,
it was a it was a commons. Yeah, nobody paid for doing stuff to even today.
Our listeners, audience, viewers, when you go into Google Chrome, or some kind of browser,
you will still see those letters, HTTP, colon slash slash something, you know, that is a language,
a computer code developed once upon a time in the early 1970s, so that people can actually
visit each other's pages, you know, browser. And we still use that. The people who actually
created the HTTP or SMTP that you may have seen in your email app, it's the protocol for sending
email, SMTP, HTTP, all those protocols, which are still there inside the internet today,
were developed by folks of scientists, computer people, who gave them away. They didn't make a
single penny on it, not a single penny. It was a commons. It was a gift exchange economy. That's
what the internet was. Put them out there and completely open source and just enjoy the fact
that others use their wares. Yes, that was the entire culture of the internet was creating
things like that. I remember when I was a kid, so I joined the internet in the 90s when it was
still dominated by that culture. And I loved video games. And there was a whole culture of
people would write guides for video games, long, long guides with art and, you know,
jokes in them and things like that. And they would just post them on the internet because
I love this video game. You love it too. And I want to share that with you. And that was the
culture was this sort of free gift exchange. And it really strikes me how these companies have,
I think you might be working your way to this point, perverted that culture so that now we
still post in that way. I post to Instagram, to Reddit, to all these places for free,
except now, the fundamental reason for the post is to line the pocket of the person who owns the
site, that they are profiting off of it, even though I am not, which is a really remarkable
shift. But I worry I cut you off. No, no, no, you're adding to what I said.
The delicious irony about the process which begun the privatization of the original internet
commons has to do with our identity. Because when we started playing around with the internet,
and I joined the internet before it was called the internet, and I joined an earlier version
called Janet, standing for, standing for joint academic network. That was the internet.
That reveals my age, right? And I tell you that people won't believe it. The first time I joined
the internet, I didn't even have a screen. I had a teletype, and all the output was being printed
on a doc matrix. That's amazing. But that is, that's so cool. I love that.
So that internet began to get privatized for one simple reason, because governments did not help us
become the owners of our identity. Because, you know, in that internet, everybody was anonymous,
or we had whatever name that we chose to have, you know, through aliases.
At some point, when you wanted to, when you were given the opportunity of buying stuff
over the internet, or hailing a taxi, whether it's Uber or something else, you had to have
an identity. You had to make a payment. At that point, something quite absurd started.
Because, unlike the physical world, where you have an ID card, a driver's license, a passport,
that is issued by the state, for a small fee to every citizen, courtesy of, you know, being a
citizen, means that your citizen's right to have an ID card of sorts, to be able to identify yourself
if the police pull you over or anything. On the internet, we, to this very day, you have to beg
some bank or Google or Facebook to testify to who you are before you can transact with anyone
and declare your identity. You're not the owner of your identity. So that's how the colonization
and the privatization of the internet began, because we do not, we still do this day. There's no
way you can identify yourself unless some conglomerate says, yeah, okay, this is Yanis. I can certify for
you that this is Yanis. And every time you need to, you know, to transact, you have to beg some
conglomerate to testify to who you are, which is quite astonishing. It makes a very big difference
in the way you conceptualize digital trade. So for instance, I mentioned before, hailing a card,
okay? Now, the only way to do it today is you have to have an account Uber or Lyft or one of those
apps. And the way to do that is you use your banker, you use your debit card, your credit card, your
essentially, you beg the Bank of America to tell Uber that you are who you say you are.
You use the codes that Bank of America has given you for you to have the right to call an Uber
cat, right? Now, imagine if you and I were the owners of our digital identity. And I wanted to go
to work today. I'm here in Athens today. Now, you know, I imagine I could, there was an app
free for everyone, you know, just a common kind of license, where I would say, this is who I am.
I identify myself because I own my identity. This is where I am. I'm on the corner of such and such
states. And this is where I want to go to the airport. Who wants to offer me, you know, bid for
my fare? Yeah. And imagine if anybody, anybody could bid for my fare, including public transport,
who would send me a, you know, a smart little message saying, you idiot, there is a tube station
public bus and take you there for, you know, much faster and, you know, much more cost.
We cannot do this now. Yeah. And we don't do this because we do not own our digital identity.
You know, the cloud is only for us. I also think that, you know, these companies
worked so quickly to decentralize and to privatize the the internet. If you look at Amazon, for
instance, it not only built a major section of the pipes of the internet with their web
services that so many companies are now, you know, now use, but they also worked to destroy their
competitors, to either buy them out or to ruin them, to underpriced them aggressively anti-competitive
policies that the government did nothing to protect against. You know, these were classic,
sort of, Amazon worked to build a monopoly in classic fashion. And it was able to do it because
the internet was a frontier. And the government, who's the regulator, who's, you know, supposed to
be the cop on the beat, didn't stop them from doing it. And now they are finally suing them
and prosecuting them, but, you know, probably 15 years too late. Yeah.
But you see, I think you're absolutely right. There's no doubt that anybody who has a lot of
power tries to enhance it by means of destroying the competition, destroying anybody who threatens
them. That was the case with Henry Ford, you know, and the General Motors. They, since the 1910s,
1920s, they brought municipalities to rip out the trams and to replace them with their own
petrol-engined cars and busses. So there is a similarity. But that's where the similarity ends.
If you look at Teddy Roosevelt versus Rockefeller and Standard Oil, you know, the famous antitrust
laws and the trust busters and so on of the 1920s. Yeah, that was very impressive.
But the argument of the antitrust push, drive policy, which is a very good argument, had to do
with the way in which those monopolies were pulling markets in order to drive prices up
because they were traditional capitalists. They were monopolists, but they were traditional
capitalists in the sense that they produced stuff and they wanted to have a monopoly and to sell you
the stuff that they produced. Right. You think, you know, old-fashioned terrestrial capital,
the clad lists that I refer to, they are not in the business of driving prices up to exploit you,
they're actually driving prices down. It is impossible to use the Teddy Roosevelt mentality
and antitrust legislation against Rockefeller because it doesn't charge you anything. The price
is a very radical zero. That's the price you pay to use Instagram or to use.
Our political class was also not trained to see what cloud capital does different to the capital
of Henry Ford and Westinghouse and all the folks or Edison. The whole point about
basis and these people is that they use capital and free services in order to capture both consumers
and producers, to extract rents from them, not to sell them stuff at higher prices. Right. So
exploitation of society takes also the form of pushing prices a little solo, that the environment
suffers, the producers suffer, you know, the middle ground, the small and medium scale producers
go to the wall. So that's why I'm insisting on the importance of understanding the difference
between cloud capital as a produced means of behavioral modification from the traditional
capital that the Robert Barons used 100 years ago. Yes. I mean, maybe there's a comparison
you could make between the railroads of 100 years ago because they were a means of transportation
as a system that was trying to extract rent from producers and consumers. But I take your point
very well that Jeff Bezos is not producing anything and he's not trying to raise prices for
consumers. He tries to lower the price to the lowest possible floor, but then extract unearned
money from everybody at every part of the transaction. And also I want to return to this,
extract free labor from everyone as well. I feel that constantly in my use of the internet that
every time, again, I post a story just, oh, I want to communicate with my friends. I'm also
providing value to Mark Zuckerberg or to whatever site I'm posting the story to. Every time I write
a review, if you look at, and also in my role as a content producer, right, I'm making this show
right now. I'm doing labor right now that benefits YouTube, right, that benefits Google.
They will sell an ad against this video. And the only promise of income I have
is that this is going to go through YouTube's algorithm. And if it is successful in the algorithm,
according to some metric that I don't know, I have my guess. I'll come up with a title that I hope
will make people click on this or will make YouTube show it in the right hand sidebar.
But I have no guarantee of that because the algorithm is always changing. If the algorithm
bestows its favor upon this video, they will break me off a percentage, a small percentage of the
ad revenue that they earn off of it. And that percentage is up to their whim. They can change
it at any time. I just log into my little panel and it said, oh, you made 50 bucks. Oh, you made
200 bucks. And I'm like, oh, thank you. I'm so happy to receive the blessing from YouTube this
year that they didn't take too much of the money I earned. This is a bizarre way for me to do labor.
And yet it is, in fact, my only choice because this company, Google, via YouTube has replaced
so much of the media consumption in the United States. And there is literally nowhere else to go
if you want to make or consume this sort of content. And despite the fact that they do not make the
content, they are able to extract huge amounts of revenue from it. I couldn't have put it better
myself. You are a cloud, sir. You are a cloud. God damn it. Yeah. Let's go back 500 years, Europe,
where you had the actual surfs in the estate of some Lord in Nottinghamshire, let's say, right,
in England. That's how they felt. They were glad to have access to the land.
You know, it was the same land and they lived in probably the same hut or house
in which their parents and grandparents lived. They toiled on the land. They loved the land.
They loved the area. They probably never left it all their lives unless they went to war.
And, you know, they had the rituals, they married on that land. They had children,
grandchildren. They were praying to God that they would have more time on that same land
than they could not be expelled. They put all their resourcefulness into producing wheat or
barley or whatever it is that they produced. And they hoped, like you hope,
in relation to YouTube, that, you know, the sheriff would leave enough produce for them
to have a decent life at the end of the harvest after extracting the rent.
They hoped they don't get demonetized. Yeah. Yeah. Tell me the same thing. They never knew
exactly how much the sheriff would take on behalf of the Lord at the end of the harvest.
That varied in ways that reflected the mysteries in the mind of the landlord or
his own calculations of how much he had to leave the peasants at the end of the harvest
in order to minimize the chances of a rebellion that would remove his head from his shoulders.
Yeah. You don't even have that opportunity with Google. You wouldn't know where to find them.
So it is a form of feudalism, but it is far more than that because as you put it so brilliantly,
you know, this is the first time in the history of humanity where through our leisure or leisure,
as you would say in America, we are contributing. We are replenishing and reproducing the capital
stock, the cloud capital stock, which reinforces the land, the cloud land, the digital land,
the fiefdom in which we toil. That is the new element of it. And also, if I may add something
else, the same algorithm that creates the fiefdom in which you labor for free or partly for free
is this algorithm which you train to train you, to train it, to train you, to give it an opportunity
to make good suggestions to you through recommendations in order to press you so
that the next time it says to you, you should buy that, you want to buy that, and then it
sells it to you directly as well by passing every market. Why do you also observe for the same thing?
And the same algorithm, and this is my conclusion, in the warehouse or the factory where some
proletarian or precariously employed proletarian is producing the stuff, either in the factory or
even in the Amazon warehouse, has a device, a digital device strapped to their hand using the
same algorithm, exactly the same algorithm, in order to speed up their work and to tell them
which box to take where and monitors the rate of their working and maybe firing them occasionally,
detecting the probability that the union will form in that particular facility and therefore
winds down the facility and opens a warehouse or another factory somewhere else. That's the
same algorithm that does all that at once. That's science fiction. Yeah. I mean, and if you compare
that, for instance, to an Uber driver or better yet, let's say, let's say a gig delivery driver,
because we as consumers often interact with Uber most often, but your packages are now
delivered via the same means. That's, again, someone who is directly being paid via algorithm
doesn't know how much they'll be paid until the moment the job appears and is just going to hope
that, oh, the algorithm bestows them enough work at a high enough rate to make a living.
It's, we're so much under the heel of the algorithm that I think, surf really, the more you describe
it, the more of an appropriate term it becomes for how we all feel. On both ends of the equation,
as consumers, we feel that way too, that we're just like, all right, we'll just watch whatever
the algorithm chooses to give us. This is the best that we can get, might as well accept it.
Can I add another two elements to this story? We've done a good job of putting this together,
but there are two elements which I think are essential and missing. One is finance. I was
completely gobsmacked when I discovered that in a country which I know reasonably well from
years ago, Indonesia. I remember the first time I went to Indonesia many, many years ago, I was
struck by the so-called waroons. The waroons are stalls on wheels that you find along the
countryside at different townships or at intersections. They would sell everything from
cigarettes and various small wares to telephone cards, SIM cards, and so on.
This is a bodega. That's what they're called in New York, except it's a store. This is a cart.
Let me tell you this. Why was I gobsmacked? I found out that 3.5 million of those
have been taken over by one of those digital victims owned by an Indonesian magnate. Then
Jeff Bezos himself decided that he wants a piece of the action. Jeff Bezos enterprises,
one of his companies, went over and purchased the other remaining couple of million of those.
When you see the cloud capital spreading like wildfire in a place like Indonesia,
the question is why did they care about these waroons? What value added can they have? That
was the first question. What profit margin did these sales leave? Nothing. Until you realize
the real purpose of taking them over, to use them as mini banks, providing micro loans to their own
local area through the same app that the locals were using once these waroons were taken over
by a cloud thief in order to buy telephone cards and cigarettes. It's a financialization process
seeping through cloud capital all the way to those grass roots. In China, as we speak,
there is an application called WeChat. I'm sure you've heard of it. Of course. Of course,
many of you haven't heard of it because it's not available in the United States or you're not used
to the United States. WeChat is everything we know in the West wrapped up in one application.
It can do everything that Netflix, Uber, Spotify, Google, Facebook, Instagram does.
And in addition to that, you can make payments to anybody in China for free.
Now, you don't have that application in the United States. We don't have it in Europe.
Why? Because Wall Street won't let you. Because Wall Street wants to maintain the monopoly
of financial capital and transactions. And they will do deals with Google, but they will not be
for free. And with Apple Pay. That's why Apple Pay is not free. There is a huge cost involved
in transacting through Apple Pay. But WeChat doesn't have that. Why am I talking about that?
Because firstly, you see how through the imperialist waves from Indonesia to Korea to Kenya to Nigeria,
you have a spread of cloud capital and also the way in which the predominance of Wall
Street in the United States is, and that is my hypothesis. And it's a hypothesis that really
worries me. Wall Street is the most powerful agglomeration of bankers in the world who are
really worried about big tech and cloud capital. And they do not want to share the dollar payment
system which they control internationally, not just in the United States. So it's a global payment
system because that's what the dollar is. It's the global payment currency. They do not want to share
this with big tech, whereas the Chinese big tech and the Chinese financiers have joined forces
together under WeChat on one hand and the digital currency of the central bank.
That contrast between what's happening in the United States, why you don't have WeChat, they have
WeChat in China, is for me, there isn't behind the new Cold War that Donald Trump started.
They remember against Huawei initially, ZTE, and Joe Biden turbocharged because I was puzzled
for quite a few years now. Why is the United States starting a Cold War against China?
The answer that was given to me about Taiwan and Spain, that's all rubbish. I see if Taiwan was
not the problem since 1950, I think it changed by Taiwan. The idea that Washington suddenly got
pissed off because the Chinese are spying on them, the country that produced the NSA,
that's a joke and a half. The reason my estimation is that the super cloud thief of the United States
is in direct class and in a direct class with the Chinese cloud thief and
policymakers in Washington who are very small people understand that they have a disadvantage
and the disadvantage stems from Wall Street's rivalry with Silicon Valley, which is a clash
that the Chinese do not suffer from. That is fascinating. If that clash were to
end, if they were able to reach an agreement between themselves, if they were able to cut
each other in on the deals, would that probably be even worse from your perspective? What would
the effect be? I am in two minds about that because the clash between the American and the
Chinese cloud thieves may jeopardize our existence on the planet if it ends up with nuclear bombs
blowing up. I fear that, but I also fear what you said. If Wall Street and Silicon Valley
strike a truce between them and find a way of sharing the spoils, sharing the cloud events,
then they will become even more powerful within the United States, within the West,
within Europe than they already are. We're dumbed if they do and we're dumbed if they don't.
I'm not sure which domination is worse. You're talking about a group of people
the feudal lords, our new feudal lords who are so powerful in every respect. They're not just
economically powerful. They're politically powerful beyond our wildest imaginations because
again, the comparison to feudal lords, these were people who owned the land and could often
had the fate of the king in the palm of their hands because of the amount of land and money
that they owned. They're like, oh, we don't like the king off with his head. Let's put a new king
in. That was often the case in many feudal societies and it often feels that way today.
Jeff Bezos isn't a fan of the president. Well, the president might not be around that long or
he and his friends, that group. To bring us to a conclusion here, what hope is there of
resisting this trend when these folks have that much power? I know the EU has been passing laws to
reign in the power of big tech. Or at least that's the headline. You're shaking your head.
What do you think of the fate of that effort and is there any hope of fighting back against these
folks? Are the European unions hopeless? I know them inside out. I've dealt with them when I was
finance minister of Greece. They have no clue of what's going on and their constant concern is how
to continue pretending that they are following their own rules while violating them.
You can see that the European Union is falling behind on every level. When it comes to AI,
we are nowhere near the Chinese, let alone the Americans. Green technology, gone, finished.
Either imported from China or we don't have it. When it comes to the banking sector,
still fragmented. We don't have something in the equivalent of the US Treasury Bill.
Think about it. We don't have the US Treasury Bill. We don't have a common safe asset that we
can sell people. I'm afraid that I'm saying this as a European. It's in the proud European.
You're saying that Europe overall sucks. I understand that. But what about in terms of
reigning in the techno feudalists? We cannot. You see, only China has produced
cloud capital that can compete with the American capital. The European Union has no cloud capital.
We are completely at the mercy of Google and Facebook and all those Silicon Valley-based
big tech companies. Jet Basis last year made 44 billion euros, something like 50 billion
dollars in Europe only. He paid zero tax. The Europeans were trying to tax him, but they couldn't.
So he's running rings around him. So no, we can become protectionists. Yes, we can raise our
walls, digital walls. But then we are not going to have access to YouTube. And we don't have our
own. The Chinese don't care because they have their own YouTube. They have their own Amazon.
They have everything that America has created in the cloud capital world. They have replicated and
actually done it better in many, many ways. So Europe is not the answer. What can we do more
generally? Well, look, I do believe that the first step is to understand what's going on. So
conversations like the one you and I are having are very, very important because it is crucial
that people understand what's going on. Without it, it's necessary, even if it is not a sufficient
condition. Beyond that, I think that I respect people who are trying to regulate Amazon and so
on. But I don't believe that it is realistic. People call me utopic because I try to imagine a
world in which we own our digital identities, a world where we amend corporate law so that
when it comes to crucial industries like this one, they operate on the basis of one person,
one employee, one share, one vote, like big cooperatives as opposed to companies that belong
to some shadowy figure who controls everything without even working in those companies.
And so they call me a Etopian and they are proposing instead regulation as if this is the
1920s and Teddy Roosevelt would come back. I don't believe you can regulate Amazon.com. I don't
believe you can regulate Google. The whole point of Facebook is that it is international,
breaking it up like we once broke up Standard Oil into regional companies. It doesn't make any
sense. The whole point is that you're going to Facebook to find your friends from all over the
world, not from your village or your county. So the answer, the short answer to your question
is that we need to socialize the ownership of algorithms that we are creating collectively.
It's like our language. It's like a language. What Wittgenstein said, there can be no such
thing as a private language by definition. Similarly, there can be no such thing as a
privately owned algorithmic capital that is consistent with the interests of society.
Yeah. You know, I often think about the comparison to the public airwaves that in the
early days of broadcasting, there was a decision made that these signals are sent by vibrating
the air that nobody can own. People can own the land, but they can't own the air and that
since these are public, therefore, the public gets to exercise control over them. We can make
laws, simple laws like no one person can own every radio station in town, that kind of law.
And I think we've reached a point where when we look at the algorithms that control what we see,
if you just look at Instagram or any of these others, those algorithms so dominate what we see
that we have to see them similarly as the air that we all breathe. And by the way,
the signal is still traveling through the air because that is what your cell phone signal
travels through. So the principle also still applies. So I agree with you and I've made that
argument myself in videos that I've posted on YouTube's private algorithm that we need to make
these public goods that the public has control over, these media. Indeed, indeed. And there are
ways of imagining the transition towards the socialization of the means of communication,
because this is what we're talking about. For instance, imagine that instead of saying that we
need to tax Zuckerberg more, Facebook or Google. I don't believe you can tax them, by the way,
because they can always, they have the better accountants who will hide their profits by inflating
their costs. But imagine you had a situation where you said, look, we are producing part of your
capital. So we should own part of your capital. And let's say that in order to put this into effect,
to operate in the United States of America, you will need to deposit 10% of your shares
in your social equity funds, which accumulates dividends and then they can be paid back to
citizens in the form of a basic income. And then, you know, that 10% can become 20%.
And the limit is, of course, digital libertarian communism.
That's the name of this system, digital libertarian communism.
I just came up with that now.
I love it. But no, I love the principle that because it is our free labor that is powering your,
the engine that you have built or your, your rents, we should receive a part of the profit,
that the public is creating the system that therefore the public needs to profit from it,
is a very beautiful, simple argument that I think most people would understand and agree with.
And let's emphasize, this is not taxation. It's like saying, if somebody has 20%
of the capital stock of a company, they receive dividends. They're not taxing the company.
They are part owners. So I don't believe in taxing the cloud rents of the cloud delis.
I believe in grabbing, let me put it in, in on grabbing a chunk of their shares and saying,
you know what, this is ours, mate. This is ours. And they will collect dividends and we will do
whatever we want the dividends. And, you know, the easiest thing to do and the most fair thing to
distribute it to everyone. Yeah. But in order to do that, we need to have power in the system,
right? I don't believe that, look, we have a couple of regulators in the US right now who are
trying their best and they are, you know, real ideologues and believe that these tech companies
need to be reined in, but we're talking about a few department heads here who might be, you know,
out on their ear next January, depending on what happens in the election.
That's the best we have currently. We have a labor movement that is, you know, premised on
workers banding together and exerting their power collectively, but that only works at
certain times when you're able to get, you know, the right movement of folks together.
What you're talking about is it seems like it would require a mass movement of the users,
of us, the public, saying, hold on a second, Instagram, cut me in. Give me those shares,
right? Or else I'm not going to use the app anymore. So how could we practically move ourselves
towards being able to execute a plan like you're talking about? How do you envision that happening?
Creating a political movement that makes this possible. You're talking to somebody who, you
know, look, I was an, I was an academic, living very happily in my little academic cocoon,
writing esoteric articles for, you know, another 20 people around the world.
And then the 2008 crisis bankrupted my country and I opened my big mouth and nervous,
telling the world what I thought should happen, what shouldn't happen. And then I got involved
in politics, which I didn't do. I regret the fact that I lived in, you know, part of the 21st
century, which made that essential or possible for that matter. And now, you know, for eight years
now, I'm in, I'm a politician, a very relaxed, not particularly successful.
That's how we like it. I have found a pan-European democratic movement called Deem2d5.
In 2008, with Bernie Sanders in Vermont, we started what we call the Progressive International. Now
we have 200 million members around the world. We started the Make Amazon Pay campaign, which you
may have heard of. I hope you have. Hashtag Make Amazon Pay Every Black Friday. I have heard this.
It's a strike that big. Yeah. So that's the answer. The answer is we can no longer afford
to be bourgeois intellectuals sitting in our little offices or, you know, at our desk writing
books for each other. We have to engage the people out there because there is a lot of suffering out
there. There are a lot of wasted opportunities and there is so much disinformation. And, you know,
those algorithms are primed to poison the debate and our democracies. So we have a duty to drop our
little intellectual games and get our hands dirty with real democratic politics of being out there
and talking to people, listening, understanding, changing our minds, but not giving up.
That is, it's inspirational to see you put that into practice, honestly. I talked to a lot of
experts on this show and I often ask at the end, what do we need to do? And they often say, well,
I think everybody needs to XYZ and people in Washington need to ABC. Not many people say,
we need a political revolution and here's what I've done to start one. And I think that's incredible.
People can pick up a copy of your book at factuallypod.com slash books. But how can people
join the effort that you're talking about and become part of this movement that you're trying to
build? Well, Google Progressive International. Google Progressive International and join us
if you're in the United States. If you're in Europe, Google DM25.org. DM as in carpet, DM25.org.
It's amazing that when you tell people to find it, you still have to cite Google.
What are the techno feudalists that you're railing against? But hey, that's the world
that we live in. That's the air we breathe in the land we walk upon, right?
It was always the game. I remember that Gutenberg Press was created to print the Bible.
Yeah. Okay, we printed the Bible and then we started printing subversive stuff as well.
I love it. Yanis, thank you so much for being on the show. I really can't thank you enough.
This has been a wonderful conversation. It was a great, great pleasure. Thank you for having me.
Well, thank you once again to Yanis Verifakis for coming on the show. If you want to pick
up a copy of his book, Techno Feudalism, you can get it at factuallypod.com slash books.
Just a reminder, when you buy there, it supports not just this show,
but your local bookstore as well. If you want to support this show directly,
you can do so on Patreon. Head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover.
Five bucks a month gets you every episode of the show ad free. For 15 bucks a month,
I will read your name at the end of this podcast and put it in the credits of every single one
of my video monologues. This week, I want to thank Jasmine Andrade and April Nicole.
Thank you so much for your support of the show. Once again, patreon.com slash Adam Conover.
I want to thank our producers, Sam Raubman and Tony Wilson. Everybody here at Head Gum
for making the show possible. You can find me online at adamconover.net where you'll also find
all of my tickets and tour dates for the stand up shows that I do across the country.
Please come and see me and I'll see you next week on factually.
