Hello and welcome to Factually. I'm Adam Conover. Thank you so much for joining me on the show again.
Artificial intelligence is supposed to revolutionize the world and our economy.
The major platforms are spending tens of billions of dollars on it just this year alone to gain an
advantage. It's one of the largest infusions of cash into a specific technology in the history
of Silicon Valley. But while we're seeing all this investment, what we're not seeing yet is
anything approaching a revolution. The companies tell us that AI is about to get massively better,
that this is just the beginning, and that a mega powerful artificial general intelligence
that will transform work and our lives is just around the corner. But there's a big problem.
Large language models require material written or generated by humans to train on. And a recent
study found that they might already run out of training data in just the next couple years,
which means those models won't be able to get much better. And in the meantime,
all of the AI companies are burning cash. ChatGPT loses $700,000 every day that it's running.
OpenAI's recent release of GPT-40 lets users interact with audio or video,
but the underlying model is the same. It's not actually any smarter than it used to be.
It's just a little bit slicker now. And it's not going that much better for the other companies
either. Apple just did a big reveal of their new Apple intelligence, which will let you use AI to
turn a photo of yourself into an emoji, which, okay, I mean, who gives a shit. And meanwhile,
Google has had to deal with the humiliation of people posting examples of their AI giving
insane answers to boring, normal questions. No, Google AI, you should not put glue in your pizza
sauce. And it's kind of weird that your brand new product told me that I should. So there's
the suspicion growing that AI is nothing but marketing hype, that it's the same as crypto,
web three, and the metaverse, just a new way for these tech companies to prop up their stock prices
because they don't have any other real ideas. So is that the case? And if so, what is going to happen
with the bubble bursts? Well, on the show today, we have an absolutely incredible guest to answer
those questions for us. But before we get into it, I just want to remind you that if you want to
support this show and all the conversations we bring you, you can do so on Patreon. Head to
patreon.com slash Adam Conover. Five bucks a month gets you every episode of the show ad free.
We've got a lot of wonderful community features as well. We'd love to have you join us.
And just to remind you, if you want to come see me do standup comedy on the road,
head to adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates. Coming up soon, I'm heading to Phoenix,
Arizona and Toronto, Canada, adamconover.net for those tickets. And now let's get to this
week's episode to dissect the waves of AI hype being pushed by some of the most powerful companies
on earth. My guest today is Ed Zitron. He's a writer. He's a PR guy. And he's also one of the
smartest, fiercest and most influential critics of tech out there, which he puts in his influential
newsletter. Where's your Ed at? Please welcome Ed Zitron. Ed, thank you so much for being on the
show. Thanks for having me. You have a wonderful newsletter called Where's Your Ed at? Correct.
Where you are documenting more than almost anybody else. What exactly is happening in
the economy, especially in tech? You use this phrase, the rot economy. What do you mean by that?
So the rot economy is this growth for all costs ecosystem that's kind of eaten all the markets.
And it's most prevalent in tech where it's not about better. It's not even about making more
money per se. It's being able to show that you will grow forever and you will show 10, 20% growth
per quarter forever perpetually. And what this means is you see products like Facebook especially,
Facebook's best example, which are made worse. They are harder to use. There are more ads. They
interrupt you more and they're getting your way more. They interrupt you trying to do the thing
that the website is meant to be for connect with friends, for example, so that they can show Wall
Street, oh, we're growing. We're not only increasing revenue, but number go up. And it really is the
number go up mission. Facebook also hilariously as of last quarter, no longer reports their actual
user numbers. They report daily active family people, which is a really confusing metric.
You know, I often feel walking around, oh, I am a daily active family person. Yeah,
that's how I feel today. But what's great is when you go and look back, they've mentioned
this metric before and it's just completely different to the other metric. It just makes no
sense. They're playing with the numbers. It's a fake number. Yeah, I wouldn't say it's Enron
level, but it's Enron adjacent. But you see it with other companies like Google. You just did
a video on Google. Google wanted to increase the number of queries on Google, which doesn't mean
Google is good. It means that more people are searching for more, which usually suggests that
Google is not doing its job right. Because if the more you have to search, the less good search
results you're getting, you're trying three search results when previously only needed one.
Exactly. And the problem is for the user there is Google is worse, so you use it more, but
that's a solution for Google because you're seeing more ads. And also number of queries goes up.
Yeah. Great. And this is really the rot economy writ large. It's when products have kind of
escaped the pen of utility. There was usually, it used to not be quite so obvious a con. It used to
be, oh, this is a free product. We make so much more money. Like we should be paying you as well
as this being free. But we're all happy here because the product does what it's meant to.
Not really the case anymore in a lot of cases at least. You make the argument that Facebook is
dying in what way. So traffic to Facebook has been dropping off for like three or four years.
I mean, I deleted my Facebook account totally four or five years ago and I've never once missed it.
I'm still, I'm an Instagram addict. And I kind of have to be for my work. Like as a comedian,
literally people ask me to do shows on there. That's where I see other comedians. It's like,
that is the town square for what I am doing for better or worse. Facebook never comes up.
It just has disappeared from the social world I inhabit.
So what's insane is billions of people allegedly use Facebook.
Yeah.
Now you go in there and it is kind of like Instagram. It is
thing you've followed, carousel of people you might know, ad, ad, carousel of videos you can't,
what, that show, it's like a three second loop, ad, person you follow, ad, person you follow,
or sponsored content. What's also crazy is it's full of AI content now. Just weird,
like Shrimp Jesus is the, when everyone see it, like it's just a shrimpy AI Jesus.
It's Jesus, but he's like made of shrimp.
Made of shrimp.
Or like,
So not even like cocktail shrimp, like crustacean, like in the sea shrimp.
It's so, I have seen both.
Okay.
And as a connoisseur of the shrimp. Yeah, I just wanted to be clear. Shrimp does not refer to
the form of Jesus because he's actually usually quite buff. What's also weird is you see a lot
of these ones where it's like, no one will share this on a post with a million shares.
Yeah. And it will be a disfigured child begging for money on the street.
And people are responding just like, wow, this is so, so terrible. I will support this.
It isn't obvious whether these are real people or not.
Yeah.
But Facebook as a product has just deteriorated and the, the traffic's gone down.
Web visits are down something ridiculous, like 20%, 25% over the last few years,
along with most of the major internet platforms. And actually the product itself
functions so poorly. If you, one of my favorite things I found recently was if you type Facebook
complaints into the search bar, you can find six, seven different groups with thousands of people
all complaining to what they think is Facebook. But when you go in there, it's just the most
obvious scam artists saying like, oh yeah, DM me, I'll help you get back in there.
And then the occasional Judas go with someone responding who's another scammer saying,
oh, this person really helped me.
And it's so strange because yeah, this website makes billions and billions of dollars,
but the actual product is broken.
And you log in, you're like, there's nobody here. It's a, it's a dead mall. There's,
there's sort of like deluded boomers walking around by people who,
people who like don't have their wits about them sort of stumbling about the place, but
not no like actual activity of the type that we were used to 10 years ago or the type that
would indicate there's a thriving product happening.
I wouldn't go on there to talk to a friend, which kind of feels like the point of the thing.
Yeah.
And even Instagram, the only reason they keep Instagram is I have three or four friends on
there who for whatever reason, maybe they hate me is they like, they're not great with texts.
They're not great with email. They're amazing on Instagram DMs.
Yeah.
And I guess it might just be the lanes of brains that people go into.
Instagram is right now pretty bad too, as you well know.
Yeah.
In the sense that you do get algorithm, algorithm, persons thing, algorithm, algorithm.
Yeah.
But I think it's going to get so much worse. I think once Facebook really falls apart,
they're going to go, now we need to make Instagram even more profitable.
Adam Masari at the helm, just gimbly screaming at people that we must show more ads.
Did you see a few years ago when with Kylie Jenner, I think it was when she complained,
the funniest thing there was she was saying, we need to stop and her and
she posted, we just want to see photos of our friends. Like what are all these videos?
Like Instagram was just for photos of our friends. What happened?
And I love Adam Masari. I hate him. I think he's a disgusting.
He's the guy who runs Instagram.
Yes, yes, under Facebook.
He used to be the head of Facebook's news feed as well, which is just
the Michael Jordan of breaking the internet.
And he responded to that by saying, we're actually going to show you more videos,
which honestly, I have to give him credit for just like one of the most
well-known celebrities in the world. And he's like, actually, it's going to get worse.
What are you going to do? Use TikTok? No, don't use TikTok. Don't use TikTok.
But that is striking because celebrities like her used to be the main currency of Instagram.
One of the points of social media was, oh, hey, this celebrity is actually on there,
actually posting. You can comment. They might see it.
Yeah, it's the imagined proximity.
Yeah. Well, and in some cases, like real proximity, people used to have those sort
of casual interactions with celebrities or people they were interested in.
And then there's the effect of, you know, the old effect of Twitter of this being the sort of
large casual social network or lots of different professions, you know, everyone is sort of
visible to each other. Everyone's posting things and having generally a good time.
And then you see ads as well. And that's what you get for it being free.
And it seems to have disappeared that version of social media.
Yeah. And Twitter is a particularly weird one because it wasn't that bad before Elon took over.
Yeah. But Elon wasn't growing.
It wasn't growing, but I think users were going and it was not profitable, but had been profit.
It was profit adjacent. It could have trundled along. It would have been fine.
Then Musk comes along and says, hey, everyone, you've never seen me run a company before
publicly. It's going to be so epic and based. And it was just he has ruined it mostly because
he fired the trust and safety people. I don't think people realize how important those people
were because it wasn't just them stopping people saying slurs, which has, of course, increased.
Yeah. It was them stopping spam. And the spam on Twitter is so bad. Now, you just get,
you will post a normal thing and there is just whole someone posting whole in the reply.
Yeah. Just a bot instantly. And I don't mean that in a, oh, you click through and it's no,
it's just that's the picture. I mean, that's become a meme now on Twitter in the way that,
you know, woe this blew up. Go to my SoundCloud. It used to be a meme. Now it's Psy and Bio.
Let's bleep Psy, but Psy and Bio, that is the new meme of what is in the reply of every single
Twitter. It's escalated now where it's just naked. Yeah. Just full hole. And it's crazy, but
that was Musk attempting to grow the website. He's not a good CEO. He's very bad at this.
That's why it went so poorly. But that was his attempt to go, okay, I will take Twitter
and I will just make it grow. I'll make the money come out of Twitter. And it doesn't work like
that because social networks are very precious creatures. Yeah. You touch one thing, a lot of
things break. Yeah. And he touched a lot of things and a lot of things are broken now. But you're
kind of seeing with Instagram and Facebook, what happens when someone better at this does it? And
Mark Zuckerberg's a horrible creep, but he knows what he's doing. And also everyone that works
for him, they're all pot. Javier Olivan, the COO, Boz, the CTO. Boz, the CTO, by the way,
did a letter, an internal letter called The Ugly back in 2016, 2017. And within that, he said,
all things are justified for growth. It's a crazy thing to write. He talked about a terrorist
planning an attack and killing people because of Facebook, using Facebook. And then he said,
but we connected people. But that is what Facebook is. Jesus Christ. I know it's really
horrible when you look back and you see these things and they said them out loud. Yeah. But
when you see what's happening today, you kind of say, oh, that makes sense. And a lot of what I
write is just me looking at old stuff and going, oh, no, I don't like that. That makes more sense
than it should. And then you kind of look to them to be better. You try and look even optimistically
for a second. Isn't anything, they're not even trying anymore. They're not even trying to pretend
that they care anymore. And that's really what frustrates me. Well, what would it even mean
to make Facebook grow in a way that helped people or in a positive way? Because they already had
a third of humanity signed up for this service, which is, I mean, that's got to be pretty close
to the ceiling there considering how much of humanity lives in dire poverty currently of the
seven or eight billion people on earth. How many is it? Whatever. And so if they're showing growth,
if they need to show growth, the only way to do that is to continue to squeeze
the juice out of the existing users. You can't continue selling the same thing you were selling
back in 2010 to more and more people. That's the problem. So there is data I've seen that suggests
that only 100 million people, more people got online between 2022 and 2023. So as opposed to
like hundreds of billions of people getting online. So the amount of people getting online
is going down. It's not going down. It's slowing. Right. The low hanging fruit,
almost everybody who has the means to get it now has it, or we're reaching the end of that
process. The big problem being that the global south is not getting online. There are serious
issues there that are just not being solved. Right. One might think, and Mark Zuckerberg
actually flirted with this idea before about the third world and trying to get people online,
and he just didn't do it. Right. There was stuff about having a really low bandwidth,
low internet Facebook. You're going to be able to get Facebook on a phone that can work out in
the middle of nowhere with almost no battery, like that kind of thing. Just as an attempt to,
we got to keep the numbers going up. I feel like in India, there was some sort of legislative
thing, but nevertheless, that's a classic Facebook solution to a different problem.
Yeah. The actual problem there would be
sink hundreds of millions of dollars into internet infrastructure if you want to actually do this.
Right. Fix the problem. Don't make a new Facebook to fix.
And that's a huge problem that the internet companies, I think worldwide have never grappled
with the fact that internet infrastructure limits what they do. There's a little bit of
a separate issue, but it's just something I think about all the time. How Google a couple years ago
tried to launch a video game service called Stadia where their premise was, I'm sorry,
this is off topic, but it boggles my mind to think about it all the time. Their premise was,
computers are too expensive. Instead, people should rent the computer from us. We'll have it in a
data center and you'll just send the frames back and forth over the internet. Your controller data
will go to the server and it'll send back frames. So you'll play call of duty running on our computer,
but sent over the internet. And I was like, that's completely fucking backwards. Computer
computing is very cheap. People are able to get like incredibly powerful computers at a very low
cost right now. No one has good internet. People in the US are paying hundreds of dollars a month
for internet that's worse than anywhere in Europe because our internet infrastructure is so bad.
And Google, I think at some point had a fiber optic program to like try to bring fiber to people
that failed. And like that should be if they want to grow the internet or if they want to grow their
products in the US, that should be their main focus is making sure that like everybody has
fiber and they just didn't do it. And they're facing the consequences to a certain extent.
So the irony of all this, there is a connecting fabric though. And all of this is no one invests
for actual it. They want growth, but they don't invest for it. Right. Google invested with Google
Fiber and it grew in some places. It was fine. But instead of investing on the time horizon,
you should with something like this, which is 20 years. Yeah. They gave it 510. They were like,
not really making us a bunch of money. And we don't really think of the future. So we won't.
Right. So they didn't. And they canceled it just like Google,
read or Google Wave, all those other things. Just it's another little side project while
they keep raking in money off of ads. Yes. It's like, it's,
it's frustrating because Google Stadia, for example, there are, there is precedent of this
working Xbox game pass, PlayStation remote, like there are internet streaming things like that
already. Now it's streaming from people's consoles. People do like the idea of streaming
gaming. Yeah. Like you said, the internet infrastructure isn't there. And also,
it's not good enough yet. Even if it is, it's just there's something missing.
They're not really thinking, why don't we make it really good? Then we'll do it.
Yeah. They just went, well, we got a, what was it? 2021 they did that was 2020. They just did it
at the one time it looked like it would work. Yeah. And then they didn't, they just gave up
on it. What they tried it for a year. And then they just, never mind. A whole entire year as well.
It also was a sucky program. Like you had to buy the games, but you didn't. Yeah.
You bought the games, but only on Stadia. Yeah. And then they ended up refunding everyone,
which is nice, but also why do this at all? Like, regardless with Facebook, with Google,
with all this, they don't think of the future. They don't get to think of the future if they
want to please the markets. Everything has to be now, now, now. And if it's the future,
it needs to be the vaguest possible version so that they can roll it back if it doesn't work,
so that they can change it so that Jim Cramer screams at them in the right way.
And it's frustrating because like you said, Facebook is running out of people to sell to.
And Facebook knows the moment the market realizes the market is going to punish them,
punish them hard. Now Mark Zuckerberg can never be fired. He has,
they have this labyrinthine class A, class B thing where Zuckerberg controls everything.
Thank you, Sean Parker, by the way, it's all his fault. He is the one that negotiate with Peter
Teal to have the third board seat go to suck. This is the guy who was played by, I think,
Justin Timberlake in the movie? Yes. Way more charming. Whenever I hear his name, I'm like,
Justin Timberlake is who we're talking about? Yeah. But that's the thing,
Justin Timberlake way more charming, way cooler. But Mark Zuckerberg could do anything,
which is why he's sunk $30 billion into the metaverse. But he could just say, screw you,
I'm going to have this company work sustainably. It's going to be a great company still going to
print money. Right. But he likes money. He likes power. And he's always been like this back as
far as 2008, they were buying Google ads to get Facebook holdouts onto the site.
Yeah, companies been rotten since the beginning. But there is no reason it has to be like this
other than the fact they're scared of the markets. They're scared of what the markets will do. But
also they don't care. None of the people running these companies actually give a shit about technology.
They don't build technology. Sundar Pashai of Google, CEO of Google Alphabet as well, McKinsey
Man, Mark Zuckerberg, Andrew Coda, but also hide a bunch of growth freaks. The Javi Alavan CEO as
well, like all of these people are growth freaks. And what sucks is it really does not have to be
this way. It just is because it's super profitable for now. Yeah. But I see everything slowing down.
Everything is slowing down and they don't have a next big thing to sell to the markets.
When the markets realize that, they've got nothing else. It's not like they have a great
product they can point to go, Oh, people love this. Yeah, look up how much everyone loves
Google right now. They love. Oh, wait, they don't because we put AI search in there to show the
markets how cool we are. They're no longer building products for people like you and me.
They're building things symbolic capital, I call them, to show off to the markets and say,
look, we'll grow forever. We're so innovative and we'll be innovative forever. It's very frustrating.
It feels like we've turned this corner where the tech companies used to sell us things that were
genuinely almost magical products, the iPhone, Google, Facebook. These were things that you
showed the promise to them to people and every single person said, I want that right now.
Yes. I need it in my life. It'll make my life much better today. I remember when I got an iPhone
and suddenly I can look at a map wherever I'm going. It changed my life.
Your voicemails. That was the big thing. Visual voicemails. Yes. Oh my God, that saved so much
time. But that was all the low hanging fruit. And now they are in order to keep up that promise to
Wall Street to keep up the promise of we are going to keep growing like that forever because
that's what we did for the last 10 years. For the next 10 years, we've got crypto, AI, VR,
and the public to all those things is saying, what? Yeah. Why would we want that? What is this?
What is that for? But the companies are pretending as though everybody wants it. They're making concept
videos and they're tricking Wall Street to some extent, but it's all like a fake version of what
they used to do. Yes. So call this the rockcom bubble where for about 20 years, they have found
all of the hyper growth markets on the enterprise level like cloud. We've gone from point when
computers were relatively decentralized in the sense that getting a file from you to me was
quite difficult to ubiquitous enterprise and consumer cloud. So you can share a file with
someone quickly and it's kind of seamless. You don't realize how much is going on behind the
background. We have really good batteries. We have incredibly fast smartphones. We have apps
on our smartphones that connect with each other. We have all of these things. All of these we can
now rent a property in a few clicks. We can do all these things in the few clicks that we couldn't
before. These were all hyper growth markets. These were ways of building billion hundred
billion trillion dollar industries. We're out. I think we're actually tapped out of them. Yeah.
Except everyone is still acting like there is one. Yeah. And so VR is a weird one because
been around for a while and anyone who'd used it was like, yeah, this is still niche up until
now. I have friends who love VR said, this is my mate Casey says, yeah, VR is niche and he loves
VR. I love VR. I think it's really cool. Yeah. When it works, which is a load bearing when.
Yeah. But I mean, I tried it, you know, like I have a I have a quest to I played.
I'm a gamer. I played the Valves Half Life Alex game, you know, the best quality game from one
of the best studios in a thing I love. The game was really fun. I stopped playing it after a
couple of days because I couldn't handle being nauseous for three hours after playing for 30
minutes. Like it just wasn't worth the experience and nothing has motivated me to put on that or
any other headset sense. And no one has come up with a compelling pitch for what it's for,
including Apple, whose only pitch seems to be what what if all of your emails were in the room
around you? Well, who gives a shit? Who does that solve a problem for? What's funny with the Vision
Pro is I have one and I watched half of June on a plane before getting a migraine. What was really
annoying was as much of the movie as I could take. So cool. Yeah. Giant screen. I've used like the
desktop. It's cool. Yeah. About two years too early. They should have kept it in the oven. But I
can see what they're doing with it. What's also interesting is Apple's been surprisingly, for
their new thing, surprisingly quiet. They've not been too pushy with it. They've not. They did the
whole Apple thing. Well, this will be your walk around an office with this. Yeah. Very funny idea.
They haven't talked about it in like six months. It's not like they're making a big deal about it.
But then you go to like Mark Zuckerberg and the Metaverse, for example. Yeah. So just a complete
lie. How the hell is that not some sort of SEC problem? Like, yeah, he went in this video and was
going on about, oh, yeah, I'll go into the Metaverse and I'll hit a button and I'll change
how Mark Zuckerberg, he looks just complete fanfiction nonsense. The whole thing was bollocks.
But what it is was that was Mark Zuckerberg realizing, I bet I could say something that
sounds plausible. And none of the people in Wall Street, and many people in the media like CBS
this morning, they're not actually going to care. They're just going to go along with it.
The problem is that he's stuck in his own bubble, as many of these CEOs are, where it's
when you don't build anything of use for a long time, when you really have no connection with
a regular human being, you just believe that everything you say is smart. And I think he thought,
hey, this will work fine. No one like they'll just buy Horizon Worlds, even though it sucks.
And it didn't work. But it worked in the media. There was a large chunk of the media who liked
it. Wall Street kind of liked it. And then they saw how much it was costing them. And they went,
no, no, no, Mark, Mark, you gotta get rid of that, Mark. But I do believe that that was the first
time you saw one of these CEOs becoming aware of the problem in public. He wanted this to be
the next into that. He said it'd be the next generation of Mark Zuckerberg. I think Zuckerberg
knew back then that the growth trend was slowing and he needed a new thing, except he chose the
most insane thing. He chose virtual reality and also online gaming. So unproven niche tech and just
one of the most expensive things to build in the world from a company that is terrible at
building things. Facebook's launched like 15 different things and cancelled. Like the best
thing they built is the Facebook portal, which is just a video camera. All their other products
are things that they bought, WhatsApp, Instagram, etc. They don't innovate, but also
they only build things for growth. So now that they just they're out of ideas, but the Metaverse
was a sexy, big idea that sounded if it was real, if it was an actual thing he promised,
would have been, except to do what he wanted to, based on Ready Player One, which is a dystopia,
he would need extra sensory tech that does not exist. Like very basic things like touch and feel
and spatial awareness, sensors within the human body with the brain that just cannot exist.
Maybe hundreds of years away. And it's so weird that I'm still shocked he even
pretended and I'm more shocked that everyone agreed with him.
I mean, when you even looked at what they built, like it was laughably bad. I mean, I did a video
about it, all this stuff about like we've added legs and things. And they didn't even add legs.
That's what it never did. They never actually added legs. That's what I I mean, it looked worse
than Second Life, which was, you know, is 20 years old as a product now. It had no you to people,
you know, the actual service was a dead zone, people logged in and had nothing to do on it.
And the idea that people would hold meetings there, all this stuff, it was like, it was hot,
like Mark Zuckerberg at least gives the appearance of being a smart guy. It was hard to imagine him
believing his own bullshit in that case. I just think he's craven. I think he doesn't care. I don't
think he cares whether it was real or not. He was just like, but these little pigs up by this,
just complete that man. So I did some Facebook reporting and just everything you read about
Mark Zuckerberg and the Facebook crew and the people at Matty, just like, these people are just
evil. There's an evil to it. They have this guy named Joel Kaplan, the head of US policy. So there
was a time during Facebook's wonderful history where the algorithm kept pushing this video called
pandemic conspiracy theory. So Mr Kaplan, I believe, worked with the Bush administration.
He pushed to not have it suppressed. He said, no, no, leave it alone. And the only reason
that he ended up taking Facebook ended up taking it down was because Kevin Roos of the New York
Times posted that it was the top video on Facebook. Wow. And that was using a tool called CrowdTangle,
which used to let journalists see inside the most famous things on Facebook. Yeah. And then Kevin
kept posting that, hey, everything on the algorithm is just right wing garbage. There's a lot of
press about that. But yeah, that top rated Facebook things were all conspiracy theories.
So Facebook's response to that, you'd think would be, wow, we've got a real problem at the right
wing taking over. No, their response was to shut down CrowdTangle so that no one could see.
Alex Schultz, their CMO, real, real winner. And there's all of these, the people running the
company. Facebook is unique in the sense that I think the other companies are just completely
lost and run by management concerns. Facebook is just honestly the evil machine. It's so funny
how nakedly evil they are. And just I know it's dramatic to call things evil, but you look at
what they're doing, you look at how they act. There's a great book by Jeff Horwitz called
Broken Code that everyone should read. Read that book and come out of that and tell me whether
Facebook is a nice company or a bad one because you read it. Since 2008, they've been like this
and all the OG people who did all the original stuff with people you may know, algorithmic
thing that culture people you might know, used Google ads to target people who weren't on Facebook,
outed sex workers, helped patients find psychiatrists who really didn't want to be found.
Cashmahill did some great journalism around that. The people who worked on that,
Natalie Gale, Javier Olivan, Alex Schultz, they're all running the company now. It's the same
people. And this is with my work, people have said, oh, you seem angry. How can you not be when
you read this stuff and you're just like, it's not even like there's one person who said,
yeah, this is bad though. They're just kind of like, I mean, maybe we're abusing notifications a
bit, but that's business, baby. And it's so weird. It's so weird. There's some of this stuff you
read in this. This is almost cliche in how deliberately bad it is. Yeah, especially coming
from an industry that for so many years presented how good it was, how virtuous, how this is a new
way of doing business. We are not like those old companies in the past. The Sheryl Sandberg,
Lenin, this is a new thing. This is the utopian future. Sheryl Sandberg is Mackenzie as well.
Well, talking about these fads from, I mean, the metaverse is almost two years old now as an idea.
And no one has said the word metaverse to me, nor have I read it in like a Bloomberg article
in like 18 months. It's gone. It's dead. The end. I think everyone has conveniently forgotten
about, you know, Mark's little attempt to juice what was happening with his company.
Same with crypto. Crypto is basically, I mean, you know, whatever the BitTorrent
freaks on Reddit are still hanging out saying hodl, but, you know, it's no longer
Super Bowl ads or, you know, something that is, you know, the next big thing in business.
Now the next big thing is AI. It seems like everyone has forgotten about those previous
past two fads. Yes. How much is AI, especially coming from Facebook, just another one of those?
Like, is that just Mark trying to do the same thing again? So Facebook and AI is almost an
entirely separate thing because who even knows what they're doing there? AI as a general fad
has a bit more validity. Yeah, not much more. Yeah, because large language models are, I mean,
the first time I played with one, I was like, oh, this is cool. And they're still pretty cool.
Sometimes they go play with one every once in a while. So the problem is with AI,
they do something, they do something. And that is also the problem because AI has a concept
been a while, been around a while, like decades. And it's a very loose term. It can be used to
describe a lot of things. Exactly, which is great for companies like Microsoft. So Sachin
Nadella 2021 says that he could not overstate the breakthrough that the metaverse was. Yeah.
Two years before that, he said the HoloLens 2 was a breakthrough.
They're AR goggles. Yes, which have now been, but they exist, but they've been,
he's fired most of the team. Yeah. And Satya is now major beneficiary of the open AI boom.
He has, they've put what $13 billion in, they invested early and they invested $10 billion,
mostly in Azure credits. So they're cloud services. The thing is with AI is,
it smells like the future. It has a feeling of the future. And when you say AI, people will fill in
the gaps. Autonomous agents that do things for you. Oh, a super smart friend who knows everything
about it. Right. It has the advantage of, it's at least been around in science fiction enough,
that the public knows what it means. You had to explain what crypto was and what the metaverse
was, unless someone had read like Snow Crash or Ready Player One. But artificial intelligence,
oh, I know what that is. That's the computer that talks to me from every movie I've ever seen.
From her. Yeah. From 2001, from the movie AI.
Well, I love it's when they quote these movies like, yeah, like great things for AI. Like 2001,
the movie that classically ends with the computer helping the guy. But with AI,
what's interesting is it has both the smell of the future, but none of the taste. Because
the idea of what AI could be, this autonomous thing that does things for you to quote Samuel,
when a super smart person knows everything about you, all these things sound plausible.
And you can, with chat GPT, approximate something that sort of feels like it kind of. Yeah. But
the problem they have is all these companies are promising a thing that is not there. Yeah. So
Super Bowl commercial for Microsoft's co-piler. During it, there's a bit where it says,
write the code for my 3D open world game. He hits it and then it cuts away before you actually
see what would come out. So the problem with that is that is not what comes out. It tell it.
I've typed this in many times because I'm a little bitch. And it just gives you a guide for
doing it. And it's like a, yeah, it's like an SEO article like, first you code the game.
Microsoft can't even show you why you should give a shit about this thing on this Super Bowl
commercial. Yeah. They can't actually explain what it does today. So they have to talk about the
future. Sam Orton, worst of them, talks about what it could be, what it will do, it'll be like a
virtual brain, all these things. And the thing is, the people in the markets, the Jim Cramers of
the world, the CNBCs of the world, much less Bloomberg, Bloomberg has done some excellent
journalism about AI, not so much with CNBC, those some doc arc, Hayden Field, there is great. But
nevertheless, the markets, people just go, artificial intelligence is the future. Yeah.
And this is good. And thus they kind of buy the bullshit train. But then the consumers get these
things, they get chat GPT, they get copilot, what have you. And then they say, now what? Yeah,
what's this meant to do? What's it do? And I'm sure some person will now email me and say, oh,
well, actually, it helps me with my productivity. And every time you ask them to explain, they say,
well, first of all, I sat there and I did all this stuff. It's like, no, no, no, no. Okay,
shut up, shut up. I don't care. Because we're being told, we're being told one thing and presented
another. We're being told our autonomous AI future is here. And this is why these companies
would grow forever. Because Google, Meta, all Microsoft, they're all connected to the AI boom.
Yet the reality is, the actual products themselves, LLMs, really do enough. They do
something. Yeah, you can use them. They are kind of like the next generation of internal
automation. They're like robotic process automation, like UI path, it's stuff that kind of exists.
But if it better, there are some cool things. Yeah, I mean, I used on the phrase on the show
before, I forget where I got it, but the idea that it's a word calculator. It'll,
there is a way that if you put in a certain combination of words, you might get some output
that you find useful to some degree. But it's not like a lot of the stuff's things you could
have found on Google already. A lot of it is something that if you put in a little bit of time,
you could figure it out, you could do it yourself. And it always feels hollow because it is. Yeah,
it's just, it's calculated. Like it feels calculated, supposedly enough. But the problem is as well,
it isn't that it's useless. It's the, it might only be worth 3 or 4% profit growth. Like it's
not, it may be the future, but it might not be the next big thing, but they're selling it as if
it is. And what the big problem is, is going back to your old iPhone example, you could tell a friend
exactly why that thing was cool. They'd say it was too expensive. Yeah, it was like $600,
it was a lot of money, but they saw it and then, wow, this looks great. Like, oh, you can listen
to your music and text people. You didn't have to onerously explain why people should care.
With chat GPT, genuinely gone to my head, I'm not sure how I'd describe what it does. I mean,
I'd describe the process, but what is chat GPT? It, it can write stuff kind of, but it gets it wrong.
It can generate pictures of stuff. So, right? And you can, you can talk to it sort of, and it'll
give you a rather boilerplate response. Yeah. It can, if you want it to, whenever I'm playing with
it, which I do sometimes, I'm always like, okay, give me a recipe for a pizza with poop on it.
And then it does that. And then I say, now write that as a limerick. And then it writes a little
poem. I'm like, it was mildly amusing. Like I've never seen a computer program that can do that
before. You know, there's stuff like I talked, I've talked, I think before on the show about
there's a game called AI dungeon that like works like a text adventure, like an old text adventure.
And, but it can do anything, right? You're like, I want to turn into a wizard and fly away. And
it'll just generate some text that describes you doing that. So it's sort of like a, like a one
person tabletop role playing thing where like an automated DM who can, you know, spit out a fantasy
for you. That's like, yeah, absolutely nothing wrong with that. Sure. But what's the, it's not
like Steve Jobs standing on stage going, it's a phone, it's an iPod, and you can, it's a revolutionary
internet device. You can connect to it from, connect to the internet from anywhere that you are.
You hear that pitch and you're like, my God, I mean, that'll change my life.
Exactly. Like,
you look at what GPT does as well. And you look at Claude and Anthropics model, for example,
you look at Lama, Meta's one, and you go, wow, okay, you can do stuff. Now what? Now what now?
Like seriously, what is the next step of this? GPT 40 just came out. The thing that got the
member old and the whole scandal is Scarlett Johansson. Yeah. So that was an iterative update.
That's the best they've had. It's the last time they did anything new. And it's so bizarre because
I feel like quite lonely in saying this, but what if this is all they've got? Yeah. What if this is
it? Because once everyone works that out and is willing to say it, the tech industry has backed
this so over-siferously. They've really gone to town on this one to the extent that they
feel forced to. I mean, Apple looks like they're doing all this AI stuff, like with a gun pointed
at their head. They're like, we've got AI emojis. We've got Apple intelligence. And like,
they give this whole presentation. And I was like, these are the features that I give a
shit about the least that I've ever seen in an Apple keynote. What I really liked about that,
though, was the chat GPT integration into the new iOS. They're like, yeah, we've got chat GPT.
It will sometimes answer some things and you will have to give it permission every time.
100% just something they did for the markets. That's just a bit, yeah, we've got chat GPT in
this bullshit, whatever it cares. But when you look at what they're doing with their own models,
it's kind of interesting. Oh, you can do distinct actions across apps.
That's cool. I don't know if it's the next big thing, but it's a cool new way for the phone.
But when you look at that sort of feature, well, that just looks like that's just a regular old
feature they're calling AI now, you know, that it's a little bit of automation.
It is actually AI. It's actually their own models, but it's their own models run on device.
It's stuff that people have been doing as so edge computing, so on device AI. But yes,
like it's been around in very simple example, the one I give is like, you can Raspberry Pi.
So these tiny computers, which by the way, significantly bigger innovation than anything
generative AI is done, people invented roast Raspberry Pi should be like,
it's like a $40 powerful computer that you can put anywhere you can attach.
You can have that and it can have edge AI running to like for like a machine that can
identify a strawberry that's rotten on a farm, genuinely useful industrial stuff. Yeah.
What Apple's doing is just what what you can do when you have complete control of your operating
system and no one else is really allowed to touch it. They SDK that connect the model to
different parts of different apps could be really cool. But also surprisingly to me are about it.
Like it was a big thing at Worldwide Developers Conference, but
there's no big ads. There's no big like they've done a media push, but it's not huge right there.
And also they don't appear to be really I'm sure that they have giant GP so graphics processing
units which are used to train these models. Sure they have them, but they've not been very
flashy about saying we've just built hundreds of acres worth of service space in the future.
Seems like they're hedging their bets like they're they're dipping their toe in because
they feel like they have to but not going all in. Yeah, and Apple to be clear, no companies,
particularly ethical, but Apple seems to also realize we piss off all our users and make
our products suck ass maybe they'll stop using iPhones. Yeah, that's bad for business. They
want to do it. They don't want to do what Google just did. The Google AI search that one's so good
though that one that one really that one really felt like begin to disassociate when I saw because
I've been watching this for a while because it was on Google Labs. Yeah, there's an SEO expert
called Lily Ray who's been watching it very close. And she's been posting for a while saying
this is bad they should not launch this these results of bonkers. And then they didn't surprise
and Bing did the same thing a year ago, like released AI results in Bing and people made fun
of it because it did exactly the same thing that Google's did, except they were very cautious
with it. And yeah, this is a side feature. Please don't trust this Google. You got to give him
credit for just be like, yep, there you go. And then when people found the terrible results,
they said, actually, that's good. Yeah, it's actually good that you found that. And also,
those are on common queries anyway. So yeah, no one makes pizza.
But as though, but they've also said forever that like, what is it 15% of all Google searches are
like searches that they have never seen before are completely unique, like their bread and butter is
unusual Google searches. That's the point of Google to help you find things that are unusual.
The interesting thing about chat GPT 4.0 to me. Okay, so the AI boosters or a lot of the people
I know who are still frightened of AI, you know, here in Hollywood, the thing that a lot of people
were saying last year during the strike is this is just the beginning, it's going to get radically
better. This is we don't, you know, they've got stuff cooking up that we don't even know about
yet. It's going to be so huge, you know, in five years, people were literally saying to me last
year, in five years, Hollywood won't exist as an industry, you know, because AI will be so radically
great. And, you know, I would have to say have a little bit of skepticism, because this is what
Sam Altman is telling people saying he's my product is going to destroy the world. So you
should do what I want. Yes. But where is the evidence that it's going to get radically better
rather than that? Hey, they've invented this thing called a large language model that can do this
one thing, but it might not have actually this like incredible growth curve ahead of it. And
I think some evidence for that for me was chat GPT 4.0 was not a radical improvement in the quality
of the large language model or its results. It was a better productization. Yes. Of chat GPT
where it's like, okay, now chat GPT is in a little app and it can it has the front facing camera
responds fast. It responds a little faster. It has a voice now didn't have a voice before,
but it's still saying the same shit, right? Like it still has the same cognizance. It's not
smarter. It just can sort of look around a little bit better. We put the same dumb brain
into a slightly more advanced robot dog. But it is still a dog. Yeah. And so what do you think the
prospects are for the radical improvement of AI? Because I've started to read these things, oh,
they're running out of training data, that sort of thing. So the big problem they have is that
training data. Yeah. So there was an estimate in the Wall Street Journal researcher, I forget his
name. It was the GPT 5. So the next model of chat GPT or GPT, their large language model will take
five times the available training date or the five times the amount of training data that it took
to train GPT for. So big problem there is they don't have much more. Yeah, they are running out
and they may have run out. Well, chat GPT 6 takes another five times. It's an exponential problem.
And on top of that, they don't seem to be too good at making new models. They were meant to spin
up one and more efficient model for Microsoft called Arrakis. Like when I read that one,
fucking god damn it. And then it didn't work out because it wasn't efficient enough, which is not
a good sign. But also, these things are not getting, they're getting better, but they're not getting
better. It's not like the jump from, I don't know, GPT 2 to GPT 3. On top of that, the ways
they're getting better do not suggest they're going to get better in the ways that Sam Altman has
been talking about. A super smart friend that knows everything about you suggests features that are
not part of a large language model. Right. Like memory is something they've kind of worked on.
There are other people who've worked on memory within these things. But the fundamental thing
of knowing requires knowledge, which requires actual intellect, which GPT cannot have. It's
mathematics. It's extremely complex. Yeah. But also, all of these people talking about, oh, it's
going to be so much better in the next year. History doesn't look great for you either. But also, how?
How? Just how? Yeah. Why do I have to constantly explain to you why your product is good?
Why do I have to make your argument for you? Why don't you have one? Yeah.
Other than it will be good. And that's the thing. Everyone wants it to be because it would be cool.
And also, if there's no big tech thing coming out, what's the future look like for tech?
Yeah. It's scary. I just have to continue living in the present forever? I need the computer to
distract me. But also, it's a situation where so much money has gone into it. Yeah. So many
billions of dollars, so much money into data centers, so much money into marketing efforts,
so much venture capital. Everyone is so deep down the hole. The kind of who's going to wake up first
rather than it getting to some point. Sora, the video generating model from chat GPT.
I can't wait to talk about this. Yeah. It's so good. It's so bad. Yeah.
Everything it makes has, so in hallucinations in the written word, it will say something
authoritatively that isn't true. In Sora, it just makes like a monkey with seven arms and it looks
terrible. Yeah. And every time you ask it to do anything, it takes, I think it's, if it's 20
seconds long, it takes 10 minutes or 20 minutes to generate. Yeah. And the prompts, no matter how
precise, it usually makes up some extra stuff. Yeah. And the amount of training data they'll
need to make Sora work is insane. Yeah. On top of all of this, also horribly unprofitable. And it
doesn't do anything. It does not do anything. It doesn't make anyone money. Like this is,
this is the big thing. People talking about, oh, well, it's going to get exponentially better.
First of all, it hasn't been, but on top of that, it's still not profitable. It's still horribly
unprofitable. And it requires all this energy and it requires all this training data. There's so
much more evidence that this is kind of tapping out in the generative AI space. Yeah. I mean, when
Sora came out, and let's be clear, that product is not available to the public. It's, it's,
they released some tech demo videos. But again, working in Hollywood, a lot of people I know said,
well, this is the end, you know, like they're going to, this is going to the future of movie
making. They won't need to film anything. They'll just like have Sora output shots. And, you know,
I'd have to walk through with people as like, okay, first of all, this is not available to the
public. They've released like six videos that they say were made by this. So how many bad videos
did they need to make before they got these six that they showed us, right? How long did it take
to make each one of these? Like what was, you know, we are talking about, you know, 30 frames per
second of 4k footage, right? And not even 4k, by the way. Oh, really? So I spoke to someone who
makes, who I got from a company called Shy Kids that made a video with Sora. They had to get it
at 480p because it took too long if you went higher resolution. Yeah. Because I mean, rendering times
are very serious just with traditional visual effects. And so you're talking about a large
language model generating something, or it's not a large language model, but a similar technology,
right? A generative AI. In Sora's large language model. Okay, great. But so there's that piece of
it. So the amount of processing that it has to do compared to making, you know, a Dolly image is
like exponential, right? Then you don't have the ability to make a tiny tweak, right? That you do
in, you know, when you're actually working with an actor, you can say, walk a little bit faster,
walk a little bit slower. I know because I've, you know, if you ask Dolly, generate the same thing,
but make it a little bit brighter. It gives you a whole new image, right? And so it would be like
that as well. Plus, if they, you know, they made a great image of a lady walking down a Hong Kong
street, right? With a shiny floor, right? With there was rain on the street. And the legs at one
point go like that. Yeah. Yeah. But it looked pretty okay, right? It looked plausible, yes.
But the only reason that it knew what it looked like for a lady to walk down a Hong Kong street
was because it had ingested huge amounts of footage of people walking down Hong Kong streets.
Yes. Like it needed the footage to begin with to generate the thing so it can't generate new things.
And, you know, you won't be able to solve the problem that the executive will have at the
film company where they're like, oh, I don't like the take. Can we get another one? No,
actually we can't because if we do that, it'll be a completely different person in a completely
different situation. So that problem is unsolved. Instead of to ask, well, isn't it,
fuck, and it's going to be massively expensive to compute all of this over and over and over again,
generate all of this. So at what point is it cheaper just to send a fucking dude with a camera to
Hong Kong and get a lady on a rainy day? Like what is the, but it's a great tech demo, but
people are getting rolled by seeing the tech demo and imagining what it could do rather than looking
at the reality of the technology at all. And that is the entire AI hype bubble writ large.
It is letting people, so journalists, let's be honest, filling in the gaps for these companies.
Yeah, Sora, great example. So okay, theoretically, if the computer could spit out an image of a woman
walking down the street at any time, that would be great. But like you said, it is not just a
question you can't even ask if you say woman with black hair, Asian woman with black hair,
different Asian every time, probably pink hair at some point, right, because of the training data
is trained on. Well, and because the technology is fundamentally unpredictable, like this,
that's how it works. You can't say I want exactly this, but slightly different it because it is
generating it. It's probabilistic. It's probabilistic. Yeah. And it's funny because
look at chat GPT. When people write about the future of open AI, they're not talking about this
shit. They're talking about what Sam Orton has been beating off on on TV for a year. They're
talking about Sam Orton saying, oh, yeah, well, he said to New York Magazine in 2016,
I think it was New York Magazine, New Yorker, that in it would be not unreasonable to think
within 10 years, 20 years, I think it was, that he would have a computer version of his brain.
And he's very good at making these things where the gap between the predictions is long enough
and no one's really going to check. Yeah, I will check, Sam. I've got it in my flipping calendar.
I do. But you look at this and ever he goes out and then he'll vaguely say that chat GPT is the
future. AI is the future. We need to be scared of AI. You'll say AI is not a creature. But what he
wants you to think is, did someone think it's a creature? Because he wants this mystique. Because
if he actually had to talk about the thing he's saying today, he'd go, well, it's a calculator
of sorts. Well, it doesn't always work. But when it does, it's sort of good. And it's,
and I can understand in business process automation, I mentioned UI path, the robotics,
robotic process automation company worth billions, because of them doing these very minute,
very simple customer service things. But because you can scale that, that's useful.
GPT and large language models fit into this kind of thing extremely well.
These companies are growing because of that, that will help them. That ain't sexy and that ain't big.
That's not trillions. That's hundreds of billions at best. And that's going to take a minute. And
also, you can't sell that to the markets that nightly. It's just not that nice. And also,
RPA is profitable. GPT, large language models, absolutely not. But because Altman goes in there
and says, is this thing that kind of looks like the future? Look, this thing can do kind of realistic
videos. People say they're scared. I'm scared of what this could be. And they fill in that
white space. And they say, well, because this thing can approximate how a human writes,
this thing will write in place of humans within five years. Oh, because this video kind of looks
like something you could film of real people. Naturally, in five years, this will be how
entertainment is generated. And the problem is, that's the old old, that's the old world.
When things used to, there is no Moore's law for this crap. This is not a system,
a situation where we're simply going to get more power and this will fix itself. Even if we threw
so much more power at this problem, it would still hallucinate because that's maths, baby.
Yeah, that's how it works. And it still wouldn't be able to give you that slight variation on
the previous clip because it would still be probabilistic. That's the nature of the technology.
It's not something that they can just cram more transistors onto a smaller chip like they do with
Moore's law. And the problem is, as well, is notice that Sam Altman has been crying about
how he needs more power. He needs an energy breakthrough. He needs more service space.
He's begging Microsoft for an $100 billion supercomputer, which, by the way, is contingent
on a meaningful improvement to GPT. So he's screwed. But he's asking for these things because
there is no way this goes much further based on what we have today.
And the only company that's really having a great time with this is NVIDIA because
Gendyn Huang's can just like, yeah, it's chips faster. You little pigs will buy this every day.
And he kind of, you watch any of his keynotes, NVIDIA's CEO. And it is very much him just
completely waffling. There's a bit in the latest keynote where he says, yeah, you know,
you'll have a super AI, which talks to smaller AI, which then speak to other AI. And people in
the audience are like, woo, yeah, baby, just fucking idiots. But he doesn't really care,
because he's the guy selling guns to the war. He's just selling chips. And so it doesn't need
to work for him. He's going to make a lot of money right now. It works. What he's selling works.
The chip does the thing. He's fine. He has jumped on trends before. NVIDIA has had a
very weird history. GamesNexus has some great videos on NVIDIA. He's been waffling this
bullshit before. He did it with crypto. That guy's just a classic business. He's almost
kind of folksy in how much of a classic tech bit. He's just like, yeah, faster, bigger. Who gives a
shit? When you look at everyone else with these LLMs, just this air of desperation. Facebook,
as we mentioned, great company, they've put AI in everything now. There's AI in Facebook. There's
AI in Instagram. You can ask Meta AI anything. And it will give you one AM last night when I
couldn't sleep. And it's now responding on comments. They responded on a parenting group,
because you can activate it. It responded on a parenting group a couple months back,
saying that it had a gifted child and then recommended a school.
This is so good. I hope there's more of this. I genuinely hope that. I want to see this thing
cook everywhere. But that's such a great, that when I saw that, I'm like, oh, maybe that's what
Zuckerberg wants it to do. If you need people to interact with a product, you need them to engage,
what better way than poking viciously with it? Hey, look, look, you've got people responding to
you. You have someone to talk to. I don't think it'll work, but I can imagine someone being like,
yes, really good idea. But on top of that, again, how is that profitable? Every single one of these
transactions, every time someone uses this thing, it's losing the money. Yeah, because it is very
high. It takes a lot of compute to make this so expensive. And also, there's no profit on the
horizon. Where's the money coming from? Like, taking away all the cynicism, just where's the
money, honey? Like, where is it? Yeah, what are they running ads in the middle of the chat,
GPT responses? What are they doing? Even then, do you think anyone's like, they're now saying they
they are for a full media report that they are trialing doing injected ads into people's videos
on Instagram? They are ripping out the wiring from the wall. They are desperate. And I think the AI
stuff is just them going, eh, ego, we're doing the thing now. Yeah, who cares? Zuckerberg doesn't
care at all. He can't be fired. Like I mentioned, he's just doing it. What's really interesting is
Microsoft. They're the ones where I'm like, you guys are really in the hole. I think they are
actually really in trouble. So of course, heavy investor in open AI. However, open AI, a non-profit.
Sure, buddy. Yeah. Yeah, for real. But heavily invested in open AI. Heavily saying it's the
future, this future, but also tied to Sam Altman, who is a nakedly corrupt and very strange figure.
But on top of that, promising the world with AI, but probably more aware than anyone of how limited
it is, because they have all the money in chat, GPT, they've got their own models. They're paying
Oracle billions to build more data centers. They build data centers too. I don't know why Oracle
is big on buildouts, I guess. And it's very weird because they must know. They must know this shit
sucks. And they might let the co-pilot think where they could not even explain why you should use
it. They are probably looking at this, just counting down the days. There's a company
called Inflection, which made a empathetic large language model called Poe, I think it was.
That Microsoft absorbed them in the most bizarre way. They acquired them, but also gave contracts to
they took all of the people from the company who made the large language model, then made a deal
with the remaining Inflection company people to keep running it. And now I think the Department
of Justice is looking into it because it's extremely weird. It was also worth a billion dollars.
Jesus. What are they doing? These are not the actions of someone doing well. These are like...
This is like Brackhead style stuff. Or it almost seems like a Ponzi scheme, where it's like,
I always need to find the new injection of money. And I mean, look, the sky-high valuations of tech
companies, all the money that flooded into the industry, my understanding is it came in for two
reasons. A, the costs were extremely low. Running an internet company way cheaper than building a
new car company. You don't need factories. You just need data centers. It's like the costs are
low. And B, there was a potential to create entirely new businesses, entirely new business
models. What is it? The blue ocean approach to business. You can create this new world and be
the first person to dominate it. And that is what they need to continue to try to create those new
blue oceans, those new vast universes, untapped wildernesses to go explore. And there might not
actually be any left. And so I guess my question is, what does this mean about the market? If the
market is driving this, we've been talking about all the bad decisions that the tech companies
are making that are forcing them to turn a large language model from, hey, a kind of cool niche
product that maybe would be kind of neat into the wave of the future. Everything's going to be
different where it's going to destroy the entire economy and we're going to rebuild it around
large language models. They have to make that argument because the market is demanding it of
them. So what the fuck happened to the market where the market is demanding this? Because we
are describing the dysfunctions of tech as being a symptom of the market. So what the fuck is up
with the market? So the market's addicted to growth and the raw economy is much larger than tech.
I just know my tech much better than I know wider economics. That's more fun to talk about too.
Yeah. I also believe that trying not to, well, it's done in Peru because the whole,
I'm not going to, but nevertheless, there is a problem across the whole stock market where
it's addicted to growth. When everything is always growing at all times, why would you
not invest in the thing going up? Because everything, it's always gone up. You see in games,
companies getting way overfunded, hiring, firing, hiring, firing. Journalism a great example.
People taking over journalism. Oh, well, we'll just shove more money in it and we'll get so
much more money out. Never works, but man, do they feel good about it? Yeah. And one of this is that
the markets are just disconnected from value. There has been an, I don't really know when it
started, but there has been an economic shift away from sustainability. And my case is put,
it's a good fire is one that's sustainable, that keeps you warm. What they are doing now is throwing
bits of furniture into the fire. They are throwing gasoline on it, getting burned and like, ah,
they must make more warm. And the problem is companies that are sustainable, that are reliably
growing or perhaps they're plateauing, but they are still making more money than they spend. They're
happy employees, happy customers. Those aren't sexy to the markets. The markets must have growth.
I'm not sure what started it. I really am not. Yeah. But it's everywhere. It's just more pronounced
in tech because of what you mentioned, the Blue Ocean approach. When you crave growth at all times,
this tech is a sexy little beast. Oh my, everything's growing all the time. You've got these little
companies that grew with three people that are worth during the metaverse time. It was one that
got funded, I think, like $100 million. They didn't have a product. They just formed the company.
I have no idea how they did it. Well, and every investor wants, you got in early. You were the
first person in, there was this great big thing, don't you want to hop on board? I mean, I hear
this sometimes, people were telling me 10 years ago, you should make something for VR, VR headsets
for the next big thing. And I was like, I actually don't think that they are, but that's what I was
told. And I find it very interesting that we're having this debate constantly about like,
is the economy good or bad? That's like the core issue for Biden right now. People feel that it's
bad, but the numbers are actually good. Unemployment is down. Interest rates, blah, blah, blah. There's
this whole thing. And one of the things you can point to is the stock market is doing very well.
It's done extremely well since 2020. And then before 2020, it was doing extremely well since
the housing crash. It's been like this sustained upward growth. And I've got, I have a retirement
fund. That's great for me. Look at the nice big number. But it puts this worry in the back of
my mind. Well, it seems like the one thing that the people who run the economy know how to do,
or that the system is optimized to do, is to produce good stock market returns,
that no matter what's happening, no matter what the fundamentals are, we can get the stock price to
go up. But that might be by these raw economy methods, that it is by squeezing more juice out
of the thing while destroying it, like short-term, short-term, short-term, shoring everything up,
sticking two by fours underneath all the sagging ceilings. And that that is what's really going
on, which would imply that there is perhaps a reckoning coming. I'm scared of that. I am definitely
scared of what's happening in tech. Because once the overall thing you're talking about, I believe,
like why people feel bad when economy good, it's just things are more expensive. The cost of living
is high everywhere. Rents have gone up, they rarely go down. Wages are stagnant. It is harder to get to
mortgage than it's ever been. It's so difficult. Mortgage rates are high too. The basic costs of
living one's life are harder and higher and nastier in a very tangible way. Yeah, there are
articles saying, economy is good. Yeah, we should all celebrate. With what fucking money? Where are
my, what am I celebrating? I'm not complaining myself. I'm lucky. I really am. But also,
health care costs in this country as well. I grew up, my father worked for the NHS, like I have
great, the fact we don't have Medicare for all in this country is completely fucking insane.
It's insane. But also, that's why people feel bad. It's not about a CNN article about the economy
being good. It's their life kind of feels shitty. And when they say this feels bad,
everyone's reaction is, yeah, things like overdraft fees, that's a good thing they can do.
But there are more things they should credit scores should be just illegal. As a concept,
they're evil, made by evil people, evil, evil, evil stuff. That's a great example of something,
make mortgages easier to get. That's where fixing things. But yeah, to the wider economy,
yes, I'm scared of a reckoning. And I'm especially scared of one in tech, because
when the markets realize that AI is not the next best thing, the next biggest thing even,
they're then going to say, so what is, yeah, what do you got for me? Mark Zuckerberg is going to
freak out. I don't know. I actually don't know what happens. I just had a Tom Doughton from the
Wall Street Journal on the podcast and I asked him, what happens if all of this compute space of the
GPUs get bought for AI and the demand's not there? Yeah. And he said, I don't know. Yeah.
And I don't know either. And that's actually the scariest thing.
That's a little bit like the housing bubble or something like that. We bought a lot of something
that we thought was going to be worth a lot of money and it is not anymore.
And that's exactly why it was that. And it reminded me of the hiring in 2021,
when all of the tech companies hired tens of thousands of people they didn't need just to
hoard them. Yeah. But the biggest thing is there's a way of repurposing that stuff, but there isn't
much. Like you can't just throw GPUs in something you can, but what's it going to be? And there's no
other next big thing sitting around. If you think about it, there have been many directions we could
have gone in the past. Yeah. You had Airbnb, you had Stripe, you had Uber, you had all of these
different things that you could do. There's really none of that right now. There's some
exciting companies, but there's not like a next big thing in process. And if there isn't,
there's going to be a terrible downturn against tech. Look at the startup market now. Worst funding
environment I've probably seen in my career, 15 years. And that is more of a bellwether than
anything else. Like if it's a frothy investment market and the public markets are a bit scared,
okay, that just means the public markets, the public companies aren't innovating.
It's weird that it's like this. The startup market should tell everyone what it is,
because venture capitalists aren't spending their money because they have no easy wins.
They know something's up. But all of the public companies and some of the private ones have
got themselves tied up in a tizzy following a market. I think they all kind of realize this
is bullshit. And when that falls apart, I don't think one of the big tech companies will die,
but I think you're going to see a massive collapse in one of them. I think Meta is probably the
biggest one, especially because you can't kick stock out. I mean, it's quite a prediction.
If that happens, huge amount of the stock market as a whole in the US is the tech industry.
And that's like people's pension funds. It's their retirement accounts. That's a broader
economic reckoning. Again, not many predictions here, but 2008, that was housing. It rippled
everywhere else. There's potentially a similar ripple here.
There is. And I don't know if it would be quite as ruinous because it will bring the stock market
down, but the stock market will find a way to survive. I'm more worried about tech in general.
I'm more worried about society's view of tech. The thing that the tech industry, and I try and
tell as many people as I can, tech people, especially the ones in power, are so goddamn smug.
They're so sure everyone in society loves tech. I don't think that's the case. I think things like
Google's AI search are turning people against tech. And tech may say, who gives a shit about these
people? I know they make us money, but they're little bastards. I don't care. They use my things.
I make money off of them. Except when regulation comes to tech, they're going to really be in
trouble. On top of that, private investment in tech is going to go down even further.
People already don't trust these companies. If they start collapsing,
one of these big products is going to just... Facebook is probably it. It's the first one
that's really collapsing in user numbers. If they're moving their numbers around to make it sound
better, something's wrong. If Facebook falls apart, or if Instagram goes into the red,
that's when you're going to see these companies freak out. Or maybe it's just going to be in
three quarters when the markets realize that LLMs are not the future, and then all of Microsoft,
Meta, Amazon, they're all going to get ripped through. I would say sometimes people say,
oh, wouldn't that be funny? Not for the people working at the companies who are victims of
circumstance. Yeah. Well, especially after these companies have already destroyed so many other
industries, like journalism, media, et cetera, have been either destroyed or the industries
destroyed themselves trying to chase the tech companies. As has happened in Hollywood, for
example, it's pretty bleak. Is there a chance, just as a way to bring us in for a landing here,
is there a chance that you're wrong and things will continue to go along fine?
Or I mean, do you have any positive view of the future?
So yes. So I don't think it's going to be a full-scale apocalypse where everything goes to
zero. I do think that when this AI thing falls apart and the markets start getting a little mean,
I think Sundar Pashai gets fired. I think he gets rolled. I'm surprised he didn't over Google AI
search. I think they will have to start making things a little bit better. They could find
the next big thing, sure. But at some point, because in the Rockcon bubble piece I wrote,
traffic to most of the major platforms, other than Reddit, LinkedIn, and TikTok,
is going down. These companies are losing users. There are less people getting online.
I do believe that there could be a shift where they go, oh, God, we need to fix our products.
We need to be a bit more sustainable. I believe we kind of heard a little bit of it in 2022,
the year of efficiency and so on and so forth. I think that there will be that,
that pushes things. I also think that the EU is going to aggressively move against
generative AI in a way that makes them move away from it anyway. I think that you will see
these stocks get chopped up a bit and things will realign, but the future tech industry
will have to be more sustainable. It's not about optimism. It's just the growth at all costs economy
will always exist to an extent, but tech will have to realign because so much money is being
wasted right now. Billions is being burned. I just don't think the companies personally
talk to the startups and know the companies that are getting funding right now are the ones that
have this crazy idea about them. Don't know you heard about this. What if a company made more money
than it spent? These kids, these days, they've got all sorts of ideas. I mean, hopefully,
there's a coming correction and hopefully there'll be enough people who see it coming and change course
ideally to blunt some of the impact. I will say one thing, please.
The startups and the investors, like the small scale seed investors I talked to,
I talked to them all the time from a day job in PR. They don't seem worried,
but they also don't seem beguiled by large language models. They generally, everyone right now,
the earliest stage people, they're talking about sustainability. They're talking about building
things that will last and not growing too fast, smaller teams. That gives me a shit ton of hope.
That's great. When I talk to these people, and it's usually like, this is aging myself at 38
here, but a lot of these Gen Z founders, they don't give a shit about big tech. They appreciate
that they exist, but their reaction to this thing is kind of like mine, which is, why are you acting
like this? This is a bad company. This is a bad business. These LLMs are cool, but they're not
doing the things you say. What if we built a business that people like that they paid for,
and it's very pragmatic, and it's cool. That gives me a lot of hope. It's why I'm not full scale
doomer about this. Honestly, I think big tech could use a punch in the face figuratively.
I think they need to be taken down a few pegs. I think they need to realize that they've forgotten
their customers and forgotten their purpose in life. I can't thank you enough for coming on
here to talk to us about it. We'll have to have you back in a year or two to see whether or not
your prediction, because these are very strong predictions. I want to see how accurate they
are, because you are validating my own emotional truth, and you are making it very definitive.
If I'm wrong, I'll be happy to explain why. That sounds great. I love that attitude as well.
Ed, thank you so much for being on the show. Thank you for having me.
Oh, where can people find your work? You can find me at WhereIsYourEd.app,
and that's my newsletter, and betteroffline.com. That's my podcast, and iHeartRadio, and Coolzone
Media. Thank you so much for being here, Ed. Thank you. Well, thanks once again to Ed Zitron
for coming on the show. I hope you loved that conversation as much as I did. If you want to
support the incredible conversations that we bring you week after week, once again, you can do so on
Patreon. Head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover. Five bucks a month could do every one of these
episodes ad-free, and you can join our wonderful online community full of people just like you
who love learning and complaining about how screwed up the world is. For 15 bucks a month,
I will read your name at the end of every podcast episode and put it in the credits of every single
one of my video monologues. This week, I want to thank Eden Welch, Patrick Flanagan, Crotone,
Linzlat, Andrew and Purifoy, Marcus Mitchell, Vanessa Russell, Josh Beale, and Mask When You
Can Protect Your Community. Thank you so much, Mask When You Can Protect Your Community for
slipping that message in via a $15 a month donation. If you want to slip a clever message in at the
end of this podcast, once again, head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover to join all the wonderful people
who make this show possible. Of course, I want to thank my producers, Sam Raudman and Tony Wilson.
Everybody here at Head Gum who makes the show possible. Head to adamconover.net for my tickets
and tour dates. Thank you so much for listening, and we'll see you next time on Factually.
