Hello and welcome to Factually. I'm Adam Conover. Thank you so much for joining me on the show again.
You know, the climate situation is very bad. In order to stop a laundry list of dire consequences,
we need to keep the rise in temperature to no more than 1.5 degrees Celsius
higher than pre-industrial times. And currently, we're on track for warming by almost 2.7 degrees
by 2100. Like I said, that is bad. And given this situation, given the stunning inaction we
have seen for decades, you could be forgiven for writing it all off and finding a nice hole to
bury yourself in as things get worse until you die. There's an attitude a lot of people have
right now that basically says the world is ending and there's nothing we can do about it. So let's
all give up. But guess what? That is not true. The world is not ending. It is going to exist
tomorrow, whether it's better or worse, and you are going to have to live in it. And personally,
I'm too much of a fan of my life and of planet Earth itself to give up. I don't think it's an
environmental position to say all we're fucked, there's nothing we can do because there is always
something we can do. The problem is figuring out what that is. And to answer that question,
we need to understand clearly where we are, how we got here, and just what is actually possible.
It's not about optimism and it's not about pessimism. It's about understanding the reality
of the world we live in and what we can actually do about it. And you know what? The best cure for
despair is to grab a shovel and pitch the fuck in. And our guest today is going to help us do that.
She is deep in the weeds on all of the data and she has written a deeply data-informed book
that we can use as a baseline to help us attack the challenges we face in creating a sustainable
future. But before we get into it, I just want to remind you that if you want to support this show,
you can do so on Patreon. Head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover. Five bucks a month gets you
every episode of this podcast. Add free. We got a bunch of other great community features as well.
And if you want to come see me on the road, if you like stand-up comedy, head to adamconover.net.
Coming up soon, I'm heading to La Jolla, California, San Jose, California, Indianapolis.
A lot of other dates as well. Head to adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates.
And now my guest today is Dr. Hannah Richie. She's a data scientist who works as a lead researcher
and deputy editor of the indispensable website Our World in Data, a researcher in global development
at Oxford. And she's the author of the new book, Not the End of the World, How We Can Be the First
Generation to Build a Sustainable Planet. I know you're going to love this conversation.
Please welcome Dr. Hannah Richie. Hannah, thank you so much for being on the show.
No, thanks very much for having me. Looking forward to the conversation.
Yeah. So you have a new book out called Not the End of the World. We're at a time where
so many people talk about the world that we live in as though it's about to end.
Oh, who knows if there'll even be another presidential election? Oh, who knows if
a retirement? Oh, the world's not even going to be around that long. We have this fatalism
about almost everything, which is, I think, a very odd viewpoint to have. It's a very interesting
thing about our time that so many people feel that way. But it really seems to stem, first of all,
from the climate crisis that we've, you know, I was brought up knowing, you know, watching
kids' cartoons about how climate change is coming and we're ruining the planet and we have to do
something. And then for the last, you know, 30 plus years of my life, I've watched very little be done.
And so I understand why people would say, OK, well, that means we're screwed because I was
told about this crisis as a kid and we're still not doing as much as we should be. And therefore,
you know, we're going to be a member of the last generation, you hear people say.
You have a new book out called Not the End of the World, which takes the opposite viewpoint in
its title. I love that. Tell me about it. Why do you have that view, that it's not the end of the
world? Yeah, I mean, the title is called Not the End of the World. And I think it matters how you
say it. I mean, the book tackles seven big environmental problems. Like, I think climate
change is the big one that we think of. But we face a range of other big environmental problems
as well. And I think the title is not, you know, oh, it's not the end of the world. This is not a
big deal. You know, it's a definitive, these are massive problems, but we're going to make sure
that this is not the end of the world because there are solvable problems. I mean, I think if we,
even if we just focus on the issue of climate change, I think, you know, coming from an
environmental background, working in this area for years, and, you know, also speaking to other
climate scientists on this area, feels like we've done a very fast 180 from, you know, not that long
ago. You know, the discussion around this was, you know, is it actually happening? Are humans
actually causing it? We seem to have done like a 180 towards, oh, it's too late, and now there's
nothing we can do. Right. And I think, you know, I think we're kind of suffering from this kind of
whiplash of, you know, what happened in the last five to 10 years that we've done a complete 180
from almost semi-denial to it's too late, and there's nothing we can do. So, you know, what I
try to do in the book is lay out, yes, these are, you know, massive and urgent problems. And if we
don't get our act together, the consequences will be really, really catastrophic. But there is someone
we can do about it. And although we aren't making progress as fast as we would want, and we're not
on track for where we need to be, we are actually making progress. And we can massively accelerate
that if we make the right decisions now. Do you think the view that it's too late,
there's nothing we can do about it, is that, you know, another form of climate denialism? You
say we've made a 180 from, oh, we're not doing it at all to it's too late. Is that just the new form
of climate change denialism? I mean, I think, I mean, I think maybe some people try to push that
message because they think that it's helpful for the kind of climate denial message. I mean,
I think for some people, that's not their motivation. I think they generally just feel,
you know, paralyzed and helpless in the massive problem. So I don't think it comes from the same
place. I think the actions or the outcomes are very similar, right? Both extremes of it's not a
problem, or it's too late to do anything about it. Both lead to the outcome of inaction, right?
They both lead us to, you know, what on one side, you don't take action because there's not a problem
to deal with in the first place. At the other extreme, you don't take action because it's
pointless. And if we're screwed, then what's the point of doing anything anyway? So I think the
outcomes of these two extremes can be the same, even if the intent behind them is not.
Yeah. So you say we are making progress. What are examples of that? Let's try to front load
the podcast episode with some good news. How about that? What is a reason for an optimistic
viewpoint? So I think if you look at the trajectory we're currently on on climate change, it's not
where we need to be. Like we're on track for between two and a half to three degrees of
warming. Now that's way above our 1.5 degrees or two degrees target. But if you are looking at
where we were talking about, we were headed a decade ago, you know, it was three and a half to four
degrees. So there's like a degree lower than trajectory we thought we were on a decade ago.
Now it's where we are is not acceptable. But if we can make that progress in the decade,
why can we not make more progress to pull two and a half degrees down to two degrees?
I think there is a bit of a good news story there. I mean, I think the most dramatic and
positive change for me has been that if you look a decade ago, I was really pessimistic about where
we were. Because if you looked at any of the solutions we need to tackle climate change,
I mean, fundamentally is we need to move away from fossil fuels to low carbon energy.
The problem a decade ago is that the forms of low carbon energy we had were way more expensive
than fossil fuels. So no one was going to deploy this at scale, because it was way, way too expensive.
Over the last 10 years or so, you know, the price of solar has fallen by 90%. The price of wind has
fallen by 70%. The price of batteries and electric vehicles has fallen by about 90%. Which means that
the low carbon energy sources we need are now cheaper than fossil fuels. So you don't no longer
have this, you know, this trade off of, you know, should we sacrifice the economy to tackle climate
change? Because no, they're now aligned. It's actually just in our short term economic interest
as well to go for the low carbon option. And I think for me, that's been the most dramatic change
and the most dramatic progress we've made. Now it's really about building the stuff, right? We've
pulled the prices down. Now it's about building this stuff out as quickly as we can. What I think
is interesting about the answer, and you hear that a lot from, you know, folks who are really
following what's happening with the climate, that the price of renewable or non-fossil fuel
energy has gone down so much, that's hugely good news. What I think is interesting about that is
that it really is relying on, you know, the market on capitalism, right? The price is low,
and therefore the good thing is going to happen. I guess what I'm curious about is what is our
ability to do things that the market does not demand? You know, for instance, if I look at
transportation here in the US, let me just give you a pessimistic case or a pessimistic example.
You know, a huge amount of our emissions come from transportation,
and a huge of that is because of, you know, single occupancy, passenger cars, people driving
two and four in these giant pieces of metal. And, you know, if we had, for instance, you know,
massively expanded public transportation in the United States, high speed rail, passenger rail,
you know, subways, etc., even just increased buses, we could massively reduce emissions.
But instead, we're putting all of our change into electric vehicles, which are a marginal
improvement. We're changing the engine of the car, right? And we're pushing the emissions to
the power plant, but that'll be an improvement. However, even that has stalled in the last year
because, A, the government has not built a massive series of electric vehicle charges
everywhere. But, B, you know, the car industry is kind of like, ah, sure looks like consumers
love the giant gas guzzling SUVs. That's what they prefer to buy. And who are we to tell them to buy
something different? People want to buy giant, people don't even want small electric cars.
When they're buying electric cars, they're buying fucking huge ones that like take massively more
energy to move around, massively more energy to build, etc. And so, you know, reducing the price
and hoping, all right, if we just make the slope go in the right direction, all the water will
run the right way and we'll be moving in the right direction. That's great. But we have to
have an ability to do things that are counter to what is cheap and available, right? And do we
have the ability to do that? I know that's a big question to land on you early in the podcast,
but it's what you made me think of. No, and I largely agree with you. I think there's a couple
of points there. I think I disagree that an electric car is just like a marginal improvement
on a petrol or diesel one. I mean, even a big electric car, if you look at, I mean, there's
always a debate of is an electric car actually better on carbon than a petrol or diesel? I think
what's true there is that the manufacturing of the car emits more carbon, right? Because it takes
more energy to build the battery than you would have on a petrol or diesel car. But once you start
driving it, you pay off the carbon debt very quickly. So in the UK, for example, it pays off
within two years for the average driver. And then from then on, the carbon emissions of the car
are much lower. So you're talking about like up to two-thirds reduction. And that's great,
but I do just want to toss in that almost everyone I know in the United States buys a new car every
three years. So if you're paying it back in two years, or at least they're on a lease where they
renew it every three years, so that's still that consumer behavior problem. But please keep going.
I think on that, I think three years seems very, very short. I mean, I think most people in the
UK at least buy secondhand cars. I mean, the key point is that if they're buying a new car,
car they're selling will go to someone else that might be replacing a petrol or diesel car. So I
think at the system level, it'll be better. But if you look at the emissions of an electric car,
you're talking about around a two-thirds reduction in emissions, and actually that will get better
over time, right? Countries are decarbonizing the electricity grid, so that hopefully by 2035,
for example, actually the running emissions of your electric car might be zero because the US
has decarbonized its electricity grid. But I take your point that I think, just leaving this for
the markets to run won't get us there. I think what's also really key is the timescale on which
this is needed. I think the economics of the energy transition are now just so good that we
would just do this anyway. But we might do this over 60 or 70 years, and we don't have 60 or 70
years. We need to do this in a much faster time frame, which means you do need to combine, take
the advantages of the free market economics, but also impose policy on top of that. I mean,
even if you're looking at the really dramatic declines in the prices of solar, for example,
over the last 10 or 15 years, they were initially pushed by policy, right? Some countries very
early on set up R&D, set up schemes to do this at a very high cost, and that has been the first
push that we needed in order to get these emissions out. So I think you do need this combination of
policy to put, accelerate these timescales, and you can also take advantage of the free market
economics of it as well. I really appreciate you pushing back on my rant about cars with
the data that you have. And that was what I was hoping you would do, because I think you sort of
I found a little bit of my own built-in pessimism, and I loved the way that you spoke to it. Do you
often get a lot of pushback when you are spreading these messages? Is there a way in which the people
that you're talking to, myself included, sometimes seem like we almost want to be pessimistic about
this topic? We have maybe a built-in cynicism about it. A little bit. I think what I sometimes
find is that for every solution we come up with, there's always a counter of why that solution
won't work or why that solution is not good. And I think that's very healthy. I think if we
want to find good solutions, we need to be highly critical of them. We need to work out what is the
good solution, what's effective, what's not effective. So we're putting our priorities and
money and investment in the right places. So I think we really need this critical lens to these
solutions. I think for me of what's really critical in this energy transition and tackling climate
change is that I think we're always hunting for the absolute perfect solution. We're looking for
the solution that has no land use, no minerals, and that's zero carbon. There's zero negative
impacts whatsoever. And I think the reality is those solutions just don't exist. What we're
looking for, and we need to do this quickly, we need to move away from fossil fuels quickly.
So what we're looking for are solutions that are orders of magnitude better than fossil fuels.
And we're having them. We have them and we're developing them. And we need to work on the
downsides of those and make sure we're not creating more damage by the solutions that we're
bringing in. I think if we are to wait for the absolute perfect solution to come along, we'll
just maintain the state's quo. We'll just keep burning fossil fuels and we won't be willing to
move to anything else. I think we need to get a bit of the balance there where we acknowledge the
downsides to some of these other technologies or other alternatives. But we try to make the most
of them and we go for this transition anyway. I think that's a really good point. And it's
something I think about a lot is when we are trying to change the world for the better, not
letting the perfect be the enemy of the good, but while at the same time maintaining a little bit
of skepticism and criticality, because there are also folks who will sell a solution as being better
than it is when we could be asking for a little bit more. And that's why, look, I'm a transportation
wonk. I care about that a lot. And in my view, if we're rethinking, especially the US's transportation
system, if we only change the engines that are in the vehicles, that's a missed opportunity,
because there's a much bigger win to be had. There's a better society to be built. And we
shouldn't expect, we shouldn't accept, hey, there's a lot of people who want to sell us a bunch of
fancy new cars. And if we do more, we will have an even better outcome. But at the same time,
I'm not one of those people who's like, ah, it costs a lot of carbon to build the battery. So
fuck it. I don't think there's a medium to be found there. I don't think everyone should go out
and buy a brand new electric car every three years. I think that's excessive. But I do think,
hey, if you can get a used electric car, and you've driven your previous car into the ground,
and it's time to go ahead, et cetera. There is that medium. I'm very curious, though,
you talk about how we need to find new forms of energy that are many orders of magnitude better
than fossil fuels. There are some who would say, well, what if instead of finding a great new form
of energy, what if we cut back? What if we just didn't waste so much? What if we didn't use so
much? What if we didn't insist on so much growth, et cetera? This is sort of the degrowth movement.
There's a lot of folks who have that sort of perspective, what if rather than more, we had
less? And I'm curious what you think about that point of view. I mean, I think there is some room
for that. I think where I'm skeptical is I mean, trying to convince people to do that is very,
very difficult. We would struggle with that type of message. I mean, to come back to the policy
point earlier, of course, there are things that you could do to put a cap on what we would consider
a very excessive consumption. If massive SUVs are a problem, tax really big SUVs. If really
frequent flying is a challenge, then set a tax on really frequent flying. I think you need to be
quite careful with those policies that you don't get lots of pushback. You might get pushback if
you were to put a high tax on the first flight that someone takes in a given year. You might be
able to do it at much higher levels of consumption. Someone's fifth flight of the year, you start to
put high tax on. I'm a stand-up comedian. I fly, I take maybe 40 flights a year. That was that last
year. I easily am on the highest level of frequent flyer loyalty bonuses because it's what I do for
a living. You know what? I think I would be okay being taxed on that because I'm doing it to make
money. That's how I make a living. If I'm using the system that much, I would be happy if I knew
that some amount of money that I was spending was going towards ameliorating the climate harms
of the flying. But you're right. I cannot just say, hey, what if I cut back in flying a little bit
because it's literally how I make a living. I think a lot of folks are in the same situation.
It's very difficult to ask people, hey, what if you just cut back? What if we all just cut back
and have smaller lives where we're less prosperous, having less fun, enjoying life less? That's just
sort of not a great pitch to people for how to solve a problem. Yeah, I don't think it's a great
pitch. I think if that's going to be your message, I don't think we'll get very far, very quickly.
I'm not against reductions in what we might call excess consumption. I think there are potential
ways to do that. I think what would be difficult is how do we agree on what a level of what excessive
is. What excessive is to you is not the same as what excessive is to me. I think there is another
key part of this, which is that if we want to reduce energy consumption, a really good way
to do that is just to decarbonise. I think we can talk about behaviour change and that's fine.
I think we're also underestimating how much we can reduce energy use just by getting rid
of fossil fuels and by electrifying our energy systems. If you look at, if you blow up a diagram
of the US energy system today from the fossil fuels that are burned and where that actually goes
towards providing people what we call energy services. That's like heating your home or
lighting your home or the wheels turning in your car. The majority of that energy is wasted along
the way. That's because when you burn fossil fuels, most of it goes to waste heat. It doesn't
actually go towards actually giving you the power that you need, which means that if you were to take
fossil fuels out of the system, you would get rid of a lot of the energy use without taking
anything away from the energy services or the final consumption. Your behaviours could stay
exactly the same if you wanted to, but you would need much, much less energy in the system. That
just comes from getting rid of fossil fuels and then electrifying stuff like transport,
for example. If you take your gasoline car, for every dollar of gasoline you put in it,
only 20 cents actually goes towards turning the wheels and moving you. The other 80 cents
is just wasted, whereas an electric car is almost the opposite. Every dollar of electricity you put
in, only 20 cents is wasted and around 80 cents goes towards turning the wheels. Actually, to drive
the same distance in an electric car of the same size, you might need three to four times less energy.
Your behaviour hasn't changed, but you've actually massively reduced your energy consumption. I think
we also underestimate our ability to reduce energy use just by doing the decarbonisation,
but then you can talk about individual behaviour changes as a way to also supplement that.
Okay, you're really smacking down my argument again about electric cars being a marginal
improvement. It's still marginal, but it's a very large margin. I absolutely grant you that.
I agree. It's really important to look at where the actual waste is. If we're talking about flying,
rather than me flying around to make a living, we could look at, for instance,
private jets or that kind of thing. We could look at where the largest waste is. Maybe certain
celebrities don't need to take a 15-minute flight from one airport to another. They could take a
goddamn cab, etc. I got to confess, I have always been a sucker for Japanese treats. I love going
down a little Tokyo, heading to a convenience store, and grabbing all those brightly-coloured,
fun-packaged boxes off of the shelf. But you know what? I don't get the chance to go down there
as often as I would like to. And that is why I am so thrilled that Bokksu, a Japanese snack
subscription box, chose to sponsor this episode. What's gotten me so excited about Bokksu is that
these aren't just your run-of-the-mill grocery store finds. Each box comes packed with 20 unique
snacks that you can only find in Japan itself. Plus, they throw in a handy guide filled with info
about each snack and about Japanese culture. And let me tell you something. You are going to need
that guide, because this box comes with a lot of snacks. I just got this one today,
direct from Bokksu, and look at all of these things. We got some sort of seaweed snack here.
We've got a buttercream cookie. We've got dolce. I'm going to have to read the guide to figure out
what this one is. It looks like some sort of sponge cake. Oh my gosh. This one is, I think,
it's some kind of maybe fried banana chip. Let's try it out and see. Is that what it is?
Nope. It's not banana. Maybe it's a cassava potato chip. I should have read the guide. Ah,
here they are. Iburigako smoky chips. Potato chips made with rice flour,
providing a lighter texture and satisfying crunch. Oh my gosh. This is so much fun. You
got to get one of these for themselves. And get this for the month of March. Bokksu has a limited
edition cherry blossom box. And 12 month subscribers get a free kimono style robe. And get this
while you're wearing your new duds, learning fascinating things about your tasty snacks,
you can also rest assured that you have helped to support small family run businesses in Japan
because Bokksu works with 200 plus small makers to get their snacks delivered straight to your door.
So if all of that sounds good, if you want a big box of delicious snacks like this for yourself,
use the code FACTUALLY for $15 off your first order at Bokksu.com. That's code FACTUALLY
for $15 off your first order on Bokksu.com. Okay. I want to talk about some of the other
crises that you mentioned. I just want to ask you one more question on this first about the price
going down. Because there's also a phenomenon when things get more efficient and the price goes down,
we do tend to use more of them. I think about, you know, LED lights, right, which are massively
more efficient than every other form of light ever made. But the result is that people are
using, and businesses especially, are using a lot more LED lights because, hey, guess what?
We can now have 10 times the lights for the same cost or whatever. So why not leave them running
all the time? Because they're just LEDs. That sort of effect, you know, is that at all an issue in,
you know, hey, the price of moving, the price of heating your home goes down, the price of
lighting goes down, the price of all these things go down. Does that just mean we'll use more of
them, not less? I think there's two angles to this. I think one angle is looking at a large part of
the world where a big constraint is just they cannot afford energy, right? People that don't
have much heating or lighting or air con, and actually just a big, you know, everyday struggle
for them is like, how do I get access to energy? And for those people, you know, a reduction in
energy prices is a massive benefit, right? They might get energy for the first time. They might
get, you know, vital energy services that we have enjoyed for a long time. So I think for them,
low energy prices is just a benefit. And actually, we should be supportive of the fact that their
energy use might increase because it will mask the increase. That is a great point. That's a great
point. Thank you. And then I think, I think when we're talking about, for example, people in the
US or the UK, like richer countries, I think this effect that you describe is what we call the
Jevons paradox, whereas the price of something falls or as efficiency improves, you use more of
it. Now, there are a range of studies trying to, you know, look at how big this, you know,
we call it the rebound effect, how big the rebound is. And most tend to find that there is some
rebound, right? So you do undo some of the improvements that you get in efficiency, for
example, but they rarely rebound more than 100%, right? So they might rebound 50%. So rather than
getting, you know, the full 100% of the efficiency gains, because you use more, you might only get
50%. So it's not as good as you might initially expect just from the numbers, but it's often
not so much that you use more energy than you did before. So LEDs is a good example where people,
after getting LEDs, you did just use more lights or you left them on, or you might have, you know,
installed more in your home. But actually, energy use for lighting in the US has still gone down,
so that the rebound wasn't 100%, but we did undo some of those gains because we used more.
Yeah. Well, and I was thinking about reading studies about light pollution that like light
pollution has, if you're an astronomer or someone who cares about bats, like you might not be happy
about LEDs because we're using more, but I'm glad to hear that the energy use has gone down. I love
knowing the name of that, the Jervins paradox. I hadn't heard that before. Oh, Jervins.
Yeah, Jervins paradox. That's really cool. This is great. I love that I keep standing up
these arguments for you and you keep knocking them down so ably. You're my favorite kind of guest.
You say that climate change is only one of many types of environmental problem that we have facing
us. What are some of the others? I mean, I think another big one is air pollution, where, I mean,
globally estimates, there are a range of estimates of how many people die prematurely from air
pollution every year, but they're all in the millions. And the, the World Health Organization,
for example, estimates that it's around 7 million premature deaths every year from air pollution,
which is a massive deal. And there's two, two problems with air pollution there. One is what
we call indoor air pollution. And that's people typically on much lower incomes, where actually
the only sources of energy they have are like wood or charcoal. And they burn leaves in their home
for, for heating or cooking fuels. And then they inhale the smoke. And that's really,
really bad for human health. So they, you know, have millions of deaths from that.
And then we have millions of deaths from outdoor air pollution. So that's, you know, stuff from
our cars, power plants, for example, industry. And again, millions of people die there prematurely
every year from that source of pollution. So for me, like you were to quantify, you know,
deaths from environmental problems today, like air pollution would be very much top of the list.
And it's something we, we, we kind of have in the back of our mind, but don't really think about.
Yeah. I mean, it's completely insane that when we look at the toll of our energy system,
it's one that we don't often keep in mind because it's sort of like an invisible death toll. Like
again, you know, transportation causing emissions, even if you just look at deaths from our
transportation system, we think of car crashes, people being hit by buses or whatever. We don't
think about the number of people who are dying of respiratory illnesses that they got because they
live 800 feet from a freeway, as many people do here in Los Angeles where I live. I mean,
there's like some federal regulation that says you're not supposed to build a home
within X number of feet of a freeway. And in Los Angeles, something like, I don't know,
a huge percentage, like 40% of homes are in violation of this because we have freeways
everywhere. There's just so much air pollution. And so people are dying left and right of respiratory
diseases, but that doesn't hit the news, right? It doesn't say, Hey, you know, a five year old child
with asthma killed or, you know, a person dies at 65 when they would have died at 90 because of
air pollution in the same way that a car crash does. And yet those deaths are caused by the same
thing. Yeah, exactly. And I mean, this is another what we call an externality of burning fossil
fuels. And that works in the same way as climate, you know, the CO2 emissions and the damages from
climate change are like an externality, a kind of a cost to society, a social cost and environmental
cost that isn't factored into the price of fossil fuels when you burn them. And it's the same for
air pollution. That's exactly the same thing. This is a kind of hidden externality that we just
don't really think about. I mean, I think the, I mean, again, like I like to highlight that these
problems are solvable problems. They're tractable problems. I mean, if you were to look across
a range of especially high income countries, we have actually made progress on reducing air
pollution over the last few decades. You know, the US Clean Air Act has been really successful
in reducing emissions of these gases. The same in the UK, we've seen a really rapid decline.
There's still an unacceptable number of people dying from this, but we can make progress when
we put the right policies in place and we make these transitions. I guess the key challenge
there is that most people dying from air pollution today live kind of in middle income countries
that have industrialized very, very quickly, but they've done that by burning fuels, especially
very close to city centers. So, you know, Delhi, for example, Beijing was one where, you know,
if you were to go to Beijing a decade or so ago, really, really heavily polluted over the last,
you know, decade, it's made amazing progress in reducing air pollution and added, you know,
years onto the lives of its citizens. So, I like to highlight that these are, you know,
massive problems, but they are also tractable ones and they are ones that we can make progress on.
And what are some of the other environmental challenges? I love hearing this. I love hearing
a problem and then a solution right after it. I mean, I think a big one is our food systems.
I think people massively underestimate the environmental impacts of our food systems.
I mean, I think there's almost no environmental problem where food isn't either a big player or,
you know, completely dominates the impacts. I mean, it contributes around between a quarter
and a third of greenhouse gas emissions for climate change. You know, it's the leading
driver of deforestation. It's the leading driver of biodiversity loss. It's the biggest user of
freshwater. I mean, I think when we think about freshwater, you know, we think about, you know,
taking a shower or brushing our teeth. It's farming is the biggest user of water.
It's the leading driver of water pollution. You know, so there's a really long list of
environmental problems where food and what we eat and how we produce it really sits at the center of
that. Yeah. And so how do we solve this? Because there are, I mean, look, some people will, some
people are watching this or listening to this going, vegan, we should all be vegan, right?
And what a wonderful world that would be. And I've eaten vegan for long periods for many
times in my life. And yet I do not believe that we are going to solve this problem by convincing
every single person to go vegan one by one in the, in the, you know, way that a religious
proselytizer might, that folks who are doing that are doing the Lord's work good on you,
but I don't think we're going to solve the problem that way. And I also think that, you know,
eating organic, eating local, small scale farms, very nice for folks who can afford it.
But, you know, we need a system of food system that can feed, you know, what seven billion
people at this point, eight billion we're on our way to. Eight, excuse me, thank you. I always
forget how many billions. Because when I was a kid, let me just say one of the, one of the
fucking weirdest things in my entire life is I remember being in high school and being told
there are six billion people on earth. And then I remember the day, like 10 years later, it was
like, Hey, now it's seven. And I was like, Oh, there's a billion more people. When I was just
like, you know, when I was like watching DVDs and, you know, like taking the bus home from school,
like how did, what a massive change. And yet everything looks the same to me when I'm walking
down the street. It's bizarre. And now we're, now we have eight. So we've, we've added a quarter as
many people or a third as many people as already existed when I was a kid in the last couple decades.
We got to feed all of them. So, you know, how the hell can we have a food system that feeds these
people food that they want to eat without destroying the environment? So I think there's,
I think there's two big solutions or things we need to do here. I think the very far, the first
one is we just, we need to produce food very, very efficiently. And by that, we need high crop yields.
Now, if you go back to, you know, the 1960s or the 1970s, you know, the big crisis at that point
and what people were talking about was the world running out of food, right? We saw this really
rapid increase in the global population. And basically the conclusion was, there's no way
that we will be able to feed everyone. And then, you know, there was the, the population bomb was
the book that came out in 1968 by Paul R. Erlich. And that predicted, you know, just, we're just
going to have so many millions of people dying from famine and just wouldn't be able to feed
everyone. And that hasn't come true. And that hasn't come true because we had what we call the green
revolution where we just see crop yields across the world just skyrocket. You know, you're getting
doubling, tripling, quadrupling of crop yields, which means that despite having, you know,
billions more people, the amount of food we produce per person has still gone up. You know,
we've seen a massive increase. I mean, going forward, that's also really key. What happens if you
increase crop yields is you obviously get more food. But the key point is you, you grow it on
less land, which means you need to cut down less forests. You need to, you know, go into less
wild habitats. You can, you can use much less land for farming. So that's number one. And then
number two is just, we just need to see massive global dietary change. The biggest impact by
far of our food systems is, is, is meat and dairy consumption. And we do need to find a way of
reducing that. But I completely agree with you that I think the, the message of we just all
need to go vegan tomorrow is just like not going to work. And actually,
So how do we, I'm fascinated to hear you say that then, because I, I agree. I agree with both
points, right? And so how do we square that circle? How do we reduce, and by the way,
in the last couple of years, there's been a huge amount of interest in meat replacement foods.
There was like a brief fad for them in the United States. For a couple of years,
I was buying impossible burgers and beyond burgers. And now I never want to eat one of
those things for as long as I live. Like I ate so many impossible burgers that I can like
picture the taste like, and it repulses me at this point. And, you know, God willing,
they come up with a different version that, that tastes a little different and is a little bit more
of an actual replacement. But, you know, unfortunately, that industry turned out to not
have the results that it promised investors and the public. So what, yeah, what do we do
to reduce meat consumption if all those things we sort of are agreed might not be the answer?
I mean, I think the, I mean, I think I should say that I think, I think food is way harder
to tackle than energy. I mean, on energy, I think people, for the most part, they just want,
you know, cheap energy coming out of the socket, right? And if you can provide that for them,
they don't really care where it comes from. For food, people really care about what they eat.
And it's like a such a strong part of the identity and their freedom, right? Try to tell
someone what to eat and they will immediately push back, which is why I think this is a much harder
problem to tackle. I mean, I think the, I mean, I think the key thing there is
trying to sell it to someone as a all or nothing, like you either eat meat or you don't eat meat
is not going to work, right? I think you need to find a way of reducing meat consumption or
giving people options to reduce meat consumption and starting there. And then they might progress
towards, you know, a more and more plant-based diet over time, but I think you're not going to get
that overnight. I mean, I think for me, I think we will need to rely on solutions that produce
almost complete mimics of meat that we're currently eating. I guess I'm probably pretty
pessimistic that people just accept, you know, we'll just eat beans and lentils and that'll
be fine. I think for most people, they basically want a substitute for meat, which means we need
to produce meat without the animal. And there are innovations coming through on this. The problem is
that they are currently too expensive and we haven't scaled them yet. Are you correct? Yeah.
I've read, I've read accounts of the current state of lab grown meat where they're like
sort of making like a lattice of animal cells, like very painstakingly in a lab and like one
on top of the other and like, okay, we've made the perfect artificial steak and it only costs
$100,000 a pound or whatever. It's like encouraging work, but it's not really close
to market yet. Is that right? Yeah. I mean, I think the costs are falling pretty rapidly still.
I mean, yeah, $100,000 would have been, you know, the price, you know, maybe a decade or so ago,
but they've fallen quite fast since then. And actually, I think on cost, they might be competitive,
you know, in the next five or so years. Really? I think the scalability will be the problem. It's
like how you then take that, you know, really fine, you're created process and scale that up,
you know, to produce hundreds of millions of tons of meat. I think that will be the big problem
rather than the economics of it. Yeah. And we also have the problem
with the food system of people's health. I mean, as you say, since, you know, the population bomb
was written in the last 50 years, there's been this enormous explosion of food production,
which is great sort of demographically, right? If you're looking at, okay, we produced enough
food for all of these 8 billion people. But if you look at at least, you know, the dietary health
of people in the United States, it is poor. And you have to lay some of that at the feet of our
food system. It's not people need to make better choices. It's people need better choices in the
supermarket. The food that is being rammed down people's throats is not what it should be because
of, I would say, the pressures of capitalism on these food producers to make food more cheaply and
etc. And so, you know, we have this explosion in the number of calories we're creating, but
there may be not the calories that are best for people's health. And I could imagine something
similar happening if we have our meat substitute, like we probably need, you know, some amount of
regulations in place or somebody thinking about like, let's make sure we shape this system so
that we're not producing, you know, we're feeding people and we're also not feeding them shit,
right? Yeah, no, I agree. I think the quality of the meat substitutes or, you know, whatever we
replace it with will be really important. And to some extent, that could be another lever to
encourage people to move away from particular products. Like I was saying, I think the
transition in food is a much harder sell for people. But what people really care about is their health.
So if we can produce products that are one more environmentally friendly and also better for
people's health, that could be another lever to encourage people to make that transition.
I mean, there are a range of studies looking at, you know, the health benefits of moving to a more
plant based diet doesn't necessarily mean a completely plant based diet, but a more plant
based diet. And they tend to result in slightly better health outcomes for people. And that might
not be because necessarily they're eating less meat. But I think often when people transition to
a more plant based diet, they automatically increase the diversity of foods that they retain, right?
Like the diversify different meals, the a bit more veg, a bit more fruit, a bit more of various
different foods. So overall, the quality of their diet might improve and diversify. So I think that
the health lens of this is also really, really critical. Yeah. And when I think you can make
the argument to people, hey, if you eat less meat, if you diversify your diet, you're going to be
healthier, that is an appealing message to people. You know, people want to feel better about what
they eat. And I think if we sort of abandon the the monkish devotion to I never, never again shall
meat pass my lips. And that's fine for those who want to make that moral commitment. I think
that's a wonderful moral commitment to make and I support it. But if we can focus on reducing,
diversifying for everybody in general, we can make huge, huge gains without requiring people to
without requiring people to give up so much if they don't want to. Is it is that sort of what it is?
Yeah, exactly. I think for a lot of people, even that first step seem would seem overwhelming.
You know, how on earth do I eat a vegan diet? Like, what do I eat? And I actually think as you
gradually as people are gradually exposed towards, you know, eating a bit less meat or substituting,
you know, one meal, you know, a day or a day a week for a more plant based diet, they then start to
learn stuff that they can eat. And oh, I actually quite like this substitute or I like this different
meal that I've made. I think then they become more comfortable with it over time and might be able to
take it further. I think the the overwhelm initially of okay, I suddenly have to eat a completely vegan
diet, you know, really puts people off. So I think we need to to take people on baby steps along the
way. And then they might end up a vegan diet at the end of the road. But I think most people will
not jump immediately to that. Yeah, I mean, my own, my own thing was like 10 years ago, I read a book
by the cookbook author, author, Mark Bitman called Vegan Before Six, where he had, he's like, here's
my diet plan, I eat vegan before 6pm, and then I have whatever I want for dinner. And I did that
for a year or two. And then I just sort of learned, oh, here's a bunch of vegan meals I can make myself.
And so now I eat vegan quite often, not I'm not a permanent vegan, but like, you know,
more often than not, I'm like, oh, let me try to have a vegan meal today. And I think getting that
sort of muscle memory into people so that they know how to do it enables them to make those choices,
etc. Now, vegans in the comments, I know you're yelling, everyone should just go vegan, it's fine,
like keep doing what you're doing, but we are trying to get as many people under the
tent as possible. And I think a little bit of allowance for where people are currently at,
I think helps us do that, right? Yeah, exactly. I mean, I've had this dilemma myself. So I'm,
I'm now a vegan. And I wasn't, you know, three years or so ago. And I've actually questioned over
the years, am I more effective in this role as a vegan, or as someone that's not a vegan, but
strongly encourages, you know, meat reduction, like I sometimes have this kind of block of if I,
you know, people find out I'm a vegan, you know, they don't take my message seriously,
or they think I'm like way too extreme, or, you know, they can't visualize how they would get from
where they are to where I am. Whereas if I was someone that, you know, didn't eat meat that
often, maybe didn't eat beef, ate some chicken or fish, they might find that more relatable.
And therefore they might actually feel like there was a shorter gap between where they are
and where I am. I mean, in the end, I just went vegan anyway, but I have questioned, you know,
what's the most effective, you know, communication strategy there or where to place yourself to,
to reach a bigger cohort of people? Yeah, it does. It is funny that if you're talking to a vegan,
and you're feeling bad about yourself, and then they reveal, I eat fish sometimes, and you're
like, oh, oh, thank God. Oh, okay, all right, okay. So there's, there's some hope for me yet,
you know, like it, it's just having, having a little bit of flex like makes people a little
bit relieved. So I really love that we're making progress in so many areas. I am curious though,
are there any areas where we're putting a lot of effort into reducing our carbon emissions that are
not so effective that, you know, are things that, you know, hey, we should direct our efforts
elsewhere. Are there any current initiatives that you are a skeptic about? I mean, I think the,
I think on, on climate change specifically, I mean, I think the, the issue there is that I think
there's a lot of people that are really well intentioned. They want to make a difference.
They want to cut their carbon footprint, but they don't have good information to base that on. And
they often misplace their effort. And the issue there is that they do the stuff that has a really
tiny impact or sometimes a negative impact, and then they miss the really big stuff. So when you
look, for example, if you look at surveys, you know, asking people, you know, what's the best thing
you can do for the environment or the best thing you can do to cut your carbon footprint, they
mentioned stuff like recycling or, you know, reusing a plastic bag or turning off the lights.
And, and these are, you know, fine to do, do them, but they're small in the magnitude of things.
And actually they miss the stuff like adopting a more plant-based diet. Or they even miss stuff
like, you know, switching to the, to electric cars. So they, they're focusing on the really
tiny stuff and putting effort in there. And then missing the really big stuff. And what I think
was really key is if we're to have a hope of tackling this, you know, we're past the stage of
the little stuff, right? We need to be focusing on the big stuff. So I think that's the issue that
people have is also often misplaced effort when there's actually a list of, you know, maybe
five big things that really matter. And then the rest is more like a rounding error.
Yeah. Well, recycling is such a contentious one because a lot of people have an awareness that,
you know, recycling, at least how it's practiced in the U.S. is in many ways
a bit of a PR attempt by the plastics industry to, you know, distract from the waste that they
caused. Hey, if we put that little triangle on the thing and say it's recyclable, then people will
think, oh, it's not so bad to buy one and it'll remove the guilt from them. And then we'll shift
the burden of being responsible onto the consumer. Now, I don't, I believe all that is true. I know
all that is true. I've studied it and done content on it myself. But that doesn't stop me from
throwing all that shit in the blue bin because, hey, why not if some of it's being recycled?
Whatever. I don't stress out about it too much. But I think that that breeds a cynicism in people
that, hey, these solutions that we're being presented are capitalist schemes by people
who are trying to get us to buy more. And I don't know. I think that is what leads a lot of people
to say, oh, we're never going to solve this problem unless we do something about our
economic system overall, that we change its structure. And that we have a rapacious economic
system that is gobbling everything up, that always wants more, demands endless growth,
mines the planet for resources, mines our labor to reduce it to its lowest possible cost, and is
just a fire that's consuming the planet until it's all gone. That's a very apocalyptic view.
But I'm curious what you think about our economic system itself and how it
contributes to the problem or if we can actually solve it under capitalism.
I mean, I think that was a lot. I like to give a lot at this point in the conversation.
I'm sensing you're a big fan of capitalism. No, I think there's all very valid points. I mean,
I think it's very fair to say that capitalism has got us into this mess.
Or at least has played a massive role in getting us into this mess. I think you can
still make the argument that it can play some role in getting us out of it now. Or at least
another way I'd frame it is that to me, I'm not sure we have a choice at this stage of trying to
utilize some of the positives of capitalism, which we discussed earlier, the free market
economics of energy costs and technological change. I think that's one benefit of this.
There are obviously still massive downsides. The question is, can you garner the benefits of the
system, but also try to address and pull down some of the downsides of the system?
To me, that seems more realistic than deciding we're just going to rip up the system and build a
new one, especially on the timescales that we're talking about here. We're talking about tackling
this. We need to really get moving on. I mean, we should have got moving on this 20 years ago,
but now we really need to get moving on this. We're talking about decarbonizing or electricity
grids in the UK or the US in five to 10 years. I'm skeptical that we can tear down an economic
system and build a new one on that timescale. Maybe if we're talking about this over 70 years,
then we might have a way of working on our economic system first and then deciding how we
tackle our environmental problems later. I think we are in some sense are stuck in the economic
system that we're in, but that doesn't mean we need to accept all of the aspects of it or just
accept it as the status quo. I think there are things we can do within that system to utilize
the benefits and try to push down some of the major downsides of it. I agree with you entirely.
I mean, I'm a critic of our economic system and I agree that capitalism has gotten us into this mess,
and I'm a person who is constantly wanting to envision something better. However, I don't think
that we have time to wait. I don't think we have time to say, hey, let's figure out the
economic system first and then deal with climate change. We can do both things at once and we can
be realists about the world that we live in and try to make the changes that we need to make in
that world under the system that we're in as we also try to envision a better system and build it.
I do take issue when people say, ah, as people are probably going to say in the comments of
this video when we posted on YouTube, capitalism did this. We need to uproot capitalism. Yes,
and we also need to actually solve the problem that we actually face in the limited amount of
time that we have. It is not an either or problem. It is an and, and, and, and problem.
Thank you so much for that. Yeah, I agree. I mean, I think the argument is often, well,
we're just going to take the current system, energy system, for example, that we're in,
and we're just solving it for a different one, and it's just going to be just as bad and it's
going to be so as extractive as it was before. Again, I think this comes a little bit back to
these kind of perfect solutions, this hunt for perfect solutions. I mean, I think we need to be
realistic that, you know, this is not about maintaining the status quo, but like this,
the rebuilding our energy system is, you know, the biggest, ultimately, one of the biggest
challenges we're going to face. And we're just going to see really dramatic changes here. So,
I don't think we should underestimate how, you know, big this transformation is that we're asking
even in the food system, right? We're trying to completely transform our food system,
completely transform our energy system, our industry, you know, transport systems.
So, these are really kind of revolutionary changes. I think we shouldn't underplay that,
but on the kind of extractive component, I think, you know, we're trying to move away from a fossil
fuel system, which is just take, take, take, right? When you extract fossil fuels, you burn them,
they're done, right? You need to extract more, you do this every year. And there we're talking about,
you know, extracting 15 billion tons of fossil fuels every year. Now, we move to low-carbon
energy, for example, we will also need to extract minerals. That's completely true. And we need to
be conscious of the environmental impact of that. But what's key is that we are talking about, you
know, orders of magnitude, less minerals, you know, talking about tens to hundreds of millions of
tons compared to 15 billion tons of fossil fuels every single year. I think the key point of this
transition as well is that you don't need to extract this year after year after year, right?
You can start to then recycle those minerals, you know, at the end of a solar panel's life
for a wind turbine and put that back into the system. So, we will need a ramp-up period initially,
because we just need to build lots of new stuff. But we'll hopefully reach a position where a lot
of that can be recycled and we get to more of a, you know, circular economy approach that people
discuss rather than just an extractive take-take-take one. Yeah. And what I love about that is that
you're depicting us as taking a step towards the world we want. If you're someone listening to or
watching this podcast who says capitalism is extractive and I, that's something I hate about it,
well, you're describing an energy system that is far less extractive, right, that is pulling less
out of the earth, ultimately, especially if we're able to, as you say, reuse some of the minerals
that we extract. And so, that is addressing part of the problem that you are trying to address.
We're not ripping out the whole thing and replacing it in a day, but we are taking a step
towards the world that we want, which I think is really important. And we talk about many issues
on this show, whether we're talking about the criminal justice system, right? Some folks are
prison abolitionists, police abolitionists. I'm like, hey, hey, I don't disagree with that,
with the world that you're envisioning. Let's take steps in the meantime to, you know, build forms
of justice that are, you know, alternatives to policing so we can show people how it works and
reduce our reliance on a day-to-day basis rather than just focusing on the far-off horizon. You
know, we also need to take steps towards that world today under the system that we live in.
And that's what you're talking about doing, which is why I love it so much. Are you ever, though,
like, you know, is there ever a pessimist bone in your body about it? Like, do you ever, are there,
you know, is there a world that, you know, you see us possibly heading towards that you're trying
to steer us away from? Because sometimes I do know that the optimist's point of view, especially
for a climate activist, it can be a little bit of a strategic choice, right? We need to be optimistic
in order to do these things, and therefore it makes sense to take a strategy of optimism and,
you know, not be public about the fear that's in the back of your head of like, oh, what if we don't
do these things, right? So, you know, are you still powered by fear to some degree or are you really,
like, confident, hey, all of these great things are going to happen if we all keep pulling?
No, definitely. Like, the fear is still there. Like, I still lose a lot of sleep over climate change.
I guess I just try to balance that fear and sometimes anxiety with also with the optimism
that there is something we can do about it. Like, I'm very clear always on my messaging and also
in the book that, you know, the changes I describe in the book are not inevitable in any way, right?
I don't know if we will do it. I can't force us to do it, but they are possible. And I think
there's a massive opportunity there. And I think what we need at the moment is a positive vision
of the world we could live in, almost as a North Star. I think there's a lot of the
environmental messaging is almost built around damage limitation. And it's, you know,
the world will inevitably be worse in the future. We just decide how bad it's going to be.
And I think, actually, we need a bit more of a positive vision of, you know, actually,
the future can be better. It will not inevitably better, but there is something better that we
can work towards. How do we go from where we are now to where we would want to be? So that's
what I try to do with my messaging is try to present, you know, a bit more of a positive vision
of where we're trying to go to, but also make clear that, you know, none of this inevitable. And,
you know, if we stay on our current path, you know, I'm very scared about what the future
will look like because we're not on a good one. But I just have some level of optimism
that we can get our act together and bend that curve closer to, you know, the temperature changes
that we want and are achievable. So give me a little bit of that positive version of the or
vision of the future, right? Like paying us a little bit of a picture of, you know, here I am.
Like I said, I, you know, 30 years ago, I was watching those cartoons, right? Captain Planet
and whatnot. Today, I'm in my 40s. I'm like, hey, we didn't do as much as I feel like we should have
done. But, you know, what is the world that I could live in when I'm 80 if we do all the things that
you say are possible? So if we, you know, get our act together and tackle this, you know, we won't,
I don't think we'll limit, you know, warming to 1.5 degrees. I think, you know, that's,
you know, a very laudable goal. But I think, you know, we have kind of left it too late to achieve
that. But I think the key point there is, you know, 1.5 degrees is not a cliff, right? Like we
need to fight for temperature ranges above that because with each incremental rise in temperature,
we increase risks. So I think 2 degrees is still within our grasp if we really get our act together.
So we could limit warming to below 2 degrees. We will see, you know, increased impacts there,
you know, but there are things that we can do to limit a lot of those impacts.
So we'll live in a world where hopefully the majority of the world have access to energy.
They have higher standards of living than they do today. Energy is very cheap. We don't have these,
you know, massive energy price shocks, you know, that we have in a fossil fuel system because,
you know, Putin invades Ukraine, like we've seen in the last few years. So we have more
stable and low energy prices. People have access to the energy services they need. You know, we have
much more livable cities that aren't, you know, completely governed by cars on the road.
There are, you know, better communities where we can interact. You know, we have
cycle lanes, public transport, you know, people are walking, people can sit outdoors,
they can dine outdoors. We have clean air to breathe. So people aren't dying from air pollution.
You know, we don't kill, you know, more than 70 billion animals every year for food, but we still
have, you know, really tasty nutritious diets. We've got zero deforestation because we've brought
that to an end. And we have, you know, these amazing wild landscapes coming back and wild
animals coming back. That is a beautiful vision. And you feel very confident that we can get there.
You at least feel optimistic that we can get there. Yeah, these goals are completely achievable,
whether we do them is up to us. And I mean, us, you know, at a very large collective level.
But they're there for us. And I think the key point and what I try to communicate in my messaging
is that this transition is not a sacrifice. I mean, often this environmental stuff is posed as a
sacrifice. It's, you know, oh, we'll just have to cut back or we'll just have to sacrifice this in
order to preserve the future. And that's fine. Actually, that messaging is fine if that's the
correct, you know, notation and the correct idea and correct message there. And maybe we should
just sacrifice, but we actually don't need to sacrifice because the changes we're making are
opportunities. So we have opportunities in the short term and it also leads to good benefits
over the long term. And I think we need to reframe our messaging here away from, you know,
sacrifice towards one of opportunity and abundance. Yeah, that it's the classic scarcity
mentality versus abundance mentality that we do not have to have worse lives. We do not have to
live in a worse world in order to prevent these outcomes. Actually, everything will be better.
We will all have more healthy, more vibrant, more prosperous lives if we were to make this
transition. I also, I love the name of your book so much, Not the End of the World because
it is such a deep philosophical thing that people think the world is ending. And
like it's not possible for it to end, right? Like you are, unless you personally die,
right, you are going to wake up in a world that exists and it is going to be better or worse,
you know, and you are going to have to live in it. And you have some amount of control. We all
have some amount of control over what that world is based on our actions today. And no matter how
bad things are, we have the opportunity to do something that is going to make the world that
we're going to wake up in tomorrow a little bit better, a little bit worse. And so when I think
about it that way, it makes me realize this mentality that like the world is ending is nothing
but a cop out. It's false and all it does is absolve you fictionally of that power. It takes
power away from you to say that about the world. Yeah, I think that's the extreme again. If you
tell yourself that the world is doomed and it's too late to tackle these problems and it is the
end of the world, then yeah, your reaction to that is, well, if it's over, then why should I take
action anyway? It won't make a difference. Maybe we should just enjoy the remaining of our lives
that we have left because nothing we do now is going to change things. And that again, I think
that's a cop out because that's just not the reality. And that type of approach and that,
you know, messaging is not going to get us to where we need to be. I think we need to reframe
our discussions around this of yes, these are very serious problems. For some people, these
actually are existential problems. Like people will die, people are dying from air pollution.
People are dying from climate change and people will die from climate change. So for some people,
this is really an existential threat. But we have the capacity to reduce those risks,
to reduce those dangers and actually not just, you know, have this damage limitation
vision, but also a better vision of actually improving the world going forward rather than
just trying to stop some of the damage. Yeah. And I mean, once you start thinking about that way,
it makes you realize how big of an opportunity you have because it's sort of you go from thinking,
oh, what can I do to fight climate change or to fight these problems to thinking, oh,
everything that I do can be a solution. You know, like, whether it's eating vegan or it's,
you know, getting the electric car or it's doing policy work or whatever, like every single thing
that you do is a move in the right direction if you choose for it to be. And it can be massively
empowering to think about it that way. Yeah, exactly. And I think the, as I was saying earlier,
I mean, these are, you know, massive transitions that we're doing, and they touch on basically every
sector, which means that, you know, regardless of, you know, what you're working in or where you're
working or what you're doing, you know, these issues are touching you. And you can have a
positive impact on that. Like, I think we often think of what you can do in environmentalism as
just, you know, how do I reduce my carbon footprint? And that's fine. And I give recommendation of how
people can do that most effectively. But I think we should also be more ambitious about that. You
know, my contribution is not just going to be how do I limit my footprint as much as possible. I
actually want to offset that and more by the positive impacts that I make, whether it's,
you know, communicating to others, whether it's someone, you know, working in politics, working
in engineering or finance, or, you know, we all play a role in trying to shift all of these systems
into a more sustainable path. And actually, you know, regardless of what you do, you're probably
hitting on those every day. Yes. And this is why I'm so against people putting themselves in a
position of powerlessness. And a lot of times when I'm arguing with what I think people are
going to write in the comments, it's me arguing with that. People say, oh, we can't do anything
because capitalism. No, you can do a hell of a lot. And it's not only your responsibility,
it's your opportunity to do so. And if you don't take it, you're putting yourself in a position,
you're declaring that you have no power when the opposite is true. I so appreciate you coming on
today to dispel some of my lingering pessimism and tell me why I'm wrong about it. I absolutely
loved it. The name of the book is not the end of the world. People can, of course, get it at
our special bookshop, faxleypod.com, slash books. But where can people find you online, Hannah?
And how can they get involved in this fight? Yeah, so maybe one of the best places is I work
for a project called Our World in Data. And that's a website. And we have data and research on not
just climate change and environment, but what we frame as the world's largest problem. So you
can go on there and look at all the data to try to understand what's going on in the world.
It's an incredible resource. It's really an amazing site. People should go check it out,
Our World in Data. Yeah, I have a substack called Sustainability by Numbers, where I try
to understand these problems on an environment and climate through numbers. So not about gut
feelings or intuitions or anecdotes. We're actually looking at the data on electric vehicles, for
example. Good, because I was really going based on gut feelings and anecdotes. And so you bringing
numbers was an important corrective to that. I love that. Sustainability in numbers.
Yeah, and I think how people can contribute this in so many ways. I think there is the reducing
your personal carbon footprint bit, which is important. But I think much more wider than that.
I think the key one is just how do you contribute from your career, for example? A lot of people,
especially younger people, are deciding, what should I do with my life? If you're interested
in this area, there are so many areas that you can get involved and make a positive difference,
whether that's in engineering, whether that's becoming an electricity and to massively enhance
the grid or install heat pumps, whether it's spreading the message through art. I mean,
there's so many ways that you can do this in a much more positive way. And then obviously,
also really key to that is trying to influence politics. And as we discussed markets, I think
you also have an impact on the market by the stuff that you buy. When you're buying an EV,
you're signaling, you know, we're done with petrol and diesel cars. The world is moving
towards electric cars. I think we can also have an impact politically and on our market systems.
Thank you so much for coming on, Hannah. I can't thank you enough. It's been a
wonderful conversation. Thanks very much. Thank you.
Well, thank you once again to Dr. Hannah Ritchie for coming on the show. If you want to pick up
a copy of her book once again, head to factuallypod.com slash books. That's factuallypod.com slash
books. Every purchase there supports not just this show, but your local bookstore as well.
If you would like to support this show directly, and I hope you do, head to patreon.com slash
Adam Conover. Five bucks a month gets you every episode of the show ad free. We also have a
community book club coming up soon. We're reading Caitlyn Dodie's book, Smoke Gets in Your Eyes,
and chatting with Caitlyn over Zoom on a private Zoom link. Hope you'll join us for that awesome
event for 15 bucks a month. I will read your name on this very podcast. Our most recent $15
a month contributors are Mask When You Can, Protect Your Community. Thank you so much,
Mask When You Can, Protect Your Community for slipping that message in here. I approve of it.
AAK193 and Jasmine Andrade. Thank you so much to all of them. If you'd like to join them,
head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover. If you'd like to come see me on the road doing stand-up
comedy, head to adamconover.net for all my tickets and tour dates heading to Indianapolis,
Indiana, La Jolla, California, San Jose, California. Would love to see you out there,
adamconover.net for tickets and tour dates. I'd like to thank my producers, Tony Wilson and Sam
Raubman, everybody here at Head Gum for making the show possible. Thank you so much for listening,
and we'll see you next time on Factually. That was a Head Gum podcast.
