Hello and welcome to Factually. I'm Adam Conover. Thank you so much for joining me on the show again.
This week I want to talk about an experience that is both weird and weirdly common in 2023 in the
past couple years. You've probably seen it happen to someone around you. Maybe it was a roommate,
a parent, a family friend, or for me some comedians I started out with. Whoever it was,
the story is the same. Someone who seemed sane with it and living in the same reality as you did
suddenly lost their mind and went down some rabbit hole to emerge as a fully blown conspiracy
theorist. Now, people have been losing their shit like this from time immemorial. As I've covered
before on this show and on Adam ruins everything, conspiratorial thinking follows from the normal
patterns of human thought that we use to understand the world around us. But it seems that there's
something particular and special about the way that people fall into the trap of conspiratorial
thinking now. Whether it starts on 4chan or Fox News, anti-vaxx or QAnon, there's a mirror world
of socially poisonous conspiracy that people keep falling into. It is incredibly painful when it
happens to someone who you know and love and it's often hard to know how to even understand what
happened. What is it about our world, our media, and our politics today that makes this happen
over and over again, the reasonable people who we love and care about? Well, today I have a truly
brilliant guest to help dig into this issue and into the entire mirror world that our politics
and media ecosystem has become. But before we get into it, I just want to remind you that if you
want to support this show, you can do so on Patreon. Head to patreon.com slash Adam Conover.
Five bucks a month gets you every episode of the show ad free. You can hear all the wonderful
interviews we do every single week and you can support other people getting them as well.
And by the way, if you like stand-up comedy, just want to remind you I am a touring stand-up
comedian. I just put a whole bunch of new dates up on my website. In 2024, I am heading to New York,
Boston, Philly, DC, Portland, Maine, a bunch of other places, Chicago, Nashville, head to Adam
Conover.net for tickets and tour dates. And now let's get to today's guest because she is incredible.
She's one of the most respected and influential public intellectuals and non-fiction authors
on the left of the past century. Her writings on consumerism, capitalism and climate are required
reading. And her most recent book is called Doppelganger, a trip into the mirror world.
I am, of course, talking about the incredible Naomi Klein and her new book is a fascinating and
personal look into the conspiratorial ways of thinking that are thriving in the moment we
live in today. So without further ado, please welcome Naomi Klein.
Naomi, thank you so much for being on the show. It's a complete thrill to have you.
I'm very happy to be with you. Your books, every time one comes out, they make waves every single
time. This new one, I am so excited about having read the introduction of the first chapter. It's
immediately gripping. You do something that is a form of thinking and communicating that is very
close to my heart, always interesting to me where you start from a fascinating personal story and
you ladder out from that to a really wide ranging discussion of the world that we live in today
and some really fascinating intellectual issues. It's so cool. Let's start from the starting point.
The book's called Doppelganger. Please tell us about your Doppelganger and how it led you on
this investigation. Sure. So I do have a Doppelganger by which I mean a person who I am perennially
confused and conflated with. Lots of us have had this experience. I would say mine is more extreme
than most. There is another Naomi nonfiction writer of books who is close to my age and I don't know,
we're both Jewish. We're both named Naomi and we both write books and sort of big ideas, I suppose.
You're both cultural critics as well. Yeah. Her first book, I'm referring to Naomi Wolf and so
lots of viewers, listeners and viewers might not be familiar with her. She was big in the 90s.
She wrote a book called The Beauty Myth. She worked for Al Gore when he ran for president.
She was one of the most prominent feminists of her generation. So she used to be more on the
liberal left and now, and this is why it became a little awkward for me to be confused with her,
now she pales around with Steve Bannon and Tucker Carlson and was a real vector of medical
misinformation during the COVID-19 pandemic. So I use her as a case study of, we all know people
who changed a lot during COVID. We all know people who we've scratched our heads and gone like,
what happened to that person, right? Maybe it's like a public figure or maybe it's like a brother
or a sister or a yoga instructor who suddenly is talking about QAnon. So I use this personal,
this experience of identity confusion because during the pandemic, I would go online and just,
there would be thousands of people really angry at me about things that I hadn't done.
And you know, so I just, because they, because they saw a Naomi on TV saying something who
looks, I mean, if you were next to each other, I could tell the difference, but if someone
hasn't looked at you for a couple of years and they see the other, oh, Brunette, et cetera, same age,
or et cetera. I always say she has much better hair than me. It's really important to know.
So people are actually misattributing. Naomi Wolfe was out there saying sometimes horrible
things and they were saying, Naomi Klein said this and getting mad at you.
Yeah. Like, why is Naomi Klein saying that unvaccinated people have to stay away from vaccinated
people because they might shed vaccine particles onto them and then not be able to have babies?
Things like that, which I, you know, so, you know, in the book, I use this identity confusion,
which, you know, all of us who, you know, have something of a public platform, I think the
pandemic had a particular kind of vertigo because we are used to being in rooms full of other people
who help tell us who we are, right? Like the last thing, you know, I canceled a book tour,
I canceled all these public events. And so I think that, I think generally we're confused about
what our social media avatars are. Like, is that us? Is that really you? You know, like,
it's a sort of a approximation of you. Like, it's a character version of you. It's a branded
version of you, right? And so, you know, I think that I didn't like being confused with her
because she was saying a lot of strange and dangerous things during COVID. But I also think
that I was very confused about who I was during COVID because I wasn't able to do the things that
tell me who I am a lot of the time, right? So I used it as this kind of portal to get into the
weirdness of how we are represented to the world through our avatars, whether we really believe
that each other are real when we just see these avatar versions of one another. And in a way,
that's like, like she is my doppelganger, but so is my Twitter avatar. Like, that's not really me,
whoever that person is performing me on Twitter. So I think we live in a doppelganger world,
especially with AI, where we're not really sure who and what is real. And so she is a,
you know, I guess, a kind of a literary device to get at this hall of mirrors that is contemporary
culture. And as soon as you start talking about that, the number of doppelgangers,
like, starts multiplying in my head because you talk about, yeah, do you understand yourself
that Twitter avatar as part of you, there's these sort of strange loss of your own identity you feel
when someone confuses you with another person, you know, when someone, whenever someone says,
that person looks like you, I'm like, that's what you think I look like. It's not what I think I
look like. Like it's destabilizing just to be mistaken for another person. In fact, I was once
told, I told, this happened to me in comedy 10 years ago, I told a comic I ran into that she
looked like another comic. And she said, no, I don't. And then she said, you should never
tell anyone that they look like another person, because you don't know what the person you're
talking to thinks they look like, you know, you don't know what their self image is, and you
could be violating their self image in a deep way. And I always took that to heart. And I no longer
do that. I no longer say, Oh, you kind of look like this other person, because you might be
triggering some insecurity the person has or whatever. It can be very destabilizing to be
compared to another person out there. But you know, in the end, I decided to embrace it
as an unconventional form of, you know, sort of Zen non attachment. Because, you know, we live in
a culture that is constantly telling us that we need to perform this perfected version of ourselves
and optimize ourselves. And it's like, you know, it's kind of our life raft in these extremely
competitive waters. And, and there's something sort of liberating about realizing that no matter
how carefully you tend to your personal brand and project yourself with the exact right caliber of
irony and earnestness. If thousands of people think that you are somebody totally different,
it really is just telling you like, get over yourself, you know. And so I've decided to be
grateful for my doppelganger and to take it as a message to just find, find other people,
find the others, you know, invest in community, not in personal perfection, because people are
going to think that you think wild things, no matter what you do. I feel like you've given us
the beautiful conclusion of this book at the beginning of the interview. So maybe we should
bleep it for spoilers. I don't know. That's, that's wonderful. But let's, let's keep exploring
something else that you said that made me think is, you know, when our online avatars are those us,
our people seeing us when they're looking at us, that makes me think that when people,
you know, lose that screw like Naomi Wolfe did, when, when the person goes queuing on,
when they go anti-vax, when our friend starts behaving in this bizarre way
and starts accusing us of being involved in a conspiracy or seeing those around them,
it often is. Or being a doppelganger of yourself, like Stepford people and stuff.
Yes. Oh, you're not you anymore. And they, they turn it away on you. Well, that the pain of that
is often that we no longer feel seen by our friend, but the person somehow loses their
ability to see us and to see, you know, when people are really going nuts on Twitter and accusing
each other of being, you know, whatever, vaccine propagandist or whatever, they're not seeing
the people they're talking to as people anymore. And we sort of, it seems like a very modern thing
to lose our ability to see each other as human beings. Yeah. And I mean, it's, it's weird enough
when it's somebody who you don't know, who clearly has you completely wrong. But what's weird, as
you're saying, Adam, is like, when it's somebody who does know you and is suddenly treating you
like this, like, entirely tune up two dimensional form. Yeah. I mean, I think a lot of relationships
were severed during, during, during COVID because we were all really stressed out. And we were,
we were confused. We were anxious. And so people were disinvited from family dinners. And, you
know, often for good reasons, you know, they are immunocompromised and, you know, you, like,
like if you, if you had immunocompromised people in your family, then, and you had somebody who
was not taking COVID seriously at all, you know, that's going to create a rift. And it
created rifts and countless families. But I've also heard some really nice stories since the
book came out of people who, who, who said that they reached back out to a sister they lost touch
with or, you know, another family member and realized that, you know, they didn't want to have
all these severed connections. And maybe there, there are some things that they agree on. Maybe
they, maybe, maybe you don't like big pharma either for different reasons. But you might be
able to find some common ground and maybe pull them back from what I call the mirror world.
Because, yeah, there's often a, like, you know, I write that conspiracy culture often gets the
facts wrong, but the feelings right. And there's a, there's a way in which there's always a little
bit of truth mixed in with the fantasy in any of the conspiracies. So, you know, you've got to
extend some kind of a bridge where you find, maybe you find some common ground and give
somebody an out because they might be looking for an out. There's a lot of grifters in there.
The fact that you call it the mirror world is just, again, such an evocative image you found to,
that really makes me think about it differently. What, so let's talk about what is it,
do you think that pulls people into that mirror world? Because it's happened with a lot of events.
I saw it happen to friends of mine after 2016, after the pandemic. You know, it seems like
there are these inciting events. And what is it that causes this to happen to people?
So, I think human beings are creatures of narrative. We like to have stories that tell us
who we are and where we are. And when you have a shock, like a major event that
that scrambles the story of who you thought you were, like 9-11, like a lot of Americans,
had no idea who these people were. And that was the question, like, why do they hate us?
Like, what is this? You know, we don't do a very good job of teaching people like geopolitics in
high school, let alone universities. So, when it turns out that there's like people on the other
side of the planet who are very angry at your country and you never learned why, like you never
learned, you didn't even know they were there, right? But after 9-11, I wrote a piece, I remember,
I think it was for the LA Times saying, you know, Americans woke up to realize that they were at
war, only to find that they had been at war for a long time and no one told them, you know?
So, I think that we go looking for stories when our stories of self fall apart. And
like, I don't know about you, but I've never lived through a global pandemic before. I've
never been told to stay home for months before. This was new terrain. I've never looked up at
the sky and not seen planes, time square, empty. I mean, these were shocking events. And so,
as creatures of story, we go looking for them. And I think what really derailed us during COVID is
that that search for story intersected with an attention economy. And it's an economy that means
that whoever has the most outrageous, over-claiming story wins the clicks, wins the eyeballs. You
know, science takes time. We were confronting a novel virus. We had all these scientists saying,
like, okay, be patient. We have to go do our research and then we'll get back to you. And
then you had a whole bunch of grifters just rush into that gap saying, we have the story. We know,
come over here. And, you know, often they were dusting off theories that they had been using in
different contexts, like the anti-vax movement, right? Like, they had been spinning stories about
childhood vaccines and autism, which were lies before COVID. But they just needed to kind of
do a search and replace on the COVID vaccines. And they were good to go. Like, they didn't have to
anyway. So that's some of it. Why do you call, how did you come up with the term
the mirror world? And why do you think of the conspiracy theory world as being a mirror?
Well, I was struck, you know, so I, like, I use my doppelganger as sort of my white rabbit,
like in Alice in Wonderland, to fall down the rabbit hole and really explore the world that
she is in now. Because it was either going to be like, just be horrified by everything she was
saying or, or actually try to understand, like how she could have changed so much.
And I'm a researcher and this is how I understand the world. Like, you know, when
something confounds me, I try to understand it. And so, so I started listening to a lot of the
interviews she was doing with people like Steve Bannon. She was on his show almost every day for
a while. So I listened to hundreds of hours of Steve Bannon's podcast, The War Room.
And, you know, she was also on like many lesser known.
Did you start to like the podcast after a while? Or are you like, okay, these are like
my buddies now. You get a parasocial relationship with Steve?
I didn't. Okay. I admit that I got the, his theme song stuck in my head.
Which is like pretty catchy. It's a very weird anti-China theme song.
That's what I'm trying to sing right now. But it does end with like, let's take down the CCP.
That's when I knew I was in trouble. When I just was like, couldn't get it out of my brain
when I was, you know, unloading the dishwasher. So, so, but, but I, like, I call it the mirror
world because I was really struck, particularly listening to Bannon. One time in, it was,
it was, I remember, it's Christmas 2021. And he was shilling a new coin called
FJB, like fuck Joe Biden. And he was just trying to fleece people before Christmas. He was like,
get this for your relatives. And he was making this whole patch about how you couldn't trust
the dollar anymore. So you had to buy these coins and so on. Is this cryptocurrency?
It wasn't exactly, it was even like, not even crypto. It was just like literally a coin that
said fuck Joe Biden. Like just, like just we made a little, a little piece of metal disc that says
FJB on it. Which is why I say you might be able to get some friends and family members back from
the mirror world because there are so many drifters there, right? That they might be looking for some
kind of help. It's so, they're getting fleeced non-stop, right? Send that lifeline, see what
happens. But, but as he was making his pitch, his pre-Christmas pitch, he was saying, you know,
we need to have, this is why we need to have our own money and we need to have our own publishing
companies and we need to have our own social media platforms because we will never cancel you. We
will never other you. You'll always be welcome here. And so, and he was really talking about a
one-to-one, like, you know, get kicked off Twitter, you can join Getter, which they call
themselves the Twitter killer. You know, get kicked off YouTube, you can join Rumble and so on.
And there was, there was like an exact mirror of everything like in the world that I lived in. And
I was just really struck that most of the people who I know and hang out with have no idea this
world like fully exists. And they actually think that when somebody gets kicked off the social media
that site that they're on, that they almost like have been deleted from planet Earth. And it's so
strangely arrogant. Because actually, they're really good at this. And they are building massive
platforms and they're reaching lots of people. And, and that's, you know, that's why I pay attention
to them. They're a major political force, you know, see Bannon as a strategist. He's trying to get back
into power. And these are happening on the public internet. They're not, it's not the dark web.
It's like, you can just go to these websites and look at this stuff. How do you, you know,
I know you tracked Naomi Wolf's progress through the book. How did she fall into this? Because it's,
it's a very, even if it weren't for the connection to you, it's a very strange story.
Yeah, it's a strange story because she was such a prominent liberal, such a prominent Democrat,
feminist. How did she fall into it? You know, I have an, I have an equation in the book that
might be useful because I think there's a lot of people who have, who have changed as we, as
discussed, which is social media slash grandiosity plus social media addiction. Many of, I think
pretty much anybody who we might be thinking of spends way too much time online. And plus
midlife crisis divided by public shaming equals right wing meltdown. So I want to talk a bit
about the public shaming piece of it because, you know, I think one of the big drivers for her
is that she's one of these people who became a spectacle for liberal left Twitter. And that's
because she made a foundational error in a book that she published in 2019. And this error was
discovered live on BBC radio. It's every writer's worst nightmare. I mean, I, I sort of remember
this as a viral moment. And I didn't, I honestly did not really know who she was or really follow
her that much, but I sort of remember this. What was the error that was discovered?
So she wrote a book called Outrageous. It came out a few months before the pandemic.
And it was a, it was a, it was a historical work. It was actually her PhD thesis. And it told,
what she, during this interview, she, she made this claim that gay men had been executed
for sodomy long after it was like people thought that they stopped sentencing people to death
for being gay. And what happened in the BBC interviewer pointed out that she had misread
the historical record. And he said, like in a very polite British way, like, it's just,
the thing is, is that I think you misunderstood. And then he explained that, and then the bottom
falls out of her entire book. And she, and it turns out that those men had actually been released.
She misunderstood a term called death recorded, which is what she thought was a death sentence,
but it isn't. And so that was just a journalist doing his job. You know, he fact-checked a book
that should have been fact-checked by the author and the publisher and found a massive error.
But then she becomes a meme, you know, then, then people just cannot get enough of this.
Why does she become a meme? Because the, you know, this sounds like an error is an error
that's embarrassing. Maybe people have a little bit of fun, but there has to be something deeper
going on for people to really go in on that. You know, I think not really. I mean, I think she was,
she was enough of a big deal, you know, enough of a, you know, New York Times bestselling author
that to watch this happen live on the air. It was just one of those moments where, because
it would be your worst nightmare, and there's a lot of writers on Twitter, the idea that you could
point and laugh at it happening to somebody else somehow made you feel safer.
Got it. And, but also she had been dabbling in conspiracy culture, you know, before that, you
know, she had made, she did things like they took pictures of clouds and speculated about government,
you know, yeah, you know,
Chemtrails and things like that, you know, she was a bit of a cloud truther. She's, she's, you know,
just a little, just a little spot of cloud truth, just like you're hanging out with her and she
might go, Hey, clouds are fake, you know, and you're like, Oh, well, that was weird that Naomi
just sort of tossed that on me. But other than that, she's pretty nice. Just a bit of a cloud
truth of truth. I mean, I think she thinks birds are real. I'm not sure.
So, so, but because there was a little bit of a reservoir of annoyance with her already online,
because she was dabbling in other conspiracy theories, that's why people, part of why people
really went in, it sounds like. Yeah. And then during COVID, I think she was, we were all bored
in at home and she was like, just endlessly sharing wild theories. Like, you know, like she, she'd
log online and you know, she had like, you know, almost 200,000 followers, you know, it's not like
she's like, it didn't have reach. She has many more now. But she, you know, she'd say that she
thinks that children were losing the ability to smile because they were wearing masks, you know,
and then that would be phase of entertainment, things like that. You know, there was a lot
about vaccine shedding onto unvaccinated people. And I mean, but, but I call her a conspiracy
influencer, not a conspiracy theorist, because there are often these glaring contradictions
in the claims. Like, you know, for a while, she was talking about how COVID was a bot,
maybe had been cooked up as a bio weapon. But then she was like, but why wear masks? You know,
like, and it's just, it just seems like a bit of a contradiction there. Like, you know,
if it's a bio weapon, surely you should try not to, not to get it, you know. So she's an
influencer. You should be worried about it, contradicts the idea that it's not that big a
deal. Yeah. So the story is constantly changing with whatever is going to get more clicks. So
if everyone's supposed to get vaccinated, now the vaccines are a bio weapon. If everyone's
supposed to get an app on their phone to see if they got vaccinated, well, it's not about the
vaccine. It's the app. The app can listen to your phone conversations and things like that.
But this is what I mean about how they often get the feeling right and the facts wrong is that,
you know, that's where she really took a star turn on the right was when she started talking
about those vaccine verification apps being a covert surveillance plan. So the truth is like,
people are very anxious about surveillance. They're very anxious about what happens with their data.
They're anxious about their cell phones. They don't really under, we don't really understand,
you know, what is known about our movements, you know, and so she projected all of our
collective surveillance fears onto this one app. But the response on liberal Twitter was,
wait till they hear about cell phones, which is kind of funny, right? But the assumption behind
that joke is that we all know that our cell phones are listening to us and we're okay with it. But
the thing is people seem not to be okay with it, right? So this is part of the appeal of conspiracy
culture is that, you know, they're telling a very simple story. Like if we can just get rid of these
apps, then everything will be fine and nobody will be able to track you anymore, right? Or the
vaccines or whatever is being, is the kind of boogeyman of surveillance. Whereas we actually need
policy responses so that we can control these tech companies and they're not able to mine our
data endlessly and create more doppelgangers like AI versions of us and so on. Right. The story with
the grain of truth, but with a much simpler solution and you can apply it to almost anything.
Now, often when someone is a conspiracy influencer like this, there'll be this
implication that people will say, oh, they're a grifter and a grifter generally means someone
who doesn't believe anything that they say. They're just trying to get the clicks,
they're harvesting clicks, they're like following the audience. Did you feel that that was the case
in her case? Was she a complete cynic about it? Or do you think she was believing these things and
was just not able to sort of connect the dots that they were self contradictory?
It's very hard for me to know what she believes, right? And I think that a lot of people who really
go all in with conspiracy culture aren't completely cynical. They have to convince
themselves of some of it on some level. But that doesn't mean that the primary impulse
isn't grifting, isn't ego, isn't getting people to treat you like a savant or whatever.
I think she gets a lot out of this, I guess is what I'm saying. I think she lost a lot
in the world that she used to travel in. She could no longer get published. After that error
on BBC, her publisher dumped her book. So she had every reason to move to a new market
that is very large. Tucker Carlson, when he had her on Fox, he was getting
three million viewers a night. There's no show on the left that she had access to that could
go near that. So there's every reason. So I don't know what she believes, but I do know that
a lot of people who follow this are not just grifting. The only reason the grift is successful,
if it's a grift, is because there are lots of customers who sincerely are listening to Steve
Bannon and Naomi Wolfe and RFK Jr. and believe it, or else it's not a good grift. You don't have
customers. So it's worrying because they're using such apocalyptic language. And if you really are
in this battle for humanity against a genocide, that's the kind of language that she uses,
good and evil. She's claimed that there is a genocide that has happened because of these
vaccines. She also takes pictures of her new gun and says we're at war and post-pictures of her
husband doing target practice. So this doesn't end well, I guess is what I'm saying. If you're
telling people they are fighting a genocide for good and evil, I think they might take you at
your word, whether you're grifting or not, and they might decide to do something about it. And
we're seeing lots of examples of that, actually. We absolutely are. Well, we have to take a really
quick break. When we come back, I want to ask you more about how this has changed your own
interaction with your online identity. But we'll be right back with more Naomi Klein.
You know, the year is never more hectic than during the holiday season with all those travel plans,
work projects wrapping up. And if you run a household, it's sometimes even hard to remember
what's for dinner or if anyone's remembered to feed the dog. If this sounds like your home or
the home of someone you know, this holiday season is the time for the gift of organization with
the Skylight calendar. The Skylight calendar is a smart touchscreen calendar and organizer for
all of your chores, groceries, and to-dos. It automatically syncs all of the different digital
calendars and events your family uses and shows them all together on one beautiful touchscreen
display. Skylight calendar is the best way to give your family peace of mind to enjoy the things that
matter most. It works by syncing events from already existing calendars you have, including Google,
Outlook, and Apple calendars. You can also add events directly using the touchscreen or with
the free Skylight mobile app. And it shows all family events together in one spot so you can see
what everyone has going on each week. Families are more likely to actually check it since it's always
up to date and so they don't question mom every day about schedules. And additional fun features
include dinner planning, grocery list, daily weather display, and weather forecast based on the
address of your events. And plus, when it's not in use, you can even turn it into a digital picture
frame. And get this, as a special limited time offer for our listeners, you can get $15 off your
purchase of a Skylight calendar when you go to skylightcal.com slash factually. To get $15 off
your purchase of a Skylight calendar, just go to skylightcal.com slash factually. That's S-K-Y-L-I-G-H-T-C-A-L
dot com slash factually. Okay, we're back with Naomi Klein talking about online conspiracy theories,
the Mirror World, doppelgangers. You had this really intriguing idea at the top of the interview
about how it made you think about how your own online identity is in some ways a doppelganger.
Can you please get into that for us? So I think when we create an online
version of ourselves, when we choose the picture that's going to be our avatar, when we
write that sort of kind of satirical bio, we are creating a brand. And what is
a brand? A brand is a thing version of you, of me. And this is actually the first book I wrote
when I was in my 20s was a book called No Logo. And it was about the rise of this idea that
companies should first and foremost be selling an idea, a brand, not that the product was incidental,
which was an idea that took root in corporate culture in the 90s, but also that individual
celebrities, like the first person who called himself, whose agent called him a super brand,
was Michael Jordan. And he was a mega corporation. And there were others. There was Richard Branson
and Oprah, of course. But the idea that regular people could be brands was not possible at that
stage, even though there were kind of management consultants saying this is the future and you're
not going to get a job. You're just going to have a series of contracts. But if you really want to
get ahead, you need to create a brand. And so that didn't become a reality until social media
put advertising agencies into all of our back pockets, right? Because suddenly you too can do
this for free, like for the price of your phone. And what I'm trying to do in the book is look
at it with a little bit of distance, because I think people are often called out for being
performative and being inauthentic online and so on. And this is like the ultimate
smear is like you're just performing, but we're all just performing. And the reason we're doing it
is because we have all received this message that the perfected, performed self, the brand itself,
is really our only hope of survival in these incredibly competitive,
shark-fist-laden waters. So yeah, I think we should treat ourselves with a little bit of
compassion and thinking about why we build these doppelgangers of ourselves. But a brand is a thing,
like humans are not meant to be brands. We've accepted the logic and we're all doing it,
and that's why we think we all need to issue like press statements whenever anything terrible
happens in the world, you know. Right. That is where I went as well, because there's a lot of
that happening right now with people saying, you need to post about this, you need to post,
you need to speak up. And it's at that moment that the distance between- You don't, by the way,
do you don't. Thank you. I agree. I don't think anyone can force you to post,
and I don't think that posting is good by itself. Posting can be something, but it's not- And people
will try to shame you into it. Your silence is its own statement and so on. And they're just
performing themselves, like that version, whoever those people are who are calling you out for not
having issued a press statement about the Middle East. Unless you are a politician, unless you are
a public person with some kind of record, you don't owe that to the world. I think you should
read, you should become literate about these issues that are going to impact all of us.
But if this is not your area, you do not owe anybody that sort of us versus them performance.
Correct. And I felt that really strongly. Well, it made me think about the distance
between my brand and my personal self, because I have a large social media presence. There are
things that I post about a lot. What I don't post about international affairs, that's not
part of my brand. Now, as a person, I have a responsibility to check in on my friends who
are affected, to learn as much as I can, to try to, et cetera, et cetera. But there's a big gap
there. And I really was really feeling the gap over those last couple of weeks.
Yeah. And I think people feel, you start to feel like somebody's keeping track. Like,
there's some list somewhere that's keeping track of everybody who has said something,
everyone who has said nothing, and we don't want to be on the wrong list, waited out is all I can
say, just waited out. And certainly don't say anything if you don't know what you're talking
about. But the point about this idea of that a brand is a thing version of you is a bad way to
be human. I have studied what it means to be a good brand. And what means to be a good brand
is to repeat yourself endlessly and have extreme message discipline. So if you are a good brand
as a human being, you are incredibly boring. You do not evolve. And you basically are
just like a dog chasing its own tail for the rest of your life.
You're just Nike. You say, just do it, just do it, just do it, just do it over and over again.
Yeah. Yeah. Change the celebrity, keep the slogan. Good branding is all about discipline.
And that may work for Nike, but it is really not what one should look for in our attempts
to be human, which is to actually evolve and learn from our experiences and reserve the right
to change. And it's interesting because it relates to AI because I think the more formulaic we are
as people, as artists, as creators of any kind, the easier we are to make a doppelganger of us
by AI because AI studies formulas as you got to keep the machines guessing. Be a bad brand,
break their own formula. But I also think it relates to the cruelty because a brand is not
a human. A brand is a thing. And I think that when we're all out there performing thing versions of
ourselves, we start to forget that each other are humans. And then we start to throw very sharp
things at one another. And then we're surprised when we hurt each other because things don't
bleed. You can hurl anything you want at Nike. That'll be fine.
Do you feel that you've created a brand for yourself? Did you say, oh, wait, hold on. I
am a brand in a way that I'm no longer comfortable with as you were looking into this?
Yeah. I mean, this was a question that came up for me pretty early because my first book,
I got really, really fortunate with my first book. And NoLogo became a brand in the world.
And it was very awkward because it was this anti-branding book that suddenly there's a
NoLogo craft beer in England. There was a whole line of Italian sundries, including some very good
olive oil in Italy called NoLogo. And then there was a restaurant in Geneva called NoLogo,
which I went into. I was like, wow, there's a NoLogo restaurant. And I went in and I introduced
myself to the owner who ran away. He was so panicked that I was going to stew over something
that I had decided not to trademark it because I thought that that compromised my ethics. Anyway,
I was like in my 20s, I could have gotten so rich.
Well, yeah, it became a meme, NoLogo. It was everywhere.
Yeah. So I was confronted with this tension early on of like, okay, so even if I didn't want to be
a brand, but I did sort of want to be a brand. And then I just realized it got way beyond my control.
So I just decided to try to become a bad brand. And then the next, for me, what that meant was
not writing that marketing for another 20 years. So my next books, my next books were
really not sequels to NoLogo. The shock doctrine and this changes everything. Because I thought
to be a good researcher, to be a good investigative journalist, I have to follow my,
I have to follow the research and not just chase my tail. And it was very clear to me that some
writers just write the same book over and over again and slightly change the title. I mean,
they're franchises. It's very popular. But to me, it was never really an option because I don't have
the discipline to write about things that are not interesting to me. Like, I'm too lazy for that.
It has to interest me. I have to not understand it and have this desire to understand it
to keep me working. And the thing about being a good branded author is you've already figured
out the formula and then you just have to repeat it. But to me, writing is too hard to do that.
If I'm not in a process of discovery, I will just watch television. So it wasn't so much
like that I was so pure. It was truly not an option for me. I mean, I guess I could have,
now I could have hired an AI to write those books for me.
Well, it seems like you also, you hadn't urged to resist it, which I deal with that in my own
work. I have my pet topics I return to again and again, anyone who listens to this show knows
what they are. I don't need to list them. But then, you know, I have an urge to get away from that
and do something new. But then the problem is, well, how do you sell that? Because people know
you for the thing that you just did, right? People know you for that. And so maybe they want
more of it. I mean, even this book seems very different that it starts from such a place of
personal history of like, Hey, this weird thing happened to me compared to-
Well, I think any kind of success is always going to create its own trap, right? I mean,
that's like Dylan going electric. Like people didn't want that from him. And then that's why
he had to do it. But with this book, it was similar in the sense that I couldn't bring
myself to write a conventional nonfiction book again, because I had lost faith that argument
changed minds. I had lost faith in the concept of a linear nonfiction argument-based book.
Life was just getting too weird. And so I just thought, well, maybe I can write in a
in a really different way. And you know, this book is much straight, it's weirder,
but we live in weirder times. And it uses my own double to go into a hall of mirrors.
And I think that if I had tried to write about the weirdness of now, as if I was outside of it,
and just be like, I'm now going to make an argument about doppelgangers,
no, no, who would want to read that? Like what's fun is to read about a hurricane from inside its eye.
Oh, I love that. I love that. And to explore, yeah, what does this mean? What does this word
mean? And to explore the hall of mirrors from inside the hall of mirrors, like to join you right
there and to like try to get out, try to get out, you know, you got to start inside.
Do you have any belief that that project can change minds more than the linear argumentative
essay can? You know, I have found that like I've, I've, I have received so many really
beautiful responses to this book of people who are grateful to have a kind of a map
of, you know, this dynamic with the mirror world where we're defining ourselves against
one another and projecting everything we can't stand about ourselves onto them, you know,
and then feeling pure because we are not them. And you know, I think, you know, even something,
having a term like the mirror world, I have found like all a writer can do, I always see my role,
it's it as helping people read the news better. I know this as a sort of a strange like a job
I've assigned, but to myself, but like, I don't, I don't have grand ambitions about what books can
do on their own. But I do think that that we can provide a little bit of orientation and some
language, right? Like, like with a shock doctrine, I gave people some terms to describe what happens
when we're in a state of shock, and people try to take advantage of it. They try to push through a
preexisting wish list, right? And so whenever there's a disaster, people, I start hearing people say,
well, it's, it's the shock doctrine, it's they're, they're doing disaster capitalism. And I think,
okay, I helped people just get oriented a little more quickly. It's not nothing,
you know, like I, yeah, that's, that's all I can do. I think there are more, there's more
that we can do that are not books that mostly involve organizing with one another in the real
world. Yeah. Well, but to create a piece of language that can help people understand the
world more quickly is a powerful thing to do. It's as you say, it's maybe a small contribution in the,
in the overall world of language, right? Or, or of our concepts, but it, it does give people
a new verb almost a new way of relating. I want to return to that point of organizing,
because I obviously believe that strongly as well. But the online world, I'm curious
how you feel about it, because there's a, there's a, just a little aside early in the book, where
you say something like, oh, I dismissed that as happening just online and not in the real world.
You know, I was so naive back then we were all naive enough to still say things like that.
And what's weird to me is I lately have found myself saying, oh, that's just happening online
more. You know, I've, I've been on the internet my entire life, literally since I was, you know,
very young. I was obsessed with the internet with the computer world and like dwelled there.
And now over the last couple of years, I've been like, I want to be on the computer as little as
possible. I want to go look at a fucking tree. I want to go like, you know, be, do comedy with
people in a room. I want to meet people face to face. I like, I hate zoom meetings. I want to,
like, I will go 45 minutes to meet you in person, you know? That's just been my own,
my own orientation. And yet we do at the same time live in a world where you can't say, oh,
that's just Twitter or you can't, I'm not sure. How do you feel about it?
I mean, I think like you, I am drawn to the real to the embodied spaces. You know, I live in an
incredibly beautiful part of the world in, in, in coastal British Columbia, where there are many
trees to spend time with. And, and, you know, it is really literally grounding. And I don't think
that I could do the kind of work that I do if I wasn't able to balance it out with a hike in the
forest or some time on the water. And since this book came out, like being in rooms full of other
people has felt incredibly nourishing after so much time away. And I think this is how we
keep each other sane in these, in, in these very vertiginous times. We are creatures of narrative,
like I said, and we, we do that work together, you know, we make sense of the world together.
And I don't think we can do it just in a zoom meeting. I think there's something
irreplaceable about doing it with one another. And so I, the way I try to use social media is
as a way to get people off social media. So like, come on over, you know,
yeah, join the picket line and, you know, and, and, and go to the rally and come to this meeting
and come to this event and go to this concert and read this book, you know, and, you know, get
wherever the work is deeper than whatever the little box Elon Musk has given us, you know,
whatever that little box is or Mark Zuckerberg. So when I see a lot of people using it in that way,
right, to, to, to bring us to more, to, to more deeper work that more fully represents us,
whatever that is. And sometimes it'll be embodied with one another. And sometimes it'll be,
you know, just offline. So that's the way I tend to relate to it.
I really liked that. I, you know, I became well known over the past year for posting from the
Writers Guild picket line quite often. And I was, that was to me, a very beneficial use of social
media because people became connected to our struggle and they were able to offer support and,
and just telling, you know, showing people what was happening was important. But I think it was
really important that I was doing it from the picket line. You know, I was like, here I am
surrounded by other people and you can see what is happening here in the real world. I'm on the
street in front of Netflix and here's hundreds of people around me or we're at a rally, etc.
If I'd been doing that from my bedroom, you know, if that, if that was where the struggle was taking
place, all of us on the internet, it wouldn't, first of all, it wouldn't have won. It wouldn't
have been as powerful, but it also wouldn't have, it wouldn't have mattered. Like the, the connecting
to, you know, the real life physical organizing mattered so much. And when you're doing that
face-to-face, you see how powerful it is to see someone who you're in, you know, struggle with
and you see them face-to-face and you give them a hug and you say, you need some water and you
like have a connection. It's just funny though, because so in all this about return to work,
so many people make fun of bosses for going, oh, the ineffable synergy of being in the office
together and people would make fun of those bosses for requiring people to go back to the office.
And part of me would go, I do kind of believe it though a little bit. Like I do agree, face-to-face
has something irreplaceable. But talking about-
And if nobody wants to go back to their workplaces, it probably means that their workplaces sucked
and, you know, they need to change their workplace culture. And that's another argument for organizing.
But I love that description because, you know, all of these ways, like ways of building doubles
of ourselves, right? Like whether we're optimizing, we're, we're, we're perfecting our brand or we're
I talk about the optimized body as being a kind of doubling, right? Like the idealized form. And this
is, you know, part of what pushed a lot of people over the edge during COVID was this idea that they
had a strong body, a strong immune system, so they didn't need to worry about other people.
And they didn't, you know, they didn't have to think about being in this enmeshed, you know,
world of other people. Where they see their kids as their little mini-mes, their little doppelgangers,
but all of it is about the self as opposed to building collective power. And, you know, when,
when, when we are trying to, to face huge collective problems as individuals, that's when we feel
most powerless, right? And we feel ashamed, you know, because we can't seem to make ends meet,
despite the fact that we're working so hard or we're carrying this debt, you know, or we have
this terrible boss. And the, the power of the demonstration, you know, and this is really
where the book ends, quoting my friend, Keyanga Yamada Taylor, who, who teaches history at Princeton,
and also quoting the late, great John Berger about the power of the demonstration is not
just that you demonstrate to those in power and Netflix or wherever that there's a lot of you,
it's that you demonstrate to one another that you are not alone, that you are, that, that what felt
individual, like an individual crisis for you, because you couldn't pay the bills,
is actually a collective crisis. It's actually a crisis for your boss when, when everybody gets
together and withholds their labor or withholds their rent, you know, in a, in a, in a, in a tenants
union, or withholds their debt payments in a debtor's union. So that's, that's why we need to
get over ourselves, right? That, that is why, why I'm grateful to my doppelganger, because
I think I care, like all of us, I cared too much about my own image. I who the hell cares, you
know, so people confuse me with somebody else. And that's that I take that as a message to just get
over myself and reach towards other people, build collective power.
Oh, I love that. It makes me think of this thought that I've had recurringly over the past couple
years, which is that when you're face to face with other people, they see you in a way that you
can't control. I think about this as a stand-up comedian who I perform live in front of other
people and I watch other stand-up comedians. And when I think about how the audience regards you
on stage, they're looking right at you. You're, you're exposed in front of them. You can try to
put up whatever front you want. And a lot of people can put up a front quite well. But the
audience is gaze always pierces to something that you don't control, you know, that I feel that
people are able to, you know, when we're present for each other, we see each other in this sort of
like deeper, uncontrollable way. And maybe that's why it's a relief to be in person, because we,
you know, on, on the internet, it's all artifice, right? It's all, all anybody sees is what I
control. And it's actually helpful to be in a situation where I'm not totally in control. And
then I get, I get seen as a person, which is satisfying and sort of lumpy and weird, even
though it's, I don't have control over, it's a little scary, but it is ultimately so much more,
there's more fucking going on there. Well, they will also do things you can't control, right?
Like, and that's, that's a whole other thing. But it is, it's, I mean, this is the thing about,
I think there's certain things about the tools of technology that are habit forming, you know,
that when you can mute somebody, you know, and just, or just block, like, like, there's something
habit forming about the idea that you can just make inconvenient people disappear. Which, look,
I'm a muter. I admit it. Like when someone's putting me in a bad mood, I'll mute them. I don't
block. It's so much more than the satisfaction. You can't block, but it's so fun to follow someone
and then mute them and be like, they don't know that they're muted. They still think I follow them.
They're still yelling at me and they think I hear them.
But it is, it's a sick thing to take pleasure in. Because when you are in a room with other
people, you realize that you can't turn them off. Like they are going to be, they're all fully human
selves, right? And this is why we need gun control.
I love we're having this very, like, airy philosophical argument about seeing each
other and control and identity and persona and you're like, and that's my policy argument for
an assault weapons ban. Because I want to have a debate. I just don't want it to end that way. You
know what I mean? I love it so much. And this again, it connects to so many things that I've
been thinking about who I am and how I move through the world and what I do. It sounds like
I get too high and I start wigging out about my online identity and stuff. And this is helping me
giving me a framework to think about it, which I think is your goal. So do you have any to bring
us in for a landing here, you know, concrete like steps that you take away from this journey
that you went on with Ms. Wolfe and everything that you learned about the mirror world? Like,
how do we, especially if we talk about those people who are really trapped within it and we
want to like connect back to them? Because I have so many friends who've experienced the pain of
that. I have friends who've lost parents to QAnon who they can't speak to anymore. And to
that mirror world, what do we do? Well, so all the research shows that if somebody is going to
get out of that mirror world, you know, if they're going to get away from Steve Bannon or whoever
it is that they have adopted as a guru, it's going to be somebody who they have a preexisting
relationship with who will have reached them. And like I said, this world is full of grifters.
They're getting fleeced all the time. The stories are changing all the time. They probably have
questions. Some people are too far gone, but there may well be people who are looking for an
off-ramp. And it's not going to be my book that's going to get them. It's going to be a friend from
high school who maybe read my book and had some ideas for how to extend a bridge and find some
common ground. Like I said, maybe I don't like Bill Gates. I don't think he's implanting us with
chips. I just think he's a fucking asshole who made his billions in a horrible way and then is
bad to people and created a propaganda machine about how great he is, where he made his own
Netflix documentary about how he's the smartest guy in the world. Exactly. There's so many reasons
to hate Bill Gates without making anything up. He's mean to his wife. He's an asshole husband,
isn't he? He hangs around with Jeffrey Epstein, if I recall. So I do think that it is worth
extending those bridges, but I don't think we're going to solve this one uncle at a time.
And I do think if you listen to how these right-wing populists are gaining ground,
it's by mixing and matching some true things with some very dangerous and untrue things,
great replacement theory and the immigrants are coming to replace you and teachers are turning
your kids' trends. So they'll take something like a fear of surveillance or rightful suspicion of
Big Pharma and they'll mix and match it with this much more nefarious agenda. So what we can do is
we can take away the true things that they're like, we can take them back and put them to work
in a real progressive project. So I don't think we fight conspiracy culture by just like de-platforming
and content moderation. I'm not saying that there's no role for that, but I think that
Sean Fain, the head of the UAW has done more to fight conspiracy culture just being out there in
his eat the rich t-shirt and saying record profits should mean record contracts and being an actual
left populist with a plan, an organizing plan for how to actually meet people's needs. Because
what conspiracy culture is is a distraction machine. It takes people's anger at elites,
feeling that they're being screwed over and it pivots it towards scapegoats, right?
So the best way to fight it actually is to give people a real economic project that's going to
meet their needs so they are less likely to fall for these counterfeit grifters.
Absolutely right. To say, hey, the feeling that you have is real. There needs to be a fight,
but to actually wage the right fight and don't just pay it lip service, but organize
Marshall to power. I mean, Sean Fain has power in the UAW and he is winning and people can,
hey, don't you feel like you're getting screwed? Everybody says, yes, let's fucking do something
about it rather than selling you bullshit coins. Fuck Joe Biden coins.
He's going after the bosses and that is what they fear most. I mean, there's a reason why
some of the richest people on this planet love a good conspiracy theory. Like, why is Elon Musk,
the single, you know, greatest vector of misinformation right now? Like, if you were
the richest man on the planet on a good day, you would want people distracted too, you know?
You would want people not looking at systems of economic consolidation that allowed you to get
as rich as you are. You would want them talking about the Jews and the CCP and, you know, Anthony
Fauci and the rest of it. It's a distraction machine and it serves elites even though they
claim to be fighting elites like Rupert Murdoch, right? So, we just need to understand this. We
need to do a little mapping, that's all. We need to understand it and then we need to organize
to show the alternative path and then we need to win, which we are starting to do, I think.
Because I think so too. I think so too. And I want to thank you for all of your organizing in
real-world action, right? Because that's how, that's the best way we fight this sort of
fake world is by doing real work. Yes. That is such a beautiful conclusion to this conversation.
Naomi, I'm so thrilled that you came on the show. I can't wait. I'm going to get this book,
an audio book, I think, is going to be for my next month of travel on the road. I can't wait to
listen to it. I hope folks check it out. If you want to pick up a copy, you can get it at our
special bookshop, factuallypod.com, slash books. Naomi, is there anywhere else that people can
follow you or your work? Okay, I guess I'm on. I mean, I can't answer the question.
You're right. You're right. After an hour of talking about Twitter and stuff like that,
you know what? How about this? I have a website, NaomiCline.org, and you can
follow my articles in The Guardian. And you can sign up for my newsletter, which is free.
How's that? That sounds beautiful. And then maybe someone can see you in person
and talk to you about organizing or something like that. They run into you in British Columbia.
Thank you so much. This was such a pleasure. Thank you so much for being here, Naomi.
Well, my God, thank you so much again to Naomi Klein for coming on the show. I hope you love
that conversation as much as I did. If you want to pick up a copy of her book, you can get it
once again at factuallypod.com slash books. That's factuallypod.com slash books. And when you do,
you'll be supporting not just this show, but your local bookstore as well. If you want to support
this show, you can do so at patreon.com slash adam con over five bucks a month gets you every
episode of the show ad free for 15 bucks a month. I will thank you in the credits of the show and
in all of my video monologues. This week, I want to thank Richard McVeigh, Celine Dragon,
Blamo, Michael Frasco, Lee Dotson, Emily Wilson, Sekto Abedin, and God King engineer of Beaverkind.
Really like that username. God King engineer of Beaverkind would love to know what that means.
Send me a message on Patreon. You can message me on Patreon as well if you feel like it.
I want to thank my producers, Tony Wilson and Sam Raubman. Everybody here at Head Gum for
making the show possible. You can find my tickets and tour dates at adamconover.net. Once again,
I'm going to New York, Chicago, Nashville, DC, bunch of other cities as well. Boston,
Portland, Maine, bunch of places. Head to adamconover.net to get those tickets.
Hope to see you there and see you next week on Factually. That was a Head Gum podcast.
