Audio formats have come and gone over time. One may have meant to be a replacement while
another tried to create its own market. But in the early 90s, one new form of physical media
tried to do both. This is the story of Minidisc.
In the early 1980s, Sony's Walkman was a huge success. It revolutionized the way the world
listened to music. It used compact cassettes, which were simple, rugged, and inexpensive enough for
playback on the go. The format offered a lot of flexibility, such as how easy it was to record
cassettes at home. And the Walkman played no small part in the rise of a cultural phenomenon known
as the mixtape. But as successful as Sony was, it also recognized that it couldn't just sit back
and relax. If you ask the public what they think they'll need, you'll always be behind in this
world. Sony founder Akio Morita once said, you'll never catch up unless you think one to 10 years
in advance and create a market for the items you think the public will accept at that time.
Linear tape was a dead end, and Sony knew it.
So in 1986, it kicked off research on a new format. The company reached out to Phillips,
who it had partnered with in the late 70s to create the compact disc. Phillips joined on,
and the two started discussing options. Things turned rocky pretty quickly, though.
Both agreed that a digital format was the way to go, but couldn't agree on what technology to use.
Sony argued that optical media was the future, with its random access nature and the fact that
there was nothing to wear out on the disc itself. Phillips, though, demanded backwards
compatibility with cassettes, citing a large installed base and hesitant record companies.
The two sides couldn't reconcile their differences, so they parted ways. Sony was on its own this time.
What resulted from several years of research was Minidisc. It was small, durable, and recordable.
Everything cassettes were, but better. Minidiscs were about three inches square,
and similar to computer floppy discs, they were fully enclosed to keep the surface of the media
clean. They were read with a laser, just like CDs, and offered high-quality digital sound.
It was Minidisc's rewriteability that really set it apart. It used magneto-optical technology,
where the laser would heat up the surface of the disc so an electromagnet could write the bits of
data. They could be written and rewritten thousands of times with no degradation of sound quality,
a common problem with tape. What's more, audio was written to discs in blocks, but unlike with CDs,
those blocks didn't necessarily have to be in sequence. The disc's table of contents kept track
of them, and players were able to skip around the disc to retrieve the blocks in the right order.
This was possible because a memory buffer was made standard. Data would be read and stored
in the buffer, which allowed for seamless playback as the laser shuttled across the disc from block
to block. But the buffer was also critical to Minidisc's usability as a portable format,
and that it could mitigate skipping if the player was bumped or shaken. A few Minidisc
decks even made creative use of the buffer with a so-called time machine feature, where they would
store the last few seconds of incoming audio even if you hadn't pressed the record button yet.
The result was that you'd never miss recording the beginning of a song.
Even if you hadn't pressed the record button yet. Something that any sort of tape could never touch
Minidisc on was its powerful editing features. Tracks could easily be split up, moved, deleted,
or merged on the fly and instantly. Audio data that wasn't needed any longer was simply marked
as eligible to be written over, just like files on a computer hard drive. If you moved track 3 to
be track 7, for example, the data wouldn't actually change location on the disc. Instead,
the table of contents was simply updated as to the new track order. Mix tapes were now more
customizable than ever before. Because of its small size, though, some compromises had to be made.
Only so many bytes of data could be packed onto its surface, but Sony knew that MDs had to at
least match the runtime of compact discs. Yet the company also prioritized sound quality,
believing it to be another incentive to get consumers to switch from tape.
Sony had quite the dilemma on its hands. It needed to fit a CD's worth of music
at or near CD quality on a disc that was less than a third its size.
What it came up with was an algorithm that would compress the audio. Called Adaptive Transform
Acoustic Coding or ATRAC, it worked by analyzing the sound and throwing out the parts that it
deemed inaudible to listeners. This allowed the audio data to take up only a fraction of the space,
at a quality that Sony determined would be hard for consumers to tell apart from CDs.
Sony had its successor to cassettes. It was smaller, more robust, more flexible,
and sounded better. All the company had to do was get the format to catch on.
In the United States, compact discs had seen decent adoption, but cassettes were still the norm.
The market seemed ripe for disruption.
Minidisc launched at the end of 1992 to great anticipation. It's advertising targeted teenagers
and young adults, the so-called MTV generation, with whom Minidisc would have had the biggest impact.
But the equipment was prohibitively expensive for them, costing upwards of $750. That's a
price tag that audio files could afford, but they snubbed the format because the ATRAC compression
affected the sound quality too much for their discerning taste. Sales were slow, and critics
declared that Minidisc would turn out to be a flop. The biggest threat to Minidisc, though,
was a ghost from Sony's past. After they had parted ways, years earlier, Philips continued
its own research, eventually partnering with Panasonic's parent company, Matsushita.
And just a few months before Minidisc's launch, they unveiled digital compact cassette, or DCC.
Sony's worst fears came to haunt it again, a decade after its Betamax videotape lost out to VHS.
It had the makings of another format war on its hands.
DCC was a compelling medium in its own right. While it also used audio compression,
DCC tapes offered more capacity than Minidisc, so the resulting sound quality was a bit better.
It had a table of contents too, so listeners could skip between tracks with just a button push.
But its defining feature was that the media was based on tape, and its players were backwards
compatible with analog cassettes. Consumers could upgrade to DCC, but still listen to their existing tapes.
The recording industry was skeptical of Minidisc. It had been battling Sony's other new media,
digital audio tape, since the late 80s. It feared widespread piracy due to Dat's ability to perfectly
copy CD audio. We're very afraid of the possibility of cottage industry, because
the copying will be so accurate. The fidelity would be, well, actually, it's a clone. It's not a copy.
It's exactly like the original Compact Disc. While Dat had ultimately failed in the consumer
market in the early 90s, record labels were just as concerned with Minidisc's easy and powerful
recording features. Industry executives also worried about confusing consumers with another new
optical format. In 1992, the Compact Disc was already a decade old, but in the U.S. and many
other countries, its adoption rate was still relatively low, about 30%. But the format had
been responsible for the bulk of the industry's profits, and Minidisc represented a potential
threat to CD's growth. DCC looked like a safer option. Recording labels gravitated towards it
because of its backwards compatibility, and also because it could be clearly perceived as the
successor to cassettes. There were also unspoken concerns about Minidisc licensing. In an interesting
twist, both Sony and Philips were responsible for it. The two shared patents around optical media,
stemming back to their joint development of the Compact Disc. Minidisc made use of some of the
same technology, so Philips had to get involved, though it said it would leave the actual licensing
process and conditions up to Sony. This made the music industry a bit nervous, since both
companies already held control over the Compact Disc. If Minidisc succeeded in replacing tape,
they'd jointly have the majority of influence over the consumer audio market as a whole.
With DCC, while Philips would still be involved, Matsushita could act as a counterbalance.
This had never been a concern with Compact Cassettes, because while they had been developed
by Philips back in the 1960s, licensing the technology was free of charge. That had come
about incidentally due to Sony. In 1963, Philips realized that it needed cassettes to succeed in
Japan in order to gain acceptance worldwide and defeat a rival tape format made by Grundig.
Sony was known as a tough negotiator, and the company managed to hammer out an agreement that
gave it free licensing. After signing the deal, though, Philips discovered its error. If other
potential cassette manufacturers found out Sony wasn't paying anything, they wouldn't want to either.
And while it was less than enthusiastic about Minidisc, the music industry wasn't fully trusting
of Philips either. Pirated music CDs had started to enter the market, and there were concerns
that Philips was being a bit lax in its licensing to CD manufacturers. Labels also became upset over
an October 1992 announcement that Philips was working on consumer rewritable CD technology,
targeted for release in 1996. These, of course, would come to be known as CDRWs.
Record labels started to draw battle lines around the two newcomers. Sony had cleverly
acquired CBS Records in 1987, not just as a way to diversify its corporate portfolio,
but also to bolster its consumer electronics business. CBS had a roster of best-selling artists
like Bruce Springsteen, Cindy Lauper, Mariah Carey, The Beastie Boys, and Michael Jackson.
And this gave Sony tremendous leverage. Naturally, the company was inclined to release titles from
its catalog on Minidisc, but when it tried to court other labels, it was given a chilly reception.
Ultimately, only EMI came on board. In comparison, Matsushita owned MCA Records
and Philips had Polygram, so they had their own stable of popular artists to compete with Sony.
And as DCC seemed like a safer bet, other recording industry heavyweights joined on,
like Warner and Universal. Sony's worst fear was becoming reality. With most music labels choosing
to back DCC, it was starting to look like Sony was going to fail again. Except the format war
was a non-starter. After a solid initial response, DCC sales dropped off dramatically.
A manufacturing defect in the first batches of pre-recorded tapes caused DCC to stumble out of
the gates in Japan, delaying its launch by a month. Worldwide, it wasn't growing any faster than
Minidisc, and as time went on, sales continued to decline. The economics of both formats simply
didn't make sense for the majority of consumers. Compact discs were reasonably priced at about
$15, but pre-recorded MDs and DCCs weren't much cheaper. Blank media for either was dramatically
more expensive than cassette tapes, and as predicted, the new technologies caused consumers
to become overwhelmed and apathetic. Analog cassettes were cheap, ubiquitous, and most importantly,
good enough, so both newcomers suffered. Sony continued to make refinements to its format.
Newer versions of the Atract codec offered better audio quality and prices of blank media fell.
The company cut prices on players and recorders and launched new marketing campaigns.
Market share grew, but slowly. It was becoming obvious that pre-recorded music was going to
remain only a small part of Minidisc sales. Despite continuing to court record labels,
only a few hundred titles were released. Sony wanted the format to succeed worldwide,
and being a giant company, it continued to throw money and resources at the technology.
At the time, Philips was only slightly smaller, but unlike Sony, it also had chronic financial
struggles. It had taken on some big acquisitions over the years, but they weren't proving profitable,
and technologies it developed, like the V2000 video cassette, quickly found themselves beaten by
rival formats. The company brought on new CEO Cor Boonstra to clean up the mess,
and he found that Philips simply couldn't continue to subsidize DCC.
It was clear that the format's time had run out, so in October 1996, after four tough years,
DCC was quietly discontinued.
Minidisc had won the format war that never was. But it was still facing an interesting dichotomy,
because while it was slow going in North America and Europe, there was one country where MD was king.
The music industry in Japan works very differently than in the West.
For a variety of reasons, purchasing copies of music has always been an expensive affair.
A CD that sells for $12 in the US can go for the equivalent of $30 in Japan.
And while consumers in that country generally have a healthy amount of disposable income,
it's still costly to collect albums. In the early 80s, music rental shops
started to pop up as a way to fill this gap. You could rent music from chains like Gio,
Rekudo, or Tsutaya for the equivalent of $2 a day. These stores soon became wildly popular.
For the price of buying one CD, you could rent a dozen. And as one might expect,
many people would make copies of the music they rented.
Fearing a loss of revenue, the domestic music industry tried to get rental shops declared
illegal. It lobbied the Japanese diet, but found itself going up against electronics manufacturers
who had been benefiting from the increased sales of blank media and recording devices.
The manufacturers were effective in their lobbying, and in 1985, the government amended
Japan's copyright law in a way that ended up striking a balance between the two.
Copying rented music for personal use was declared legal, but rental shops had to pay
royalties to the music labels and a fee was attached to sales of blank media.
American record labels hated the arrangement, but there was little they could do about it.
The way the Japanese consumed music had fundamentally shifted, whether the labels liked it or not.
Because of this, Minidisc became an instant hit in Japan. Consumers found it an easy,
inexpensive, and high-quality alternative to tape just as Sony had hoped. The technology
was licensed to other companies such as Sharp, JVC, and even Matsushita, which further increased
sales. And while blank MDs weren't nearly as cheap as tapes at first, they still proved to be
good value over the cost of purchasing a CD. The irony of being both a leading member of the music
industry but also the manufacturer of a popular tool for piracy wasn't lost on Sony. It knew what
its new format would be used for. One small concession came in the form of the Serial Copy
Management System, or SCMS. It placed limits on digital copies from one format to another to
block multiple generations of perfect quality pirated recordings. Some governments required
manufacturers of digital audio equipment to include it, like Sony's Minidisc and Philips DCC.
This came about from the recording industry's battle with DAT in the United States. In Japan,
the net effect was that listeners were more likely to make copies from CDs they rented themselves
instead of making a third-generation recording from a friend, and thus the record labels would
get their cut of the licensing fees. As another way to combat rental copying in Japan, a few
companies launched music kiosks in the late 90s. These were usually located in places like convenience
stores and held a library of the latest singles and popular songs. You'd insert a blank Minidisc
and the kiosk would copy your selection to it in just a few seconds. Songs cost between 250 and 500
yen depending on how recent they were. And despite the prevalence of CD rental services,
these kiosks were poised to become commonplace, with one option, the music pod from VSync,
planning to have 6,000 machines located across the country by the end of 2000.
Over the years, Minidisc would become a dominant format in Japan. By 1998, sales of Minidisc players
even overtook those of CD players. It may not have become the worldwide replacement for cassettes
that Sony wanted, but it certainly had momentum at home.
In its efforts to spur Minidisc adoption, Sony packed in as many features as it could.
Players and recorders came in all sorts of form factors. The first Minidisc recorder was actually
a portable unit, the Sony MZ1. It was a bit bulky, weighing one and a half pounds, but it featured
both analog and digital inputs and outputs, along with those impressive editing capabilities.
It was a great showcase for the promise that the format held, but if Sony wanted Minidisc to be a
true replacement for cassettes, it also needed to offer home recording decks. And over the years,
it produced quite a number of them. Some home decks were simple one-disk units meant for
straightforward recording and playback. They offered the full complement of editing features,
but these tasks were a bit cumbersome due to their basic buttons and controls.
Higher-end decks offered more features, like a PS2 port for connecting a computer keyboard
to make editing and entering track names easier. There were also a range of combination units
that incorporated a CD player and offered one-touch dubbing from CD to Minidisc.
A few of these could even do so at high speed, two or four times faster than real-time.
Boomboxes and shelf stereo systems were a logical extension for the format as well.
Some shelf systems even offered features the home decks couldn't, such as the ability to
set a timer to start recording from sources like radio stations. A few models offered not only a
multi-CD changer, but also a multi-MD changer. This was a nod to the Japanese market. As you could
load in stacks of CDs and blank Minidiscs, then with a button press, the system would copy them
all on its own. And at least one system also featured a special input that could control
a portable player for doing automatic Minidisc to Minidisc copies in the analog domain,
as a way to bypass the limits imposed by SCMS. A number of manufacturers also offered Minidisc
stereos for cars, with some automakers even including them as a factory option. Most of
these only played back MDs, but there were a few models that also had the capability of recording.
They could make copies of discs in a connected CD changer or record from the radio. You could
be listening to a favorite show while driving, then park your car and keep recording on a timer
even after you turned off the ignition and walked away. It was a very narrow use case,
but just goes to show the lengths that Sony and its licensees went to in order to grow the popularity
of the format. But clearly the most popular form factor for Minidisc hardware was portable decks.
Some had the ability to record like the original MZ1, while others were for playback only.
Recorders typically offered the same capabilities as home decks, including editing,
and sometimes even had additional functionality, like microphone inputs. As new models came out,
they got smaller and battery life continued to improve, with some players lasting for a dozen
hours or more on a single AA cell. Eventually, portable players and recorders shrank to be
barely larger than the Minidisc inside them. There were a few other uses that Sony tried
to press Minidisc into service for over the years, but with mixed results. Because of its random
access rewritable nature, it seemed to be a good fit for computer data storage.
But drives could only use special MD data media, which at $30 each were much more expensive than
regular audio blanks. Performance was poor at only 150 kilobytes per second, the same as a
single-speed CD-ROM drive. When iOmega's ZipDisk format launched in 1994, it almost immediately
rendered MD data obsolete. The first generation of ZipDisk held 100 megabytes, less than MD
data's 140, but it was significantly faster at up to 1.4 megabytes per second. And more importantly,
the media was a lot cheaper at $10 per disk. iOmega was also able to negotiate deals with
computer manufacturers to have its drives built into many models, giving it an installed base
Sony could only dream of. A few manufacturers, such as Yamaha, Tascam, and Sony itself,
released multi-track audio recorders meant for home music studio use. These offered a solid step
up in sound quality over the typical cassette based multi-track and had the same powerful
non-linear editing capabilities as home recorders. While they used the expensive MD data media,
they still saw brief popularity in the mid-90s, until computer-based multi-track recording
became affordable. But one unique Minidisk recorder proved very adept at its niche role.
The Sony MDCC-2000 was a four-track deck specifically designed for capturing courtroom
proceedings. It featured two optical drives so recording could continue uninterrupted while a
disk was swapped. And perhaps most importantly, it used ordinary inexpensive MD audio media.
By the mid to late 90s, portable MD recorders found themselves popular among concert bootleggers.
Their small size made them discreet to carry, and their good battery life, high sound quality,
and shock protection were all welcome features. Many recorders included inputs for stereo microphones
and their digital nature meant that copies suffered from minimal generation loss,
even when recorded through an analog connection. In time, a number of concert recordings would
start showing up on websites like archive.org, listing Minidisk as the source.
One final group was much bigger and jumped on board with the format straight away.
Even through the early 90s, radio stations continued to make heavy use of magnetic tape.
Those that used CDs for music playback still relied on tape for other purposes,
like advertisements or other pre-recorded programs. But tape was time-consuming to edit and degraded
with repeated use. And while computer-based audio editing did exist at the time, it was
prohibitively expensive for all but the largest stations. Minidisk's powerful editing features
made quick work of putting programs together, and reporters in the field could use portable units to
record interviews. A number of professional quality Minidisk recorders ultimately made it to market
and saw a quick adoption in radio worldwide.
This variety of models was a big factor in cementing Minidisk as a dominant format in Japan.
And in the late 1990s, something curious was happening in Europe. MD sales were suddenly
improving. After years of production and refinement, prices on hardware had fallen to levels that
younger people could finally afford. In June of 1999, Sony started a European
ad campaign that helped further growth. In the region, the company had sold a million players
in its first five years, but it only took from 1998 to 1999 to sell another million.
And some previous record label holdouts began offering pre-recorded MDs,
spurred on partly by the positive sales outlook, but also by so-called attractive terms offered
by Sony's disc manufacturing plant in Austria. While the outlook for Minidisk was positive in
Europe, the actual sales numbers didn't pose any threat to CDs. The typical pre-recorded disc
only sold a few thousand copies at most, and labels were still conservative with their releases.
By July of 1999, EMI had only issued 70 titles. The format saw a similar uptick in
interest in North America, but in even smaller quantities. By the end of the decade, only a
million Minidisk decks had been sold in the US, about a third of what had been managed in Europe.
And while the threat of DCC was long behind it, as the millennium was coming to a close,
Minidisk faced a new competitor.
Around the turn of the century, digital music took a new direction. The MP3 audio compression
format allowed high-quality music files to take up just one tenth of the space as that of a CD,
and the increasing capacity of hard drives prompted listeners to store those files right on their
computers. Peer-to-peer internet file sharing services such as Napster and Limewire helped
drive this shift, and portable MP3 players like the creative Nomad and Diamond Rio looked to
capitalize on it. By connecting to users' PCs directly, one could quickly and easily copy
over downloaded MP3 files with just a few clicks. But those players, while fairly compact, were
severely limited by a small amount of storage. The players themselves were affordably priced at
about $200, but only featured 32 to 64 MB of memory, enough for a couple dozen songs at mediocre
quality. Some offered expandable storage, but memory cards were very expensive. A 128 MB upgrade
retailed for almost the same price as the player itself.
Sony recognized the opportunity. Blank Minidisks only came in 60, 74, or 80-minute varieties,
but prices had fallen dramatically to as low as about $2 a disc. If Sony could make Minidisks as
easy to manage from computers as MP3 players, then it might be able to secure a foothold for
itself in the changing digital landscape. So in the middle of 2001, Sony launched NetMD.
It brought a line of recorders that connected to PCs through the increasingly common USB interface.
The included software allowed owners to manage their music files and write them to Minidisks
just by dragging and dropping. To extend the runtime of those discs, two new recording modes
were added, offering up to 320 minutes of music, though at the expense of sound quality.
Sony went all out with NetMD, even building Minidisk drives into some models of its VIO computers.
And with recorders offering easy copying of music to inexpensive media,
all the pieces were in place to get Minidisk to finally take off in the West.
That is, until an old friend launched a revolutionary product of its own. In October 2001,
Apple introduced the iPod, an MP3 player with an intuitive interface and simple design.
It integrated with iTunes, the company's own music organization program, and allowed files
to be copied at high speed through a Max Firewire interface. But instead of removable media,
the iPod had an internal 5 gigabyte hard drive, which Apple touted with the slogan,
A Thousand Songs in Your Pocket. Apple had one-upped Sony in spectacular fashion.
The two companies had worked on various projects for decades. Apple frequently used Sony parts
in its products, like the floppy drive in the original Macintosh and Trinitron tubes in its
monitors. Sony had even designed and manufactured one of the company's first laptops, the PowerBook
100, because of its expertise in miniaturizing components. Yet the iPod and later the iTunes
music store proved wildly popular, and ultimately sparked a huge decline in physical audio media.
It was the iPod that ended up becoming the Walkman for the next generation.
But Sony gave it one final go. In 2004, it launched HighMD, a major upgrade to the format
that boosted the storage capacity of a disk to one gigabyte. This six-fold increase in size
allowed much more music to be stored, and also brought with it support for uncompressed audio,
just like a CD. HighMD recorders were backwards compatible with original mini-discs and featured
the same PC connectivity as NetMD units. The majority of HighMD devices were portables made
by Sony, but Ankyo produced a few decks for use with shelf stereo systems.
And with HighMD, Sony tried again to push the mini-disc format for data storage. The new media
could share its capacity with audio data. You could record some music to a HighMD blank and use
the rest of the space to store files. But zip drives had evolved to store 750 megabytes,
CD burners were common, recordable DVDs were gaining popularity, and inexpensive USB flash drives
were on the horizon. There simply wasn't much of a place for HighMD data. And while the format
finally offered the pristine sound quality audio files had originally demanded,
it was a decade too late. The new discs were economical, about $10 each,
but the world had simply moved on to a more computer-centric music experience.
Mini-disc had hung on far longer than it needed to, but eventually even the loyal Japanese market
shifted its focus away from the format. Sony stopped shipping portable recorders in September 2011,
and by March 2013, it sold its last Mini-disc player. The company said it would continue to
offer repairs in blank media for a while, but 20 years after Mini-disc launched, it was the end.
While mass market use of Mini-disc has ended, there's been a renewed interest in it as a
retro format. Commercial disc pressing plants have long since shut down, but a new cottage
industry has sprung up in its place. Starting in the late 2010s, independent artists began offering
their releases on MD, largely centered around the hip-hop, vaporwave, and future funk genres.
Using small fleets of net-MD decks, companies specializing in retro audio media would record
the music to ordinary blank discs. Sometimes these were new old stock, but more often,
they were one specific model of blank imported from Japan, the only new Mini-discs still being
manufactured. Album artwork could be printed directly onto the discs, and they'd be packaged
up with J-cards into custom, clear cases. Quantities of each album release are typically
limited, usually around 50 copies. Yet they often sell out quickly. Buyers are as equally
interested in the music as they are in the retro futurism of the format. For many, it's their
first time using Mini-disc, kicking off a new, albeit very small, generation of fans. The trend
will naturally have its limits, of course. The only players available to buy are used ones,
and someday Sony will finally stop making new blank media. But until that happens,
at least the format has found some newfound appreciation for a while.
Most people, though, look at Mini-disc and see a format that failed. Failed to see mass adoption,
failed to quickly and definitively replace any other medium. Failed to become a household name,
with a player in every boombox, car dashboard, or pocket. But perhaps that's not the only way to
look at it. Perhaps just hanging in there and winning small victories is enough. Mini-disc was
the right format at the right time. In the early 90s, analog tape had worn out its welcome, but
computer-based audio just wasn't ready yet. Sometimes between major changes in technology,
bridges are needed to ease the transition. Not everyone will need to use them, but to those
that do, they're indispensable. It didn't become the format Sony wanted, but as a way to ease us
into our new world of online music, Mini-disc was a success.
