Hello and Hare Krishna, it is Ryan here, aka Ramananda Das by some, and we are very fortunate
on today's Chasing Reality podcast to be joined by Professor Dennis Noble from the University
of Oxford. I very much enjoyed his writings over the last few years since I've come to
know about him, taken great inspiration. In a sense I wish I'd only, my only wish is
I'd known about his thoughts earlier in my scientific career before I got out of working
in the lab. I'm looking forward to hearing what he has to say today. He's the writer
of two main books from 2006, The Music of Life and 2016, Dance to the Tune of Life, Biological
Relativity. I very much recommend you pick them up because they're a great read, very
easy to read and very, very important books. So thank you very much, Professor Dennis Noble
for joining me today on this Chasing Reality podcast. I'm actually very honoured. I've
been following your work closely over the last few years. I've read both of your books,
The Music of Life in 2006 and 2016, Biological Relativity, Dance to the Tune of Life. And
I found them very refreshing. Thank you. I noticed that you're part of a group online
called The Third Way of Evolution. Exactly so. And I just wanted you to tell me a little
bit about this, maybe in terms of the history, the biology, and why do we need, what is it
and why do we need such a thing? We shouldn't need it at all. That's a short answer, but
there's a longer answer, obviously, because there's a long history to this. And I'm afraid
it goes all the way back to 1883. Charles Darwin died in 1882, so he would not have
known what happened very soon after his death. Because in 1883, August Weissmann, a great
German geneticist, well, I describe him as a geneticist. Actually, of course, genetics
and certainly not DNA was not known in the way that we know it today, but he concerned
with inheritance. And August Weissmann took Darwin's ideas, and he was shocked by parts
of Darwin's book, The Origin of Species. His shock was that Darwin, in about 12 places
in the origin of species, accepts Lamarck's ideas on the inheritance of acquired characteristics.
August Weissmann was of the view that there is no way in which the body, the soma, could
influence the germline. That idea is what we now call Weissmann's barrier. Now, it often
thought that Darwin must have agreed with that. He certainly did not, because not only
in The Origin of Species does he refer, in 12 places, to accepting Lamarck's idea, he
also developed a theory for how it could happen. It's in one of the later books, The
Domestication of Animals and Plants. And what he said was, I think there must be tiny particles
that go through the fluids of the body and can influence the germline. He called them
gemules. His gemules are what we now call exosomes. We know that exosomes go straight
down to the germline. The DNA in them, the RNA in them, can get incorporated into the
fused egg and sperm. It can get incorporated into the genome. That's all been demonstrated.
Actually by one of the third-way scientists, Corrado Spadafore, in Rome. Now, why am I giving
you this little bit of history over, what is it now, 130 years old? Because it's crucial.
Weissmann's idea was never debated with Darwin, because after Darwin passed away a year before
he presented it in a great lecture. But it formed the cornerstone of the main theory of
evolutionary biology today, which is called the modern synthesis, sometimes also called
neo-Darwinism. And for those who don't know very much about the academic aspects of biology,
a good way to sum that up is that it is what Richard Dawkins describes in The Selfish Gene.
Now, we've known actually for a long time that many aspects of that idea must be wrong.
70 years ago, at least, Barbara McClintock, who was working on plants, who was actually working on
Indian corn, showed that under stress, the plant could transfer bits of genetic material from one
chromosome to another. The plant was effectively saying, of course, I don't mean consciously,
but it was effectively saying, I'm under stress. Let's see what happens if I just shuffle my cards.
Let's see if I can get a different solution to the problem of responding to the stress.
And she was told in 1957, I think it was, that her discovery should not be referred to in papers
she was publishing because nobody believed her. 1983, I think it was, at the age of 81,
she won the Nobel Prize for what we now call mobile genetic elements. Now, the reason I'm
saying all of this is that actually we have known that there are major breaks in relation to the
Weissman barrier for a very long time. So why have people not admitted it? You won't find what I've
just described in most of the textbooks of evolutionary biology. You certainly won't find
the way in which DNA can pass from sperm to egg. And indeed, egg cells can also pick up DNA
from the fluids of the body and RNAs, which control the DNA. The reason why we formed the
third way of evolution website, which now has something like 60 or 70 senior people,
all of them published books and major articles on evolutionary biology, is that as a group,
we found it very strange to be faced with this situation in which it's been known for a long
time that the simple assumptions of neo-dialogism or what's called the modern synthesis cannot be
sufficient on their own. Yet you don't find this taught in schools. You don't find it in the textbooks.
And until recently, it was also quite dangerous even to go public, as I've done now for more than
12 years, with doubts and serious doubts about the modern synthesis and what we now call neo-dialogism.
So there was no other way to make sure that other academics and the public know that there's a very
substantial group of us who wish to see research on evolutionary biology open up to the new trends,
which are very important, but which are also old trends. Because as I said, they were found many
years ago, they've been ignored. Thank you. That's a very comprehensive answer to my question.
It's something that I feel very struggling about because I was taught through those textbooks,
which you're talking about, and nowhere did I see anything like this.
No, that's right. And bring that point out, because I actually think things will only
change when the textbooks change. Well, that's one of my questions, actually, Dennis.
How do textbooks change? I'm a bit naive to this process of how academia interacts with
the process of teaching outside in schools and colleges and universities. How does that
happen? Is there a particular process or is it just whatever seems in vogue gets picked up by?
Yeah, that's a very good and very deep question.
Of course, if what you're doing is advancing science in what I might call an incremental way,
it's not too difficult for textbook writers to adjust and edit their textbooks,
as they do every five to ten years. So if what you're doing relates already to existing well
established ideas, then I think it's gradual and it's not too difficult. It takes time,
of course, for the textbooks to catch up. I think that's reasonable because some of the
developments that are novel just peter out, but this certainly hasn't petered out. So that's not
the explanation. I think the explanation is a social and cultural one and it is this.
Maybe the people who might listen to this podcast will not know the nature of the situation in
the United States, but let me just briefly describe it because I work in the United States as well as
here in the UK quite frequently. I collaborate with a lot of United States people.
The debate over evolution over there is hotly contested in a way that we don't really see
here in Europe. It's contested, of course, by very strongly fundamentalist Christians.
Now, I respect their faith. I have no quarrel with that. What I find very difficult to understand
is their position in relation to science because apart from strongly fundamentalist groups here
in the United Kingdom and perhaps also in Europe, there are very few people now who seriously challenge
the general theory of evolution. That is that organisms are developed from other organisms.
You don't find the Archbishop of Canterbury questioning that idea. You don't find the
leaders of other churches and religious groups challenging that idea in a serious way. In the
United States, you do. I know Middle America as well as the East and West Coast and you'll be
surprised the extent to which just talking with ordinary people in relation to this question of
whether they think we have or have not evolved from other animals are very large numbers who
think that cannot possibly be true. Now, I think that puts the evolutionary biologists in the United
States in a very particular social situation which we need to understand, which is that many of them
have also used evolutionary biology to attack religion. Now, that's their right. That's fine.
Again, I have no particular quarrel with that, though I wouldn't wish to be involved with that
myself. But the consequence is that the stakes are very high. This is a very hot issue in the
United States. It's not a hot issue in the same way in Europe. Now, it's not a surprise therefore
that when I organized a meeting on new trends in evolutionary biology at the Top Academy of
Science here in the United Kingdom and the Top Academy of Humanities and Social Sciences here,
that is the Royal Society in the British Academy, three years ago in 2016, I received the information
that evolutionary biologists in the United Kingdom were worried about this meeting because they had
received messages from colleagues in the United States saying, this is a disaster. How can a
meeting like this be organized by somebody who openly challenges neo Darwinism in his lectures?
That's me. Now, this I think gives us an insight in what is going on. It is not just a matter of the
science. This is a matter of a very hot and lively debate that is still occurring in the United States
and which I think has polarized the issue to the point of which it seems to me the writers of the
textbook simply don't risk, if that's the right way to put it, putting those new trends out.
There's a kind of community of people who defend the fortress, if I might put it that way, of neo
Darwinism. I've never in my long career in science encountered anything like it. I've had controversies
in my own field of physiological science, but I've never encountered a situation where
there's a kind of dogmatism in reverse. The dogmatism here is that the neo Darwinist synthesis
must be protected, must be regarded as absolute because we've told the religious right in the
United States that it is absolute and absolutely certain. Now, that's my amateur sociological
analysis of what has gone on, and I think it's not, therefore, just a coincidence that the
major opposition to a meeting here in the United Kingdom, which incidentally was very successful,
highly attended and with a very good publication that came out from it. Not a coincidence that
the opposition came from the United States. There is a fear there, I think, on the part of
standard evolutionary biologists that if they admit that they were wrong, the religious right
will be, well, to put a usual phrase on it, laughing down their beards. Now, I think they're
wrong to think that. Science is science and it should advance according to what the evidence
shows. But there is my somewhat amateur sociological analysis of what I think has happened, but I've
direct experience of it because, as I said, I live and work sometimes in the United States with
colleagues there. I know middle America where all of this is rampant. And I therefore know that I'm
partly right, whether it's the whole explanation, I really can't say. Thank you. That's very,
very helpful. And the way you looked at that from the standpoint of the European
socio-political environment versus the United States, it raises a question in me,
which is that I can imagine, even in that kind of an environment where you're holding on,
where someone's holding on to the neo-Darwinist viewpoint very strongly, small changes could
be accepted, perhaps. So my question is, what is the fear? The fear must be coming from something
that seems like a radical shift that's needed. And so I was wondering what it is that's being
proposed that could be put in place instead of neo-Darwinism or maybe something tagged onto it?
Well, these are very good questions.
First of all, it is true to say that neo-Darwinists in the United States have, of course,
accepted quite a lot of the developments and changes that have occurred and which show that the
modern synthesis or neo-Darwinism is not itself sufficient as it was formulated roughly 70 years
ago. So you're quite right. There are many biologists in the United States who would say,
okay, we have extended the theory. Isn't that sufficient for you? So your question is a very
good one. Why do I think it is not sufficient? I think that is best explained by asking the
question, how has neo-Darwinism been presented to the public? I'm not talking now about academics,
talking at academic meetings, what I just said would be readily accepted. Yes, we've extended
the theory. We've added this. We've added that. No problem. I'm talking about how it is perceived
by the general public. And sadly, the books that have the great influence there are Richard Dawkins,
The Selfish Gene, and Dan Danette's Darwin's Dangerous Idea, both of which give no hint whatsoever
that these changes have occurred and these developments have occurred. That is the problem.
So I find that when I discuss with particularly, no longer amongst scientists,
amongst scientists, much of what I say is just, they say, well, what's the problem, Dennis?
You know, all of this is obvious. But with the general public, there's a very different situation.
And not only the general public, incidentally, with people working in the social sciences,
like economics and sociology, who are now using genomics, incidentally, in order to study sociology.
I mean, what they do, of course, is very close to the dangerous idea of, can we characterize
people by their genomes? And can we then start asking the dangerous question, are there good
genomes and bad genomes? And how do you correct the bad ones? I mean, this is highly dangerous.
And we've seen that with the outrage occur, of course, that came from experiments in China
on children and babies to actually change the genome in the embryonic stage or in the earlier
and embryonic stage, which of course, nearly all scientists around the world condemned as
far too dangerous, because of course, it would affect generations to come. Now,
the point I think I'm making here is that the change needs to be in the popular presentation
of evolutionary biology. Moreover, I go further and say that the view that I'm expressing,
which is that the language of neodymium is part of the problem, would produce a view of
evolutionary biology, which is much softer, much more nuanced. Instead of, for example,
genes created as body and mind, that's a direct quote from the selfish gene, I would say,
we control our genes. We are the medium through which our culture, our environment,
our interrelations with other people, with other organisms influence through the,
well, no longer doubted control of the genome. The genome is controlled by the organism itself.
Outside a cell, a DNA sequence can do nothing whatsoever. That's why viruses are not alive.
They've got to go into a cell in order to use the cell's machinery to reproduce. So just taking
that one example, genes created as body and mind, well, it's simply wrong. It's not a matter of
nuancing it. It's incorrect. Moreover, and I'm sure Richard Dawkins would agree with this point,
to attribute selfishness to a piece of a molecule is very odd. You and I could be selfish.
Wish I have that inclination. My poor DNA can't be selfish. And indeed, a few years ago,
I published an article showing that it's actually an empty hypothesis. The only way you could test
selfishness for a sequence in a bit of DNA is to find out whether it succeeds in reproducing better
than its competitors in future generations. So the very term selfish gene, the only way to sort of
ask the question, can we show that this gene is selfish is to find out whether its frequency
in the subsequent generations increases. Now, that may seem obvious. And of course,
to readers of the selfish gene, it does seem obvious. But actually, it's philosophically speaking,
an empty statement. Because what is the experiment you could do to test that idea? You first define
a selfish gene perhaps as the genes that are successful in the future generations increasing
their numbers. But what's the test for that? It is, do they increase their numbers? You can't
have a hypothesis whose main definition of its key component in the hypothesis is the very thing
that would enable you to make a prediction. The prediction can't itself be the definition.
I mean, it's a philosophical point, but it's an obvious one. So I think the difficulty lies,
and this is why I think we need a revolution in our thinking about it. I think the problem lies
in the language that has been used. It's metaphorical. People sometimes criticize me for using
metaphors. I've openly done that with the music of life and the new one dance to the tune of life.
The fact is, though, if you read them carefully and you go towards the end of my book,
the music of life, what I say at the end is this. The reason for introducing that metaphor is to
compare it with the alternative metaphor, that is genes created as body and mind.
What I'm demonstrating is you can let go of your metaphors. You don't have to be taken in by them.
You don't have to believe them. You can use them. Metaphors are there to be used.
What I'm really saying, therefore, is not believe my metaphor rather than somebody else's. It is
remember that metaphors are just metaphors, and you've got to then ask the question,
what do they do? What do they make you think? The best move then is to say,
okay, give up the metaphors and just look at what the facts are. The facts of why
the Third Wave Evolution was formed, because all the people on that website are very concerned
about people ignoring the facts that have been discovered over quite a long period of time,
but which are now accumulating in a very rapid way. What I'm picking up as you're speaking is that
there's a real resurgence of the idea of organisms, the return of the organism,
is the way that I understand it. And instead of the organism is in control. Yes,
yes. And that not entirely so, because obviously, you know, somebody's got cystic fibrosis that
that is a genetic disorder. No question about it. There are certain forms of genetic
change that you can do nothing about other than about have a drug that helps you with coping with
it, possibly also some degree of gene therapy. Obviously, I don't disagree with that. But generally,
the interesting thing is that most changes in the genome don't have much effect. The genome-wide
association studies have shown that the correlations between particular genes and function is not
extremely strong in most cases. You have to accumulate the correlations with a large number
of genes before you arrive at a good possible genetic component. Let me just take one example of that.
Look at athletes and ask, what is it that makes a really good athlete? And you might think, okay,
they've got to have the genes for being good athletes. And I agree with that. Don't disagree
with that. If you've got a cystic fibrosis problem, you certainly won't be a terribly good athlete.
In certain respects, it must be true. It is obviously true. But when you do the analysis,
do you find a few genes that can be able to explain why you've got a top athlete rather
than somebody who couldn't even run a mile? The answer is no. What you find is hundreds of
correlators, and each of them with a fairly small degree of correlation. What does that tell us?
It tells us that we're not, as it were, fully determined in that kind of way. And you can
demonstrate that. There are lovely studies now looking at identical twins. Why do that? Because
they've got the same genome. More or less, there can be a bit of change of genome following the
fusion of egg and sperm. But generally speaking, you can say that identical twins have got
similar genomes. I'm just about to publish a paper reproducing a beautiful picture that was made,
oh goodness me, I think at least 60 years ago now, of two identical twins, one of whom trained
as a weight lifter. The other trained as a runner. Their body physique is totally different.
The runner has got fantastic leg muscles, and he's very thin at the top because he doesn't need
to carry a big weight in his running. That's how he can go fast because he's not loaded up too much.
The weight lifter, my goodness, his arms are so strong, his chest is strong. And by comparison,
his legs, of course, they've got to be moderately strong, but the real strength is up here, of
course. The fact is that what we found there is that when you study the difference, this is
modern studies now, rather than that particular one that was done about 60 years ago, modern studies
of identical twins in relation to athletic performance, exercise-related performance,
show right down at the level of the RNAs that control the genome, the RNAs are different.
Wow. Now that's because somebody decided to become an athlete.
Yes. That's not because his genes made him decide that. The genes they say are the same.
Again, what I'm describing here is facts. When you think about it, fairly obvious.
So again, I'm puzzled by the, apart from my sociological analysis of the big debates in
the United States over evolution, I'm very puzzled by why it is there has been so much
resistance to these very obvious facts. Now, I come to a very interesting fact, but it's a sociological
fact there, not a scientific fact. That was true up to about the time of the Royal Society meeting
in 2016, that there was a huge amount of public resistance gone completely silent.
For the last three years, I've been lecturing all over the place in the United States, in Europe,
in East Asia, almost everywhere. I was for a number of years president of the International
Union of my subject, physiological sciences, and I find that all the oppositions disappeared.
I don't get seriously difficult questions anymore. What I get is, okay, what experiment
should I be doing? Wow, that's very nice. Lovely, isn't it? You see, I'll just give one example,
it was from an experimental biology meeting in the United States. It's huge. This is the
grand jamboree of maybe 10,000. It's a huge number of people from all the biological sciences.
And one of the plenary lecturers gave a lovely lecture on what biochemical changes occur in
muscle during exercise. And he was training rats. See, the rats were either trained to run on tread
mills, or they were not. So he could then look, again, because these were cloned, similar genomes,
he could look at the extent to which the biochemical changes, including, of course, RNAs,
could change as a consequence of exercise in those that were exercising compared to those
that were not. And he found many changes, many biochemical changes. That fits what I said earlier
on about the other modern studies of twins in the case of humans. But these are rats or mice.
I can't remember which now. So I went up to him afterwards and I said, you've got a colony
which is identical genetically with another colony, but the difference is simply the exercise.
Have you thought of breeding from them? Now, initially, the penny didn't drop. He couldn't
see why I was asking that question. And then he suddenly said, my God, do you think that's really
worth doing? Of course, this is landmarkism. This is the idea that if you, you know, the Paul Blacksmith,
you know, uses his arms all the time to hammer the stomach, his iron bits and pieces, would that
pass on to his children? I don't know. I still don't know the answer to that question. But
that person could do it. He could find out whether in animals it works. Now, why doesn't he, first
of all, he didn't even think of it. You see, my God, is that even worth doing? Oh, my goodness,
it's worth doing. There are many examples now of paternal and maternal effects that pass down the
generations. Amongst physiologists, that's not even questioned anymore, is established fact
that there are great transgenerational passings of the lifestyle effecting of the parent,
affecting the propensity to disease and health of the offspring. And we now know some of the
mechanisms, of course. We know, to go back to Darwin, his gemuals idea, we know that there are
little packets. They're so tiny, you can't see them under the light microscope. You need
electron microscopes to see them, that carry information from the soma to the germline. So,
we know that the Weissmann barrier, which is the idea that the germline is sacrosanct and not,
in any way, influenced by the soma, is clearly broken. The Weissmann barrier is no longer a barrier.
So, we've no longer any difficulty in explaining why all of those maternal and paternal effects
get passed down through the generations. What's still, though, an interesting fact is that,
I think, if you put a research grant proposal in, to do the experiment, I suggested to that American
scientist who was giving lecture at the experimental biology. The chances are that people would say,
oh, that's a way out experiment. It's not worth doing. Anyway, we know that Lamar chism is a lot
along rubbish. You see it, so don't even do it. There are fashions in science, of course. There's
no doubt about that, and committees are influenced by that, as much as, of course, by the science
itself. So, this comes back to another reason why we formed the third way. We thought it was very
important to give the message, particularly to young scientists, that it is worth doing these
experiments. Of course, they may not work. Of course, we don't know the answer. That's why you
do them. Yes. Whether it will upset standard evolutionary biology. But what do you do with
theories? You test them to destruction. That's the way science works. And I'm intrigued by the fact
that younger people I talk to now are looking at doing precisely such experiments. That's
greatly encouraging for me. It's very exciting for me as well. I wish I'm out of the lab now. I've
been out for a number of years of studying in a different career, but I wish I had had your
influence while I was there. I was an explosion. You're echoing what I find amongst young people
now. You see, where I go as I lecture around the world is that I find that I get young people,
and not so young, but people still with active laboratories coming up to me and saying, well,
what is worth doing, you know, is what I'm doing a way of trying to test the ideas and test them
to destruction. The key message from the third way I think is this, that nature is more wonderful
than we imagined. It uses processes that we didn't even think could happen.
And so there's huge amounts of great work there to be done. It'll be Nobel Prize winning work
if people can do it. So that's my main message to the young. And it's what I find as a reaction
around the world as I lecture. I get people asking me, you know, what exactly is now worth doing?
Thank you very much, Dennis. It's been a pleasure speaking with you. And I think that's a good
note to end on. It's a very encouraging... I like to end on encouraging notes because I
have sometimes presented as a fairly old sort of, well, I am old incidentally,
disgruntled chap. I'm not really. I'm actually very positive. And I've been, I've been very
positive throughout my career. But I've been very, very surprised by the reactions that occurred
in the early part of the 2000s when I first started publishing openly my dissent.
But first of all, the reactions which were essentially is the latest moronic attempt to
discredit neodymism. But I'm now very encouraged indeed by the fact that the reaction to young
people is, what are the good experiments to do? And there are many.
I appreciate your, your inspiration and the fact you persisted. It's, you know,
hopefully I'm sure it will inspire a whole new generation of scientists who consider,
like you said, nature is as a wonderful thing and something worth really trying to get to grips
with and not... I mean, the idea of reductionism obviously in itself of producing things isn't
necessarily an issue when you study things in isolation, but as a philosophy that you have
to look at life that way. You've got it. It's the studying things in isolation that is the problem.
You've also then got to go back. Reductionism is fine. If you do that, that's great. But you've
also got to go back and ask, how does it work in the real organism? Exactly. Yeah. Well,
thank you very much, Professor Dennis Noblin. And I hope we can speak again sometime in the future.
Okay. I'd be delighted to come back in a year or two when you've got some reactions.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Okay. Bye bye for now then. See you Dennis.
Okay. So thank you for tuning in. I hope you enjoyed the podcast episode today with Professor
Dennis Noble as much as I did. I'm very thankful to him for giving such a lively, exciting and
memorable account of the history of evolutionary theory and how... What I take away is the main
message, which is that organisms aren't reducible to their parts. Ultimately, organisms are in control
of their own genetic material. And it seems to me, is if their desires, the desire of the organism
manifests in the use of the various different molecular toolkit that the body consists of.
And obviously, there's many layers of this down from cells up to organs and the organism.
So it seems to me that Dennis is saying that organisms, based on what they want to do,
they ultimately use their bodies in that way so that they can try and fulfill their aims.
Now, it doesn't always work out because there are restrictions. Just like if you've got a motorbike,
you can drive 100 miles an hour. But if you've got a restrictor on it, you can only maybe go 60
miles an hour if you're learning or something. Similarly, certain genetic mutations can cause
restrictions on how much we can use or enjoy our body in certain ways. However, generally,
the rule is that organisms are in control and our molecular toolkit follows suite.
So I'm looking forward to asking some more questions. Dennis and hopefully
others in the third way of evolution in the future. And please stay tuned. Harry Kushner.
