Hello everybody, David Shapiro here with another video. So today's video is by popular demand
as we talk more and more about artificial intelligence and the potential of UBI and AI
displacing a lot of jobs. For some people it seems like it's a foregone conclusion that a lot of
people are going to be out of work real soon, probably for good. There's more and more universal
basic income experiments going on around the world. And if you didn't see it, I have another video
called Post Labor Economics, which kind of talks about more of the macroeconomic aspects of that.
But in this case, people really wanted to learn about UBI on an individual level. So
let's get right in. Just a real quick plug from my Patreon before we get in. I do have a Patreon
and all the tiers get you into the private Discord, where I am often available to chat with
people. There's two Patreon Discord, so there's the premium Patreon Discord, which I prioritize,
make sure that I answer all questions that people send me on Patreon if you're in the
premium tier. And I also do have occasional office hours, where we just all kind of get
in a voice chat together. And then I do have a higher tier for one-on-one sessions. All right,
back to the show. So first, let's set the stage. Imagine this future scenario. Every American
gets $2,000 a month, no questions asked, starting at age 18. Let's also, for the sake of this
thought experiment, assume that healthcare is either heavily subsidized or for all intents and
purposes free. If you check out my Post Labor Economics video, I talk about how AI could lower
the cost of lots of things, including healthcare, by a factor of 100x or 1000x in the long run.
Let's also assume that the unemployment rate will be about 70%. There are some people calling for
more. Some people calling for less. But just looking at the number of jobs that are
vulnerable to being automated away with AI today, my personal estimate is that it's around 70%.
Let's also assume, for the sake of argument that parents get a little bit of UBI per child,
but it also tapers per child. So basically, you don't want to necessarily hand out as much UBI
for every child, because that incentivizes some people to just keep having more children. But on
the other hand, you also want to ensure that you incentivize the behaviors that you want to see.
One thing that people are concerned about is population collapse. This is what we're seeing
in places like Italy, Japan, North Korea, and other places where the population is already
slowly contracting. So you basically need to incentivize people to have children. You need
to reward them. Right now, you get tax breaks in the form of dependent tax credit. Basically,
this is not a reverse tax credit, but a tax credit in the form of increased income on a
monthly basis to help pay for children. Let's also assume that GDP growth is going to be something
like 15% due to AI automation. So the idea is that most people aren't working, but the GDP is still
growing like crazy. The stock market is growing like crazy. So corporations and politicians,
there's plenty of wealth to go around. So we're basically assuming that a state exists of economic
abundance and then also some redistribution. Oh, and there was a question. Someone was asking,
what's the difference between this and socialism? So the difference between this and socialism is
that socialism is about collective ownership or state ownership. So in this case, UBI actually
fits within capitalism and neoliberalism because the state isn't owning anything. The state is
just taxing and redistributing within the existing framework. Another assumption that we're going to
make, and I talked about this again in the post labor economics video, is we're basically going
to assume that inflation and deflation are going to be modulated by some of these market forces
with things like quantitative easing, tax rates and that sort of stuff. So we're not going to
address that further in this video. Just assume that prices are stable ish. Okay, so absolute,
right off the bat, let's talk about budgeting. You get $2,000 a month. No further questions asked.
The first thing that everyone's thinking is the rent is still way too damn high for this.
My mortgage payment, which is, I bought this house almost 10 years ago. So before things went
absolutely insane, my mortgage payment is about $1,200 a month, which is pretty good.
But that being said, the lowest mortgage payment I ever had was $325 a month for a $65,000 apartment.
So it can be done, obviously, as demand goes up in certain areas, the prices also go up.
But point being is that for most people, that's just, these numbers probably sound completely
ridiculous. Like it's not going to happen again, because again, 10 years ago, the economy has
changed a lot. Inflation, supply and demand has changed. We're facing housing crunches and
recessions and all that kind of stuff. So again, it's like, oh, you know, everyone's heard like,
you know, someone from our parents or grandparents age, like, oh, you know, I put a family through
college on, you know, a cashier's salary, believe me, I am aware that economics change over time.
We will address the housing thing in just a minute. I'm just kind of setting the stage as to saying,
okay, we need to figure out a way to get housing into $600 a month or so for everyone.
Cars are another huge, huge expense for Americans. So these are the two biggest expenses for most
people. So, you know, for instance, I have friends that their car payment is $600 or $700 a month.
That's insane. You know, so you combine that with, you know, let's say I had a $600 car payment
on top of a $1,200 mortgage, that's $1,800 a month, leaving $200 a month for everything else.
That's not going to fly. That's not going to work. Now that being said, if we can get rent or
mortgages back down to $600 a month for most people, that leaves $14, and if we can get rid of cars,
that leaves about $1400 a month for everything else. And also remember,
in this hypothetical scenario, health care is highly subsidized or functionally free for most
people. Okay, so housing, biggest expense. Let's talk about housing first, because if we can get
that under control, the whole UBI thing looks a lot more sustainable and feasible for most people.
So the first thing is downsizing. A lot of people are already downsizing, tiny houses are all the
rage right now, Katrina cottages, that kind of kickstarted it because after Hurricane Katrina,
actually what happened was a few celebrities got together and paid for architects to design
cottages, small houses that were very cheap and easy to build, so that people that were affected by
Katrina could recover more quickly. That didn't start the tiny house trend, but that certainly
put it on the map. And people are like, oh, Katrina houses, they're pretty cute. Because again,
they paid for professional architects to make something that was sustainable and
appealing, not just cheap and efficient. So demand for smaller houses is creating new markets.
There's, you know, last time I looked up at tiny houses a few years ago, there were not a whole
lot of options. Now there are tiny house kits, there are prefabs, there are all kinds of stuff.
Some of the some of the cheapest DIY, like livable tiny houses that I could find,
were around $4,000, which is much, much more efficient than, you know, a $200,000 house or a
$400,000 house. You can also get prebuilt for around 12k. And that's, you know, starting price,
you can spend up to 200k on a prefab tiny house, which is still cheaper than, you know, a half a
million dollar suburban house. One thing, one of the biggest problems with tiny houses is that
regulations and zoning laws need to be updated. In many municipalities and jurisdictions,
a tiny house is not allowed to be the primary residence. You can have what's called an auxiliary
dwelling unit in many places, which is basically you can put a tiny house in your backyard, but
then you need a regular full sized house. So my wife and I were about to downsize, but even in the
countryside, the minimum house size that we're allowed to build is 1200 square feet. So it's
smaller than my current house, but it still doesn't qualify as a tiny house. We would love to have
built something smaller, but because of the, because of the county zoning laws, we're not allowed to
build anything smaller. So in order to accommodate a shift to a UBI, we're going to need different
zoning laws or areas that are zoned for tiny houses. Another option is portable tiny houses,
such as trailers or van dwelling. Now, lots of people, you know, there's the van dwelling subreddit,
there's plenty of influencers on TikTok and YouTube and Instagram and everywhere else
that either travel or live in a van full time or whatever. This is good for some people. It
can be very cheap. You can also spend a lot of money pimping out a van or a bus or whatever.
There are challenges associated with this, such as safety, where do you stay, permanent address.
It also requires a vehicle, which again, vehicles can be really expensive.
The last thing is micro apartments. So not everyone wants to own their own home or their
own land. So micro apartments are something that is an option. They're increasingly popular,
but again, there's a lot of regulations, particularly in America,
that prevent us from even building tiny apartments. Usually the smallest studio
apartment you can get is around 400 to 500 square feet, which, you know, there's nothing wrong
with that. But those are often in trendy areas. And so even though it's a small apartment,
they're often very, very expensive. So they're not really optimized for being economical. That
being said, as I mentioned, as the market demand for these things goes up, the pressure for cities
to accommodate that, and for the capitalist class for the corporations to accommodate that
will go up. And again, there's lots of experiments going on, but there hasn't been a new establishment.
And so one thing that I want to talk about is in the context of history, the American suburbs,
those were intentionally designed about 80 years ago. After World War II, as the
nation was beginning to urbanize very quickly, you know, all the regulations and patterns and
architectural designs and municipal layouts, that didn't exist. The modern suburb, the subdivision,
was a new invention. And so the fact that we had, we invented a new way of living
within the last century tells me that we can invent a new way of living again. And it probably won't
take that long, because where there's a will, there's a way. And certainly, necessity is the
mother of all invention, and we will need to figure out alternative ways of living that are not
centered on the American suburb. Another option other than downsizing is combining households.
So this is called co-living or co-housing. There are successful co-housing and co-living
things around the world. In America, they're usually actually more expensive because of
construction costs, regulations, red tape, and so on and so forth. In many cases, particularly if
you look on Reddit, under the co-housing and co-living subreddits, there are plenty of horror
stories of very, very dangerous, manipulative people building these communities. So I want
to urge caution before you get involved in any of those kinds of things. Now that being said,
there are successful examples in America, but there are more successful examples around the
world, particularly in Europe in various places. There's eco-villages, which are focused on
sustainability. They're basically like co-op farms, essentially. Now that being said, there is a lot
of rising trends around co-living in conventional houses. You don't necessarily need a special
village or a special structure because that's where the red tape and regulation and excess cost
comes in. What a lot of people do is actually just combine finances and live in a larger house.
There is a trend that started a few years ago called mom-munes, and there's actually services
that can help single moms find each other to join forces, band together, and combine households.
Obviously, not everyone is a single mother, so that model doesn't work for everyone, but
put it this way. Some of my friends in my 20s got together and rented a large house,
and so having two or three couples living together, or even just a few friends,
three, four, five friends living together, if you combine those incomes and you end up with
eight or $12,000 per month guaranteed income from universal basic income from combining households,
you can afford a pretty nice house for that. This is a pretty simple model. What I will say is that
finding the right people can be challenging. Certainly, there are plenty of cases of people
having gotten stuck with toxic roommates or destructive partners or whatever and getting
trapped in those situations, so we will need to keep in mind that some people are going to be
better and safer living on their own. Certainly, plenty of people want to live that way,
but that being said, the social advantages that come from joining forces and banding together,
of course, we're on the tail end of the pandemic, in which case a lot of people actually were kind
of forced into that situation. We created our little survival groups, right? It was like the
walking dead. You band together. Anyways, whether you downsize or join forces or a little bit of both,
those are ways that you can drastically reduce housing costs here in America. Again, the biggest
thing is that particularly on the downsizing, we need to update our zoning laws and regulations
to accommodate this, but I have no doubt that the pressure from people to do this will kind of force
the government's hand. All right, so transportation. I mentioned cars are really expensive and
America is a car culture, so how do we reduce transportation costs? The first thing is walkable
cities. Most cities, I don't know about most, but many cities in Europe were designed and built
and founded long before cars. Because of that, walkability is kind of intrinsic to a lot of
European cities. However, whoops, come back. A lot of American cities were designed and built
with cars in mind, and so because of that, a lot of American cities are designed around the car.
They actually prioritize and privilege cars over pedestrians, which is super, super problematic.
Now, that being said, there are literally dozens of major projects going on around the world to
experiment with new walkable cities. Then, of course, there are hundreds, if not thousands,
of smaller experiments of urban revitalization. The cities near where I live, all up and down the
east coast in the south, they're building walkable areas. Maybe not the entire city is walkable,
but some of it is walkable. This focus on green spaces and walkability is rising.
There's a couple of YouTube channels I want to recommend. One is City Beautiful, and the other
is not just bikes. These are really great channels. They're really informative, and they will point
out all of the things wrong with American cities, the things that some American cities get right,
that'll compare American cities with European and Asian cities as well. But for instance,
I've been to Paris, and I was surprised at such a sprawling city. I was at the cathedral on the
hill, Sacrecur, which means Sacred Heart. I know I didn't say it with the right accent,
but it's literally Paris to the horizon. You cannot see outside of the city from the middle of the
city, but you don't need a car in Paris. It's wild. As an American, that was the first time I had been
one in a city that big, but two in a fully walkable city. Some of the metros were fully automated,
which was really cool, because you could go all the way up to the front and look out the front
windows. There's buses, there's light rail, and then of course, they have the TGV, which is the
high-speed rail to get outside of the city. Anyways, point being is that there are lots of
these experiments going on, and so for people that want to stay living inside of a city,
if you combine those micro apartments or those co-living situations with walkability,
that will drastically, drastically reduce cost of living for many people. It will take some time
to build this up, especially since we've got so much invested in being a car culture, but ride
sharing and fully automated cars are coming, and I actually forgot to create a slide for this,
but one of the things that a lot of the big auto manufacturers want to do is actually have fleets
of robo taxis. Rather than owning a car, you'll just use an app to summon a Ford or a Chevy
or a Toyota or whatever, and as competition drives down the price, I think I did a calculation once
that the total annual cost for me, if I were able to switch to a robo taxi based on the hypothetical
rider mile cost, would probably be about $600 a year, and I'm someone who drives 20,000 miles per
year, so the possibility of doing ride shares and robo taxis could drastically, drastically reduce
the cost of ownership for automobiles, or rather you get rid of the ownership cost and you just
rent in real time. Another thing is if you don't want to live in the city, because I sure as heck
don't want to live in the city, I am not a city boy, I'm a country boy, is what I call coaster
villages, and these are starting to pop up. They're often just called like tiny house communities or
RV communities or whatever, but again, this is one of the things where zoning laws need to be
updated, but fortunately these experiments are going, but basically think of the Shire, think of
Hobbiton, but instead of underground houses, it's tiny houses and Katrina cottages and tag along kind
of trailers. Basically what I anticipate is going to happen is that in cheap rural land,
a lot of that land is going to end up being used for very, very small, planned, nearly
self-sufficient, not necessarily fully self-sufficient, I'm not saying an eco village, but rather than
having these things planned around cars and subdivisions, it'll be planned around sustainability,
and so what I mean by coaster is someone who decides, you know what, I'm just going to coast
on UBI, I'm going to be happy with that, but I also want to live in the countryside.
You will need things like HOAs because, you know, good regulations and good agreements make good
neighbors, and so you will need stuff like HOAs still in some of these places, but the total
cost of living there is going to be much, much lower because imagine if your plot of land and
your tiny house is about $40,000 total, right, the mortgage payment on that is going to be like
$80 a month or something like that, maybe, well, let's say $200 a month, you can afford that,
that's going to be a tenth of your monthly $2,000 income, so between these two possibilities,
walkable cities for those who want the urban living and tiny house villages out in the countryside,
we can probably accommodate a lot of people very efficiently and very cheaply.
Okay, cool, so I think, oh, and also another advantage of these coaster villages is you
don't necessarily need a car, you know, if you live like Bilbo Baggins and Frodo,
you just walk to your neighbors, it's a tiny little village. All right, now, one thing that a
lot of people ask is, okay, yeah, but what, you know, what if I still want more money,
what if I'm willing to work, what if I'm able to work, what is, what are the options going to be
so that I can still, you know, make some money and get by? So after doing a lot of research,
one thing that I found is that local goods and services, there's going to be a lot of these
that are going to stick around, and this is because even if a robot can do it, these are,
these are things that you still prefer a human to do, and that most humans will be willing to
pay another human to do. So the first category is the health and wellness stuff. So this includes
fitness coaches, personal trainers, massage therapists, that sort of stuff. These are the,
these are the kind of things that require a human touch or human empathy, or at least those are
highly preferable. So this will be things like barbers and dentists and massage therapists,
that sort of thing. Education, tutoring, mentoring and coaching, these are also things that, that
could be pretty durable against being automated away. Certainly some online learning is going to
be fully replaced by things like chat GPT, excuse me, many students are already using chat GPT
for learning and mentoring and tutoring. And certainly, I mean, even I use that if there's
something that I want to learn about, it is one of the best teaching resources out there,
because it's interactive. Now that being said, there are still going to be plenty of classes
and skills that are going to be better taught by a human because a human has the same
abilities and capacities that you do. So say for instance, you go to a painting class or a cooking
class, or a carpentry class. Those are the kinds of things that, that you will, you will prefer to
pay for a human just for the experience of being with other people, right? Another thing is going
to be experiences such as performances and entertainment, local music, stage performances,
busking, you know, those sorts of things are going to be pretty resilient because again,
we are a social species and so we want that connection with other people.
Renfairs or think are going to be really popular. And so, you know, you can go set up your booth
and do face painting at a renfair or whatever kind of festival or convention you want to go to.
Caregiving, grooming and hygiene, these are other things. So whether it is child care or elder care
or pet care, those kinds of jobs are going to be very resilient against being fully automated away.
Because again, even if you do have a robot that can take care of grandma, grandma probably would
want to see you rather than a robot, unless you don't get along. Maybe, maybe it's better that way.
But also like your dog, right? Like my dog hates machines, right? So he would freak out if a robot
showed up to take him for a walk. So, you know, granted, I work at home all day, every day. So
I don't need walkers, but some people would. Other domestic services like gardening, lawn care,
cooking, cleaning, growing and sharing food, these are things that will probably persist as well.
Because again, local economies, circular economies, these are rising in popularity.
And then finally, artisan and craftsmen, handmade goods, arts and crafts, these are the kinds of
things that people will really value and cherish. And it's also something that a machine intrinsically
cannot do. In the age where machines can make all kinds of furniture and mass produce it,
we still already have Etsy where you can buy handmade clothing and handmade furniture and
handmade tools. And so the demand is already there. And one thing that can happen of,
and yes, they're more expensive, but these are much higher quality goods, and they're also much
more durable. So again, even if mass produced goods become cheaper due to AI, there's still
going to be a demand for those high quality handmade, unique goods and arts and crafts.
Now, okay, so that's local goods and services, there's also still going to be online and remote.
So content creators like me, probably going to stick around influencers, streamers, whether it's a
lifestyle blog or travel blog or whatever, I follow, I started following lots of lifestyle
bloggers. Usually they're attractive women because that's just the pattern. But I also follow plenty
of guys who build stuff or go on adventures, that kind of thing. And the reason that I think
that these are going to stick around is because even if you have a fully digital avatar, your brain
knows that it's fake. Some people, of course, will be plenty entertained by a digital avatar.
But really as a human, I want to see another human's experience. I want to learn from that human. I
want to empathize with that person. And so content, influence, streamers, you know, it's the personality,
it's the realness, the authenticity. Even if there is some performance associated with it,
that's what people really want to connect with. Crowdfunding platforms like Patreon only fans,
plenty of other alternatives are out there. Those are going to stick around.
And so basically the two ways that you can make money online in the future, I think,
are going to be ads and crowdfunding. There's also white label services like subscription-based
services. But that's essentially crowdfunding, right? Like you pay to get in and then you get
access to exclusive content. Game hosts, coaches, and trainers of various kinds. So one of my Patreon
supporters is actually a professional online coach and she teaches other coaches. And this is
actually a really, really huge market segment. I had no idea how big it was. But again, having that
one-on-one time with someone where you can say, hey, this is what I'm struggling with, because
we're humans, we're always going to be struggling with something, right? But then like game hosts,
there's paid dungeon masters that can host, that can run D&D campaigns for you. All kinds of stuff
is possible online that are intrinsically better done if it's a human. That being said, there are
plenty of people working on using GPT technologies to automate game hosts and that sort of stuff.
So some of this is going to change. But a lot of these things, again, people are willing,
the demand for the human is high enough that people are going to be willing to pay for it.
Now, on top of making more money with the UBI, there is also a lot that you can do to further
reduce costs. Obviously, the biggest things are housing and transportation. We already talked about
how to reduce the cost there. There's a lot of other stuff that we can do to keep reducing costs
in order to make better use of the free time that we have. So for instance, tool sharing, tool
libraries, there's actually, I didn't realize this, but many county libraries or city libraries
already have tools that you can check out. And then of course, if the demand for that goes up,
then libraries will continue to do that. There's also maker spaces that you can join,
usually with a small fee, that give you a space to build stuff and borrow tools.
Circular economics, which is reusing as much as you can, refurbishing stuff. We're going to talk
about refurbishing more in a future slide. Clothing exchanges, clothing swaps, other good swaps,
like one thing that I do is that every now and then, I have a folding card table and I'll put
it out by the road and I just will give stuff away. And so by just giving stuff away and sharing,
you don't even have to worry about bartering or exchanging or buying stuff, just giving stuff away
and making use of those, essentially, community-based donations. Sharing services as well.
So say for instance, you might provide childcare for people in your community,
not necessarily for pay, but in exchange, they give you food or something. So that goes back
to bartering and trading. DIY skills, repairing things, fixing things, cleaning up, whatever.
There's lots and lots of value that you can get by learning more skills and thus,
further reducing costs. Caregiving, domestic stuff, I already mentioned that.
Okay, so let's talk about the psychology of this. One thing that people are concerned about is,
yeah, but what do you do for fun? What do you do for sense of mastery? What do you do for challenge?
If I lose my job, how do I have any sense of self-esteem? So let's talk about the psychology
of living under UBI. First, we're going to talk about, well, we're going to use frameworks for
this. So first, one of the most famous ones is Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs. So if you're not
familiar with Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, it is basically just this pyramid, which is color-coded
like the food pyramid if you're in America, but it says you need to satisfy these needs
starting from bottom to top. So physiological needs include air, water, food, shelter, sleep,
that sort of stuff. Safety needs, which is about, are you in physical danger? Do you feel safe at
home? Is your environment quiet enough? Are there any dangerous smells or chemicals or whatever?
Above that, once you have those needs met, the next most fundamental need is love and belonging.
So you need friends, you need family, you need to feel that human connection. And of course,
we're in a loneliness crisis. I think something like 30% of young people today don't have a single
like best friend, which is really horrible. And I'm hoping that UBI gives us more free time
to connect with people. Above love and belonging, you need esteem, self-esteem, which is
self-respect, status, recognition, that sort of stuff. And then finally, self-actualization.
So this is what a lot of people are referring to when they when they worry about, okay, well,
if I lose my job, what am I going to do? I need some kind of self-actualization. And so self-actualization
is the impulse to become the best version of yourself. That is the that is the version to
reach your highest level, right? And so these are things that are still going to need to be there.
And we'll talk about this in future slides in terms of how can how can you achieve your best,
the best version of yourself. Another framework that I'm a big fan of is what's called TLC or
therapeutic lifestyle changes. This is a model that was developed by Roger Walsh. And it is an
eight point framework that talks about how do you make a better life for yourself?
So the framework is pretty simple, pretty straightforward. One, and this is in no particular
order, by the way, one spirituality. So being involved in some kind of spirituality doesn't
have to be a megachurch or anything like that. You know, paganism, witchcraft, neo-hellenism,
all kinds of stuff, Norse reconstructionists, lots and lots of spiritual frameworks are kind of
becoming popular, as certainly a lot of us younger people are more pagan.
Giving back so volunteering and community service is one of the things that, you know, again, we
kind of alluded to this already in terms of cost reduction. But giving back volunteering,
giving your time is actually a really good way to build up self esteem. It's deeply satisfying.
Like I said, one thing that I love is just giving stuff away. And if I had more free time and
energy, I would probably volunteer more because I have certain skills. And, you know, honestly,
a lot of the code that I give away, because I publish all of my code under open source standards,
to me, that is kind of like giving back. And it's very satisfying. I love seeing the little
stars and forks on my GitHub repos. Time and nature, hiking, walking, going to the lake, whatever,
this is really important for your physical and mental health. I go for a walk pretty much every
day, unless the weather is bad, or unless I'm sick or too tired. Recreational activities,
we're going to talk a lot about recreational activities and upcoming slides. Rest and relaxation.
If you don't have to go to work, you can spend a lot more time resting and relaxing.
Diet and nutrition, we've talked a lot about how, or we will talk more about how all the free time
that you get from UBI will allow you to do things like gardening, but also allow you to
learn to cook and spend more time cooking. Because a lot of people don't have time to cook good
meals because they're too busy working and resting. And so UBI with additional free time
will help people really improve their diet and nutrition. Seven, exercise and activity.
So this is like exercising for the sake of exercise, which for me, I get that with time and
nature because I go for walks. And I also like to do other things, although I haven't done it
as much lately, hiking, climbing, that sort of stuff, kayaking, relationships and connection.
We already talked about relationships and connection in Maslow's hierarchy of needs.
And also you will see that relationships and connections, spending time with friends and family
is common for all psychological wellbeing frameworks.
Self-determination theory. This is one of my favorite frameworks because it is so simple.
And it kind of encapsulates a lot, but it's also not a hierarchy. You need all three of these
at all times. And so the idea is that self-determination theory is this is what people
are intrinsically motivated by. These are the intrinsic psychological needs of all humans.
So first is autonomy or individual liberty. We need to feel like we are in control of our lives
and our fate. This is absolutely critical for all humans. Even humans in collectivist societies,
there is always a tension between individual needs and group needs. But that's intrinsic to
all social species. It's about balancing the self versus the group. Desire for competence and mastery.
So this has to do with Maslow's top hierarchy of needs, which is self-esteem and self-actualization.
So competence and mastery, basically feeling like you're good at something.
One way to measure this is that we thrive with what's called optimal stress.
So optimal stress means that you need some kind of challenge. For instance, people play Elden Ring,
people play Dark Souls, these really frustrating, impossible games that I personally don't like.
But the idea is that you try and fail, and then when you finally succeed, you feel a sense of
mastery, right? And of course, video games are not the only way to get mastery, but video games are
a good way to get a sense of mastery. And as we'll talk about once we talk about hobbies, there are
lots and lots of other ways to get that sense of mastery. Finally, desire for relatedness and
connection. As a social species, we are intrinsically motivated to seek out connection with others.
And so by keeping in mind what our intrinsic base needs are and building a life around that,
we can still maintain our psychological well-being even if we don't have a career,
at least a conventional career that we're familiar with.
Okay, as I promised hobbies, this is the last section of the video, and this is honestly where
I had the most fun. And it made me really realize, I'm looking forward to this. So I'm going to do
everything that I can to help make this future state come to fruition with my YouTube channel and
my open source research. So the first thing, obviously gaming, a lot of you tell me how excited
you are for the possibility of FDVR, which means full dive virtual reality. Everyone knows what FDVR
is, you saw it in the matrix. The idea is that you plug your head in. And as far as you can tell,
it is 100% real. We also explored this with Ready Player One, which had like haptic suits.
I don't know if it's possible, a haptic suit seems like it's probably more possible in the near
term. Full dive VR, such as the what you see in the matrix might not be possible, but you never
know. People are working on brain computer interfaces. So if you can just plug in all the
sensory information directly into your head, maybe it's possible. Anyways, whatever you want to do,
whatever experience you want to have, should hypothetically be possible with FDVR.
Part of gaming is that it can be social, right? Game with friends, whether you're competing online
with friends, or you got a guild or a clan that you've built, you can also do parallel play in
person. So this is what I do with my wife, we heckle each other. While she's playing Assassin's
Creed, I'll be like, Hey, did you know that you're on fire? And she's like, Yes, Dave,
I know that I'm on fire. You know, parallel play is a great thing to do with friends. You can
sit around, you know, I used to do this back in my college days with my buddies, drinking a
couple beers, playing Call of Duty, trolling each other. It can be a really great thing. And I'm
glad to see that the younger generations do this still. My nephew and all of his friends,
they play Minecraft together and other things. There are, what I will say is there are some
potential downsides. Screen time can be detrimental to your health. But if you balance it with some
of the other things, like in the therapeutic lifestyle changes, make sure that you go outside,
touch grass, as kids are saying these days. It can also be addictive and isolation as possible.
I do suspect that we will see legislation coming that kind of at least provides warnings for
how addictive things are. There's a book that I refer to often called Liquid Rain, where they
talk about how full dive VR could actually be programmatically addictive, like where it could
just stimulate your dopamine. And so you feel like you're having more fun than you actually are.
And then when you're not in the full dive VR, you could, you could like physically crave it and get
sick if you don't have it. So we do need to be careful with creating gaming as a central lifestyle.
And another thing is that a gaming world is not necessarily the real world. And most people's
brains will keep track of that difference. And so it might not be good for self actualization.
For instance, if you're, if you're a gamer, you might not get the sense that you're reaching
your full potential. That being said, if you're a competitive gamer, maybe that is the way that
you reach your full potential. Making and fixing things. We humans evolved to use our hands. That
is why we have so much dexterity in our hands. We are the tool users. And so one of my best
friends from back in the day is working on rebuilding a thistle. So this is a thistle. It's
a small racing boat. We would be doing this all day every day if we had UBI and no need to work
for money. Because the shop where he's rebuilding his, there's two other ones that are just waiting
for someone to come and fix. And if I had the time, that's what I'd be doing. Why? Because it's
something that my friend does. And you can then race it and do competitive stuff. But there's also
skill building, right? The sense of mastery that you get from building something from fixing it
and having that thing that you can show off and use. This is a really great way to get a sense
of mastery. There's plenty of other things that people do. Lots of guys like rebuild mustangs or
corvettes, fixing up old houses and other things. So reusing, refurbishing, fixing, building things.
These are really great ways that also tap into really primal needs for humans.
Some of the things that are really popular today, particularly with young people, forging,
leatherworking, sewing, other carpentry, all of these things revolve around tool use.
And so whatever hobby you pick up, if it uses tools, chances are there's a lot of skills involved,
which can also lead to that sense of mastery. Cooking, I mentioned this earlier. Cooking is
one of the oldest trades, one of the oldest professions out there. And everyone needs to
eat plus cooking is a good social activity. My wife and I cook together pretty much every day,
or at least we take turns. Some people compulsively cook and feed other people. My sister-in-law is
like that. She loves cooking for people. Point being is that there are a lot of hobbies out there
that center around making or fixing things. Outdoor stuff, hiking, climbing, canoeing,
boating, whatever. There's all kinds of stuff that we could stand to do more of if you had more
free time because you didn't have to work, because you didn't have to be at a desk or at an office
or at the store or whatever. And it's not just fishing. Obviously that's the prototypical example
where a guy gets to retirement age and he decides he's going to go fishing every day. Not everyone
wants to do that. I get it. You could do competitive fishing, but there's also other
kinds of competitive outdoor stuff, like cross-country challenges. I ran Tough Mudder
almost 10 years ago and I was hungover as heck when I ran it. I was not hungover by the end of it.
I burned all that toxins off. Skiing, kayaking, all kinds of really challenging stuff that you
can do outside. A lot of my friends picked up mountain biking, which you could do practically
anywhere during the pandemic. So one thing that I realized when I was making this video is that if
we got UBI tomorrow, I would probably go hike the Appalachian Trail. I love being outside. I love
being in the mountains, and that is something that I want to do. But right now, my brain is like,
well, I'm still got to make YouTube. I still got to do AI stuff. I still have meetings with my Patreon
supporters. So doing the Appalachian Trail is not really an option for me right now unless I were
to take like three months off, which maybe I should. Anyways, fitness. Fitness is the most
familiar model that a lot of people use to get mastery, whether it's yoga or Pilates or running
or cycling, martial arts, strength training. These are all things that people, many, many people do,
it can be a little cultish for some people. There's also fitness-based competitions like Ironman,
American Ninja, that sort of stuff. That being said, there are many, many, many additional
benefits other than just, you know, it's something to do. Better fitness leads to reduced pain,
increased health, cognitive benefits, emotional benefits, plus you get to show off your body,
right? There's lots of people that love being fit just for the sake of feeling sexy, right?
There are so many people that I knew and have met and where they decided to get fit,
you know, started climbing, started going to the gym, and the transformation that they felt,
as they felt better about themselves, about their body, the sense of accomplishment
that they get from that is incredible. It's still not for everyone. So I want to say like,
okay, even if you have all the options in the world and you decide that exercise isn't for you,
that's fine. Or fitness, exercises for everyone. Fitness might not be for you.
Meetups. So I am a huge fan of meetup.com. I actually met my now wife at a meetup.
We're both writers. So the kinds of tools that are out there. So meetup.com is there specifically
for finding people with the same interests, challenges, or whatever, right? So meetup.com,
it's free to join. I tell people about it all the time. I think more people should be on meetup,
whether you have a special interest, or if you've got something that you're coping with,
there's support groups on meetup. I host a local AI meetup. I'm actually going to that later today.
Let's see. There's intellectual kinds of things. There's chess clubs. There's spirituality clubs,
arts, crafts, photography, all kinds of stuff. Whatever your interest is,
especially if you live in a city, you can find other people that have that same interest,
which is a really great way to get that social connection. But then also some of these things
can lead to senses of mastery, for instance. All right. So this is life under UBI. I hope that
you got a lot out of this. Like I said, making this video, actually, I kind of clarified a lot
for myself. And it makes me personally a lot more excited for the future. And personally,
this was probably the most fun that I've had in making a video yet. So anyways, cheers.
