So again, like if you're an entrepreneur, you'd be an entrepreneur in this.
If you are someone who can communicate, you communicate this to other people and you get paid a million bucks a year as a consultant, right?
You organize information, right?
If you're an artist, if you're a creative, you use a tool.
If you're an artist, you become the most efficient artist in the world when you lean in on this, you know?
Like, systems can be out-competed.
It's like the example of the steel mill, right?
There were big, vertically integrated steel mills that were out-competed by lots of little steel mills.
Sure. Micro mills, right?
The big corporations, the big programs, the big things will be out-competed by just individuals and small groups.
Building on top of this technology can do anything.
And a massive transform to purpose is what you're telling the world.
It's like, this is who I am. This is what I'm going to do.
This is the dent I'm going to make in the universe.
Welcome, everybody. Welcome to Moonshots and Mindsets.
I am here with an old friend and a new friend.
Imad Moustak.
Imad, welcome. It's a pleasure to have you here.
Thank you for having me.
We're going to have such a fun, wide-ranging conversation across everything that is of, I think, importance to anyone listening,
to any entrepreneurs, any CEOs, any government leaders, any kids.
Everything that you're doing is really transforming the world.
Let me do a proper introduction.
Imad Moustak is the founder and CEO of Stability.ai,
focused on amplifying humanity's potential through AI.
You probably know Stability AI because of its text-to-image model, Stable Diffusion,
released in 2022, which rocked the developer world and I think broke the internet as a good way to describe it.
Previously, Imad has been a hedge fund manager and autism researcher.
Now has led multiple technology initiatives across multilateral organizations and governments.
And an XPRIZE competitor today, Imad, is pursuing an incredible moonshot,
actually a series of moonshots that can transform many industries.
You know, I started by saying, which industries are you looking to disrupt?
And your answer was, all of them, could do better.
And I think that's not hype.
I think that's actually, from what I understand, what we're going to explore, true.
You know, scientists and technologists have been talking about AI for decades.
But today is different, isn't it?
Yeah, I mean, we always like to say this time is different, but this time really is different.
I mean, if you kind of look at it, AI is basically information classification.
And we had classic AI, which was information goes in and then you extrapolate from a data set.
You create really custom models and it goes out.
Like the big AI is, Internet2 was Google and Facebook taking all that big data
and then targeting PETA with like ads for rockets, you know, and things like that.
And, you know, like rockets in 2017, we had a bit of a step change
where there was a paper called attention is all you need about how to teach an AI
to pay attention to the important things and learn principles.
Yeah, principle based analysis.
Yeah, so it's not good old fashioned AI or kind of logic causal based AI, but it's kind of that.
Because you remember, like, there was a book who was it by type one, type two thinking.
A con, yeah.
So, you know, there's the very logical thing.
There's a freaking tiger in that bush over there.
Yeah, you know, and we didn't have that second part.
We didn't have the ability to kind of just leap to conclusions,
principle based, heuristic based thinking.
You know, this is kind of the mindset thing, right?
Whereby you construct these things and it allows you to go very fast to just amazing conclusions.
That's part of what makes humans humans.
Yes, it's here now.
It actually was leaping to conclusion.
But so it's no longer extrapolation based upon data.
It's actually learning to understand the meaning hidden in the data.
Exactly.
It's kind of semantic understanding, kind of literally, it's kind of called latent spaces,
hidden layers of understanding.
So like, I'll give you an example.
One of the ways that I kind of entered AI was working with AI to do drug repurposing
for my son who has autism.
Yes.
So he was two years old at the time and the doctor said nothing could be done.
And I was like, oh, there's something can be done.
Like, let's try and figure out information.
Because what we're looking for is information I need to come in time.
It's kind of the Claude Shannon theory of information theories.
Information is valuable in as much as it changes the state.
So how do you find the valuable information amongst all those autism studies
and figure out what's going on?
Because no one can really explain to me what caused it.
So just one second there, because typically people are looking for a very clear cut answer
in the data.
That's obvious.
But there are answers, but it's hidden.
It's hidden.
It's kind of hidden.
And so you have to look at things from a first principles basis when you can't see
things just from scanning everything.
You have to dig down to another layer, another layer, another layer.
And kind of when I dig down, I kind of used AI to do natural entity recognition,
look at all the different compounds or different trials that were tried,
built a team, then built a biomolecular pathway analysis model of neurotransmitters
in the brain.
So it's like, just like a common cold.
It seems like something very similar is happening.
It turns out there's two neurotransmitters in the brain.
One of them is GABA.
You pop a valium and chill out.
It chills you out.
And then another one is Glucomate.
And Glucomate kind of makes your brain accelerate.
And so you know when you're tapping your leg and you can't focus and concentrate,
that's what happens.
Because humans are really a filtering entity, as it were.
We have so much information in the world.
There's just too much.
So our brain creates a simulation.
That's why we've got the optic nerve, for example, filled it instantly.
We are kind of constrained a little bit.
And that filtering allows us to focus.
We all know what it's like when you're tapping your leg because there's too much stuff going on.
So with kids with ASD, they couldn't filter for various reasons.
But it was different reasons.
Not enough GABA, too much Glutomate.
When you're born, GABA and Glutomate are actually both excitatory.
And oxytocin flips the switch on GABA.
Interesting.
So we started digging down into kind of the things.
And we're like, ah, different compounds can affect this in different ways.
But then what was the upshot of that?
And how is this long story coming to a conclusion?
Because there's too much noise, my son couldn't speak because he couldn't formulate the hidden
layers of meaning and connectivity on concepts.
So kind of we've got cup here.
Yes.
And you can cup your hands.
You have a World Cup, which England, hopefully, will win.
And you've got various other meanings of the World Cup.
You form this latent space of hidden connective meaning to that.
So it can be applied in different things, the principle-based analysis.
By reducing the amount of noise, you could then filter and pay attention and build that out.
The AI can now do the same thing.
So you don't need to have huge petabytes, exabytes of data anymore.
With structured data, it can figure out interconnectivity.
And I want to come back to that, because that's the revolution that you're creating right now.
Just these personalized data sets that are good for you, your country, your company, yourself.
Your context, exactly, because humans are heuristic animals.
We learn by principle-based analysis.
And we are animals that are story-based.
So you have multiple stories that make you up, you know, from your work on the X-Price to your humanitarian
to, you know, bold VC fund and all the things.
We all kind of form connectivity there.
But those stories are very hard to map initially.
Now we can do it dynamically.
And we can start building tools to re-augment human potential by doing this.
Because we can finally have that assistance.
We're going to have so much fun on these conversations.
But I want to take us back to some of...
People around the world, for the last year or so, have heard of Dolly and Dolly2.
And here comes stable diffusion.
That is an open source version of Dolly and Dolly2.
And as I said, broken internet, you sent me an image of the speed of growth on GitHub.
Yeah.
Of people using stable diffusion.
And it was so funny, because you first sent me this image, right?
Here you see on GitHub the users who are like on Ethereum over time, right?
And then there's this line that goes straight up that I thought was one of the axes for the graph.
Yeah.
Like what happened there?
So first of all, what is stable diffusion?
It's one product of your company, right?
Well, stable diffusion is a community effort to build an AI that allows anyone to create anything.
So words go in and then anything you describe comes out, which is a bit insane.
Okay.
So what we did is, you know, collaboration with various entities,
which we paid an important part in stable diffusion to is kind of led by us.
We took 100,000 gigabytes of image label pairs, 2 billion images,
and created a 1.6 gigabyte file that can run offline on your MacBook and create anything.
1.6 gigabyte file, which is relatively, you can transmit it over the phone network.
You transmit it over the phone network.
But you only need to transmit it once.
Everyone having this tiny file that basically compresses the visual information of a snapshot
of the internet can create anything from a high-resolution render of an apartment
to Robert De Niro's Gandalf or anything else.
And they can now do it in a second, something a week.
They can do one of those images in 30 seconds.
So what do you mean, one 30th of a second?
One 30th of a second.
We just broke in real time.
We had a 30-time speed up in the last week.
So when you mentioned that, just as we were getting ready for this, I said,
so you're basically able to render a virtualized world in real time.
Yes.
And that's one step away from being able to render a movie in real time.
Yes.
So are we in the verge of basically, and we're sitting here in Los Angeles,
and you've been in the Hollywood world.
I mean, are we talking about rendering motion pictures by just writing,
reading a script and having some stable diffusion three-bottles create a film in real time?
Well, who needs to write a script?
Okay, I did that.
You just say, I want something to make me happy, right?
And then it'll pull together various models and it can live-generate a movie.
Yeah.
So we're live-generating.
So Hollywood.
So in the next five years, I think that Ready Player One awaits this world,
minus the microtransactors of why teenagers will be here.
Great.
Anything you can imagine, iterate it, dynamic, new forms of communication,
new affordances, like all these clicks and things like that.
You don't need that anymore.
Then this is one of the biggest evolutions in humanity ever,
because the easiest way for us to communicate is what we're doing now.
We're having a nice chat, right?
Back and forth.
Then the Gutenberg press came, and suddenly you could communicate through it and form.
It's harder, you know?
But still, you see now GPT-3 and other of these AIs are made easier now.
For anyone to do anything like chat, GPT just came out.
It's amazing.
Yes, I saw it.
Everybody's making extraordinary claims about what it's going to do to Google.
Exactly.
Well, this is a very interesting thing.
But then visual communication is the hardest.
You toil to be an artist, or a lot of people on this call.
How much have we toiled with PowerPoint?
We're going to rid the world of the tyranny of PowerPoint.
But that's my expertise from a PowerPoint expert.
You're not a PowerPoint expert.
You're a communication expert.
So we remove the barriers whereby any visual medium can be created instantly.
And you just describe to it how it shifts.
And because it's got these latencies, it understands happier or sadder.
Or you can say flamboyant.
And that's not a word.
But it figures out what that kind of means.
But the ability to rapidly iterate it and say,
okay, I don't like that movie scene.
Make it happier, make it brighter, make it more dramatic.
And then being able to render any form of communications, like you just said,
you know, a movie and have a thousand variants.
I mean, what's going to happen to Hollywood?
I imagine Hollywood will be quite disintermediated.
Yes.
Hollywood in everyone's thing.
I mean, what is Hollywood, right?
Hollywood emerged because it was far enough away from the East Coast
that IP laws didn't apply, right?
And then kind of it got constructed around here as an entity that extracted
rents from performers, ultimately, and creatives.
Like how many creatives like the Hollywood or the music industry or others?
Not many, because they tend to be treated quite badly.
Some people achieve superstardom.
But a lot of this technology now is just truly democratizing in that
things are going from centralized to the edge.
And we had to create centralized organizations as a people
because we didn't have the information classification and communication tools
to be more dynamic.
It's called the represented democracy.
It's not a true democracy.
It's represented democracy exactly at the same time, you know,
everyone speaking at the same time doesn't make sense.
But what we need, like the most successful organizations,
are complex hierarchical systems.
It's groups of people working together loosely bound for a bigger story.
And this is what we can achieve as humanity,
like the human colossus when we all come together to do one big thing.
But it gets blocked by a lot of the stuff because we're not communicating properly.
Like one of the things I tell my team is that roadmaps are not about resources,
they're about communication.
If you can communicate properly and something's good,
you will always get resources for anything.
It's also about creating a common vision that AirBees aiming towards in order to get there.
So you're not diversified in a thousand directions.
So like Google is full of amazingly smart people, right?
They did an amazing study called Product Aristotle.
Yes.
Because it's like, why is one smart team better than another?
What was the finding?
The finding was it came up to two things.
Common narrative and ideally something that kind of engages you.
And there's a bit of sacrifice, you know, like the very...
So this is what Salim and I and Salim Ismail, who you know well, who sends his regards,
talk about as a massive transformative purpose, having a unifying,
really compelling, emotionally charged vision that you're heading towards.
Something deep and something that you've put yourself into as well.
So it becomes part of your story as it were.
And the second part was psychological safety, which I think was very...
Amongst the team.
Amongst the team, the ability to actually express yourself
and talk about something without fear of reproach.
That's what makes them the most successful teams.
Because we're too scared often about kind of our status and worrying people and things like that.
That's obviously on the research side of things primarily.
But I think some of these lessons kind of come because when you feel comfortable as a community
and you work towards a massive transformative purpose, you can do a lot more.
Because when you're falling behind, you can communicate it and you're not scared of people judging you.
And if you have an idea that's considered, you know, divergent from the center,
you feel open to being able to share it.
In fact, it may well be the right idea.
And I talk about the day before something is truly a breakthrough.
It's a crazy idea.
And if you're scared about actually putting forward a crazy idea, then you're stuck.
Well, again, it comes back to information theory, Shannon style, right?
Information is only valuable in as much as it changes the state.
Yes.
Everyone's on the same page with everything.
Flat equals dead.
Exactly.
And this is a time where we basically have to have exponential progress.
And now we actually have the tools to help us make exponential progress.
Like, you know, Facebook released Galactica recently,
which is their language model trained on 42 million science papers.
They made some claims that were a bit hype peak.
And then people like, oh, you can use this to create racist science papers.
And so they were forced to take it down.
But I mean, it's an amazing piece of tech and we're going to help re-release it.
And this is an interesting thing.
You can use it to do things like a null hypothesis creator.
You can use this AI to do all the sorts of things that enable more divergent original
thought or creativity or any of these other things.
Like, classically, I couldn't because it was out of mode.
Yeah.
It was out of the data set.
Yeah.
Of course, if it's not in the data set, then you're screwed.
Whereas now you don't need it to be in the data set.
You can create new data.
Yeah.
That's extraordinary.
This episode is brought to you by Levels.
One of the most important things that I do to try and maintain my peak vitality and longevity
is to monitor my blood glucose.
More importantly, the foods that I eat and how they peak the glucose levels in my blood.
Now, glucose is the fuel that powers your brain.
It's really important.
High, prolonged levels of glucose, which is called hyperglycemia,
leads to everything from heart disease to Alzheimer's to sexual dysfunction to diabetes.
And it's not good.
The challenges, all of us are different.
All of us respond to different foods in different ways.
Like for me, if I eat bananas, it spikes my blood glucose.
If I eat grapes, it doesn't.
If I eat bread by itself, I get this prolonged spike in my blood glucose levels.
But if I dip that bread in olive oil, it blunts it.
And these are things that I've learned from wearing a continuous glucose monitor and using
the Levels app.
So Levels is a company that helps you in analyzing what's going on in your body.
It's continuous monitoring 24-7.
I wear it all the time.
It really helps me to stay on top of the food I eat.
I mean, conscious of the food that I eat.
And to understand which foods affect me based upon my physiology and my genetics.
You know, on this podcast, I only recommend products and services that I use,
that I use not only for myself, but my friends and my family,
that I think are high quality and safe and really impact a person's life.
So check it out.
Levels.link slash Peter give you two additional months of membership.
And it's something that I think everyone should be doing.
Eventually, this stuff is going to be in your body, on your body,
part of our future of medicine today.
It's a product that I think I'm going to be using for the years ahead
and hope you'll consider as well.
You know, when you go to your website, I love the notion of AI by the people for the people.
And then you say, stability AI is building open AI tools that will let us reach our potential.
Let's talk about that because, you know, there's a lot of individuals that you and I both know
that are fear mongers around AI.
You know, it's the devil.
It's going to destroy us.
It's going to superhuman AI is the end of humanity as we know it.
And I mean, my position is AI is the single most important tool
we're ever creating to solve the world's biggest problems.
And we can't solve our problems from where we were before.
But these are the tools that are going to allow us.
How do you so how do you address the Bill Gates that you want to the world on that side,
the fear side?
Well, I think fears are valid because it's the most powerful technology we've ever created
and it comes from us.
But then who is us, right?
Like if you look our current data sets, they're massively biased.
They're fixed towards the internet and they're fixed towards manipulation.
The way I kind of look at AI is that organizations themselves are AI.
They are slow dumb AI that feeds on us and turns us into cogs.
In fact, this is concept of Molok, right from the Ginsburg poem, you know,
how talking about this carthaginian demon that pervades our organizational structures
and turns us into these cogs that feeds on us effectively.
I think this is the first thing that can actually defeat that this particular technology
that we have today, because is the world happy now?
How many people in organizations are happy?
We all know, you know, we should talk about my idea for a happiness X prize,
but that's a different conversation.
Happiness X prize, but what is happiness?
Happiness is agency.
Happiness is achieving your potential and it's kind of going out there.
So we need some help.
But I think a lot of the AI discourse has been focused on gigantic language models
and fricking supercomputers, which we still have,
to create something that will equal and surpass us.
It's very religious in its way.
And you see parallels to religion across this.
Sure.
In that you have the kind of declaiming people who are like for it,
the people who call it heretical.
And then you kind of have most of ethics in AI.
It's not actually ethics.
Instead, it's ultra orthodoxy, as it were.
Like in Islamic terms, everything is haram unless it's declared halal.
You know, classic Jew days, ultra orthodox Judaism, etc.
It's the same thing.
People look at red teaming.
They don't look at green teaming, right?
And they look at this technology being too powerful.
So just like cryptography, we should keep it from the people.
And we definitely shouldn't give it to like emerging markets
and people who aren't smart enough to do it.
And that's very interesting because, again,
if you think about the power of it and you believe it's powerful,
then the question should be, what is this?
And I believe that this AI is infrastructure.
Clayton Christensen, kind of the departed mental mind,
had an amazing quote, which is that,
infrastructure is the most efficient means by which society
stores and distributes value.
Now, obviously, that's ports and things like that.
Sure.
But it's also information.
Sure.
And I think that's valuable when you combine it with the Shannon theory.
So this AI is infrastructure for the next generation of human thought.
And what does that mean?
It should mean that it should be a commons that is accessible to everyone.
And you made a very definitive decision to make this an open source movement here.
Your community is how large now?
I think we've got about 120,000 in the communities.
And we created communities across verticals.
Classical open source is product related, where you have MongoDB or something like that.
And then you've got there.
Whereas we said language, healthcare, biomass, audio.
Let's get all the people who are fantastic in the private sector, public sector,
actively independent together.
And let's jam on, how do we build a next generation infrastructure?
The way I put it is, let's go to the future and bring back AI with us.
Nice.
And we can choose if it's a panopticon controlled by corporations like Web 2,
or we can choose if it's open, an infrastructure for humanity.
And if it's infrastructure for humanity, I think it's an important point,
because I'm just finally saying that.
A lot of the naysayers around AGI and ASI and others,
I would agree with them if it's controlled by corporations,
which are this type of weird entity that we've created.
Like YouTube optimized for extremism, because it was engaging.
So ISIS co-opted those algorithms.
And they adjusted eventually, but it was slow.
If it comes from us and it's biased, and we've brought in the conversation,
I think AI is more finalist, likely to kill us all if it ever becomes sentient,
which is a big question, especially if it's representative.
So I want to come back to this in greater detail later,
but I think we share a common belief that humanity ultimately is good.
Yes.
And it's fundamental level, because that's a very important distinction.
If you believe that humans at their base are good,
and you're enabling humans with more and more powerful technology,
they're going to be using that to make the world a better place and solve problems
on the whole.
On the whole.
But it depends on what the perspective of humanity is.
You know, you've kind of got, what's it called,
the thing when you go to space and you look at Earth?
Yeah, the overview effect.
The overview effect.
You know, like hopefully more and more people get to space and have that,
because people are very narrow and they view themselves like that.
The Rabbi Sacks, former Chief Rabbi of the UK,
had a very wonderful concept called altruistic evil.
Those who actually do evil believe they're doing good.
Interesting.
And you see that.
Like, you know, if you talk to...
Especially in the religious realm.
Religious or anything like that.
I'm like, Isaiah Berlin's conceptualization,
British philosopher from like the 1940s,
he had a conceptualization of positive liberty versus negative liberty.
So negative liberty was the freedom from anyone telling you what to do,
and then to kind of laissez-faire capitalism and things like that.
Positive liberty was the ability to believe in an ism,
something big, like fascism, communism, capitalism, Islamism, etc.
And people use that as excuses,
meaning they were doing good to actually do bad.
But then how does this all relate to this?
I believe people inherently want to do good.
It's just that what good is can become misdefined and co-opted.
And so my take was, if we start building infrastructure,
where people can see bigger perspectives,
because they get the information they need,
what does that look like?
What if we mapped all the religious texts in the world,
so that a child in Egypt could see Judaism
from the perspective of a child in Jerusalem?
We have the technology to do that.
What if you could automatically translate
teapotty republicanism into libertarianism and have commonality there?
Again, we finally have the technology to do that.
But we didn't before, so people remain in their huddles,
they look at the other, and they're encouraged to do so.
We've seen that increase in political polarization.
So society is a tipping point.
And by the way, that's been what social media has effectively done so efficiently.
Because it's beneficial for the algorithms
and for the slow, dumb AIs of the corporations that drive it.
Let's come back to the company and the products just to lay out the tapestry here.
Stable diffusion is one product vertical area.
What are the other ones?
So for example, our Luther AI community has GPT-NEO and X.
It's the open source version of GPT-3 by OpenAI.
The most popular open language model in the world.
It's been downloaded 25 million times.
Incredible.
And so can you take it?
You customize it for yourself?
No permission needed, right?
Harmony has dance diffusion,
which is the most advanced audio model in the world.
You'll be able to create your music.
So you put your own music in it,
and then you have your own music model
that can create more music of your style.
And you can just basically produce it,
produce your own concerts, extrapolate in any direction you want.
Exactly.
We have OpenBioML, where we kind of have OpenFold and LibreFold,
protein folding, DNA diffusion for DNA protein matching,
and OpenBioML for, again, some protein kind of stuff.
So we've spent some time talking about a passion that I have
and you share, which is the ability to truly transform
the health care industry and human longevity,
understanding why we age, maybe why we don't have to.
I think the why is the important part, right?
Most of medicine.
So, again, when my son was diagnosed,
and scratching a wall to his fingernails bled,
you know, eventually went to mainstream school,
thanks to the interventions.
And I want to come back to those.
For those who are listening who have a child with autism
or know someone, I want to come back afterwards.
What were your learnings and what's your advice?
Yeah, because a lot in this space that we kind of occupy,
of course.
But like, what I realized is that conventional medicine
and a lot of things view humans as a girdic.
A thousand tosses of a coin is the same as a thousand
toins cost at once.
Coins tossed at once.
But humans are individual.
So, for example, a good proportion of humans
have a cytochrome P450 mutation in their liver,
which means they metabolize things like fentanyl
and opioids far quicker.
So a very simple SMP test, but we don't do it.
So we just prescribe everyone the same thing
and then a bunch get addicted, you know?
Because we are individualistic kind of creatures.
This is why I went to the first principle's thinking
kind of approach on this.
And the question is, this personalized medicine thing
has always been kind of out there.
We've not been able to reach it.
Again, I think the technology we have right now
enables personalized medicine.
We've seen things like CRISPR, obviously, and others.
But more than that, it's about data availability
and viability.
We do need to get to a point where every child at birth
is sequenced and that is plugged into their personal AI
and they understand exactly how every food, every medicine,
and every aspect of our living affects our physiology.
Again, you go to the future and you bring back the AI with you
and you say, what should it look like?
So you take a whole country and you say,
how do we build an amazing health care system,
education system, et cetera?
Is there any doubt that health care and education
will have AI at the core in 20 years?
Zero.
Well, I think it's not 20 years, it's 10 years.
I know, but let's just say 20 years.
You and me, we're like, no, no, no, let's say 20 years.
But then is that AI open or closed?
Yeah.
And is it better for it to be open or closed?
Yeah, there's no question.
Open is fundamentally critical.
Open is fundamentally critical because then we build,
it is infrastructure, it is valuable.
Like the way that I actually orient my rights,
Vinay Gupta, I was one of the Ethereum guys,
think you probably know him, big thinker, crazy.
He had a very great conceptualization of rights,
which I agree with, which is the rights of children.
And so like effective altruism and all of that,
looking at people a million years in advance,
it's kind of difficult.
And it comes down to utilitarianism,
all sorts of weird stuff.
But the rights of a child.
Rights of a child, today.
Today.
What does that child have the right to?
Achieving their potential.
Yes.
What infrastructure do we need to give that child
in a refugee camp or in Brooklyn or in Kensington
to help them achieve their potential?
And this goes back to what's on your website,
in terms of using AI to help, in this case, a child
in the broader case, humanity, achieve its potential.
Achieve its potential.
I mean, that's everything.
Yeah.
And so for me, it's about, I've oriented that
on agency and happiness.
And it sounds fuzzy, but it's literally,
when you have the tools to be able to do anything,
you know you can do anything.
People underestimate their agency.
Sometimes you've got to go for your shot, as it were.
Yeah.
But again, it's information.
What information can I bring to that person?
What tools can I give them so that they can be creative?
Because we lose that creative spark
as we get older, right?
Yeah.
Now it's coming back a bit, you know?
What can I give them so they can access the information
they need to be educated?
And what's the optimal way to teach linear algebra?
And by the way, it's all about play.
It's all about play.
It is all about play.
Happiness play, all the neurochemistry of your brain
is maximized for learning, retention, experimentation
around that.
It's flow.
It's flow.
So I used to be a video game investor.
That was my big sector.
It was one of the biggest in the world.
And I used to judge video games by time to fun,
flow and frustration.
Hmm.
And so if we're building systems for humanity,
we have to look at fun, flow and frustration.
Yeah.
Because if we can get those, you know when you're just
learning something like, wow, this is amazing.
And kind of you get in there.
It absorbs amazingly quickly.
But our education system is not set up for that.
Our health care system definitely isn't.
And you've got to mess up health care system.
Yeah, I'd say it's maximizing for frustration.
Yeah, that's what I speak about it.
Openly saying my mission is to crumble and destroy
the health care system.
And also education system, which is really sad.
So again, it's very interesting.
You look at the US in inflation numbers,
education and health care, massive inflation.
Yes.
Everything else, not really.
Yeah.
And it's the percentage of the person's income is in end,
it should be going to zero, right?
The top health care and the top education
should be all AI driven.
It's all basically the cost of electrons.
Life expectancy is falling in the US.
A little bit over the last couple of years due to COVID.
Yeah, but actually no, before COVID.
Before COVID, it was falling.
I mean, that's the thing.
Whereas again, it's not complicated,
but it does require coordination.
So the question is, can you create shelling points?
So for me, open source software, this next generation,
this model based one,
whereby stable diffusion is basically a programming primitive.
Just like you have a library to do various things.
So the program is out there.
So in the good old days, when we started programming,
we used to have to code everything by hand.
Now you've got GitHub and things like that.
It's more like playing with Lego, right?
Yes.
And you're sticking it all together.
It's a new type of thing.
A 1.6 GB file that is hashed,
so it can be common across every single computer in the world,
that you can call something in and an image comes out.
And you know predictably what that is no matter where you are.
And you can take a little stick and image
and put text on the other way.
Yeah.
That changes the paradigm.
But then what if you have that for language, audio,
all these different modalities?
Okay, I'm going to go here next then on that,
which is what happens to electoral property rights, IP rights?
Who owns the IP of those images?
Is it the person who puts the prompt in?
Is it, you know, help me understand where that evolves to?
Nobody knows.
Nobody knows.
Okay, it's a fair answer.
Yeah, I mean, nobody knows.
I personally think it should belong to the person that prompts it,
because again, we put this out as a commons for humanity.
Like we did put an ethical use license around it for various reasons
that will be replaced by a purely open source license.
But again, I'm viewing this as building blocks, right?
It's really the person that has the action
because these models do not have agency.
If you're going to breach property right,
you can type in, I want a picture of Mickey Mouse.
And then if you sell that, done.
But it's like photos.
It's like telephone.
It's like internet.
It's like Photoshop.
This is a tool, but it's a tool of a very different type.
Because like, something like Photoshop is a million lines of code.
This is a binary file.
That can do anything that Photoshop does.
But you still need to act on it.
Last year, there was a patent awarded to an AI in South Africa,
which was interesting.
I think more of a gimmick or anything else.
Do you imagine these models will lead towards
significant intellectual property on the invention side of the equation?
Oh, 100%. They already are.
If you look at Google's new TPU chips,
they're partially built by AI that they built.
Sure, yes.
I know. We just released OpenLM from our Carpalab,
which is an evolutionary algorithm for code for robots.
So we're trying to optimize robotics via that.
And then when we bring in a video, we'll have even better robots.
So are we going to get to a place where I'm saying, listen,
I'm please invent a device that does this for me,
that's under this price point, that's made of commonly available materials
and constrain it left, right, and center,
and then design it, now go and print it for me
and deliver it for me the next day.
We're going from mine to materialization in one sense.
Yes.
I mean, again, it's kind of the, what's it?
The Star Trek thing?
Yeah, it's a little bit longer.
Yeah, it's the, oh my God.
We've both forgotten it.
Yeah.
Anyway, you know, when you get the replicator, exactly.
We're all great to your heart.
Exactly.
But then you can kind of see this already,
because like there's an app on the App Store right now,
you pull your Lego out and it scans all the Lego.
I'm nice.
And what can you build with it?
Yes, it comes up with, this is how you build it as well.
So things like you can build birds and cars and things like that.
Awesome.
So you go, so this is just an extension of that.
Again, they use a transform based architecture for that.
Well, I'm interested when it'd be fun to say,
okay, create new life forms.
I mean, we're not far from that.
Well, you know, I'm going to leave that to other bioethicists.
I don't want to step my foot in that one.
But wait, there's ethics involved in that.
Okay, exactly.
I mean, the life form thing is very interesting though, right?
Because again, everything is happening all at once.
And so it's not just biology or physics or sociology.
All these models, all these technologies all seem to be converging at once.
So you can create anything and all the barriers are dropping at once.
So and that's complicated.
Yeah.
So the world is, do you think anybody truly understands how fast the world is about to change?
No.
I mean, like look at creative industry, video games, $180 billion a year,
like Disney spends 10 billion a year, Amazon 16 billion a year on content.
All of that's going to change in the next couple of years alone,
just from one tiny little two gigabyte file.
Extraordinary.
As well as healthcare, as well as education, as well as you said,
every single industry, we're going to, so here's another question.
Go ahead, please.
Well, I was going to say industry is about, again, information theory.
Yeah.
That's, most industries are based on that, especially service based industries.
And so once you can basically take a system, you can have human input in the loop to train
a system that's a generalist to understand principles.
You just drop just about everything.
Yeah.
I'm going to pause on that because it's probably one of the most important things.
Any entrepreneur, any CEO, any parent, any kid, anyone needs to understand,
we're about to enter a period of hyper disruption and growth and hyper opportunity creation.
Yes.
Like what happens is that in any area you create, there are value spikes.
So you can look at it as like a flat area and then companies and individuals occupy
certain areas.
So they've got like a mix of skills, right?
And that's how you earn your living.
And these are like spikes.
That's all going to get shaken up and it's going to be the value is elsewhere.
We don't know where the value will be.
We've got some guesses.
So like in a time when everyone can make anything, what becomes valuable?
Something.
So if a model that can make anything, that means Disney should have their own models, right?
To create Mickey Mouse's and things like that.
But now they can use that not only internally to save money on creation,
they can use it externally.
Why can't we have Mickey Mouse having coffee with master chief at a Starbucks and microtransact
pay that?
It's been the promise of the NFTs and things like that.
Now with these models, you can do that seamlessly.
On demand over and over again.
So one of the realizations for me is that this open source technology made available to everyone
effectively has the potential to make everyone the equivalent of millionaires,
billionaires, trillionaires when whatever you want can be manifested, right?
You can have the world's best education for your child independent of where you live and
what wealth you have.
You can have the best health care available.
You can have customized entertainment.
We end up in a world in which the cost of anything is raw materials in IP,
which is going to be disrupted itself, and electricity.
Yeah, pretty much.
Again, you look at what Elon Musk did with SpaceX, right?
He's like, let's break it down to what is the constituent cost of this?
Basically look to first principle thinking on rockets.
First principle thinking.
So what I've been doing is first principles thinking on information flow, social theory,
and our systems.
It all comes down to just information being in the right place at the right time to make the
maximum impact.
And if we can give that as an open architect to the world, then we can augment and then
replace our existing systems with better ones because they outcompete.
You go to an African nation and you teach every child with an AI that teaches them and
learns from them.
Within a few years, they will be outcompeting children in the top schools in New York.
What if you give them the ability to code the system as well and improve it?
It becomes very interesting.
The kids are helping train the AI and the AI is helping train the kids.
Yes, but then also the kids can improve the actual code that they have there.
This is something that we've seen in our things.
A virtuous cycle.
A virtuous cycle.
And you make that open and then you make it transplantable because what you have then is
you have models that are standard like a base.
So I like to call Stable Diffusion 1 was a Precretious Kindergartener.
Then it was a Precretious High School Stable Diffusion 2.
Stable Diffusion 3 looks freaking amazing.
It's going to be like a university level student.
So Stable Diffusion 3, by the way, is the real time rendering?
No.
That's Stable Diffusion 2.
That's 2.
Okay.
Stable Diffusion 3.
So again, to give you an example of the thing, when we launched Stable Diffusion 1 on a top end
A100, which is like a super super top computer chip.
Right?
We have a lot of those.
We can talk about the supercomputers in a bit.
It took 5.6 seconds on August the 23rd when we launched it.
To render a single image.
Render a single image in 512 by 512.
Okay.
Today it takes 0.9 seconds in 768 by 768.
We've just sped it up 30 times.
Amazing.
30 times.
And I'm still blown away by the real time rendering of the world.
Once you get below 200 to 220 milliseconds of response time,
it opens up entirely new UI UX.
And we didn't just release Stable Diffusion as an image creator.
We also released an in-painting model.
So you could take, you know, Emma's hat and you could turn it red just by describing it.
We released a depth image model so you could do transformations.
We released an upscaler.
So you can have a 64 by 64 image and the AI fills in all the details to take it to
1.024 by 1.024.
Transforms the storage industry for media.
Amazing.
And this is real time now as well.
So listen, I have to ask you the question, but come back to it later,
which is do you believe we're living in a simulation?
Yes or no?
Yes.
Yeah, as do I.
I think we're living in an nth generation simulation, but that's a different story.
Okay, we'll come back to that for folks who are interested.
But okay, how far out are you able to imagine this world that you're creating,
the disruption of industries, the transformations?
How many years out?
I don't know anymore.
Like when I started, so I funded the entire open source art space from January of last year
when it started because you had a generator model and then opening I released this clip model,
which took images to text.
We advanced things back and forth for each other.
We're like, wow, that's the way to do things.
Creators and discriminators, as it were.
And it's advanced, advanced.
I was like, this is the next big thing.
Humans can now communicate visually.
It's the next big thing since it's going to make press and it kind of went as expected
plus minus six months.
I thought we'd get to stable diffusion in Q1, Q2 of next year.
And that was a big massive bit.
I built a gigantic supercomputer and everything.
To get to real time, I think it would take another year or two.
And instead it took like four weeks.
And like, again, this is what you mentioned earlier.
The number of GitHub stars now for stable diffusion is more than a theorem in Bitcoin
and just about everything else.
And that took them 10 years in three months.
Yeah, I mean, again, it's the notion that people have no idea how fast the world
is changing and is accelerating.
And it's what you're coming back to with the common mission and the energy.
When you sent your first Bitcoin, it was an amazing experience.
They got overtaken by raccoons and stupidity.
And they tried to create an alternative system outside the existing system.
The interfaces were all the robbery and all the profits were made.
This is something different whereby you're talking,
when we talk to developers and the contributors that are increasing in the ecosystem,
they're so energized.
And this is what drives things forward.
When you see teams that do the biggest things, they have the energy.
It's almost palpable, right?
Where it's like that driven thing.
But we've got people from all over the world.
Like one of our latest developers was an Amazon warehouse worker at the start of this year
who taught himself to code.
And now he's building the most advanced models in the world.
He's got 16-year-olds to 62-year-olds.
And it's a team of how big?
So our team is 137.
But the developers who are creating...
500.
Well, but they're teams of one, right?
Their team and their individuals are able to use this to create...
Oh yeah.
So if you want to create with this, you can just do it by yourself.
So there's a fantastic Twitter.
You can look at levels.io.
And he's like, I'm going to create businesses by myself
that are making millions of dollars of things.
Just because you could took those primitive and you wrap things around it.
And you're just making money.
Like Avatami, you can put your own face into the model.
Ten images, you can create a Peter Diamandis model.
And we can put you in space.
In fact, we'll do that a bit later.
So listen, you're listening.
You're a 20-year-old entrepreneur.
You're in college.
You're finished.
You're skipped college, whatever it is.
What's your advice to that 20-year-old listening right now?
You should drop everything.
You should focus entirely on this.
This is the biggest shift ever.
Self-driving cars, $100 billion went into.
Crypto, hundreds of billions of dollars went into.
$100 billion, a trillion dollars going to go into this sector.
Say that again, how much?
$100 billion in the next few years and then a trillion dollars will go into this sector
because it's so transformative and so few people understand it.
There's never been something a technological advance that will diffuse as fast as this.
So this is electricity.
This is the Gutenberg press times a billion.
This is the Gutenberg press times a billion because it's not just writing.
It's image, 3D.
It's everything.
It's creation.
Protein folding.
It's creativity and extrapolation.
So what does it look like to focus on this?
So again, you say, drop everything in focus and I get that.
Part of me is like, maybe I should do that too.
But what does it look like to focus?
What would a person do?
So again, if you're an entrepreneur, you'd be an entrepreneur in this.
If you are someone who can communicate, you communicate this to other people
and you get paid a million bucks a year as a consultant, right?
You organize information.
If you're an artist, if you're a creative,
if you're an artist, you become the most efficient artist in the world
when you lean in on this, you know, like systems can be outcompeted.
It's like the example of the steel mill, right?
There were big vertically integrated steel mills that were outcompeted
by lots of little steel mills, micromills, right?
The big corporations, the big programs, the big things will be outcompeted
by just individuals and small groups.
Building on top of this technology can do anything.
And we've seen that over and over again in every converging exponential field.
We've seen entrepreneurs disrupting and the rate of, you know,
I think of this as the asteroid impact that the slow lumbering dinosaurs all die
and the furry mammals are the ones that rapidly evolve.
Yeah. I mean, like let's take a practical example.
And this is what we said a bit earlier about chat, GBT.
Why does anyone need to use Google image search in a year?
Yeah, where you can create any image just by describing it
and then iterate it just with your words.
Just attribution, that's it, but that's an easy lookup table.
True, absolutely.
So now let's take it, okay, the 20 year old, drop it, start experimenting,
start playing, start using.
Now you're running a company, you're running, you know, a hundred million
dollar company, worse off a billion or ten billion dollar company.
And you see this, how fearful should you be and what should you be doing?
Again, you should be leaning in to understand this.
The classical innovation process inside a company is very limited.
You should be having kind of a crack team of people who've just given freedom to say,
how can this potentially change my entire company?
You know, but it's hard because you are fighting against the inertia of your company.
You find people being used to certain ways of interacting
or certain ways of distributing stuff.
So this is why I think you have to think and think again from first principles.
If this technology is real time fast across modalities and it can look and understand stuff,
let's go forward five, 10 years and work back.
Does my company still exist in this current format?
Can I out-compete that?
If not, how can I fold these into my current processes and procedures, etc.?
Because this is the other thing.
As a true exponential, like the AI research actually in this area,
80% of all AI research has become in this area in the last few years.
And it's exponential with a 23 month rate of doubling, a true exponential.
The adoption of this now is also exponential
because everyone from around the world is using it.
And then each of those introduces another two people.
So it goes four and four and four.
So right now it's like a wave that's under the surface.
It just hasn't come yet.
Next year is when it cracks and the year after is when it crashes.
I hear you and my reaction is I'm excited as hell about that, right?
It's like because it's about transforming the inefficiency of the world today.
It's about taking individuals and empowering them to do to giving them agency, like you said.
But this is very interesting.
Inefficiency is where value is created in the current paradigm.
In some ways, or where value is created.
Because efficiencies exist.
Value is captured by inefficiencies.
So we have to have, we go to the gatekeepers and we give them,
like you pay your lawyers loads of money, right?
Pay your accountants and other things like that.
Because there are inefficiencies in the system.
So you pay them to remove the inefficiencies as it were.
Some of these inefficiencies will no longer remain in the system,
but that means that that value capture will also disappear.
And again, this is why you have to start thinking.
Where does the value look like in the new reconfigured landscape?
Do you have an example in an industry that exists today?
And just to make this concrete for someone?
Sure. You don't need lawyers anymore for everything.
I mean, like, you know, you've got do not pay.com has unmassive things.
They automatically write your tickets for you and kind of yes.
For those who don't know, it's if you got a parking ticket
and you go to do not pay, they will figure out the legal loopholes and arguments
to get you off your ticket.
Yeah. But like, you still need litigators, right?
What point can you have a robot litigator?
It's like Phoenix Wright on steroids, right?
You know, if you've got the, again, movie creation thing,
movie creation is just going to transform completely.
Video games, you'll be able to have your own user generated content.
You know, like, again, people can right now,
use stable diffusion, create any image.
They can go to chat GPT is an amazing system by OpenAI,
and they can chat with any like, oh, okay.
That disrupts a lot of industries as well, because it knows the different things.
But it's just a model. It's a blob. It doesn't look on the Internet.
What happens when you hook up these models that are principle based to the Internet?
Stable diffusion plus Google image search is actually incredibly powerful.
But people are just looking at a stable diffusion.
Stable diffusion as part of a pro architecture is incredibly powerful.
People are making movies.
So like, if you look at our friends at the corridor crew, for example,
they did a movie called Spiderman. Everyone's home.
Where they created a custom model based on the Spider-Verse movie with Mars Morales.
Couple of days, they created a three minute trailer that blows away anything big studios can do.
Just a few people, a few thousand bucks.
Let's go to a few general questions on AI.
First of all, you come out of the hedge fund industry.
I have to imagine that the day of the trader
investing on their own without the use of any of these technologies is long gone.
Does anybody have any advantage on their own?
I mean, I think that's the thing. What's an edge in trading, right?
And again, it comes down to information theory.
What can move the Apple stock 50% very little information?
What can move it 5% a decent amount of information?
1% quite a lot of information, right?
So we're just looking at the narrative and the incremental narrative of this
because again, as humans, we're heuristic creatures.
So like I used to be a specialist in the number of markets, oil market was one.
An oil barrel is fungible going around the world because you can just shift it on a ship.
Sure.
But the impact of a Libyan barrel going offline was the third impactful as an Oklahoma barrel.
Why? Because most of the money is in the West as opposed to near Libya.
So they feel it more and market reacts more.
The market is a counting mechanism and a voting mechanism.
I think the tools that people will use for investment are going to change now
because you'll be able to actually visualize stories better.
And people will kind of introduce that.
This is kind of why people like invest on themes like ESG
and you have these index trackers and all these other things.
So I think that's going to be very interesting.
But then which industries will be disrupted faster than others?
We don't know.
Who will be at the edge in the forefront of this embracing this technology?
And then who can be left behind?
We don't know.
So I think the entire stock market is going to change and adjust.
It could be a period of supernormal profits and then out competition as well.
And this is against a backdrop of inflation and
recession and all sorts of crazy stuff all at the same time.
So will you be using this technology to assist a hedge fund manager out there on investing?
Yeah, I can run to my own hedge fund.
No, look, I mean, again, I think this technology would be pervasive
because people again will see the power of this.
And ultimately, like I said, investing usually comes down to stories.
Influencing human desires and intention.
Exactly.
Like, you know, if you're doing VC to fund management or whatever,
you just basically you've got a story.
You can say for all you want, you're trying to be like quantitative and this and that.
But nobody knows the future.
So you construct a story, but you know,
you're saying what is the evolution of that story going to be
such that someone will buy this from me at a higher price?
That's all that matters.
And part of it, like, you know, for entrepreneurs,
one way that I suggest to look at things is,
what's the terminal value?
You get someone to agree to that.
All you're doing when you're raising money is you're de-risking your path for that terminal value.
And people don't realize that's all of investment.
Yeah, it's a very simplified view of it.
So I'm excited to have you at speaking at abundance 360 this year.
Thank you for joining us in March.
Thank you for having me.
And, you know, I've dedicated an entire day.
We've added a fourth day of the program focused on AI because it's just,
I think people need to understand how powerful and disruptive and a view of what's coming.
Another one of our rock star speakers there,
someone who you know, Ray Kurzweil, and Ray's going to be joining us to speak as well.
And, you know, it's been Ray's long held belief that we're going to reach
a human level AI of like 2029.
However you want to define that, what's your thought about that?
Do you think that that is the case?
How do you think about it?
I'm not sure, I think it's singularity in the array.
Again, how have you defined it?
I think my ideal view is that a future that's an intelligent internet,
every person, country, culture, and company has their own models
and they will interact with each other in an optimal way for humanity.
So again, I kind of go to this thing of, you know, Tim Urban and Wait But Why,
when he wrote the article about Neuralink, had this option,
this discussion of the human colossus.
I would like AI to be something of all of us working for us to make us better.
And I think part of this is why I'm basically pushing open source
and these open source models.
And I've created an organization that goes and has all these verticals
that will then be spin off into independent organizations.
So we can standardize the architecture across that.
And it can be an emergent global consciousness as it were.
I think it's important for us to talk about the idea of these models
and these personalized models to understand what that means.
So when you build a massive model that is trained on everything out there,
it's not really necessarily useful.
But you talk about creating models for nations, for cultures,
for companies, for individuals.
Can you just give us the 101 on that
so people understand the power of that and the value of that?
Knowledge evolves at different paces, right?
There's knowledge on how to use a toilet that's been with us for many, many years,
you know?
Versus knowledge on foundation models, which is just very new.
You kind of see that fashion is like pace layering, as it were.
The thing, the way that models will be built is that you should look at them
as like pizza bases.
So we're trying to figure out what an optimal pizza base is
for a generalized image model.
Then you've got maybe an Indian model with a bit of culture in there
and then Indian fashion in there.
And then Indian fashion for MAD to try and be fashionable when he's in India.
And so you can kind of look at those as bases.
Because what we do is, again, we float the paradigm.
So to train stable diffusion, like we built a 4,000 A100 cluster with our buddies at Amazon.
To put that in context, the fastest super computer.
4,000 A100 cluster.
Yeah.
It's huge.
Yeah.
To put it in context, the fastest super computer in the UK, Cambridge One is 640.
We've got about 10 times the compute of NASA, roughly speaking.
It's one of the top 10 in the world.
And next year, it'll go 10 times bigger.
Yours will go 10 times bigger.
Yes.
Okay.
And we make that available to everyone.
And it's on the Amazon cloud?
It's on the Amazon cloud, yeah.
Because it would have been a bit too much for us to build it by ourselves.
So we got them to lean in on that and kind of build this.
Facebook has 16,000, for example, because they're pushing big metaverse.
That's the fastest in the world, if you want to have an idea.
But again, this is an exponential thing whereby we have more than just about every single country.
And we use that to take 100,000 gigabytes of images and compress it into that.
100 terabytes.
Yeah.
100 terabytes and compress it down.
So into two, effectively.
So 50,000 to one compression of knowledge.
All right.
And so when you say that compression, when you're talking about a neural net,
you're not all of the connections or the pathways in neural net are useful or valid.
Yeah.
Right.
And so what you're doing is you're choosing which ones are.
Yeah.
Because it pays attention to what the most important.
So this is part of the attention.
Yeah, yeah.
And then it creates these latent spaces that you poke with the prompts,
which are the words that you put in.
Right.
So like OpenAI, for example, made GPT-3.
It was 175 billion parameter model.
The next step, after that deep learning, because that's called deep learning,
this thing, because we spend all the energy and all that compute, you don't have to.
You can then take that base, that pizza base.
You can inject some PETA and then you have a PETA model.
It just takes 10 images and then you can put yourself in anything.
Or you can spend 100,000 images and do an even more refined model.
But it forms a base.
It's what's called the foundation model in a way.
But you can even make it even more efficient.
So GPT-3 is 175 billion parameters.
So it's like 80 times bigger.
And they said GPT-4 was going to be like 100 trillion parameters.
Could be.
Yeah.
I think the chat GPT is actually training GPT-4 right now.
Interesting.
Because what happens is that you have this foundation.
But then in the classical day age of big data, what mattered was who you were.
So they took your data, they built these big models and they targeted you.
What matters now in the day age of big models is how you use the models.
Because not all those neurons are needed.
We don't need all two billion images, right?
Right.
So GPT-3 was 175 billion.
They saw how people used it.
And they identified the neurons that lit up.
And they compressed it down to 1.3 billion parameters.
So now when you're using chat GPT, you're training one of those models.
And they're looking at how people are using it to compress it down.
So several fusion compress down even more.
But then this is personalized model that's very interesting.
Because you can have almost this standardized base.
And then you can inject your own context into it.
And the context of your culture, your company, your community, and others.
And so that base is manual built.
In that you can extend out the latent spaces.
So like in stable diffusion one, we didn't really filter it.
So Mona Lisa is overfit.
There's too many pictures of Mona Lisa.
So it's very hard to get her out of the picture frame.
Now we adjusted it so you can make her swim very easily.
Because it's not overfit anymore.
And it'll continue improving and adapting.
So we'll have a better amount of bases.
And in a year's time, we'll have a very mature base that people can take and extend.
So like in Japan, they took stable diffusion.
And they adjusted the text encoder for Japanese culture.
And then it meant that if you use normal stable diffusion,
because it's very Western oriented, salary man means a happy man.
Yes.
In Japan, diffusion is very sad man.
Very sad man indeed.
Because it understands that context.
Fascinating.
So in the future, if I wanted to, you know, I coach a lot of entrepreneurs
and a lot of CEOs through abundance 360 and so forth.
If I wanted to create a virtualized version of myself,
that in certain circumstances would react in a certain way,
that's pretty easy.
It's coming.
So pocket coach, if I wanted to like have Tony Robbins in my pocket
in the right moment or the Dalai Lama, it's all possible.
Yeah.
And that'll be probably a four gigabyte file.
And how far is that from now?
Pretty much do it now.
Go do it now.
And you can do it fully realistic.
Like, you know, I think the term is holy shit.
That's amazing.
Yeah.
Because you have the multi-modality.
You can make it indistinguishable from a human.
Like stable diffusion two is pretty much photo realistic.
Now stable diffusion three will break that barrier.
And obviously we can animate now.
So again, that's kind of crazy.
It's crazy.
You know, meta humans, epic game and epic game style or what and video doing.
You can also do human realistic voices with fully emotional range as well.
So like my sister-in-law runs a company called Sanantic.
She reconstructed Val Kilmer's voice for Val and Top Gun.
Nice.
I was doing all the video games.
And if you go to Sanantic.io, you hear an AI tell you that it loves you and it's really creepy.
She just sold to Spotify.
So I'm sure we'll have some really engaging podcasts and things like that.
And like again, across all modalities now, in narrow, you're achieving human levels
and going on to human levels of performance and benchmarks.
From media to understanding to output.
And the barriers to putting yourself in, like I said, you can train a model now
in like less than an hour with 10, 100 images of yourself to put yourself in anything
for a buck.
Because we've done the heavy lifting of millions of bucks of pre-training the model as it were.
Yeah.
Whereas classically AI wasn't like that.
So if I wanted to create a virtualized host of myself being able to on screen
play me, say what I want to say, that's here now.
Let's say it now.
Like the technology is here now.
The implementation needs to be there.
So like one of the companies we work with is called at lethia.ai.
And so they use our language models.
And so you can upload your scripts and it'll learn how you speak.
But then the voice technology, they haven't integrated the voice technology.
We have our next generation audio technology.
That'll come in a month or two and then it'll learn how you speak literally.
I was using last year at Advanced 360.
I was using a company called Soul Machines and it had a virtual humans.
Yes.
All right.
And so I would love to create a virtual version of myself for anybody I want.
And that's here.
That's here again.
Soul Machines is upgrading now thanks to the technology that we're open sourcing.
This is the other interesting part.
Open source will always lag closed source because closed source can always take open and add in data.
Yes.
And they can have very focused teams focusing on certain use cases.
So we're literally upgrading the foundation of all of these companies
as we release these models.
Interesting.
And then you mix and match and that's where the value is.
Actually, who was it who said, was it my friend Jason or someone else?
No, it was one of the other VCs.
Most of the money in the world is made by aggregation and disaggregation.
It just depends on which part of the cycle you're at.
Interesting.
I can see that.
Yeah.
I was having dinner with Reid Hoffman a month ago or so and he said something
which is interesting.
Every profession is going to have an AI co-pilot very soon.
And I've been saying this for medicine.
I think it's going to be malpractice to diagnose without having AI in the loop.
We'll see what the time frame is.
Five years is my guess.
But I can see an AI co-pilot as an architect, as a lawyer, as a chef, as everything.
How far is that?
Well, I mean, it's here for code right now.
Yeah, sure.
So co-pilot literally was called from Microsoft GitHub.
And then Code Whisperer now from Amazon.
They help you write better code.
It's about 50% speed increase.
Amazing.
And that's what we've kind of measured so far, which is insane.
Like you type in, I want to have a piece of code that does this and boom, is there.
And maybe you need to add snippet.
Doesn't matter.
It makes your life easier, right?
Like Say Well The Fusion is a co-pilot for art.
So artists use it to iterate rapidly on different concepts.
And they take it and there's a Photoshop integration.
And they use it as part of their Photoshop process.
I used to say that the crowd was the interim step until AI, right?
So GitHub was the crowd.
And now you've got, you know.
Yeah.
And, you know, there's questions around, you know, what was it trained on?
Because it was trained on entire snapshot of things.
But again, it's like a different type of information flow to the Web 2 economy.
We're going to skip over Web 3 because it was a bit crap.
And we're going to go to Web 4 or whatever it is now.
And, you know, maybe you could write Web 4i.
It looks like AI.
Do a cool logo for that.
I should get that stable diffusion to make it.
It's, in fact, it's listening and it's made it.
So I love Jarvis from Iron Man.
Yeah.
And I find Siri and Alexa and Google now kind of disappointing.
How far are we from Jarvis?
So I think Jarvis is probably two to three years.
Because like right now you've got a MacBook M2 in front of you.
16.8% of that chipset is a neural engine that's optimized
for these transformer based architectures.
Stable diffusion is one of the first models to actually go down to that level.
And so when will we see that on this machine?
I think Apple is basically aiming for like 70-80% of everyone to have this.
And then you can go from Siri 1 to Siri 5.
And this is why Apple has been talking about privacy and things like that.
Because the new paradigm of the internet, whereby the classical Web 2 internet
was intelligence at the middle, coordinating us and feeding on our dreams and hopes and emotions
to sell us ads.
Now it's intelligence at the edge.
Whereby you've got your own Apple ID, you've got your own privacy layer,
and then you've got chips that can run AI at the edge that really understand you.
That's why the noggin's experience is seamless.
And Google also realized that, so they're building stuff into the Pixel phones.
Yeah, I think people need to realize that the power of these future systems,
call it Jarvis for lack of a better term, is when you give it open access to everything in your life.
Yes.
You let it watch what you're eating, you let it read your emails, listen to your conversations.
Because it makes the world, the term I use is automagical in that regard.
Yeah, and you need to have the foundation models to do that because it needs generalized
knowledge and then specific knowledge and contextual knowledge that can adapt to your needs.
This human in the loop process is very important.
And so there'll be big AIs in the cloud, but then a lot of AIs on the edge,
and they'll interact with and talk to each other and part of each other.
Because what these models also do is they take structured data and turn it into unstructured
data.
So again, stable diffusion, a few words.
Robert De Niro's Gandalf, you get a photorealistic picture of Robert De Niro's Gandalf.
Yep.
That's structured, unstructured data.
Yeah.
And then you can go both ways.
A brief note from our sponsors.
Let's talk about sleep.
Sleep has become one of my number one longevity priorities in life.
Getting eight deep uninterrupted hours of sleep is one of the most important things you can do
to increase your vitality and energy and increase the health span that you have here on earth.
You know, when I was in medical school years ago, I used to pride myself on how little sleep
I could get.
You know, it used to be five, five and a half hours.
Today, I pride myself on how much sleep I can get.
And I shoot for eight hours every single night.
Now, usually I'm great at going to sleep.
If I'm exhausted, you know, I've worked a hard day, I'm right out.
But if I'm having difficulty and it occurs, I'm having insomnia or my mind's overactive
and I need help to get that eight hours.
I turn to a supplement product by Lifeforce called Peak Rest.
Now, Peak Rest has been formulated with an extraordinary scientific depth and background.
Includes everything from long-lasting melatonin to magnesium to elglycine to rosemary extract,
just to name a few.
This product is about creating a sense of rest
and really giving you the depth and length of sleep that you need for recovery.
It's a product I hope you'll try.
It works for me and I'm sure it will work for you.
If you're interested, go to mylifeforce.com backslashpeter to get a discount from Lifeforce
on this product.
But you'll also see a whole set of other longevity and vitality-related supplements that I use.
We'll talk about them some other time.
But in terms of sleep, Peak Rest is my go-to supplement.
Hope you'll enjoy it.
Go to mylifeforce.com backslashpeter for your discount.
So let's talk about something which I have an opinion about.
And I'm curious about yours.
I think I know it, which is the idea of privacy, which fundamentally people all want privacy.
I don't believe it really exists.
I mean, when AI can read your lips, when there's data flowing everywhere or where encryption.
What are your thoughts about privacy and how do we deal with it?
Do you have any ideas?
I think for privacy, you should always look at kind of what the downside to not having privacy is,
actually people are more than willing to give up their data.
Too willing, in my opinion.
Everybody clicks the yes, I accept there's 15,000 pages of legal.
Exactly.
And then you have to think as well of different paradigms.
In China, will there ever be privacy?
Probably not.
And you have the social credit score and it's an opticon being built by AI, etc.
And the Western Parasite, what's the downside on the privacy thing?
Like what if your stuff isn't private?
It's basically bad actors using you in certain ways,
which can include AI algorithms trying to manipulate you.
I think, again, what Apple's doing is building a paradigm for actual privacy
because it's aligned with their business model.
Even other companies now, Facebook and Google have enough information,
they don't need your data anymore.
Who actually wants your data?
I think it's a question.
We view ourselves as these wonderful things.
Who actually wants your data at this point?
But the systems have adopted to do that and policies adopted to do that as well,
with GDPR and all these other things.
Some of them overreach, I think, a bit.
But we are moving to this area whereby nobody needs your data anymore.
And also the systems are now available to give you that privacy that you want.
And I think people want to opt in rather than opt out of a lot of different things
to get more resources and other stuff.
Finally, the final element is that federated learning has matured now.
What does that mean?
So federated learning is when you take the model to the data.
So you used to have to ingest all this data and train the models.
Now, if it's just like a freaking gigabyte, you send the model to the data, it can train.
And then without saying it's Peter or Emma, it can upstream the output.
So we're seeing that in HGR UK, for example, health data, we're seeing it with Melody,
which is a thing with a lot of pharmaceutical companies coming through to open source analysis
of patient data.
You can finally get that where you don't have to sacrifice privacy to build AI and models.
And that's going to be pretty amazing to, again, advance the field
because you have access to so much more data to build better models.
Amazing.
Let's talk about the perceived downside.
And I have to imagine that as much incredible compliments and the world should thank you
for the work that you're doing because of the impact it's going to have,
you're going to have to have detractors who are worried about technological employment
or malicious use of AI or fake news and all of that.
What concerns you?
And I know you're a principled man who thinks about this deeply.
What concerns you most?
I don't have all the answers.
And that's a fairer statement to make.
Yeah, I mean, generally, what I saw was that very few individuals had control
of this most powerful technology.
And then there's very weird things like people like open source AI is like nukes.
So why should you control the nukes?
It was a very strange kind of thing.
No, it shouldn't be open source.
So why should big companies control it?
Again, we live in largely a democracy.
We live in a society.
And so my take was let's educate people, get this technology out there,
and let's have a common conversation about it.
Because I have my own viewpoints, and they're there.
But again, I'm not a representative of anyone.
I'm just me running my own company trying to catalyze this.
Because I thought it was important, given the fundamental change of society
that will be caused by this technology now.
Because exponentials are a hell of a thing for it to get out there.
And so you need to make a splash.
So you know, I've got hate mail and kind of all sorts of things
because it is disruptive.
And we have to be aware of that.
It is crazy and it will cause fear.
We have to be aware of that.
And we have to decide together how to do that.
So like for example, there are artists in the data set.
Because it's a snapshot, right?
Sure.
It's less than 0.5%.
And so is it ethical, legal, and moral to have them in there?
So people can prompt an art style and then mash them together?
I think it is.
But does that mean that we disregard artists who want to opt out of the data set?
No.
Yeah.
Because they're part of the global community.
So we've built it opt-out and opt-out mechanisms.
And by the way, those artists are influencing other artists normally
in the course of just them going to a museum.
Yeah, exactly.
And you know, what we have is now we've had like four or five thousand artists
sign up, per spawning.
Half of them have opted out.
Half of them have opted in.
They'd love to see their work influence the world.
But how many people have really absorbed the prams of the discussion?
Very few.
So like I said, my thing is that again, this is fundamental infrastructure.
Access to this technology is a fundamental human right.
Because otherwise what you're going to have, this is a discussion that, you know,
you've had many times, superhumans and normal humans.
Yeah.
The ability to communicate and create makes you superhuman.
Because it's just not only images, like it's presentations, it's being able to,
like we have voice to voice technology that can allow you to speak more confidently.
It's interesting.
I mean, people need to realize that today the poorest among us in society have more
than the kings and queens had, you know, a couple of centuries ago.
And this is about leveling the playing field.
This is about, this is about, this is the technology and this is what I care about deeply.
And I know you do too, uplifting humanity, enabling every man, woman and child to have
access to food, water, health care, education.
And have a voice.
And have a voice.
They are invisible.
And have dreams.
Yeah.
And have dreams and have the tools to fulfill those dreams.
To have agency.
Yes, agency is the right word.
I had a bit of a flipping comment because again, I can do what I want in my kind of role.
It was like humanity is creatively constipated.
We're going to make it so it can poop rainbows.
I think that's great.
It's a silly comment.
But again, it's the reality because people don't believe they can create.
They don't believe they, the mentality and mindset is wrong because people have more
agents than they can do.
An individual can shake the world or the individual can make anything around them better.
But not if they don't believe they can.
And this is why art therapy is used in mental health settings to amazing things.
We've been conditioned to consume rather than create.
We've been conditioned to be polarized rather than talk to each other and communicate with each other.
And this can again, can change that.
And again, that's why, like I said, this should be, in my opinion, a human right.
It is infrastructure as important as 5G.
And what I'm trying to catalyze now is not that I build the company that makes the decisions for that,
but that we put it out there and we're spinning off a Lutheran other things.
I just figured out a governance structure.
It's not the UN.
It's something else.
So I think one important point is, do you think a world in which individuals are
held back, are restricted, feel they have no hope, or a world where every mother knows her
children have access to the best healthcare, the best education, the best ability to create,
that's a more peaceful world in my mind.
Yes, 100%.
I mean, look, all wars are based on lies.
Okay.
Because for otherwise both sides couldn't be because humans are humans.
Like to kill another human is disgusting.
Yeah.
Right.
And so you have to tell the line that that person is the other and you have to communicate it
and control the means of communication.
You look at kind of, again, where conflicts are resolved when people realize they are humans
and we're all part of a global society.
But our infrastructure has been set up to polarize.
Like literally we can see it visually.
This is how it happens.
The incentive structure is misaligned.
So how can you fight polarization if not by communication?
And how can you do that if you don't give people these tools and you create it so that
there is a base foundation for the world, so that there are generalized models that are global,
then every country has its own AI policy using their variants of those models.
And then because it's all standardized, we can hop between one and the other.
That is a peaceful future.
Yes, and a future worth working towards creating.
Working towards creating.
But it's also now it's the first time we can build that future
because of this disruption in technology.
Like the governments are, there's a definition of a government.
It is the entity with the legitimate use of political violence.
The only one.
That's a sad definition.
But it's the nature of it, right?
Because you saw lots of political violence and then it was consolidated into one entity.
They can imprison you.
Yes.
And they've got an army back in the currency and this and that and that.
Right?
And governments rule on the basis of pure legitimacy to violence.
And again, we see that kind of thing.
Right?
So against this, what typically changes the government or society?
It is an act of violence in some ways.
It's an act of disruption.
It can be a technology.
It can be a revolution or anything like that.
This is a revolution that's happening just after COVID
when everyone's thinking, holy crap, the system was rubbish.
Let's do better.
Yeah.
So once in a lifetime, we respond.
Yeah, I agree.
And the challenge is that in the world today,
you can't transform a government gradually.
Yes.
And this is why as well, crypto,
there were some amazing things in there and amazingly smart people work in there.
It's rubbish because it tried to build a system outside of the existing system
and there was this system and then there was the interface.
Fortunes were made there and fraud happened there.
Yeah.
Whereas this AI, because it can bridge structure and unstructured,
can actually go into our systems, outcompete them and make them more efficient and bring
them forward.
And it's the first technology that can do that dynamically and at scale.
Or build virtualized systems that are de novo that we spend our time in
and opt out of the existing system and into the new.
Exactly.
And it cannot compete.
Or the final thing, of course, is that if you keep it as it is,
whereby it's controlled by the few, they will ultimately use it as a system of control.
It is the Panopticon forever.
And again, we're seeing this in China and other places with a social credit score
that's about to be augmented with AI.
Everyone's looking at everyone else, marching everyone else.
What is freedom there?
Maybe it's still happiness.
Maybe it's control.
Let's give people the option, right?
Let's give people the infrastructure and the building blocks they need
to be independent, happy.
And maybe they don't choose independence.
Maybe it's a bit more kind of Borg-like.
That's fine.
At least you got the choice.
Because again, if we tie this all back, the fact that you can now have AI
that can write better than a human, that can draw better than a human,
that can emote and speak to emotional tones means that, let's say, for instance,
take one aspect of it, companies that are ad-driven that sell ads,
they can create the most manipulative ads in the world ever,
and regulators will not regulate that.
That's interesting.
And they do.
No, but now it's the next step up because they have these latents that resonate.
So like now, when you look at some AI art,
artists can complain what they want.
It's resonant.
When you listen to the most advanced AI voices, it's emotional.
You can feel it.
It tugs at something.
And again, this is a breakthrough that's literally a year old.
Let's talk about the ethics and morals.
Does AI have a moral compass?
I think that the creator...
Should it have a moral compass?
Well, I think the creators of AI, technology is not neutral.
Okay.
The creators of technology do have a responsibility,
and they will never make it neutral because it embodies their perspective.
And it embodies the data set and other biases and things like that.
So I think that AI itself, this particular type of AI,
again, if we just take the model,
it is the action upon the model that then needs to the output.
So there's a responsibility there.
But then like, how do we adapt the model?
We just have a one and done thing that's hardly trained in Western values and norms and mores.
Which is the way it's been going historically in the large corporate setting?
Yeah, because there's nothing you can do.
You can't build a Swahili version of it because you don't have access to technology.
Whereas now with the pre-training and other things like that,
you can do that with one graphics card.
Yeah, it's great.
Right?
Because again, we've kind of flipped the paradigm
of an AI needs to be going all the time to this pre-compressed foundation model.
So I think that then there is the things of like,
when you've got self-driving cars and other things like that,
what are the ethical norms, the trolley problem and everything that you input on that?
These are not easy questions because you're extending humanity,
which that means you also extend the ethics of humanity.
And that is not the same around the world.
Education.
One of your moonshots.
We first got to know each other through the Global Learning X Prize
that Elon Musk and Tony Robbins funded.
You were one of the leaders of the one billion team.
That wasn't the idea.
I just kind of helped implement it with Joe.
And they match a lot of the idea.
Yes.
And so what, so if you don't mind,
what did your team do in that X Prize?
And then where are you taking this vision?
So my co-founder Joe and I, Joe led this,
made Imagine Worldwide to take the winners of the X Prize Kit Kat School
and one billion who are the real kind of champions
and implement it around the world into the Rohingya camps
and Malawi and camps and others.
Like I just support from the side and share him along as he kind of goes
and does the really hard, valuable work.
But now we've seen that I believe the latest stats
from the randomized control trials,
because you need to actually implement it as soon as what happens.
I think 76% of kids in refugee camps,
learning literacy and numeracy in 13 months without internet, it's immense.
It's like one hour of use per day is equivalent of them being in school.
Pretty much, yeah.
Because like as one teacher per 300 students, 400 students.
But then is it enough?
No, it's not enough what we've done at the moment.
What needs to happen is there needs to be a big grand challenge
whereby Malawi kind of has said that they want to roll this out at super scale
and so have multiple other governments now that we have the RCTs.
Let's make an open source ecosystem that has AI at the core,
that teaches kids and learns from kids.
So you take from what's happening in Malawi,
move it to Ethiopia, Sierra Leone, Rohingya camps, Brooklyn, everywhere.
And so there is a actual superstar, amazingly well-created ecosystem for education.
And again, go to the future and bring it back with us.
Love that.
This year at Abundance360, Sal Khan is going to be joining us as well.
Have you spent any time with Sal?
No, not yet.
Okay, so I'm excited to connect you guys because he's built something pretty extraordinary,
but his vision is to bring AI to it so that AI is generating the content, not him,
and it's able to rapidly iterate for cultural appropriateness and so forth.
This is why we need to build.
So one of our things is that we're building national level models
from India to other ones where there's localized data sets and other things.
If you can get the education piece going.
Remember how I said that this AI is like a kindergarten or a grade schooler?
Sure.
It matters what you teach it.
So right now we're teaching everything.
Do we need to teach everything?
No.
So if you have an AI that teaches the kids and learns from the kids,
that's the best data in the world to teach an AI for a Kenyan model or a Nigerian model or others.
And you know who should run that technology?
Nigerians and Kenyans and others.
And so one of the things we're doing is almost like family-based learning
and extrapolated from there.
Exactly because we don't know best.
But we can give tools and we've reduced the barriers
to create national level localized cultural models.
And then those models together form a constellation
that not only have you got base learning of like,
what's the optimal way to teach an analogy about getting better,
then you can go beyond that to that.
And the plan is to have an integrated system
where it's hardware software deployment curriculum
because then we could update that through mesh networking
or the amazing work of Project Giga,
which is putting high-speed internet into every school in the world by the UN.
And then you can put healthcare on that.
Yes.
And then you have a self-adaptive improving healthcare system,
self-adaptive improving education system.
And then the world, I mean for me, that's the calling that I think both of us have
and hopefully many entrepreneurs here.
It's like, what greater purpose could you have in life
than uplifting humanity in that fashion?
Exactly. And then as an etc. manager,
you can fund that at scale by bonds.
Yeah. And the world's biggest problems
are the world's biggest business opportunities, right?
Exactly.
And so what?
Why to become a billionaire, help a billion people.
So one of the ways that we're kind of doing that is results-oriented bonds
whereby you can pledge $20 million for million kids
are provably educated on this standardized architecture.
The invisible become visible.
And measurable.
Measurable infrastructure banks and the World Bank fund the remainder.
Held by the pension funds and you can divert billions and billions of dollars into this.
It's kind of the promise of one laptop a child can finally be done.
But rather than building a system for today, we build a system for tomorrow
that constantly adapts and improves, is understandable and standardized.
Because that is infrastructure.
Yes.
Again, the thing I really want to emphasize is this AI is infrastructure.
It's more important than 5G or anything else.
It's oxygen in the room.
It's oxygen in the room.
So when I think about the future of education going out 10, 20 years
and bringing you back to today.
For me, it's not a book and it's not a flat screen.
It's going into a virtual world.
If I want to learn about Plato, there's a guy sitting on a slab of marble over there.
And he says, hey, Peter, come on over.
Let me show you around.
Introduce my friends.
And it's experiential.
And that that NPC of Plato is trained up by all the knowledge
about Plato by every historian and it's accurate and the imagery and so forth.
And what you just said earlier about real time rendering from stable diffusion
enables that, right?
And the ability to take every historian's work on Plato and train up a model on Plato
enables all that.
Exactly.
And particularly when it is at the hardware level.
Because typically what software happens is that, again, you build layers and layers and layers
of kind of compilers and translations.
So you're far from the hardware.
This model is already efficient at the top level.
What happens when we optimize them and push them down to the hardware level?
You don't need anything.
You don't need anything.
You can form it.
But then all of a sudden you have the young ladies in the straight of primer.
Yes.
Neil Stevenson's incredible book and a vision for the future of education.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And we can make it finally, but we can make it more.
We can make it closer to the prime radiant and foundation.
So are you building hardware, Imad?
Getting other people to build it for me.
My life is not complicated.
But you're setting the specs.
We're setting the specs.
But this is the thing.
Who is we?
Okay.
The way that we're going to do it is that it's similar to the grand challenges and the
prizes and that like, let's get together.
We will drive the process because the rule by committee, you know, never works.
But let's invite everyone to participate from the kids using the tablets to code them.
To the most advanced developers in the world.
And let's build something for humanity.
That's the way to do this.
Amazing.
Amazing.
So you don't like the term web three.
You wanted to jump over to web four.
But this virtualized world, which is the convergence of AI and VR, AR, blockchain,
and so forth, where do you see it in the near term going?
It's just going to go insane.
So like we have technology, I'm going to make an announcement in January about some of our
technology.
You've got Apple likely having AR glasses, snap, oculus is all of this.
It'll be a fully immersive worlds where you can engage.
Like when I was a video game investor, I looked at time to flow, fun and frustration.
Yes.
And I think this technology can adjust all of those and create worlds for us.
But it'll be a year or two.
Because again, now it's percolating and it's getting ready to then create brand new experiences
on the fly for everyone.
And I think in a couple of years, it starts going in five years.
Creativity, imagination, engagement, entertainment is completely transformed.
Within five years.
Within five years.
It's going to be the biggest shift change that we've ever seen.
Because the incumbents can't keep up with entities that are using this technology that
can do everything.
Like, what does making a picture look like when you can change it live with just words?
Right.
And you can say, actually, make his hair a bit longer or, you know, get rid of those
nostril hairs and it just understands and does it.
Intentionality, yes.
Intentionality and action.
Yes.
You know, it's kind of, you know, the whole military thing of observe oriented,
decide and act, right?
These systems enable that almost flawlessly.
Like if you use OpenAI's whisper technology, the translation of the podcast is just immense
and all these other things.
Because it's learned so many principles and they're tiny files.
And then you can say, you could make it self-referential and say,
improve it the way you think I'd want it to prove.
You can.
And like we're building a technology, for example, that tells you how good a story is
or how good code is.
Yes.
So then you have a creation and a discriminator.
They bounce back and forth against each other.
And they learn from your personal context.
Amazing.
You took a break from being a hedge fund manager to address your son's autism.
Which was, I mean, there are individuals like yourself, like Martin Rothblatt and others who
were like, you know, I refuse to believe that something can't be done.
And you jumped in.
For those who are dealing with autism personally or in their families or in their community,
what were your learnings and what would you advise?
There's always room for improvement.
And everyone struggles with something.
How old is your son today?
He's 14.
14.
He's super happy.
So I've asked Burgers and ADHD myself.
I think they balance each other out.
That's what they say.
You do it pretty well.
Yes, all right.
So I had a lot of kind of issues around those things.
But people, again, everyone's different and then diversity is our strength, as it were.
But sometimes kids and others need help because they can't achieve that potential
because there's too much going on.
So like I said, I'm buying into the GABA glutamate balance theory of it.
And so we had some drug repurposing and other stuff on an N of one equals case.
That's not science, as it were.
It's first principles.
And I don't think it's coherent enough to kind of be brought forward, but it's interesting.
Instead, I think there are certain things that benefit everyone, such as a blind behavioral
analysis, whereby because you haven't built up the words,
there are short trials to try and reconstruct what a cup means.
It's quite an intensive process, but it's also what people do after strokes and
other things that make them lose their connectivity in their brain.
Most of this thing, though, is about noise filtering and reduction of that.
But I think percolation of that means that you have to look into
first principles analysis of some of the science of what can cause it.
And then you have to bring that forward to what is safe.
So don't do kind of crackpot theories.
But there's an emerging science and studies showing things like NSE216,
software refrain, other things that calm you down are probably the best.
And a large part of it is just connection and engagement there.
So one of the things that we'll be doing next year is that we'll be taking all the research
that I've done and formalizing it properly.
Because again, it's not a case of, well, I can do it, so anyone should have it.
I did an N equals one case.
Yes.
But then that should be extended out.
And this is why I realized when COVID came along.
So I designed and launched, with the help of loads of people,
collective and augmented intelligence against COVID-19.
Launched at Stanford in July of 2020.
Was that the actual origin of stability?
That was the first origin of stability.
So we didn't incorporate at that time, but kind of put it together.
I mean, it's insane how far things have gone in two years.
Yeah.
I mean, we probably actually kicked off in 13 months ago.
So yeah, it was insane.
Because I saw it coming and I saw it like autism as a multi-systemic inflammatory condition.
Where even now, if anyone asks you, how does COVID actually work?
If you ask a scientist, they'll tell you, we don't actually, sure.
Sure.
Like why are ferritin levels high and why is this and that?
The reality is our base foundation is not good enough.
We don't have enough shared knowledge.
So I created that to create a system that's comprehensive, authoritative and up-to-date.
So there's a nice blog about an OCDU type site and things like that.
A lot of private sector enterprises that promised a lot didn't deliver.
And so I realized, again, this technology was the future.
And we needed to create open infrastructure for that.
So when we do our autism releases next year,
all of the knowledge and everything like that will be available.
There will be a semantic scholar on steroids,
which allows you to access the information relevant
to the type of autism that your child might have.
Because basically we figured out there were 16 different etiologies while driving conditions.
But 30% of kids will get worse and 26% of kids will get better with the same treatment.
So it doesn't work.
This era of personalized medicine needs a foundation.
And again, that foundation must be common.
But we can't wait around to do it.
And it's interesting, right?
The more I learn about the fundamentals of human biology, the more complicated,
you can dig layer after layer after layer.
And I don't think it's possible for, I mean, we're discovering so much
because the tools we're using.
But we're going to need this level of AI to cognitively understand the interactions of the system.
Again, it's a complex hierarchical system.
You know, classical Herb Simons style.
And so we have to build new tools to enable that.
The question is, are these tools closed?
And the company is trying to, are they open?
And so our take is open.
And then so our business model is just scale and service around that,
which is how all the servers and databases are.
But open is secure as well.
That's why Linux is used everywhere versus Microsoft Windows, et cetera.
So I think the final part of this is that, you know, again, it's all interrelated.
Like the body is such a wonderful, powerful thing.
If you look at longevity and things like that,
we need, again, this first principles thinking to both make us healthy
and live longer and be happier.
Yeah. Have you thought much about what's coming down the pike
with quantum technologies and quantum computing?
So like, I think very sympathetic to various approaches there.
Like I'm quite, I quite like the quantum annealing on the kind of D wave.
Because I think that, you know, Carl Friston's theory around kind of free energy principle
and having these low energy states makes a lot of sense.
In fact, this is similar to what the AI models do
in that when you look at the latent spaces,
you're going to the low energy states of what that could kind of mean.
So that's quite a lot of jargon, I think, for a lot of lists.
But basically, quantum computing kind of is another part of the puzzle.
A lot of people try to take one AI model and say,
oh, we're going to put something that can do everything.
You know, they look at AI as the thing that can do everything.
The human brain is made up of so many different parts.
And we're just filling in some of the missing gaps right now
of which quantum computing is one of them.
Yeah. And it's, I think it's adding fuel to the fire of how fast things are moving.
Ah, yeah.
It's going to be, you know, kind of an insane future.
We can see the qubits increasing and we can see it getting there.
I mean, again, part of this is a supercomputer thing, right?
Like our supercomputer, we've been the fastest in the world five years ago.
Yeah.
Which is insane for a private company.
Right. Yes, absolutely.
You know, like think about bigger than everything.
But if you look at it, like NVIDIA is the one that kicked off
because they put AI in the core of their graphics cards before this even happened,
which is why it's now a 32 billion dollar part of their business.
The AV100s, four years ago with the first iteration, the A100s were the next.
Now the H100s are like up to nine times faster.
It's literally going exponential, the compute.
It's going exponential, the research.
The technologies, we see exponential technologies everywhere and we're like,
it's so difficult to piece all these things together to see.
I don't even know where things will be in a year, let alone five years, let alone 10 years.
I think that's an important part.
And this is what, when Ray talks about the singularity,
you know, it's the notion that we're, you know,
the ability to predict what's going to happen next has become impossible.
And that timeframe, you know, people say,
what's it going to be like in 20 years?
I can barely think about 10 years from now,
or five years from now, let alone 20 years from now.
Yeah.
And this affects the way that we act.
So the way that our brains work is that our default is decision making under risk.
So we look at the upside down side of something
and we make an expected utility calculation based on that,
because systems are stable.
Is the world stable now?
No.
Yeah.
You know, so what do we do instead?
We make decisions under uncertainty,
which is we minimize for maximum regret.
You know, or actually we just minimize for regret.
Yeah.
So with these powerful technologies, people are like,
don't give them out because I don't know what can happen.
It's the amygdala, it's a dystopian point of view.
It's minimizing our downside, protecting what we have.
It's a scarcity and fear based animal brain,
you know, reptile brain that we default to.
And this happens synchronously.
That's what we saw with COVID.
It just happened.
All of a sudden, everyone thought the same.
Right.
It's what we're seeing with tech layoffs and things like that.
Like Facebook makes loads of money.
Why are they laying off?
You know, things like that.
And so we have to be kind of aware of this
because what's happening now as well is that the classical system has reached its end.
We've borrowed too much money from the future.
And now we are going to a negative sum game
with inflation and other things.
People are losing wealth rapidly.
That leads to unstable Nash equilibrium
from a game theoretic perspective.
So we go from one steady state and lurch to another.
Inflation to deflation to maximum employment,
to job losses, to fiscal stuff.
And it's just going to be a crazy few years.
And that's the reason I called it stability.
I was going to, that was one of my questions.
We're, you know, and obviously there's,
there's a terminology of stability in the,
in the models that you're building,
but stability in order to help stabilize society.
Yes.
Build a human OS or catalyze a human OS
because it can only be built by society.
We're just a catalyst.
Yes.
Help guide that in a way.
Because this AI can be finally the thing
that can stabilize a complex system
that is humanity and allows to achieve our potential.
That's a platform, a infrastructure platform
that uplifts all of humanity.
Yes.
And again, it should be run by the people for the people.
So like our subsidiaries in the countries,
we're putting aside 10% of the equity
for the kids that use the tablets.
And I'm never going to take a penny out of any of them
until IPOing them,
because they should be owned by the people.
I love that.
Okay.
Close this out with two, two topics
around the moonshots and mindsets.
If I were to launch an EMAID XPRIZE,
fully funded and push it out to the world,
what's a grand challenge in XPRIZE
that you would love to see materialized out there?
I think this education is the key one.
I think it's the next step of global learning,
which is a grand challenge just to build this system
and especially for low-income countries.
Again, the delta on the impact can be so massive on this
because it's infrastructure for the next generation.
Like a lot of these emerging markets leapfrogged
straight to mobile phones to skip computers.
Yeah.
Now they can skip to the AI age.
How amazing will that be?
It'll uplift everyone.
And there's no greater asset to a nation,
a company, anybody than the intelligence of its citizens.
Citizens are intelligent.
They don't have access to be able to take that intelligence
and build for themselves and extend that.
We can make that infrastructure now to do it
for the first time ever.
Yeah.
Amazing.
Amazing.
What are the mindsets that have allowed you
to be successful, do you think?
I talk about an abundance mindset, a longevity mindset,
a moonshot mindset, an exponential mindset,
a curiosity mindset.
Do any of those resonate for you or are there other mindsets?
Because I think mindsets are the most important
differentiator that we have.
So, like, I've always been very lucky
and I've achieved very interesting things.
I was never really motivated the last few years
when I finally applied myself.
And what I'm good at is first principles thinking
on those first bits rather than atoms.
But I realized there's nothing I can't do.
There's nothing, people can do anything
if they put their mind to it.
But they have to think in a structured way
and they have to let almost water flow as it were.
So what I always try to do is I try to make it a win-win
for everyone to participate, to help, to extend this.
And at a time of absolute change, you can make that happen.
So this is why I go to the future and I go back to the past
and I work back that way.
Which I think a lot of people don't
because they get stuck in the present.
So it's the moonshot mindset looking to the future
and, again, recursively back propagating.
And I'll close out with if you were going to list
the moonshots that you're working on right now.
You're clearly working in education.
We've talked about that.
But as someone who's, like, going to disrupt
all the industry is healthcare as a moonshot.
I am working on everything.
Everything.
I've got about 18 different ones.
But education is core.
And creativity is core.
Those two enable everything else.
If you want to fix climate, if you want to fix hate,
if you want to fix a lot of different things,
get those two right.
And that's the foundation for the future.
Mademoustak, it's a pleasure, my friend.
What a fun conversation.
Excited to share your wisdom and vision with the world.
Excited for what you're creating as a fundamental platform
and infrastructure for humanity.
I wish you all the luck and look forward
to supporting me any way I can.
Thank you very much.
Again, it's just a little catalyst.
It'll be everyone else that drives this forward.
See you in March at A360.
Cheers.
Cheers.
Everyone, this is Peter again.
Before you take off, I want to take a moment
to just invite you to subscribe to my weekly tech blog.
Today, over 200,000 people receive this email twice per week.
In the tech blog, I share with you my insights
on converging exponential technologies.
What's going on in AI?
How longevity is transforming, adding decades to our life?
In the tech blog, I often look at the 20 meta trends
that are going to transform the decade ahead
and share the conversations I've had
with incredible tech thought leaders
on how they're transforming industries.
If that sounds cool to you and you want to try it, join me.
Go to dmads.com.
Backslash blog.
Enter your email and let's start this weekly conversation.
Let me share with you the incredible progress
we're seeing in the world of technology
and the positive impact it's having on our lives.
Again, that's dmads.com backslash blog.
Looking forward to sharing my insights,
an incredible breakthroughs I'm seeing with you every single week.
