Okay, this is gonna be a really fun video
because I'm gonna explain to you
how corrupt the music business was when I got in it.
But it really started back in the mid-90s around 1996
and it eventually led to the demise of rock music
but really of most music.
And this particular corruption happened on so many levels
that it's a really convoluted story.
So I'm gonna have to explain it
with a couple other punchins to get into greater detail
so you actually can follow along
because you're gonna be scratching your head going,
wait, what?
I have Jim Barber here.
Jim's been on my channel one time before.
Jim, give us a brief history of your career.
I've done radio promotion.
I manage driving and crying.
I've been a producer, been a publisher
and I was an A&R executive at Geffen
during the era we're gonna talk about today.
But if you wanna know more about me,
you can read me on Substack.
It's called Stars After Stars After Stars
and I'm writing about all of these things.
It's in the description.
Okay, so we agree on this one thing
that 1996 was a pivotal year
because of the Telecommunications Act
that Bill Clinton signed
that consolidated radio here in the United States.
And essentially two companies, Clear Channel and Cumulus,
bought up most of the radio stations.
Before that, you had local stations
that would be controlled,
let's say a company might own six stations
in a particular area.
These stations would be supported
by local businesses advertising on them.
But what was the theory in them
developed in this communications act?
Well, the original idea before then was
you should have local ownership of media
and you should have as many different voices as possible.
And the people who wanted the Telecommunications Act
wanted to say we'll have more leverage in the marketplace
if we have 100 stations.
What we miss about pre-1996 was
when you only own five or six stations,
you have to have individual program directors
for every one of the stations you own.
And what happened after that passed
when somebody bought 100 stations,
corporate America hates duplication and jobs.
So they fired all the local program directors
and put one person in an office in New York or Atlanta
to program all the stations.
Okay, so you have the program director
which is the head of the radio station.
You also have DJs.
Now, most of the people I've interviewed
talk about one station really breaking them.
Andy Summers talked about this.
There's one station that broke the police.
Pretty much everyone I've interviewed
from these huge bands, one station breaks them.
It's very rare that something just jumps right out.
Like a Nirvana jumped out.
They put the video on MTV and it just blew up
and that was it.
Well, when you have a mom and pop business,
the individual people who work at the radio station,
the DJs had a lot more influence
than they would later when everything's controlled
from a corporate headquarters,
when everyone's told what to play for their entire shift.
When I was playing in a band in the late 90s,
I knew people that worked for record labels
that lived locally and were radio promotion people
for the labels that would go into the stations
and the ones like 99X, Leslie Fram.
So because they were not owned by Cumulus
or Clear Channel at the time,
she still had the autonomy to play whatever she wanted
and add whatever records she wanted.
So they would have a person go in,
you'd have 15 minutes or so to give your pitch.
They'd have a room full of people
and everyone would have their records they would pitch.
When I say records, it would be a single of a band.
It was a real badge of honor for some of these stations
to be the one that found a new artist.
So there was a lot of competition in the community.
The radio community, people wanted to say,
oh yeah, I discovered this band and it became a hit.
So there was a real motivation for people
to listen to as much music as they could.
So a big part of the equation for all these years
was independent radio promotion.
Independent promoters, no offense to my friends
who worked in radio promotion,
were basically the buffer between the labels
and the radio stations because Payola still existed
all the way up through all these eras.
So-
Payola was when you used to pay radio stations
to play your records.
So when they made that illegal,
they just had independent people that you would pay
and they'd be the intermediate so it wouldn't be illegal.
You didn't really know what they were doing
with that money, you sent them in an envelope.
Once these stations were bought up,
they were like, okay, well, who are we gonna get to program
these 150 stations that we bought?
Oh, let's find one person to do that.
This happened, actually.
There was basically one guy that programmed
almost all the rock stations
and some of the programmed all the alternative stations.
I won't mention who they are.
They were people that were paid by both the record label
and the radio stations or the big companies
to program these stations.
And they would get a particular sum of money
from every single station they got an ad on,
even though they were in control of the playlists.
They're basically paying themselves
to put the records on the air in a weird way.
And in one case, one of the guys ended up
becoming a manager of some of the bands.
He would get paid,
the bands would make money from radio airplay
that he would get 20% of when he was the person
that put them on the radio
and decided how many spins they were getting a week.
Doesn't quite seem like that should be happening that way.
Well, and those of us who believe competition is good,
this becomes a real problem
because what you really have is the taste
of one or two individuals determining what goes on the radio.
So people start making their records and mixing them
and mastering them in a way that they think might appeal
to this person who controls all these radio stations.
So I had people saying that they, when I was producing,
people were looking for the next Nickelback.
They just were, that was what people wanted
because the people that were playing Nickelback,
the guys that controlled the playlist,
that was the standard.
And that they were a band that was selling records
and people wanted that
because the people, that was their taste.
They liked Nickelback, so they played it.
Here's a real problem for me.
So the stations are being controlled by people
who don't live in the market
and don't actually have to listen
to what's going out over the air.
So you get these records that are all mixed
to sound the same.
And if you start listening to a rock station in Detroit
or Cleveland or Atlanta for two hours,
all the records, if they're playing new records,
they all blur together.
Well, first of all, a lot of them were produced
by the same people and they were mixed
by the same people.
There was a handful of producers
that produced all the rock records from, you know,
the late 90s on until about 2012
when rock music completely died.
They were not only produced by this handful of people,
then there was a handful of mixers.
When I say handful, I mean less than five.
So the records sounded,
sometimes you would listen to the radio
and you'd hear 20 songs in a row
that were all mixed by the same person.
And they could have the same drum samples,
the same, you know, everything,
same bass sound, same type of compression,
things happening.
Well, if you're doing your testing
and for your radio station in your market,
you're all of a sudden discovering that wait,
I have to play records that were made before 1995
to get people to not turn my station off.
It wasn't a, oh, the bands are all terrible situation.
It was records don't sound very good on the radio
anymore, so people are gonna go back
and play older records.
What was considered to be rock or alternative radio
all of a sudden becomes this sort of hybrid.
You get one or two new records and a bunch of oldies.
There's another layer that this is really unbelievable.
Jim and I were laughing about this thing.
You also had these people called producer managers.
Now producer managers started in the 80s, I think,
but by the 90s, there were a few,
a handful of producer managers that handled,
not only all the producers,
but they also handled recording engineers
and mixing engineers and then record label executives.
So you could have a person that had the head of A&R
for a major label was their client,
so they would negotiate their contract with a record label
and they would get a piece of their signing bonus
or they would get 10% of their contract,
whatever it would be.
In addition, that A&R person would hire
a producer that the manager also manages
and then they would hire a mixer
that the producer manager manages.
The producer managers were making a percentage,
15%, I think it would be, of the producer's money,
the people that produced the records.
In addition to doing that,
every producer that I worked with or that I knew at the time
had their own gear and why did they have their own gear
because their producer managers told them to buy gear
so they could rent it back to the band
so that the labels would pay for it.
Let me give you an idea of how these up charges happened.
This is another way that producers
and really the producer managers would make extra money.
So I own this Marshall JCM 800.
This is an amp that we're gonna use for the session.
Well, I'm gonna rent it to the band for $100 a day,
even though I bought this amp 30 years ago
because this is not part of the budget
and this is part of my sound,
so we're gonna use it.
As a matter of fact, we're also gonna use this here.
This is an old Laney Clip amp that people don't have.
I'm gonna charge $100 a day for that too.
You know what, Jay, my JCM 2000,
that's gonna be $75 a day.
Oh, this hi-watt here, yeah, this is $125 a day extra.
So people would charge this day after day after day.
On top of the $2,000 to $2,500 a day
that a studio would cost when you're making a record.
And sometimes you're working for two, three, four months,
five days a week, but you'd get a lockout,
a seven day a week lockout.
So that'd be $14,000 a week just for the studio time.
And then when we use the amps, add all those together.
Maybe it's $500, $600, $700 a day on top of that
for the days that you use them.
Let me give you another example.
So this is, let's say, this comes with the studio.
These are the mic prez that are in the studio.
These are BAE, Neve type mic prez.
But that's not really my sound.
My sound is my rack of mic prez here,
these Helios mic prez.
And this is what we're gonna use.
And since the studio doesn't have these,
and I do, I'm gonna charge the band $1,000 a day
to use my Helios mic prez.
I might even charge them more.
So the studio time is two grand a day,
but there's an extra upcharge here.
And who does that go to?
Well, the producer gets some of the money.
Now, they've already owned this for 20 years or so, right?
So they're just making money every single time
because they can, but ultimately 15% of that
is going to the producer manager.
And they're the ones that are encouraging
the producers to do that.
Another thing to aid up money in the band's budget
was the drum rental.
They almost never, producers almost never use
the drummer's drums.
They would always rent them from a drum company.
They would bring in a bunch of different drums,
in addition to a bunch of different snares,
and then they would have a person
that worked for this drum company tune the drums
and change the heads every single day.
There was a record that I worked on that as in a band
where the drum rental and the drum teching cost,
I think about $25,000 to change the heads
and tune the drums during the week that we tracked drums.
Now, these are legitimate costs, right?
Renting drums and things like that,
but producers like me, I owned all this stuff
and I wouldn't rent the things to the band
because ultimately the bands needed to recoup the money
that they spent on the record from record sales.
And me being the producer,
I needed to recoup that money as well
because I got my producer advance of $3,000 per song
that I needed to recoup
before I started getting paid any royalties.
So this really didn't benefit anyone,
except of course these producer managers.
And it just took the money from the labels
as much as they could.
This is an era when debut albums
would have a $250,000 budget
and they wanted to make sure they got
as much of that budget as they could
and leave less for the artists to live on.
But you're forgetting one other thing.
These same rather smart producer managers said,
hey, if you're gonna hire my mixer to mix your single,
he would get a point for mixing the single.
Well, the single's the thing that's selling your CD.
Wait, let's explain this one point.
One point is one percentage point.
When a new band got signed back in those days,
they would get 13%, that was their deal
of whatever the retail price of record was.
So if a record cost 10 bucks or they made 10 bucks,
the band would make $1.30 per record, okay?
So out of that 13 points though,
they'd have to give the producer three points
and the mixer one point
because somebody, these producer managers figured,
the mixer should also get a percentage point
because if they were mixing the radio singles,
then that was selling the record
so they should make that money.
So you mix one song,
but you get a point on the entire album.
Right, so then they decided to have them
just mix the whole record.
And mixing a record at that time
so that they would charge you,
these mixing engineers would charge money
to rent their 3348 Sony machine.
Then they would pay $2,000 a day for studio time
and then they get paid $3,000 to $5,000 per mix.
That's just the mixing part of it.
And the people who were going along with this
at the record companies
shared a manager with the producers and the mixers.
This is why the producer managers would say
that Rick Biato is not a team player.
And y'all think I'm being funny,
but I've actually heard that language.
I wasn't a very good team player either.
Well, I just thought it was outrageous
to be charging on these things.
And what a lot of people didn't really understand
at the time is that this made no difference
to the record companies
because it wasn't coming out of the record company
share of the sales,
it was all coming out of the artist's share.
Right.
All of these extra charges are being recouped
against the artist royalties.
Artists are paying for all of this.
That's right.
People were feeding at the trough together
and then the records all start to sound more alike
and more alike and more alike.
Well, in 1999 though, Napster happened.
And then college kids were like,
well, I'm not gonna pay 19 bucks for a record.
I can get this for free.
And plus there's only one good song in the record
because the record labels would only focus on a few songs.
They put most of the budget
towards making those songs hit songs
and then the rest of the record was filler.
I will maintain forever
that if records had sounded better
and there had been more variety
and there had been opportunities for more bands to break,
Napster would have been a blow
but it wouldn't have been fatal
to the model of the record business.
But the fact of the matter is that Napster
was the beginning of the end of that
of being able to make huge amounts of money
for producers.
And Napster killed the $18.98 list price CD
which undermined that entire everybody
getting paid to make the record model.
Yes, and then budgets started going down.
So in the 1990s, a typical record budget
for a new band on a major label was about $250,000.
Now, it sounds like a lot of money
but there were bands that had bidding wars
that would have $750,000 budgets.
Two guaranteed records, $150,000 tour support,
guaranteed videos.
I made a few of those signings.
And by 2005, the idea that you would wanna make a record
with a budget of $75,000 was laughable.
People said, what are you thinking?
We aren't gonna spend that much money to make a record.
So then what they started doing,
labels started relying on people like myself.
I could go in, I could co-write the songs with the bands,
I could play the parts,
I wouldn't have to hire session people
because I could replay their parts if they needed it.
Because almost every rock record from the mid-90s on
would have a session drummer on it
even though there was a drummer in the band.
Not everyone, not everyone was Dave Grohl,
but a lot of them, they'd have a session drummer
until Pro Tools happened.
And once Pro Tools happened
and people started beat detecting,
then you could have the crappy drummer of the band play
and you could fix,
even though they would still hire session people
and use beat detectors.
I was once executive producer on an album
that hired very expensive drummers
and then ran them through beat detective.
I wasn't the producer on those tracks.
But that was very common to hire session people to do it.
Well, when there was no budget to hire session people,
labels would say to me, okay,
I've got, this is the budget I have.
I got 50 grand, can you make the whole record for that?
Including mixing it.
Right, so.
That's the catering budget on a record in 1998.
Right, that's true.
And then it was like, well, we don't have a budget.
Well, then eventually people just didn't get signed.
There was just no signing
because rock music started to decline in popularity.
I started doing sessions with no backend royalties
just so I could get an extra 500 bucks per track.
Because it all changed so much.
I mean, I always say that I started producing 10 years too late.
If you had a million selling record,
you'd make $300,000 as a producer on it.
So if you had a multi-platinum record,
somebody had sold 3 million records
you'd make a million dollars on as a producer.
Of course, your producer manager would take $150,000.
All those bands in the 90s from Pearl Jam,
Stone Temple Pilots, Allison Chains, Nirvana,
Raging is the Machine, all these things
were all multi-platinum records, Soundgarden.
So the people that produced those records,
they made a lot of money from that.
They did.
Was it the copy of a copy of a copy thing
that really killed rock music
that it wasn't just Nickelback.
It was people trying to find the next Nickelbacks.
A&R people were afraid to sign things
that sounded original because every time
they sign something, they're risking their job.
Well, and they're risking their job
because radio had changed so much
that you couldn't go find a rogue promotion person
to go to a rogue radio station
to find out if your record was a hit.
So if I signed a band in 1993, 1994,
there was a really good chance.
I could get it on the radio somewhere.
And test it.
And test it.
And if then you put some records in the stores
in that market and people start buying them
and you can go to another market and say,
oh, this record's a hit in Chattanooga, Tennessee,
or Knoxville, or Birmingham, Alabama,
in that next radio station is more likely
to give it a shot.
And sometimes it took six months
to build a hit record, but you could do it.
They would call record stores to see
if things were selling.
This was a common thing,
that radio stations would do research,
record labels would do research.
Look, we put it on the station here in Atlanta,
Wax and Facts, Wux Street,
whatever record stores were here,
we're selling 20 records a day
from 10 spins that we had this week.
All of us in the music industry
were drunk off the catalog royalties
from reissuing things on CD.
There was so much money around in the early to mid 90s.
The people weren't really paying attention.
There were a handful of people in the record industry
who understood how devastating
the Telecommunications Act could be,
but most people just didn't see it coming at all.
I have a radio promotion friend here, Randy,
that's who lives here in town.
He was the one that told me way back then
that that was the thing that was basically
killing the music industry.
That whole FM radio underground,
let's play what we like attitude,
which still carried over into the 80s and 90s.
There were still people running radio stations
who came up that way,
who were determined to keep that spirit alive.
It was wiped out by the end of the century.
I remember back when Urban Hymns by the Verve came out
and Bittersweet Symphony was a single
and the DJ at 99X played it eight times in a row.
He's like, that was amazing.
I'm gonna play it again during drive time.
I can't believe that's something that just kills me.
I'm gonna play it again.
I'm gonna play it again eight times in a row.
Now that would never happen.
And that was this because it was not owned
by one of these big corporations.
Well, we both have friends who or DJs
who by the early 2000s,
there was no creativity left in the job for them.
They were told what to play.
It best you would get a choice
between two or three records.
And you had to play the same kind of record
in the same part of the hour during the day.
It was all allegedly scientific
about what would get people to listen to the radio more.
And all of that research basically destroyed
what made people love radio in the first place.
So Jim, what's next?
Can rock music ever become popular like it was?
Or is that just something that's gone?
I'd look at rock music as having sort of two things
that I really love about all kinds of music
but rock in particular.
One is the freedom for creativity.
And one thing that's been wonderful in the last decade
is young artists who have no prayer, no hope,
no thought of ever getting played on the radio
have had the freedom to be creative in ways
that it's a really nice time to go out and listen to music.
But what's missing for you and for me
is the collective experience
of everybody enjoying a record together.
And I hope you have some ideas.
This is a really frustrating thing for me to think about.
Well, just to that point,
when you're saying enjoy it together,
that collective experience,
artists, whether it was bands like Nirvana or Pearl Jam
or all the bands in the early nineties that were huge,
they were worldwide bands.
They were famous everywhere.
And that's really when rock ruled.
That was the last time that rock ruled.
Lincoln Park I think was probably famous worldwide, right?
But a lot of the other bands from that new metal era were not.
And there was a real split.
People in England weren't listening
to new metal records necessarily.
They listened to Lincoln Park,
but I might be wrong about that.
Am I wrong, Jim?
I think they did.
I just don't think it had the same urgency.
The notion that everyone's talking about an artist
is something that I think people miss.
For Taylor Swift being the biggest artist in the world,
I think she's the biggest cult artist who's ever existed
because I know dozens of people who care a lot about music
who claim to have never heard a note of her songs.
I do too.
Imagine people saying that about Led Zeppelin
or The Beatles or The Rolling Stones or Joni Mitchell.
Or Michael Jackson or whoever.
What's good news if you're a musician
is you can find a passionate fan base.
You can pursue your art.
There are people who are figuring out ways
to make money being artists.
What we were gonna miss forever is the sense
that everybody in the world has to talk about
this record on this particular day.
Was that a function?
Part of it was radio.
It was radio.
I know a lot of music fans.
I know people who are hyper-engaged by music.
I love to talk to them.
We should embrace what we have with that,
but I miss it.
You miss it.
We talk about this a lot.
This is an ongoing conversation between me and Rick,
and I think this is a little window
into what's been a hundred hours
of talking about this between us.
I wanted to capture this,
one of our conversations here about this topic,
and this will probably go on forever,
but Jim, I really appreciate you being here today,
and check out Jim's sub-stack.
I'll put the link in the description.
And I'm working on an interesting project,
which Rick has been seeing a preview of.
It's full-body motion capture live performances by musicians.
It's gonna be available through an app
on the MetaQuest in about three months.
We'll put a link so you can sign up
for information from Soapbox.
That's the company.
It's amazing.
And it's real creativity,
and it's an attempt to bring music to a wider audience.
In the post-radio era.
Post-radio era.
Jim, thanks. Appreciate it.
Rick, this is always fun.
