Hey everybody, it's James Lindsay. You're listening to the New Discourses podcast and
it's time to talk some more about queer theory. I want to make the case, and I suppose there's
a bit of billion ways I could do this. I want to make the case that queer theory is the doctrine
of a sex-based cult. That's it. In other words, to put it more frankly, or more clearly I suppose,
queer theory, which pretends to be an academic discipline, is the doctrine of a religious cult
that primarily targets children and that is based on sex and topics related to sex. And that's
sex meant in both meanings of the word, both the biological fact and the activity, which is
related to the biological fact, incidentally. And it has very little to do with gay identity. So
those are the main points of contention. Some of you will recognize, if you're readers as well,
that what I'm going to do in this episode is actually summarize or mostly run through and ad
lib off of a essay that I published on New Discourses in February after I gave this as a talk in
Pittsburgh at the University of Pittsburgh, which is the one where people dressed as clowns came
to protest me. And if you remember that image on the website, you know what I'm talking about. It
was an amusing little story. The clowns are outside. I didn't see them. Then the clowns came in. I
did see them. And there was one clown actually and her friend. And about five minutes into the
talk about the after about the time I had given like the basic introduction and some serious
facts, she started crying, got up and left and called her mom so loudly that you could hear her
kind of blubber into the phone. Hey, mom, as she walked out, and no further incidents were
recorded. But the way I started off was as strongly as possible. By saying exactly what I
just said, I'm here to talk about queer theory. And its major points can be summarized very
easily. Queer theory is the doctrine of a religious cult that religious cult is based on sex. That's
not the same as saying a sex cult, by the way, that's actually different. It is based on sex in
both regards. But it's not necessarily a sex as an activity oriented cult. And that sex based
religious cult primarily targets children and almost none of it has anything to do with gay
people or gay identity. And all of that is actually demonstrable in their literature. The least
obvious of these points is that last point that has nothing to do with gay people. And it's a
great place to start. And the way I make this case, I could point to an awful lot of their
academic literature, drag queen story hour, which I read their academic paper about drag pedagogy
in one of the Grimmer school series, I think it was Grimmer schools for I read that paper talks
about how the point of drag queen story hour is not actually for LGBT empathy. It's not even about
LGBT identity. It's about awakening a queer potential queer horizon, living clearly, alternate
modes of kinship, blah, blah, blah. In other words, what queer theory is doing is hiding behind
gay identities. And it doesn't even have much to do with them. The gold standard proof in their
literature comes from David Halperin, which is he's a scholar, who is the one who defined queer
in queer theory in his book from 1995 called Saint Foucault toward a gay hagiography, which means
toward making him into a saint. Now, Saint Foucault refers to Michelle Foucault. People have heard
me say Saint Foucault referencing the book, particularly I did it at Oxford in my debate,
and they thought I was making a joke. No, it's literally the title of the friggin book. And you
can actually go look at this book and read how horrifying it is. It's impossible actually on
anything that you want to publish, you know, FCC guidelines, or even the much looser online
guidelines to read this book to you, because it's too blatantly inappropriate. I mean, it
occasionally talks about topics like I don't even want to say it because I don't want the video to
demonetized. Let's just say that it refers to putting fists in certain orifices very explicitly
and refers to it as a liberatory practice, and calls it anal yoga explicitly. I mean, you can get
the book and to search the term anal yoga, and you're going to find all of this right there in
the book. It's pretty shocking to read like a lot of queer theory, but David Halperin's book is kind
of the gold standard for defining the word queer. It's where the word queer was first defined. It's
like the first major treatise that lays out queer theory as queer theory and what it's aiming to
accomplish. Obviously, given the title, it's building off of the ideas of Michel Foucault,
who is this French postmodernist. He was also a pedophile. He was also a BDSM gay man. He bragged
about his experiences in bathhouses in San Francisco and elsewhere. There are some very
unfortunate stories regarding male children or boys around 11, 12, 13 in Tunisia that have come out
at any rate. That's who he's harkening back to. And what he's really pushing back to, he could
get into discipline and punish, birth of the clinic, civilization and madness, some of Foucault's
groundbreaking, I guess, if you want work in what we would recognize now as critical constructivism.
But in this case, it's mostly the history of sexuality and primarily history of sexuality
volume one. Foucault in that book is laying out what is the idea of a homosexual in a very kind
of parallel way to what Simone de Beauvoir was doing, laying out the concept of what is a woman
in the second sex in 1949. Although, allegedly, Foucault was not copying Beauvoir, I don't know
if that's the case or not. I'm not going to get into it. I'm not going to try to parse it out today.
What I am going to say, though, is that it's the same idea, is that the homosexual should be defining
himself on his own terms and those terms have to be defiant to the heterosexual, homosexual binary
and the power constructions built around it. And this idea of an oppositionally defiant identity,
political identity, against norms and expectations is what Halperin said means queer. And in fact,
he says that it means queer, where Foucault says the homosexual, it can only be interpreted
to mean queer. I probably have that citation somewhere and could pull it up to read it to you,
but I didn't plan to. I don't think I put it in this essay, but it's an eye-opener.
But I'm going to read some from St. Foucault as it is, just so that you can have a sense
that this is not about gay identity. So the first words of this relevant definition appear
on page 62. That's the page in this book. You have to read 61 pages of Jesus Christ,
could you just shut your weirdos before you get to the point where he defines queer. And here's
how that paragraph starts. The first three words, which are by a type setting quirk, are in bold
all caps are unlike gay identity. So when he sets out to define queer, the first thing he says is
unlike gay identity. It's something different than gay. Queer is not the same as gay. This is why
he had to do his whole exploration about the homosexual from Foucault, because it's something
different. So what he explains the difference is, is that gay identities, as Halpern puts it,
are grounded in a positive fact. That means something about reality. They are grounded in
the positive fact of homosexuality. Now Halpern does not actually say that gay is something that
is intrinsic and essential to the person as an accident of birth, because he says that it's
grounded in the positive fact of homosexual object choice. That's his actual phrase, which means that
it might be the choosing of same-sex desire. He doesn't go so far as to say it's innate,
but he does say that it's real, the positive fact of homosexuality. Queer, he is contrasting to that,
and he says explicitly that it need not be based on any positive truth or in any stable
reality at all. And he says there is nothing in particular to which it refers. Queer doesn't
mean anything in particular is what he's saying. He calls it an identity without an essence. That
means, unlike gay identities, it is not based in reality. So what is queer if it is not based in
reality? It is a radical political view. In fact, if we want to pull from the Antonio Gramsci ideas
of cultural Marxism, it is a counter hegemonic idea. There's this idea that we have prevailing
cultural values, and they tend to maintain themselves and transmit themselves and stabilize
people and themselves. And that's cultural hegemony, quote unquote, the way things are.
And queer is a defiant oppositional position against that. In other words, it's counter
hegemonic. Just like Antonio Gramsci said, the point of what we now call cultural Marxism or
Western Marxism is to establish counter hegemonic infiltration into our institution. So bringing
queer theory into institutions, whether education, law, whatever it happens to be, media doesn't
matter. Bringing queer theory into institutions is a counter hegemonic activity in line with
Gramsci's Western Marxism, which we often call cultural Marxism. Halperin tells us that queer
means adopting a politics that is against whatever the normal, the legitimate, and the dominant are.
And so you can tell I'm not just making it up. Here's exactly how he phrases it.
Unlike gay identity, which, though deliberately proclaimed in an act of affirmation, is
nonetheless rooted in the positive fact of homosexual object choice, queer identity
need not be grounded in any positive truth or in any stable reality.
As the very word implies, queer does not name some natural kind or refer to some determinant
object. See, it's not real. It acquires its meaning from its oppositional relation to the norm.
Queer is by definition whatever is at odds with the normal, the legitimate, the dominant.
There is nothing in particular to which it necessarily refers. It is an identity without
an essence. Now, I'm cutting off here a lot of how actually psychotic David Halperin is
when I present it this way. I have the book open, so I'll just read to you a little bit more.
He says queer then demarcates not a positivity, that means something real,
but a positionality, that means a politics, vis-a-vis the normative, a position. Here's
where it gets weird. They can't leave it alone. A positionality that is not restricted to lesbians
and gay men, so it's not really about being gay, but is in fact available to anyone who is or feels
marginalized. You don't even have to be marginalized. You just have to feel marginalized
because of her or his sexual practices. It could include some married couples without
children, for example, or even, who knows, some married couples with children, with perhaps very
naughty children. I'm just going to pause. What the hell is he talking about? I'll let you speculate.
What the hell is he talking about? Why does he say that it could be couples who are married
with very naughty children, very naughties and italics? What does he mean here? Why do they always
go there? But I'll continue the rest of the page. Queer, he says in any case, does not designate a
class of already objectified pathologies or perversions, so it's not just about that.
Rather, it describes a horizon of possibility, just like communism is a horizon of possibility
for socialist praxis. It describes a horizon of possibility whose precise extent and heterogeneous
scope cannot, in principle, be delimited in advance. It is queer Marxism, in other words. It is from
the eccentric positionality occupied by the queer subject, so it's subjective. It's not real,
that it may become possible to envision a variety of possibilities for reordering the relations
among sexual behaviors, erotic identities, constructions of gender, forms of knowledge,
regimes of enunciation, logics of representation, modes of self-constitution, and practices of
community for restructuring, that is, the relations among power, truth, and, of all things he could
pick, desire. This is why in the Drag Queen Story Hour paper, it says explicitly that Drag Queen
Story Hour, or Queer Worldmaking is, I think what it actually says, Queer Worldmaking is always a
project rooted in desire. He underscores his point, though, that it's not about gay identities by
saying that it's not restricted to lesbians and gay men, but in fact that it's open to anyone who is
or feels marginalized because of his or her sexual practices. So what are we dealing with?
We're dealing with something that doesn't have a lot to do with gay identity,
at all, when we're talking about queer and thus queer theory, and we're talking about something
that is rooted in sex because of his or her sexual practices. It's right there in the text,
it's extremely clear. But what is the conclusion that we draw from this discussion that Halpern
gives us the defining characteristic of queer in queer theory? It is that you cannot be queer.
Do you understand me? There's no such thing as a queer identity. There is, let me say it again,
no such thing as a queer identity. You can only do queerness. You can only act queer,
and that's what it is. It's an act. And that's why with Judith Butler's work, we see that her work
can boil down to drag is life and life is drag, and that the enlightened people are the people who
know we're always doing a drag performance. What do I mean by that? If I'm a man and I present as
a man and look like a man and act like a man and am a man, I'm just doing male drag as a man.
And if I'm a woman and I'm doing female drag, or I'm sorry, if I'm a woman and I present myself
as a woman and live according to feminine choices and stereotypes and activities and so on,
I'm just doing female drag. And if I'm a male who does female drag, I'm still just doing drag,
but now I've chosen to do it. I'm not just doing it like a socialized robot. I'm awake and I've
chosen to do that in a defiance of the norm. So nobody is queer. People feel queer against some
standard. In other words, they feel defiantly opposed. And I keep using this language, by the way,
oppositional defiant. Oppositional defiant. Why? Because there's a disorder known as oppositional
defiant disorder, which seems to fit the bill here. They are people who feel and act against the norm
and against legitimacy on purpose. So they are not queer. They are acting queerly. And that means
they are acting defiantly against normalcy and legitimacy, while denying and even decrying
reality. You can only perform queerness. That's what Judith Butler's work is really about,
gender performativity. You can only perform queerness, but they think everything is a form
of queerness. You just don't know. You're either upholding the status quo, or you're rejecting it.
So you can only perform queerness, or if you refuse their liberatory politics as they see them,
you can perform straightness instead. Performing straightness to queer theory
isn't being who you are if you're straight, just like gender performance. It's just another
kind of performance, one that upholds the allegedly oppressive status quo, instead of
opposing it, which is thus problematic. We see the same theme in the Drag Queen story hour paper
from a couple of years ago. Let me see if I actually found this other quote from
Foucault, just to really drive in the point. I know that I have it in this other document.
He says, this is Halpern talking about Foucault. Foucault insisted that homosexuality did not
name an already existing form of desire, but was rather something to be desired. So it doesn't
describe a way of being romantically or sexually attracted to people. It's something that you want
to become. It's an identity you seek to become. He says, our task is therefore to become homosexual,
that's quoting from Foucault, not to persist in acknowledging that we are homosexual. Or to
put it more precisely, what Foucault meant is that our task is to become queer. For his remarks
make sense only if he understood the term homosexual according to my definition of queer.
Remember we're reading David Halpern here. As an identity without an essence, not a given condition,
but a horizon of possibility, an opportunity for self-transformation, a queer potential.
Because one can't become homosexual strictly speaking, either one is or one isn't. But one can
listen to this shit. One can marginalize oneself, one can transform oneself, one can become queer.
Indeed, queer marks the very sight of gay becoming. So that is what Halpern is saying
is the point of queer theory. And that's what meshes with the drag queen story hour paper that I was
about to jump to. So I just want to remind you that in that paper there is a section near the end
titled From Empathy to Embodied Kinship. It makes the same point we just made. That section makes
the point that queer programs are presented as improving LGBT empathy in their words,
and that drag queen story hour makes use of such tropes again their word. It then says that that's
not really what drag queen story hour is about at all. It says that's not what queer education or
queer world making are about either. Instead they use the so-called tropes of empathy strategically,
that's their word, as a marketing platform, that's their word too, to justify getting it into schools,
libraries, and in front of kids. But it's actually not about empathy at all. It's about leading the
kids to see the world in themselves in a queer way, in other words to lead them into a queer
worldview. World views, by the way, have ideologies. The ideology of the queer worldview is queer
theory. So it is the doctrine of a sex-based cult that primarily targets children should add through
manipulation and deception, and it has very little to do with gay people. Here's how it's worded in
the drag queen story hour paper in the relevant part. Finally they say it is often assumed that
that's Lil Miss Hot Mess in Harper Keenan, a drag queen at Arizona State University whose real name
is Harris Cornstein, and Harper Keenan is a trans education researcher somewhere, I don't know,
maybe Canada. Finally they say it is often assumed that the primary pedagogical tool of queer
education should be to increase empathy toward LGBT people. That's what you've heard, that's why
we're supposed to have drag queen story hour, because we have to care about the poor little
gay kids who don't have representation, and apparently needed a drag queen to look at,
to feel represented. They go on to say, while this premise has some merit, and it underlies many
sincere projects in educational and cultural work, including drag queen story hour, the notion of
empathy has also been critiqued by feminist scholars of color and others for the ways in which,
notice they throw that intersectional kitchen sink, this is about drag queens, but it's been
critiqued by feminist scholars of color and others, for the ways in which empathy can enable
an effective, emotional effective, effective with an A, not an E, an effective appropriation of an
individual's unique experiences and reinforce hierarchies of power. That's a lot, but what
they're saying is that when you can start, basically that you can do munch housings by proxy, you can
start to show empathy in order to elevate yourself and thus cause problems for the people you're
allegedly empathetic toward. Whether through literature or virtual reality, these tropes
tend to reflect an overstated ability to understand difference as well as empathy's
potential to preclude meaningful relationships of solidarity. See, you can't be in solidarity with
somebody you feel sorry for. They go on and say, it is undeniable that drag queen story hour
participates in many of these tropes of empathy from the marketing language the program uses to its
selection of books. And here it is. Much of this is done strategically in order to justify its
educational value. However, we suggest that drag supports scholars' critiques of empathy rather
than reifying the concept, reifying in the sense of George Lucache, one of the other founders or
fathers of cultural Marxism, to means to make real through social processes. This approach
this is them again. This approach can support students in finding the unique or queer aspects
of themselves rather than attempting to understand what it is like to be LGBT. So what they're telling
you is that the point is grooming people into a queer ideological worldview, children in particular,
not about increasing empathy. It's not about understanding, obviously, they aren't putting
a drag queen in front of the kids because it's trying to teach kids what it's like to be gay.
Drag queens are a horrific represent like misrepresentation of that phenomenon. It's to
support students in finding the unique or queer aspects of themselves. That's what it's really
about. Drag queen story hour is not about empathy. That's their marketing strategy. And it is in fact
to their eyes a bit problematic. So they know that they're lying about it in a way that actually goes
against their values, in order to get it into the schools and libraries and in front of children
in general. But what it's really about is getting kids to discover any aspects of themselves that
they might feel uncomfortable about, or marginalized because of, or different because of, that might
be able to be considered queer by a queer theorist or queer educator, so that those aspects can be
nurtured in the sense of making them have more and more and more discomfort about themselves.
And then until an initiatory rupture occurs so that they can develop the children into a queer
political stance, that will then be conflated with being who they really are. That's what's
going on with queer theory. That's what Halperin is actually describing. By calling them queer
identities, what you're doing is saying, here's this political activity and you're going to pretend
that that political activity is who you are. By the way, that political activity is hating the
world as it is and hating people for being normal and hating anything that is based in the idea of
legitimacy, so oppositional defiant disorder, as a political stance that you're now going to consider
to be who you are, which is in fact, in the definition of queer, not what it's about. So
what will happen is they take these kids, they introduce them to queer potentialities by sticking
a drag queen in front of them, and then they make them feel uncomfortable about themselves,
and they exploit that uncomfortable or emotional crisis or whatever it is to make them feel isolated
and alone, and then they say, there's a new way to understand yourself, and there's a new way to
understand who you are and the world and why it doesn't like you. So then they can awaken to
some basic ideas of queer theory, and more than that, they'll be told that they're not truly allowed
to be who they really are. Society will object. Their parents will object. In particular, they'll
focus on the objection to the parents because they have to get the kids away from their parents,
whose parental duty and responsibility it is to protect them from this kind of ideological and
maybe worse grooming. In fact, it's so likely that their parents will reject this discovery
of who they really are as queer, that it may have to be kept secret from their parents in case
it wouldn't be affirmed by them. And don't worry, the state, depending on what state you're in, and
now more than a dozen states, will force your parents to affirm this or threaten to take your
children away or maybe take them away for real. I'm not supposed to use, I know the word grooming
to describe this grotesque set of activities. That's a part of a major controversy. In fact,
it's part of, it's one of the main reasons that these kids came dressed as clowns to protest me at
Pitt when I gave this talk. But I'm not supposed to call these people groomers because it makes the
left mad that we call them what they are. So I'm going to ask a question instead. Instead of saying
this is obviously groomer behavior, and I know I already did. Let's back up, let's slow down,
let's be a little more careful, Jim. I'm going to show you something else from this paper,
and I'm going to ask this question. What word am I supposed to use for it? We've already talked
about this idea of from empathy to embodied kinship. But I'm going to read something else from this
paper, and I want to know what word I am supposed to use for it. Drag Queen's Story Hour presents
itself as family friendly in a way that characterizes itself as a preparatory introduction to
alternate modes of kinship. That's what it says. What does that mean? What does that mean? Preparatory
introduction to alternate modes of kinship. In fact, it says the family and family friendly
refers to a queer code for the other queers they connect with on the street rather than the family
that's like the real family. So the Drag Queen Story Hour people are not just lying about the
idea that they use empathy, but they're also lying about what they mean by family when they
sell it as family friendly. They tell us themselves in black and white that they mean it is a queer
code for a new family, a queer family, a drag family, that Drag Queen Story Hour is teaching
kids to become friendly to. That's what they mean by family friendly, but they want you to think
it means that adults and parents and little kids and their grandparents are all welcome to come watch.
The paper in fact repeatedly invokes the concept of a drag family for the kids that they would
obviously latch onto in order to develop their queer aspects of themselves. And then the last
sentence of the paper, the last half of that sentence anyway, is we'll leave a trail of
glitter that will never come out of the carpet. Well, what's the carpet here? Seems like it's
probably children's minds. Doesn't seem like that's on the up and up. Now remember that I'm
going to read the actual full quote. I've just talked about it. Let me read the real quote
to you, the real paragraph. And the question is what word am I supposed to use for this?
Because I'm not supposed to call it grooming. Okay, so here's a full, the full quote of that
family friendly part. So you don't think I'm lying, even though I did a podcast about it before.
Queer world making, including political organizing has long been a project driven by desire.
That's what I said earlier. It is in part enacted through art. Sorry, it enacted through art forms
like fashion, theater and drag. So queer world making is enacted through art forms like fashion,
theater and drag. Notice it's not math or physics or history. We believe that drag queen story hour
offers an invitation toward deeper public engagement with queer cultural production,
particularly for young children and their families. This is one of those times where I
want to have like digital slowdown, particularly for young children and their families,
particularly for young children. Do you get the point? Particularly for young children.
It may be that drag queen story hour is quote family friendly in the sense that it is accessible
and inviting to families with children. That's what we call the mod. But it is less a sanitizing
force than it is a preparatory introduction to alternate modes of kinship. Period. That's the
Bailey. Here drag queen story hour is quote family friendly in the sense of quote family
as an old school queer code to identify and connect with other queers on the street.
So I'm asking, I can't use the word groomer. What word am I supposed to use for that? I know which
word I can't use. And that puts me at a complete loss. But what I have actually described to you
isn't just drag queen story hour. It is queer pedagogy. It is queer education. It is the
installing of queer theory into children by means of the educational system and educational
methodologies, both in terms of curriculum and in terms of teaching methods. So here's how queer
theory works. You can't describe it. You can't say anything about it unless you support it. Because
otherwise, you were applying power to it. You were being unjust. You were doing anti LGBTQ hate.
You didn't engage properly because if you engaged properly, that means that you took on the worldview
and agreed with it. You can't even talk about queer theory, according to queer theorists,
unless you support it. It is just like a cult. One that targets kids as we can clearly see. One
that is based in sex and one that doesn't have a lot to do with gay people. Remember, if you
criticize queer theory, that's anti LGBTQ hate. You will end up with a profile, if you're a high
enough profile individual such as myself, on the Southern Poverty Law Center accusing you of anti
LGBTQ hate, of hate speech, of malice, of all these things. You'll get accused of homophobia,
transphobia, and the famous term is anti-LGBTQ hate. I'm going to keep coming back to that because
there's so many things out there claiming that people such as me and others engage in anti-LGBTQ
hate. All you have to do to engage in anti-LGBTQ hate is read queer theory out loud word for word
as it is written by queer theorists themselves and say that's bad. So there's a rumor widely
printed about me that I, because of my use of the word groomer to describe what we just talked about,
implicates me in some social crime called anti-LGBTQ hate, which is apparently very bad,
very serious and utterly toxic, even though all it means is not agreeing with queer theory.
It's not just harmful rhetoric. It's in fact also a conspiracy theory, they say, and I am not just a
very bad person, which obviously I must be, but also a very crazy person for naming the obvious.
Not as a result of inference, not as a result of guesswork, not as a result of any emotions that
I have, but literally just by reading out loud and saying exactly what their own proudly printed
writings say. Without any need to embellish, without any need to interpret, I just tell you
what it says and say, by the way, they mean it. When they say the empathy is a marketing trope
and family-friendly is a marketing trope, but they really mean something else, that there is a
Mott and Bailey rhetorical strategy in play here. A Mott and Bailey actual dialectical lie here.
All I'm doing is telling you what they've written,
taking some of the veneer off of it, and now I am a conspiracy theorist. I am a hater. I have a
Southern Poverty Law Center article and a profile written up about me, and you think, well, who cares?
That's like a badge of honor, and I take it that way. Obviously, that's why I called myself
general hate, but stop for two seconds and realize that if I get called to do some professional
thing, that's going to get brought up as a reason why I'm not supposed to be there. If I try to give
a talk and protesters try to get a shutdown, they're going to leverage that against some
wavering or even complicit institutional administration to keep me out.
They know how this works. The accusation and the resulting social dynamic, which is always hostile,
is straight out of Maoism. It's straight out of Maoist China from the 1950s and 60s.
I have been alleged to be engaging in a crime called anti-LGBTQ hate, and the right side of
history and right side of society, which are on the right side of history, are called to judge me,
bully me, hold me to account for that crime by whatever means it can manage.
The bullying is to continue until I learn to recognize my crime from the queer position.
In other words, I adopt the positionality of queer theory and see how what I said or what I did
was actually socially criminal, and I pledge to reform my thought by adopting queer theory
so that I can not only do better, but also become an activist on behalf of queer theory.
It's a lifelong commitment to self-reflection, self-critique, and social activism. This is
identical to the thought reform programs of Maoist China. It's just a slightly different ideology.
Of course, their accusation is absolute nonsense, but that's not the point. The point is to
initiate the social struggle session on me in order to transform my views to ones that are
either at least sympathetic to or ideally that embrace and repeat queer theory. The accusation
is of an old Marxist standard form, truth married to a lie, and here's the truth. Gays and lesbians
fought for decades to break the public perception that they are predators and groomers of children,
but here's the lie. That's who and what I'm talking about when I criticize their theory and
activism. In other words, I'm not talking about gay people. Just like Halpern's not talking about
gay people, unlike gay identity, I'm talking about people who are deliberately engaging in the
ideological and maybe worse transformation of children into a queer political identity.
That's who I'm talking about, but the lie is that I'm talking about gays and lesbians,
or maybe trans people at large. When I criticize their own theory and activism and point out
that what they say in their own words needs a word. It seems very groomery, even if I can't say
groomer about it and we're all not supposed to. Of course, we can say that and we do say that and
it's not hate to point it out. It's right there in black and white. But this has nothing to do
with any of that. The truth is that queer used to be a slur for gay people, so the activists took
it on to describe themselves in defiance of prejudice and bigotry, but also because it now
becomes impossible to talk about it. Oh, queer theory, you're using a slur. There's a situation.
The lie is that queer theory ever represented civil rights movements for anyone or gay people in
particular. In fact, it was the opposite. It was against everything that the gay civil rights movement
was about. Queer theory is a destructive form of radical activism because it's a Marxist theory,
so there has to be activism connected. It's not just a theory, it's theory and practice combined,
and it is a destructive form of radical activism that actually historically opposed gay civil rights
inequality. Well, why in the world would it do that? Aren't they the same thing? No, of course not,
because gay equality and gay acceptance would normalize being gay within society,
and would legitimize normalcy and legitimacy, right? Legitimize gay people as fully equal
members of society. Queer theory is by definition radically opposed on principle to anything normal
and legitimate. They even have a word for what would happen if we had gay equality and gay acceptance,
homonormativity, which is society accepting gay as being part of the normal expression
of what it means to be human sometimes, and that would mean it's within the normative framework
now, and that gay people are expected to, okay, you're gay, so what? Great, put on a suit and get a
job, and that would all be very bad because they're no longer radical activists. Gay activists who
are listening to this from the 1990s can readily back me up on this. They'll readily attest that
the queer activists were often strongly opposed to their ambitions for civil and legal equality,
for marriage, and for social acceptance. They just were. Why? Because they wanted radicals.
Queer theory needs radical activists, not stable citizens, who can go about their lives in a society
that doesn't in any way meaningfully discriminate against them. They need there to be discrimination,
or the appearance of hate, or the fear that there will be the bad old times coming back
in order to radicalize those people into revolutionary activity, or just to show up and be
human shields for the queer theorists who are doing that. The civil rights activists and the
gay civil rights movements in the 80s, 90s, and so on fought hard for decades, starting at least
in the 50s, to overcome stereotypes of predatory behavior and the idea that they're intrinsically
groomers, and that's why the queer theorists actually claim, or that's why they're actually
able to claim that calling out their blatant grooming is anti-LGBTQ. They're saying, look,
50, 60 years ago, 30 years ago, people said that all gay people are groomers and gay rights just
enables groomers, and the gay civil rights leaders fought back and said, no, that is not what we're
about. That is nothing to do with who we are. That is a harmful stereotype, and they won. We
trusted them, and now you have these freaks and weirdos who are queer theorists who were never
particularly interested in civil rights at all, who are saying, if you call them, which is the
narrower subset, the Q, not even all the rest of it, if you call the Q groomers, then what you are
doing is anti-LGBTQ hate. Do you see how the acronym works to create human shields?
Do you understand that L, lesbian, G, gay, B, bisexual, T, trans, Q, queer, all different,
all different. Lesbians are women who are attracted to women. By the way, you have to know
what a woman is to make that work. Gays are men who are attracted to men. You have to know what men
are to make that work. Bisexuals are people who are attracted to men and women by two.
So you have to believe in the binary to make that work. Trans people, that's their own complicated
topic, but they are men or women who do not recognize themselves as men or women and in fact
may actually recognize themselves as the opposite. So something's very different there. And then Q
is queer, and we already heard that queer has nothing to do with any of that because queer is
a radical political stance. But if you criticize queer, you get wrapped up in anti-LGBTQ hate when
you're not engaging in any anti-LGBTQ or maybe even sometimes anything at all. It's super fake.
It's a standard trick that these kind of Gnostic cults do. Another example is the Christian
nationalist movement. It does the exact same trick. For example, if you criticize Christian nationalism
and you happen not to be a Christian, ask me how I know. What they will say is,
James is attacking Christians. No, I'm not. I'm attacking lunatics who are hiding behind the
Christian identity and brand. Same thing with feminists. If you do, maybe ask me how I know
again. Maybe you call radical feminists hags. I don't know why you would do that. You'd say
they're a bunch of man hating hags. Maybe you would say that about radical feminists for some reason
or another. Maybe nobody could know why you would say that, but maybe you say that. Maybe you're
tempted to say that and you say that and they'll say, you're attacking women. No, you're not attacking
women. You're attacking radical feminist hags. It's very clear who you're actually talking about
and they don't get to represent all women. It's very much like when Donald Trump,
this is one of my favorite Donald Trump incidents, was in an interview with one of these hags,
probably Katie Couric or something like that. I don't remember the details, but he was in this
interview and they said, well, what about when you called women hags? Luckily,
he knew what the hell they were. No, pigs. What about when you called women pigs?
And Donald Trump luckily knew what the hell they were talking about. He said,
I didn't call women pigs. I called Rosie O'Donnell a pig, which is hilarious because
that's actually what's happening. And of course, I'm way off script here, but this is generally
what they do. They blend contexts that are not the same together and treat them as though they're
the same. Radical feminists might be women, but they are not representative of all women,
no matter how much they think that they get to be the Gnostic representatives of true womanhood.
They don't get to do that. So if you criticize the specific groups, say radical feminists or
Christian nationalists or queer theorists or whatever, they hide behind the general group
by claiming to be the true representatives of that thing. They're blending together the context
of the specific, their group with the general or the whole, which they actually are a part of.
Yes, it's true. When I criticize radical feminists who happen to be women,
that I am criticizing some women, but I'm not criticizing women as I don't even like to think
of women as a class. I'm criticizing particular women, just like Rosie O'Donnell. When I criticize
queer theorists, I'm not criticizing LGBTQ because LGBTQ doesn't even exist.
That's a manufactured synthetic coalition so that queer theorists can hide behind
other people who are sympathetic characters. When I criticize Christian nationalists,
it doesn't really matter. They call themselves Christian, but they're obviously not. So whatever.
What's happening is that the fact is that queer activism explicitly, as we've described it so
far, puts the appearance of glaring truth back into the stereotypes of groomers. And then when
you call them out for it, they get mad and hide behind gay people and say, see, they're attacking
you, all you gay people. See, the conservatives, everybody, the society hates gay people. And
everyday gay people who are good citizens lose the most from this little trick,
because eventually things start to break down. And the queer activists gain the most because
they end up with a larger pool of radicalism. They end up with more contention and division in
society, and they end up with more instability in society. Queer activism is therefore a strictly
parasitic behavior like any cult activity. But about grooming more specifically, I am talking
not even necessarily about the thing that they are accusing me of. I'm not when I say that this
is grooming. I'm not actually talking about the sexual grooming that they try to pretend. This
is them again, blending context. I am grooming, talking about grooming specifically into a cult
ideology called queer theory. I've been very clear about this over and over again, you can look the
word up, type in the word grooming and see what it means. Yes, there is the idea of sexual grooming,
and oh, there it is, ideological or political or whatever other professional grooming.
But just to really drive home that they are doing ideological grooming, like it's not already clear,
let's direct our attention to another scholar, another queer educator, Kevin Commissaro,
who wrote a paper in 2002 called Against Repetition. I remind you, Against Repetition means against the
repetition of the existing society by teaching kids to be queer activists. Anyway, in that paper,
he describes the purpose of queer education for children, and Commissaro explicitly says
that teaching children about social justice, including about ideas from queer theory,
is meant to induce, in fact, it is the obligation of the teacher to do this, to induce an emotional
and identity based crisis in them. He then says, that's why it's so important to have queer
educators in place who can guide the now vulnerable students who are experiencing emotional crisis,
so that those crises are resolved in favor of social justice and queer theory. Here are some
relevant quotes from the paper from pages 74 and 75. He says, repeating what is already learned
can be comforting and therefore desirable, students learning things that question their
knowledge and identities, on the other hand, can be emotionally upsetting. For example,
suppose students think society is meritocratic, but learn that it is racist. Raise your hand if
you're sick of this shit. Or think that they themselves are not contributing to homophobia,
but learn that they, in fact, are. Raise your hand if you're sick of this shit.
In such situations, students learn that the ways that they think and act are not only limited,
but also oppressive. Learning about oppression and about the ways they often unknowingly comply
with oppression can lead students to feel paralyzed with anger, sadness, anxiety, and guilt. It can
lead to a form of emotional crisis. They think this is an educational mandate. This is what the
point of education is. And then he says, once in a crisis, students can go in many directions.
Some that may lead to anti oppressive change, others that may lead to a more entrenched resistance.
Therefore, educators have a responsibility not only to draw students into a possible crisis,
but also to structure experiences that can help them work through their crises productively.
Let's just pause for a second. Educators have a responsibility to draw students into
possible crisis? That's a real sentence. And then they also are meant to structure the
environment and experiences around the student to get them to go in a particular direction.
That's cult indoctrination. It's knowingly, willfully, and deliberately cult indoctrination,
but other scholars in the same domains confirm this for us. There's another paper
of 2019 to scholars Torres and Ferry. They say it explicitly.
In a paper called Not Everyone Gets A Seat At The Table, they say it explicitly
that this is what their model of education represents, that it's indoctrination. Here's how
they said it. For all the criticism teachers receive for quote indoctrinating students,
turning them into liberal-minded crybabies, not much has been said in defense. At the very least,
a shy denial is made. It is time for educators to own this criticism and admit. That is exactly
what we do. There it is in black and white. It's on page 33 of Not Everyone Gets A Seat At Table.
You can read these quotes in the querying of The American Child, where Logan Lansing put them.
He found these quotes, actually. I did not. But what Kevin Kumashiro is describing is actually
worse than the indoctrination that Torres and Ferry are talking about, saying that that's exactly
what they do. A cycle of inducing crisis and then resolving it toward a particular doctrine
isn't indoctrination. It's trauma bonding. That's a practice of ideological transformation,
or thought reform, or brainwashing, or cult grooming. It can be pretty plainly said.
Queer theory practices thought reform, and it practices thought reform because queer
theory is the doctrine of a religious cult. We already see that that cult is based on sex,
and that it primarily targets children, and that it has little or nothing to do with being gay,
so that pretty much lays out my primary thesis. That's what queer theory is. Now, of course,
fine. It's a cult. What now? Well, nobody joins a cult to join a cult, so you want to have in mind
that the people in it don't know it's a cult. In fact, they may not even know that they are
subscribed to queer theory, or that queer theory is a critical constructivist ideology of sex,
gender, and sexuality. They probably don't know those things, as a matter of fact.
But the point is, people don't join a cult to find a cult and join it. Nobody says in the morning,
hey, I'm going to get up and go find a cult and join a cult because I don't have anything better
to do. People join a cult because they are suffering in some way, and the cult comes in
parasitically and offers them some false resolution to their suffering. It seems like
something that will get them out of loneliness, out of spiritual malaise, out of vulnerability of
some kind. Virtually everyone who has ever escaped a cult tells this same story. They wanted to belong,
they wanted a social circle, they wanted to understanding, they wanted purpose in life,
they wanted something to do. The cult preys upon these people and slowly locks them in.
One of the tools they use is trauma bonding. One of the tools they use is separating people from
their family and friends. What's trauma bonding, though? That sounds bad. Besides what Kevin
Kumashuro says is the point of queer education or education for social justice, trauma bonding
is as harmful and manipulative as it sounds. It is the technique of cult initiation, I should say,
and abuse. It's basically like hazing. The basic formula is really simple. First, you traumatize
your targets until you've harmed them enough for the process to work, and then you celebrate them
when they do what you want, and you don't celebrate them or even punish them more
when they do what you don't want. That's it. They will bond with the people traumatizing them
because of the rewards they get when the traumatic experience is lightened up. This is what Robert
Lifton in Thought Reform and the Psychology of Totalism refers to as an alternating cycle of
harshness and leniency. That's key to how cult bonding works, or thought reform works,
as a matter of fact, which is basically the same thing. In queer theory, what you do is you take
people, particularly kids, and you tell them the world isn't at all the way that it seems. In fact,
neither are they. It isn't the way that they've been led to believe. If they're different, it's
because they're oppressed. If they feel uncomfortable, it's because society doesn't like people like them.
They're probably different than they've always been told. Maybe they've been lied to about
themselves. They've certainly been lied to about other people and how society should be,
and it's been holding them back and making them feel bad. Maybe instead, it's, well,
maybe you're not in that category, but the way you act hurts other people. You're hurting people.
That's what Kevin Koumashiro actually said. Now, if you're interested in exploring further,
even though you're young, you should. You should explore these feelings, these guilt, anxiety,
anger, sadness. Aren't those the ones he talked about? Discomfort with your body, discomfort with
your sexuality, discomfort with your social environment, discomfort with your parents.
If you're uncomfortable with any of this for any reason, maybe your body is wrong. Maybe your family
is wrong. Maybe there's somebody else who you really are that you don't know about, and society
just doesn't want you to be who that person is. Your parents don't want you to be that person,
either. If your parents disagree, maybe they're going to disagree, maybe they shouldn't be included
in these decisions. Maybe you need to trust a trusted adult instead. Maybe you need a school
counselor. Maybe you need the faculty member in charge of the gay straight alliance. Maybe you
need a teacher who has the flag up that represents that they're a safe space and that they won't
tell on you. Maybe you need a queer family. Queer theory is then offered as the lens that
resolves all the resulting confusion, shock, dissonance, pain, guilt, anxiety, sadness,
anger, and vulnerability. That's how this works. Then what happens next is that you affirm and
celebrate them when they show interest. If they get interested in this, think, oh yeah, maybe that's
right. Maybe I am different. Maybe society's not free. Maybe my parents wouldn't like me
thinking this or doing this. Maybe I was made wrong. Maybe I'm in the wrong body. Maybe I'm in
the wrong family. Then you celebrate them. You lead them to believe that they're making brave
decisions that are worthy of interest and respect. You coerce them and their social groups to participate
in this ritual of affirmation and tacitly threaten anyone who doesn't want to go along with it,
or maybe not even tacitly. Maybe you talk about how not inclusive they are and how they're part
of the problem and how they're hurting people's feelings. You make the people who are taking
the path feel like they belong and that they, just for being who they are, are special and have a
special purpose in the world to fulfill, to change the world, to transform the world, to make it more
accepting of people like them who don't get to feel that way, or others that they know, their
friends. You teach them special words that describe the very small but growing number of people who
identify just like they do outside of the norm, outside of what society and their parents consider
legitimate. This is the trauma bonding process of queer theory, in particular in schools. This is
also called programming or grooming, and it takes predictable paths. The first thing it does is it
leads people into emotional vulnerability. That's what Kevin Kumashiro said. What I just described,
by the way, was it lead them into emotional crisis and then structure their experiences so they
resolve those crises in the direction you want them to go in. That's all I described. But it leads
people into this emotional vulnerability and into a kind of a path is offered to resolution,
and that generates personal and social interest, which is followed up by psychological and social
commitment. They don't want to let the people down that they've so far impressed. They want to keep
feeling brave and unique and different and special, so they get a psychological commitment, but also
a social commitment. These people have invested in them. These people care about them. These people
are supporting them and affirming them in their journeys, and you're going to let them down if
you just bail out and think maybe it's not for you. This has then deepened into an increasingly deep
social and emotional commitment to the cult that's achieved largely through repeated cycles of trauma
bonding techniques. That's how they do this. That's what it means to lead people into crisis and
structure their environment so that the crisis resolves in the desired direction. This process
creates emotionally and socially bonded members who populate the wide majority of any cult membership.
Those who are socially and emotionally locked in without necessarily understanding the doctrine.
They don't have to know a word of queer theory. They don't have to know queer theory exists.
They don't have to know anything. All they have to do is feel like they belong in the cult and
feel like they don't belong in the world anymore. They don't need anything more than that. I've
called this in the past talking about the structure of cults, the outer school of the cult.
The social, psychological, and emotional cues are then steadily deepened over time through processes
of increasing exposure to doctrine, by processes of increasing exposure to trauma bonding, by having
them facilitate the same process on someone else who's newer in the path so that they get more and
more committed to it. The feelings, the themes increasingly focus on guilt, shame, isolation,
alienation, confusion, at least on the one hand, but meanwhile they're also talking about a horizon
of potentiality. In other words, hope, excitement, inclusion, belonging on the other. Shunning people
who act like haters, that's why it's called anti-LGBTQ hate to disagree with them. Shunning
haters who don't support and affirm them, even if it's their own families, is also increased
over time to make sure the cult environment is the predominant influence in the victim's lives.
That's what structuring the environment looks like as this process is repeated. This is
brainwashing. It is thought reform. It is not education. When the, in fact, it's child abuse
and it's happening at scale by demand in virtually every school system in the United States
and in Canada, where it's actually worse. What happens when these kids get committed enough
to the cult, when their emotional and social connection is so deep that they're, that's who
they are now. That's who they know themselves to be in terms of what's called psychosocial valuation.
Well, when the commitment is high enough, a process of study begins. That's when they're
going to get introduced to the actual doctrine. The more committed outer school members will
start to learn the doctrine of the cult. Here, they'd be studying queer theory in
Mao's prisons. They would be studying Marxism and Leninism and socialism. They're not
just learning how to use pronouns or discover new ones. They're not learning how to present
themselves, how to denounce everything against queer theory, how to shut people out of their
lives for disagreeing with what the cult thinks is good, for supporting people who are going
through this process affirming, blah, blah, blah, cancel what's against them and affirm what is for
them. They're not just doing that. They're also learning to defend that with pseudo-intellectual
arguments based in queer theory. They're learning to do a lot of queer activism,
which deepens their commitment. Every time you act on behalf of a set of beliefs,
you become more committed to those beliefs. Every time you act in commitment to a group,
you become more committed to the group. Why would you be doing any of this stuff,
which is unpopular and difficult? It might even involve scary stuff like surgeries or standing
up to your parents or throwing at your parents under the bus when you could be doing other
things, better things, easier things, unless you are really committed. That's the psychology here.
And these people who are socially and emotionally dependent on a cult that has groomed them to be
that way are then led to become intellectually committed to it. And they form not an outer
school of the cult, but an inner school. They are what we might call adapts, not initiates.
Most of the scholars, the community organizers, and the queer theory cult are in this tier. Most
of the teachers that visit this upon kids, by the way, are not. They're caught up in the outer
school themselves. They don't know the doctrine. They may not even like it. They're just stuck
having to do it or going along with a current, or they're just caught up by empathy, which is,
we already heard a lie, to push it on to people just in case. The activists, the consultants,
they definitely are. The scholars, they definitely are. They know what they're doing.
There's another tier beyond this, of course, the so-called inner circle to cults.
Members of the inner circle of a cult direct the cult and profit from the cult.
They might or might not believe in its doctrine, depending on their motivations. With queer theory,
undoubtedly, some of the biggest organizers and financiers of the movement, which primarily
targets their children, do not believe in it itself, but fully believe in its destructive
and disruptive potential on our society and our kids. Others do believe in the enormous
amount of profit that's available from destroying lives and turning them into a permanent,
complicated medical or psychiatric patient. Others see political utility.
I don't think it's likely that much of the Biden administration really believes queer theory,
but they see it as a political tool, and they also see its capacity to build a permanently
disaffected group with partially legitimate demands that will make for the rest of their
lives against a system they hate, that they can then pander to. Others see getting millions of
people to participate in the cult and its affirmations as a way to affirm themselves and
their own journeys. Think of the kind of big trans billionaires, Martin Rothblatt, the Pritzkers,
and so on. They shovel money into it, so lots of kids will become trans, so that society accepts
trans, so the society accepts them, and that they were a trailblazer who made it happen.
That's their journey, and it has to be affirmed, so then they just happen to have billions of
dollars to finance campaigns for mass affirmation. There are lots of reasons why people at that tier
of the cult might be involved, and it's not always that they fully believe in it, though it can
sometimes be that. The most important thing to remember about these different tiers of cults,
and the basic structure of cults, and the guiding principles behind each is just that
they exist. That's the most important thing to realize. The outer school are initiates,
they're seeking psychological and social reward through the cult's manipulative offerings.
They're overwhelmingly the majority of the captured cultists. The inner school seeks the
same thing, but more they have existential fervor tied to it, and some degree that increases over
time of intellectual and moral superiority because they know the doctrine. The inner circle
may or may not even know the doctrine, they usually do, but they don't always.
Tends to be small in number, and is ultimately using the whole cult to whatever its twisted
purposes are, which may not agree with one another in a case like this. In the case of Marxist
cults, the inner circle always uses the revolutionary cult of the era, and then disposes of it when
it's time to move on to the next phase of the revolution. I don't think that we should see
anything different. I think that these destabilizers that we see in queer activism are likely to be
disposed of when they become a liability if the revolution succeeds, but they're really useful for
tearing apart the society we have now by tearing apart families and children's lives and so much
else. A little more on the environment about cults though, because I think it's important to
understand the environment in which cults transform their victims needs to be kind of looked at,
and nobody's done it in greater depth than Robert Lifton, Robert J. Lifton, who studied the Maoist
cult in detail as it was happening in the 1950s. He asserts that cults effectively take advantage
of up to eight qualities that allows them to do thought reform on their populations. Queer theory,
as you'll see, very obviously utilizes all eight of these and does so in sophisticated ways,
and so I'll talk about each one of these eight very briefly. First, there's milieu control,
cults control the environment and make sure it only reflects cult doctrine. This is why they cut
people off from their friends or families. Any outside information and views that's all problematic,
it's harmful, it's hurtful, it's hate, you can't look at it, don't listen to James Lindsay's podcast,
he's a hater, he's LGBTQ hate, it's just gonna hurt your feelings, it's so much transphobia,
you won't be able to stand it. They keep you isolated in your milieu from anything that might
challenge or break you free of cult doctrine. So by the way, if you happen to be imbibed in queer
theory or you're kind of a queer theorist or you think you have a queer identity and you happen
to be listening to this, you're in a fucking cult. Now just let me tell you just bluntly,
I use the bad word not because I lack words, not because I'm missing vocabulary, but to get your
attention, you are in a fucking cult and you need to wake up, your life will get better from the day
you start getting away from this. But anyway, the milieu control is all about like in our world,
what we see is that it's using inclusion policies to ensure institutions and people only present
cult agreeable views and affirmation and they remove anything that might cause doubt to the
cult including people, materials and so on, aka cancel culture. It is the immersive media and
messaging that we get from all levels, entertainment, school, politicians, everything.
Once you have milieu control, second, Lifton says that you can then engage in something he
calls mystical manipulation and I did a short bullet point episode of the podcast recently
about that called plan spontaneity, the lie of plan spontaneity. Cults, he says,
create an appearance of total agreement, mostly by silencing all disagreement and a sense of
inevitability. You might hear it kind of phrased this way, there's a change coming and there's
nothing you can do about it, but you want to get on the right side of it because things will be
good for you. You might also hear it as who's on the right side of history. There's a sense of
total agreement, all of society's going this way and inevitability, history is moving this way.
There's also plan spontaneity, which is organized protests and activism and activities that are
made to look like they were spontaneous and organic because that gives the impression that the people
are motivated to bring this into being and it also gives a sense of higher purpose, like being on
the right side of history and the point of mystical manipulation by a cult is in order to convince
the victims of their power and influence, the inevitability, the total agreement of society.
It's just happening. Look, there's so many people involved and they're working toward a better future.
It makes the cult appear more right and righteous to those captured by its spells. Think of the film
The Truman Show. Jim Carrey's character Truman was at the center of a huge operation of mystical
manipulation, if you want to understand what that looks like, that it was a totally controlled milieu.
Third, Lifton says that within cult environments there is a demand for purity. Actually, he says
with an ideological totalist environment, which is to say cult environments, there's a demand for
purity. Cults are virtually always puritanical in their value systems. They present their victims
with stark contrasts of good and evil, of right and wrong, on virtually every issue, and they
demand purity with being on the right side of every issue. And in fact, they leverage that because
you can't be. You can't be perfectly pure. So you keep this constant wheel of shame turning inside
of you of guilt and shame. And then you use that to pressure other people into better compliance to
cover up for your failures so that it's not you getting called out, it's them instead first.
These dynamics manifest in dichotomies like pure versus impure, absolutely good versus
absolutely evil, sacred versus profane, or specifically in social justice cults like queer
theory, affirmation versus existential denial, or care versus hate. They're also interested
at cults are, if not obsessed with the binary of queer theory in particular, with the binary
of innocence versus initiation to various levels of standing within the cult, including inclusion
within the cult itself. In the extreme, this demand for purity sets up a dichotomy as stark as the
people versus the enemies of the people, the people support queer theory. The enemies of the
people are anti LGBTQ hate, who must be destroyed in the name of the queer people. Fourth, he lists,
he mentions what he calls a cult of confession that's based off of the demand for purity.
The demand for purity leads the cults of victims to readily identify how they fall short of
cult perfection, leading them to both fear and desire to confess their failures and their evil
ways. That's the whole program confess, recognize your crimes, you have to confess, look at the
three body problem scene, look at these other scenes of the cultural revolution that keep going
viral now that people can kind of open their eyes and see what's happening. That's what it's
about, a cult of confession. Confess how you are transphobic. Confess how you contribute to
homophobia. Confess how you could do better. Cults often encourage this behavior to facilitate
the trauma bonding process, but they also do it to get you to recognize cult doctrine and its
application to your own life and situation, what Paulo Freire calls your own existential situation.
The trauma bonding wheel of pain gets turned through pressuring people to confess, say to
homophobia or transphobia, being a made up gender, a made up sexuality or whatever, and then
rewarding them what they do and punishing those that get accused of not being on board. Only
later, after they do what they're supposed to do, later, it's a wheel of pain, as I said,
you later indicate that their confession wasn't sufficient or sincere enough, and you pull up
some little detail where they fell short to point out that they didn't really mean it, they're not
really on board, they still have internalized transphobia or whatever to initiate another
round of struggle. The milieu control and demand for purity come together to create a uniquely
exquisite psychological environment. Lifton's very clear about this. In this environment,
almost everyone believes everyone else is pure while they themselves are not. By the way, if you
search, I actually did do a podcast about this chapter of Lifton, specifically where I read,
I think the whole thing, if not very close to it. So you can go listen to Lifton's full exposition
on this on New Discourses and another podcast, I'll think of the title scenario later. But if
you search, go to the search bar and type in, Lifton, you can figure out which podcast is
Lifton's. And I read the entire chapter of his book for this topic. But anyway, sorry,
I was talking about the unique psychological environment, an exquisite psychological environment
created by milieu control and demand for purity. So you're in a completely controlled environment,
and your purity demands are high, and you're being manipulated all the time, mystical manipulation.
And what it results in is that almost everyone believes that everyone else is pure while they
themselves are not. Think about that. Everyone you look around at is somehow a saint, because
everybody else got canceled and thrown out, by the way. Everyone else is a saint of the ideology,
but nobody will tell how they are secretly transphobic. Nobody will come up. It's like the
time I had this young woman come up to me and the friend of the family, and she came up and
asked if she could talk to me because she knows my stance on these things. And she said, I want to
talk to you because I know I can tell you this. And I have something I have to say. And I was like,
what is it? And she said, I'm just done with the pronoun thing. And she started crying because she
didn't have anybody she could tell she was done with the pronoun thing. She thought the pronoun
thing was ridiculous. So she knew she had this inner sin against the trans doctrine or the
queer theory doctrine, that the pronoun rituals ridiculous, and it's just demanding and it's
compelled speech. But she didn't feel like she could tell anybody that. So she thought she alone
among her, she came to me to tell me because she thought she alone, alone in the world, completely
isolated, felt that way. And she had to find some forbidden outsider to tell it to. So the feeling is
that you're the only one falling short, even though sometimes you see your so-called classmates
confessing to their own failures. And then at that point, you're like, well, at least it's not me,
and you join in the denouncing of them, motivated by your own sense of hidden shame. Because you
are led to feel like you are alone and that you alone have the deepest, darkest failures against
the cult doctrine, which is impossible. And the guilt and shame are so overwhelming that they fuel
even more accusation and criticism and confession, which is self-criticism,
just by virtue of how they make you feel. And that is the part of the environment,
the cult environment that does the bulk of the indoctrination or brainwashing or thought reform
work. What is it brainwashing you into? Well, fifth, Lyfton describes what he calls that all
cults have at the center or all ideological totalist environments have at the center,
a sacred science. So at the heart of every cult is what Lyfton refers to as the sacred science
that is infallible. People can and do fail it all the time, but the doctrine itself cannot fail.
You've probably heard that before. In this case, it would be queer theory cannot fail,
but people can fail queer theory. And people are being brainwashed into that sacred science.
The point of the cult of confession is to create a dynamic that forces people to confess their
failure to understand, internalize, and act, and even embody the sacred science. The point of Kevin
Kumashiro's leading people into emotional crisis and structuring the environment around them so
they resolve it productively is to lead them to internalize and act and even embody the sacred
science, all while accusing others of their failings as much and often as possible in the
name of helping them in the same way. The point of the confession is to get people to willingly
adopt the lens of the sacred science, in this case queer theory, so that they can learn to,
quote, recognize their crimes against the sacred science and the society, aka cult that supports
it, and to pledge to do better. Pledging to do better means ideologically remoulding yourself to
use Mao's words for it. And here, queer theory is given as the sacred science, the one true correct
understanding of sex, gender, sexuality, and all the normal features of society and its definitions
of what is and is not legitimate. It is more than we're going to cover today, but it's a critical
constructivist ideology of sex, gender, and sexuality, which believes that sex, gender,
and sexuality are ultimately socially constructed phenomena that are the products of dominant power
that imprison people in a life that is structured by the power dynamics of society,
and it is their obligation to wake up to that fact and to denounce all norms and legitimacy in order
to try to overthrow that system. Sixth, Lifton calls it doctrine over person, cults place doctrine
over people. If we quote from Hegel, as I like to do at times like this, history uses people and
then discards them. The person isn't even a person in the eyes of the cult if they don't hold to and
enact the doctrine. As Mao said, not to have correct political opinions is like not having a soul.
I don't really need to elaborate though on how doctrine operates over people. You're not really
a person and you can't be associated with unless you are involved in and support the doctrine.
Seventh, Lifton calls it loading the language. Do I have to describe how queer theory loads
the language? All the words mean more than one thing. Everything's got an agenda tucked in it.
We're all very familiar with the language stuff now. Inclusion, belonging, diversity, hate. This
is all heavily loaded language that all advances the acceptance and spread of the agenda of the
cult and keeps people locked into it. Eighth, Lifton says the last characteristic of cults
is dispensing of existence. He says at the deepest level, I'm not quoting him here. I'm paraphrasing
him, the cult decides whose existence counts and whose doesn't. The punchline of this is that those
who accept the cult doctrine, which is the sacred science and its application, are considered people
and no one else is. It's like they don't have a soul, is what Mao said. Only the doctrine
and illegitimate are allowed to exist at least in a spiritual sense. Everyone else is some kind of a
fallen deplorable hater, effectively enemies and non-people, which justifies their abuse,
their disenfranchisement, their silencing, cutting them out of your life, even if they're your parents
and so on. That's a cult environment. And queer theory, as you can see very easily, satisfies
all of that. Just kind of for fun, the standard iron law of woke projection, of course, always
applies because it never misses. And the dispensing of existence aspect of the cult environments is
kind of why woke activists always say everything is denying their existence or a genocide. You
know, they always say, oh, you deny our existence unless you give us gender reforming care. It's
a trans genocide. They're projecting. What's happening is they're projecting. It's the iron
law of woke projection. Their belief is that you don't have a right to exist if your beliefs,
quote unquote, deny their right to exist, which is in quotes because you aren't denying their right
to exist. You're denying their political identity, which isn't even a real identity. In queer theory,
this means if you don't affirm their embodied political activism against everything legitimate
and normal, then you're denying their existence. It's like how they have fat studies people,
which took this idea from queer theory, by the way, say that if you were to encourage weight loss
programs and fitness and eating better and losing weight, that what you would do is a fat genocide.
Because if all the people lost weight and there are no fat people, there would be no fat culture.
And so you've committed to fat genocide by getting rid of all the fat people. And you say,
well, we didn't get rid of anybody. And they say, well, there's no fat people. So you get rid of fat
people. And you think I'm making it up. But that's how they think. And because you are apparently
willing to do a genocide of that kind or a cultural genocide, you're therefore beyond the pale of
humanity and do not deserve to exist. That's actually the cult's logic. And that's the logic
of all totalitarian genocides. That's it. The people who, you know, we have, we have a common
esutopia on the other side, we have a queer horizon of possibility and potentiality,
what transphobes and selfish capitalists and so on won't let us have it. So we've got to get rid
of them. We would already have communism. Socialism would already be working great. We would already
have a common esutopia. But some people are selfish and won't give up their private property.
So let's just go seize their farms and get the program going. We could open our society back up,
you know, if, if everybody would just get their vaccines, if everybody would just 100% of everybody
just got all their shots, then we could just get our economy back. Same logic. All totalitarian
genocides come from this darkest piece of cult logic. We could go a lot deeper into the nature
of the queer theory cult and how it's a cult than this. I'm sure I will in future podcasts.
I'm not going to drag it out. I'm not going to get into the whole Gnostic hermetic conception of
the world with normal society acting like a evil spirit that imprisons everyone into performing
a fake persona for the world. That's gender performativity. So they can never be liberated
to be who they truly are. I've done that at length in other podcasts. I'll probably do it again. I
think there's one actually called Queer Theory is Queer Gnosticism or something. You should go
listen to that. You should also read The Queering of the American Child where we cover this in
tremendous depth. That would get us into talking about Judith Butler on a Queer Theory's founding
mothers, I suppose, fathers, I mean, whatever, and her belief that gender and sex aren't actually
real. But her performances, we already talked about that. We learned to repeat those performances in
order to satisfy normal society, which is now acting like a Gnostic demiurge. Her whole body of
work could be summarized. Like I said before in the six words, drag is life and life is drag.
So everybody's always doing drag and everything that they do, whether they realize it or not,
because society writes a script for how we do drag, which is usually cis hetero,
and that we just do that. And in her language, borrowing from Foucault, she says that imprisons
their souls, which they then have to script physically on, that's her word, script them
physically onto their body or inscribe onto their body and script into the society through their
bodies by performing gender and becoming aware of this doingness of gender, maybe one day already
doing gender as a podcast, as a paper that gets super influential, that gets overlooked a lot.
But being coming out for Judith Butler, becoming aware of the doingness of gender and even sex
and sexuality opens the door to that queer horizon of possibilities beyond the norm.
She got those ideas in turn from Michel Foucault, we already talked about him,
also from the radical feminism she was embedded in, which would be Simone de Beauvoir,
so we could get really deep into that. We've kind of done it before.
What do I want to say here? The idea, though, is that society forces you to imprison yourself
in a gender performance or a mode of presentation, and that you can break free of that prison by
understanding it. We're not going to get into the whole John Money side of things and Stoller
and Greenson and the idea of gender identity. That's another podcast for another day, but it's
basically what they did is kind of discombobulated the idea of who we are by misusing the synonym for
sex, that is gender, initially likely as a synonym, but then by divorcing it from sex entirely,
that's its own story. We're not going to get into the, I mean, I did a podcast on this,
feminist, something about feminist nosticism, you can look it up where I talk about Simone de Beauvoir,
and the pressing question of what is a woman. One is not born but becomes woman, she said,
and her point was the same as Foucault's about homosexuals. What does it mean to be a woman
when no one else, in particular society and patriarchy, get to tell you what it means to be
a woman or for Foucault a homosexual, which Halpern says means queer. In short, we really could
summarize this as a reconceptualization of what I call social nosticism in which we are imprisoned
by the features of our social reality, but can escape at least socio-spiritually with the right
hidden insights about who we really are and into what world we have been flung or thrown,
that's a Hedegger reference if you don't know it, and that by doing so that we might actually
achieve liberation or emancipation, that's why their language is this way. This is a transformative
social nosticism that reconceives of the mysticism of earlier ages. There's a lot to get into about
how characters such as Rousseau and Hegel and Marx preceding Beauvoir, Foucault and Butler,
or even Swedenborg and Jacoboma and some of these other characters, maybe Vico,
Jean-Baptiste Vico, and some others all led to this social alchemy, as described by the way,
and you should listen to my George Soros podcast about social alchemy, but with queer theory and
queer education in particular and social justice education more broadly, one of its primary laboratories
for this mysticism is our children, and we should be really upset, but we also should ask the question
why children? Why does queer theory target kids? Why is it so interested in children,
which is one of the characteristics that I gave? Remember I said queer theory is the doctrine
of a religious cult, that cult is based on sex. It is little or nothing to do with gay people,
and it primarily targets children. Well, four reasons really. First, children are in schools,
typically, and even with their entertainment they are a captive audience in schools. They have to
go to school for 30-35 hours a week, even if unless they're very strictly monitored in homeschooling,
their curriculum standards are usually including this, and so they're a captive audience. Second,
children have not achieved the necessary cortical development in their brains to distinguish reality
from fantasy, so the mystification of queer theory can be considered plausible to them,
where adults would be less interested. Third, children are going through the developmental
processes, I should say, of identity formation and puberty, which need to be hijacked for this
ideology to take firm root. It's so tumultuous to grow up, but you are also literally going
through the process of figuring out who you are, which is a whole thing, and they have to take
advantage of that in order to get queer theory to really take root. But finally, children become,
and this is really important from the Marxist perspective, that queer theory is queer Marxism.
Again, read Queering of the American Child and really get your head around this. It's important,
but children become a gateway into families, and they become a wedge into not just families,
but also other targets, families, faiths, and any institutions they grow up to become a part of.
They have to have a bottom-up demand that they're trying to force into our kids through
brainwashing them at school to demand the inclusive policies so they can have the ability
to install them by what looks like dint of demand rather than totalitarian top-down force.
That's how they're trying to get around that. Okay, so now we can summarize. What is queer
theory? It's a doctrine of a religious cult. The cult is primarily sex-based. It predominantly
targets children and has little nothing to do with being gay, and what can we do about it?
Well, normally we would turn to our institutions and ask them to see the light and step in,
but we can't do that. This isn't working. Our institutions are actually captured,
our medical institutions, our educational institutions, our government institutions,
our entertainment institutions, our media institutions, they're captured. We face a
problem of captured institutions, or as I like to phrase it now, ideologically contaminated
institutions. Our institutions accept and promote queer theory all the way up to the White House.
We therefore cannot count on our institutions, educational, psychological,
governmental, anything to help us here. They're all captured. What do we do?
They are part of the controlled milieu in Lifton's language. They are creating the mystical
manipulation. They are peddling the sacred science of queer theory. They are, in short,
the center of the problem. So what's this like? Here's an analogy. It's like being a pilot,
and you're flying the plane and imagine all your instruments go out, right? So you're flying the
plane, you're a pilot, and everything goes out on the aircraft, right? No navigation computer,
no altimeter, nothing. What do you have to do? That's us. Our institutions are like our instruments.
What do you have to do if you're that pilot? Because this tells us what we're going to do.
So imagine, picture yourself in the cockpit, you're flying a plane,
and you're in the air, and all of a sudden all your instruments go out. What do you have to do?
You have to fly the plane safely, mechanically, and find a runway and land. You don't get to
rely on your instruments because you don't have them. Like I said, no navigation computer, no altimeter,
no speedometer, nothing. You have you, you have your experience, you have your wits,
and you're, hopefully, the weather's good, and you have enough ability to see what's in front of you
to do the right thing. That's all you get. That's like us. Our institutions are like the instruments
in that cockpit, but for society, not for an airplane. And right now, they're putting out
all the wrong information consistently. They will not help us find a runway or land the plane safely.
And if we take the plane analogy seriously, our lives and the lives of everybody in the plane,
a.k.a. our society, depend on us doing this. So what would we do in that situation? We would
use our senses. We would trust our eyes and ears. In other words, we would use our senses
directly to look for the runway, to line up, lower the plane, land it, and slow down and stop.
We wouldn't be looking to the broken instruments at all. We wouldn't be looking off into space.
We would look at reality around us and navigate without the instruments as the intermediary.
And that's what we need to start finding ways to do now, at the societal level, one individual at a
time. We need to start figuring out how to look around us, assess what's really going on, and
make smart judicious action. If we're rash, if you just jerk the wheel or pull the throttle or
whatever, you're still going to crash and everything's going to go bad. We have to make smart decisions
that take into account reality. Individually, what does that mean? What do you do? Well,
what you start with is the truth. Not some mediated truth peddled by these corrupt institutions,
but the plain simple truth, the kind that you can see with your eyes and experience and everybody
knows, like that there are two sexes, that people can't change sex, that most people are straight,
that gay happens. We don't know why. That's fine. Queer is not an identity. It's a defiant
political stance. We don't have to tolerate or accommodate. How can you know that one with your
own senses? Because it's in the fucking book defining it, guys. It's in black and white. They
wrote it down themselves. So if they tell you that, you have that information. So if someone
claims to have an identity or sexuality that requires an explanation to put it simply, it's fake.
That's common sense, right? If somebody claims to have an identity or sexuality that requires an
explanation, it's fake and doesn't demand our respect. We don't have to respect this. We have
to be nice. We are not nice. We have to be human to people. We have to realize that the people in
this cult are people in a cult. They need help. They need deprogramming. They need, therefore,
patience and compassion and a landing pad and lots of things. But we also have to recognize
that there's a lot of predatory behavior happening and predatory behavior of any kind in any place
is not something that we have to support or enable. Perversion outside of the confines,
if you want to call it this, of consenting, adult, acting, and private does not deserve
our tolerance and shouldn't be given it. Our schools should not be doing any of this. Our
schools should not be pushing our kids into emotional crisis and then resolving it productively.
That's child abuse. Our schools should not be putting pornography in front of our children,
whether it's in class or through their libraries, or through the curriculum,
through any various tricks. And children do not benefit from its presence there. Enough of this.
This is the kind of stuff that you can start to first recognize. Get your bearings. If you're
in that plane, you've got to figure out what the heck's going on. You've got to get your bearings
for yourself. That's what I'm talking about. Wait a minute. Porn in the schools? What the hell?
What? Push kids into an emotional crisis and resolve it according to our doctrine?
That's a problem. What are you going to do? You've got to assess what's going on. You've got to stop
listening to the gaslighting and the BS and get your head on straight. You've got a plane to land
and you don't have instruments. In fact, you have worse and no instruments. You have lying
instruments. And where that is is in the truth. So you've got to look for the truth.
And you really have to look for it and you have to tell other people it. What I say a lot, and
you've heard this before, I did a podcast on this, is that you have to love the truth.
I kind of riff from the Bible. You have to love the truth with all your heart and all your mind
and all your soul and all your strength. Then you have to love your neighbor enough
to tell your neighbor the truth as you would have him tell you the truth. These are basic
commandments. This sounds like that's not enough. It's everything at the beginning. And then you
put that into practice and you can fix the world. But you really do have to love the truth because
if you love the truth, you'll say it. You won't care if they call you transphobic. You'll seek it.
You'll read these awful books. You'll defend it when you get under attack or somebody else says
you'll defend other people who are saying it. You'll support them. You'll back them up. You
have to love the truth because if you don't, eventually the SPLC is going to write an article
about you and you're going to back off. You'll buckle. They're going to threaten to take something
away from you or your kids that you can't bear and you'll buckle and you'll get pulled into this
caring, affirming nonsense. But the fact of the matter is that there's no caring and there's no
affirmation that isn't first built on the truth. So you're going to have to love the truth and you're
going to have to push it and defend it and help other people do it in tough situations. There's
no other way. And every time you tell a lie, just remember this. Every time you tell a lie to be
nice or to fit in, the pronoun game or whatever, you're selling a piece of your soul. So you have
to stop doing that. And that's what it means really to love the truth. And if you start there
telling the truth, that's what Solzhenitsyn said, is that if you tell the truth, one man telling the
truth can bring down a regime. It starts a ripple effect. One person telling the truth becomes a
lot of people telling the truth. Facts start to come out and then there's more things to tell,
the WPATH files come out. Next thing you know, this entire medical monstrosity starts to crumble
out from under and you say, well, we can't get the law to go along this. We can't get the courts
to agree with us. Keep fighting because day by day by day, something else comes out. Keep
digging. Somebody had to go look up what's going on at WPATH, whether it's Mia Hughes or whoever,
digging into it. There's other revelations, I guess, do no harm, just release them the day.
They collar, just release them. Somebody's digging into it. So start digging, get curious,
ask questions, read the materials, figure out who's funding it, whatever happens to be, and
then report on it. And when you do these things, which is what it means to be based, by the way,
you break the milieu control and you can start to break apart the cult. You also need to protect
your kids, obviously, to keep them out of the controlled milieu into one that children are
supposed to be in a sheltered milieu and the parents are in charge of that sheltering. You also,
when you do these things, you tell the truth, you seek the truth, you fight for the truth,
you defend the truth every day. You don't just break milieu control, you break apart mystical
manipulation. They can't trick you. If they end up doing this huge stage demonstration and you
say that's planned spontaneity and it's fake, it makes it lose its magical power. You, by doing
this, cast doubt upon the so-called sacred science. Gender ideology starts looking not just even
incorrect but ridiculous. And the more people who think it's ridiculous, the more people who will
either loudly or quietly walk away from it. What happens when you start doing this and start
doing it consistently and start doing it every day, like billboard chris showing up one conversation
at a time, getting clear on his pursuing the information, getting clear, getting out there
and talking to people is you start to break those cycles of abuse. You break the cult of confession.
You tell people that it's okay to trust their eyes and their ears and even their gut intuition
and to believe in common sense again. And to understand, therefore, very clearly that what
they are experiencing and seeing in queer theory is abusive and manipulative. Because queer theory
is the doctrine, as I said, of a cult religion that is based on sex that primarily targets their
children, has very little to do, nothing to do really with being gay. It's hostile, in fact,
to gay interests in every regard if we might use the phrase gay interests. And so it's our
necessary responsibility to learn as much about it as we can, both in theory and in practice,
and to tell people about it and oppose it. Like I said, you can read a lot of what I had to say
here in my book with Logan Lansing. It's his book really that I helped with called the Quaring of
the American Child. I hope this was a informative episode. It was a lot longer than I meant.
I gave this talk at Pitt in like 45 minutes and here we are at almost an hour and 40, but
I hope you'll forgive me. More to come soon. I've got more horrifying UN documents and
other things coming. So thank you for listening and I'll catch you in the next one.
