Hey everybody, it's James Lindsay.
You're listening to the New Discourses Podcast, and in particular, you're listening to another
long, weird episode of the New Discourses Podcast, because we're going to talk about something
weird, yet again, in rather tremendous depth. We're going to talk about the United Nations.
And a matter of fact, what we're going to talk about is there was a United Nations
character, I'll kind of spell this out in a minute, named Robert Mueller, and in the 2000 days leading
up to the year 2000. So the 2000 days leading up to January 1, 2000, Robert Mueller, who was
by no means a small player in the United Nations pantheon, laid out what he called
2000 ideas and dreams for a better world, or sometimes he referred to it as 2000 ideas,
2000 ideas for the year 2000. And in essence, he was laying out ideas and dreams, like kind of
his just thoughts, 2000 of them, as a matter of fact, for the direction that the United Nations
should take and the role it should play in the world in the 21st century. And the point of this
podcast is to tell you some of what he said, and so that we can realize that the direction of the
United Nations, whatever the United Nations was intended to be from its origins, and since it
originated with the Huxleys, I don't think it was necessarily ever meant to be a good organization.
I think it's always had theosophical roots. But it is unambiguous in these documents
that Robert Mueller, and I'll tell you who he is in a second, you know who he is, you just don't
realize you know who he is. He's not the guy that prosecuted Trump. That's a different Robert Mueller,
or I should say, investigated Trump. It's spelled differently. They're not the same guy. But you've
heard of him before. It's unambiguous in these documents that Robert Mueller wanted the United
Nations to reconstitute itself for the 21st century, that he wasn't satisfied with how theosophical
the United Nations was in the 20th century, and he wanted it to reconstitute itself as an explicitly
very theosophical organization going into the 21st century. So he delivers this in the late
1999, I should specify, to the UN Secretary General at the time, and urges him to you know
read these, and he actually, the document I'm pulling from is a small document that he sent
specifically to the Secretary General to pay attention to, which is a condensation. So the
way Robert Mueller published 2000 ideas and dreams for a better world, or 2000 ideas for the year
2000, was in four volumes. I'll make all four volumes are on his website, Robert Mueller.org.
I'll make those available in links to this so you can go see all 2000 ideas if you want.
He said he was going to write 3000 ideas because the plans were meant to extend to the year 3000
for the United Nations. But I don't know if the other thousand ever got written. I haven't looked
that deeply into it yet, but he wrote this condensed version where he wrote 59 pages of the
ones that he thought was more most important in the realm of spiritual direction that the UN
should take in world leadership, including of course a one world government, headquartered
through the United Nations, or coordinated through the United Nations. And it's kind of creepy how
much of it seems to fit with what we're dealing with, because this is straight occult theosophy
guiding the ship of the United Nations, which means the United Nations, whatever it started
as, and like I said, I don't think it started good. I think it's always been an occult theosophical
organization. And I think there are reasons to believe that that's true, some of which I've
discussed before, like in the WTF is SEL podcast. Certainly for the last two decades, since I will
say specifically 2003, it has been oriented toward a transformational project. And that
transformational project is rooted in occult theosophy. So it's not a good organization. It's
not a neutral organization. It's not even really a governing organization. It is an occult organization.
It is a best you could say is really weird organization. Worst you could say is that it's
genuinely an evil organization. And I think that we, this is all very positive the way that Robert
Mueller wrote this, but I think that we're going to come away understanding that. And because this
is going to be really long, I've set aside almost 10,000 words of his writing to explore. I want to
just kind of dive in and not preamble too much, but we got to start with who is Robert Mueller.
So Robert Mueller worked at the United Nations. It's M-U-L-L-E-R. It's not, again, the same guy
who investigated Trump. That's a different Robert Mueller, spelled differently. He worked at the
United Nations for over 40 years. He was at one time the assistant secretary general, so he was
very high up. He was very well respected. He was very well networked throughout the United Nations
through much of that long career. But more importantly, and this is where you've heard of
him before, is he's the guy who developed the World Core Curriculum, which was meant to be a
new education method for the entire planet, according to a set of core curriculum points that
were going to be core to the entire world's education program. In the United States, that
became Common Core. So Common Core was created slightly indirectly, but basically by Robert
Mueller at the United Nations. Now, and I introduced that concept to you previously in the very long
WTF is SEL. What the F is, Social Emotional Learning Podcasts that I did some time ago,
where I pointed out that Robert Mueller's ideas were in fact strongly influenced by
the occult theosophist who created the Lucifer Publishing Company named Alice Bailey.
His ideas about education were inspired by an occult theosophist named Alice Bailey. Now,
the point of that podcast wasn't to talk about Common Core and its origins or Robert Mueller.
It was just kind of a sidebar. The point was to talk about Social Emotional Learning and its
development at the Fedser Institute. Now, I want to remind you, by the way, so far as these two
programs go, Social Emotional Learning and Common Core, both of which both of these were very heavily
funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation gave hundreds
of millions of dollars to pushing the Common Core or the World Core Curriculum into the United States,
but that wasn't enough. And when Common Core kind of started to falter and it got replaced with
Social Emotional Learning starting in 2015 and 16, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has dumped
possibly up to two billion dollars into pushing that. But the point is that they're both based in
the same occult theosophy, deriving from the rantings of Alice Bailey and others. But Robert
Mueller was no small player. Like I said, he was assistant secretary general of the United Nations
for a while. He was named the chancellor of the United Nations University for Peace, which is
headquartered in Costa Rica. He talks about this. He also organized a group you haven't heard about
yet, but you're going to need to hear about, which is called the evolutionary leaders. Who are the
evolutionary leaders? Well, they're a bunch of theosophical occult weirdos who believe in something
that is called the New Thought Movement or New Thought Religion. I would say it's the Gnostic
New Thought Movement because it is a Gnostic and Hermetic kind of spin-off cult. It has roots tied
back to, I know I've talked about this briefly in the past with some of the Gnosticism and Hermeticism
podcast, has roots tied back into the Kabalian, which is probably written by this guy, Etchkinson.
I always say his name a little bit messed up. I got to work on that. And so this is like legit,
theosophical, I would say New Age, but the name of it's actually New Thought. And it's a Gnostic
approach. It's a Gnostic religion. And their goal is to make a Gnostic One World Religion
that's the one religion in the world that's coordinated and interwoven with the governments,
a world government through the United Nations. And you would be very familiar if you are a
daytime TV aficionado from the 90s and early 2000s with lots of the evolutionary leaders,
even though you didn't know you're familiar with them because Oprah Winfrey has platformed
every single one of them. The so-called New Age stuff, which is all occult theosophy, that Oprah
Winfrey and her book club mainlined into middle-class moms and primarily their daughters and somewhat
their sons for the last several decades is all Gnostic New Thought. And the New Thought movement
itself, by the way, has been recognized as a world religion now. It's not recognized in the
United States specifically as a religion, but it is recognized as a world religion
by an international body that certifies these things. So I want to thank particularly Lisa
Logan for showing me this. I mean, I wasn't digging into Robert Mueller, I probably should have been,
but she started to and she showed me this and she's helped me understand and link out all the
connections between Robert Mueller and the United Nations to the evolutionary leaders, which she's
researching tremendously right now, and to the Gnostic New Thought movement, which she's
researching right now. And she got into chasing all this down basically by pursuing the Alice
Bailey stuff that we were talking about about a year ago. And so a little over a year ago now,
like a year and a half ago. So this is deep and dark stuff. And I'm barely skimming the surface
of it. And I really want to thank Lisa Logan for all the work she's doing and for bringing this to
my attention so that I can bring it to your attention. But if you really want to want the deep
dives on this, she's already been putting some of it out and she's going to be putting a lot more
of it out. That's going to really expose this. You need to go follow and pay attention to Lisa
Logan. So she's at I am Lisa Logan. Everything spelled the way you think it is. That's on the X
and you can figure her out further from there. She's doing an amazing job digging this stuff up
and making us understand it. So she sent me this condensed document that is 59 pages of a summary
for 2000 ideas and dreams for a better world. And I have stuck to that document, even though when
you go read the all 2000 of the ideas, like there are some other ones that are so insane that it
was super hard not to add them. It's very hard not to read basically all of this, which would take
like weeks of podcasts to get through all of it. There's 2000 of them. But anyway,
this document was originally published and sent with its full reply on March 17, 1999.
It says it begins with a handful of letters back and forth between Robert Mueller and the
office of the secretary general of the United Nations. And it says, Dear Robert, your thoughtful
letter and book ideas and dreams for a better world arrived. The secretary general wishes to
thank you for the dedication and inspiration you continue to give to the cause of peace, justice,
and freedom. Your dynamic and eloquent leadership gives you courage or sorry, gives courage to
so many who share our goals. The secretary general looks forward to reading your book with care
and ask that I convey your views to other officials. So why I included this little letter
reply from the beginning is to frame who Robert Mueller is. He's a very important character. The
secretary general has a direct correspondence with him. He wishes to thank Robert Mueller for
his dedication and inspiration. And he can he applauds Robert Mueller's dynamic and eloquent
leadership. And in particular, though, this is what he says is that he this dynamic and eloquent
leadership gives courage and I quote to so many who share our goals. Well, what are those goals?
This isn't a cult theosophy document as you're going to hear. What are the goals of the United
Nations? That's the question that this really raises. And I want to point out, it says the
secretary general looks forward to reading your book with care and ask that I convey your views
to other officials. So this is in March 1999, March 17 1999. As a matter of fact, my thought is
almost all of this horrific stuff, whether it's ESG guess what year that was created 2003,
comprehensive sexuality education 2003, a bunch of the other UNESCO and UN initiatives that are
actually shaping the global agenda that we're all getting put through right now, all started in 2003,
which is a few years down the road from this. Did this inform those? That's a legitimate question
at this point. The reorganization and kind of pedal to the metal of the United Nations, which at
the time would have been pushing agenda 21. So what's the relevance of the timing? The idea was
that by the year 2021, which did not succeed, that we would enter into a new world, that was the idea
of agenda 21. And it was based off of what we're called the Millennium Development Goals, which
preceded the Sustainable Development Goals. Okay, there were eight of those, there are 17 Sustainable
Development Goals, I will remind you with their magic number 17. So I'm strongly suspicious that
the reason that it all started in 2003, this goes 2003 plus 17 is 2020. So they have a 17 year long
cycle in order to try to implement agenda 21 so that the new world starts on, it starts in,
I don't know what date they would have picked specifically within the year, but in 2021. Much
like we're supposed to have a new world now as they delayed it and pushed it back in 2030,
that's why they call it, the 17 Sustainable Development Goals are for 2030. It's literally
called agenda 2030. People want to say, you're a conspiracy theorist, is it a conspiracy? If it's
like literally an agenda, wouldn't the people be working on the agenda? Wouldn't the Secretary
General look forward to reading your book with care and ask that I convey your views to other
officials because it gives leaders, or sorry, it gives courage to so many who share our goals?
Well, what the hell are those goals? Well, let's dive into this and see what some of this book says.
But first, let me give you some context because the next thing in the document that
that was published here that I have is that Robert Mueller, this is the response to Robert
Mueller's letter, Robert Mueller then includes his own letter that he sent. I'm not going to read all
of it, obviously, and this isn't the excerpt from the book. This is just a cover letter,
and he sent that on March 6th. So again, just to underline how, what a deal this guy is,
Robert Mueller sent this on March 6, 1999, and 11 days later, and I'm not claiming some
numerology to that, 11 days later, he had a response saying that it was going to be disseminated
through the Secretary General of the UN and other people. So he's a very influential character.
So his letter, Robert Mueller's letter, this is Robert Mueller, starts off this way.
Dear Mr. Secretary General, with the year 2000, you are becoming the most important person on
Earth in the entire human history. How can you face this overwhelming challenge in one of the most
complex and messy human, Earth, and evolutionary situations this planet has ever known? Well,
here are a few advices from a lifetime world public servant and direct aid to three former
Secretaries General. I'm not going to read all these advices, which are mostly a reminder to
the Secretary General of his power and his importance as what's called the Millennium
Assembly for the year 2000 was approaching. So what was this power and importance? Obviously,
you are the most, you're becoming the most important person on Earth in the entire human
history because of the year 2000 is what Mueller said to the guy. And in terms of what the complex,
messy human, Earth, and evolutionary situations, the most complex ones that the Earth has ever known.
And so he's reminding him of his power in terms of getting all of the world's leaders on the same
page as their agenda. And so that's what that's what the advices are really about. You need to
wake up in the morning and look at yourself and realize how important your job is. You need to
get the other world leaders on board with what we're doing. We need as many of them as possible.
That's your role. We have to prepare for the Millennium Assembly. That's the kind of advices
that are there. And I'm laughing that he called it advices, plural instead of advice. So then
after indicating that the Secretary General should have all of his officers read all four volumes of
this 2000 ideas and to incorporate as many of them are useful into the Millennium Assembly,
which is supposed to set the trajectory for the United Nations in the new millennium. So in some
sense, not just for the 21st century, but all the way to the year 3000, presuming, like I told you
a minute ago, that Robert Mueller believed that there would be UN global governance till the year
3000, a millennium of this tyranny. After urging that all the officers read this 2000 ideas book
that I'm going to share from, he then notes that the purpose of this particular document that he's
sending, which is an excerpt from the four volumes, is to relay 59 pages of the ideas
that he wrote in 2000 ideas that are pertinent to a global religious movement. And I'm telling
you, it's a cult theosophy. And that's what we're going to focus on. In fact, we're going to focus
hard on that one magic word there, evolutionary, because that's what these people think that
they're doing. And like I said, Robert Mueller organized a group that are called evolutionary
leaders that believe that they're going to be able to direct the spiritual evolution of man
in the correct direction. Now, I will point out that theosophists throughout history have believed
this. The Gnostics believed this. The ancient Hermeticists believe this. Karl Marx believed
this. The point of seizing the means of economic production was that Karl Marx believed that the
means of economic production produced economic conditions, and economic conditions produced
people. It produced who you were. So if you seize and transform the means of economic production,
you seize the means of producing man to be different. In fact, to become socialist or
eventually communist, ideally, which is a spiritual evolution because Marx's idea is that communism
in its true form is the, in his words, positive transcendence of private property as human self
estrangement. So in other words, it is a Marx belief that we're going to seize the means of
production of man so that we transcend our fallen form of private property owning individuals.
We're going to go back into a unified social and creative entity, mass entity, collective entity,
where we are our own creators, direct our own evolution. And the end point of that evolution
is this liberated communist utopia. And this isn't that far off. This is a another branch
on the same tree. I'm not calling this guy a Marxist. I don't think he is. I think he's another
branch on the same theosophical tree. That's what this document is actually about is
communicating 59 pages worth of these crackpot ideas. And I had to do some work to select down
to just staying under 10,000 words of them pertinent to a global religious movement. And that global
religious movements purpose is to direct the future evolution of man. There's a word for that.
It's called eugenics. Evolutionary leaders could be called eugenics leaders very easily. It's like
a rebrand to hide what they really are. But I want to stress that the goal is not whether it's
communism, whether it's new thought, the goal, whether it's Margaret Sanger's Planned Parenthood,
which is another branch on this same tree. The goal is not and Alice Bailey made this very
clear. And I talked about this in the WTF is SEL podcast as well about Alice Bailey. The goal is
not to direct the physical evolution of man. So so much to say Alice Bailey called that
exoteric eugenics and said it's not good. It's to direct the spiritual evolution of man, which is
of course co constituted or intrinsically interwoven with the physical
evolution of man. So the goal is actually to direct man on a spiritual level, but we have to
work with the crude means that we have. In other words, as above so below, so the spiritual level
of man imprints on his physical form and as below so above. So we work with the physical forms. We
work with physical things to direct the spiritual evolution as below so above. And when that happens,
just like Karl Marx believed in the cycle of man creates society creates man creates society.
Here we have the idea that we're going to direct the consciousness of man until the consciousness
of man changes spiritual evolution. And that will cause a new man to arise who's more in line with
that level of spirituality. And their goal is to push us into a new age, which just so happens to be
under their control. Because of their global world, I want to say religion that there's the word
they're kind of using it, but it's a cult. This is the largest cult startup in the history of the
world. And ultimately, the theosophical religions across the board, all have the exact same idea
that the fundamental human right is to be back in the Garden of Eden. That we have a fundamental
right to a liberated utopia. So when you hear them talk about our, you know, human rights or
whatever, then you say, well, they just seem to make up a new right like every other day. This
is right. That's right. Everything's a intrinsic right. What they believe is that they have an
intrinsic right to live in utopia. And literally, it's to, if we go kind of deeper into the old
theosophical religions, that to re-enter into the Garden of Eden, that the God that kicked us out is
some kind of an evil demagogic being, or it's a result of a cosmic negative accident that kicked
us out of our inheritance in the perfected utopia of Eden, and that we have an inalienable right
to live in Eden that we have been alienated from because of a cruel and wicked circumstance of
whatever caused us to fall in the past. It was the serpent luring us to eat the fruit of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil, and then God kicked us out, which is characterized as an evil
act and proof that the God portrayed in Genesis as a demon, or with Marx as the advent of private
property and the individualism that follows from it. With the queer theory, it would be the advent
of people believing they can define what it means to be normal for a human being, and thus
falling into the same kind of situation and estranging one another. But their belief is that
we have a fundamental inalienable right to re-enter the Garden of Eden, and that happens by
advancing our spiritual and collective societal human evolution into the direction indicated by
their religious crack pottery. So like I said, it is the largest cult startup in the history of the
world, and my essential claim, just to put it very bluntly in this podcast, is that at least
in this century, so at least for the last two decades and maybe a little more, the United Nations
has been devoted to this goal and has been devoted to being the headquarters for this
cult movement with all of its power, all of its extensions, and so there's no reason that we
should be participating in the United Nations whatsoever. It is a cult theosophical organization.
That's my hypothesis. So just another snippet from Mueller, before we get down to these ideas,
he says, with Dr. Karen Singh of India, we have just created a world commission on global
consciousness and spirituality to promote a much needed spiritual renaissance. That's the goal of
this document. That's the goal of what the United Nations was setting up around the year 2000,
up to 2003, when they started pushing all of this stuff. He says, I'm sending other members an excerpt
of 59 pages of ideas regarding religion and spirituality, similar to the one on the future
and futures capitalized here. So that's this document. That's the 59 pages. This document is
the 59 pages of what Robert Mueller thinks the United Nations needs to understand about religion
and spirituality and what it should look like in the 21st century and actually in the entire
third millennium. And it's all connected to something that they call their world commission
on global consciousness and spirituality. There's that consciousness word. That's a theosophical
tell that there's some secret consciousness that you awaken to that if you don't have it,
you're basically like cattle. And this document is meant to be issued in pursuit of a, quote,
much needed spiritual renaissance. Like I said, he then goes on to note that he says,
these are Robert Mueller's 2000 ideas started on 11 July 1994 2000 days before one January 2000.
So there's I want I'd only bring it up because I want to point out to you how invested they are
in symbolism. It's not a hard calculation, but it's a calculation. You have to sit down and very
intentionally decide to figure out which day on the calendar is 2000 days before January 1st 2000.
And that day happened to work out mathematically to July 11 1994. And that was the day he decided
to start writing 2000 ideas for the 21st century. He didn't write one idea a day, even though that
seems to be it. He wrote on average one idea per day, but he also is proud that he finished a little
bit early. And that's why he was able to submit this on the 6th of March 1999, instead of having
to wait until, you know, December or something. And so this document I'm about to read from is
exactly what Mueller indicates. It's 59 pages totaling perhaps a couple hundred of these 2000 ideas
that he considers specifically essential to a spiritual renaissance for the world,
meant to be facilitated and coordinated into a single world religion through the United Nations.
I am not going to read all of the ideas, all the few hundred ideas in this, I'm not going to read
them in order either because that would bury the lead. Now I am burying the lead a little bit,
but I want to give you a flavor of it. And we're going to, of course, build in the level of crazy.
So stick with me. But I'm going to start with some of the ideas further down on the list,
and then kind of return to some earlier ones with a couple of exceptions. I'm going to do
a couple right from the very beginning, just to give you an idea, because it's again relevant
to understanding who Robert Mueller is and what much of his life work involved. And I just want
you to keep in the back of your mind all along. This is the guy who created the education program
that became Common Core. This is the guy who created Common Core. So idea 105, written on the 23rd
of October 1994. For the sake of this planet and humanity's future, an office of global education
should be created in every ministry of education. Global education should be required in all schools
of earth, from kindergarten to university, and in all professional schools, especially for journalism
and the media. So he understood very clearly that messaging apparatuses and schools, messaging
apparatuses need to be captured through their schools. And he understood that schools themselves
need to be turned into brainwashing apparatuses for his global education. And that's the Common
Core program that he invented. So then that's idea 105, idea 103, which he wrote two days earlier on
the 21st of October 1994. While the exact sciences are all of a global universal nature, the social
sciences are not. Now, reflecting what we just talked about with George Soros, right, who published
the book Alchemy of Finance arguing exactly the same thing two years before this. While the exact
sciences are all of a global universal nature, the social sciences are not. There is urgent need
for a global anthropology, global sociology, global psychology, global political science
that he calls Planetetics. Did I say that right now? Planetics, sorry, Planetics, Planet ICS,
Planetics, sorry, global literature, global art, global culture, global philosophy,
global futurology, et cetera. Margaret Mead was the first prophet recommending it. Now,
Margaret Mead is the anthropologist who went around and is basically the mother of cultural
relativism, which is this kind of idea that matriculated in strongly into the social sciences
and in particular into the postmodern theory that says that no culture can judge one another.
And this actually dovetails very nicely with these occult theosophical ideas, which is that
there's exactly one religion, thus there's exactly one philosophy, there's exactly one science,
there's exactly one faith, there's exactly one culture. And what that actually is, is what they
called the Priska Theologia, the ancient theology, which is the occult theology that is frankly
flat out denied by the Bible. So we're not looking in good directions here so far. So let me just
give you, now that we've had a lot of preamble, throat clearing, et cetera, let me just give
you the trigger warning, I guess, what is going to sound like an old 1950s TV show, or maybe
unsolved mysteries from the 1980s. What you are about to hear will disturb you. It's true. What
you are about to hear will actually probably disturb you. My only commentary then in setting
out is, I want you to keep in mind, this is the real United Nations. When we look under the hood
of the UN, this is what we're dealing with. Even with all the positive aspirational language,
this is disturbing. This is a cult theosophy trying to create a world cult religion that we're all
stuck inside. And it's, in fact, a transformational religion, a transmutational religion,
a evolutionary religion. And so they mean to seize the means of human spiritual production
and societal production, such that we will move into our next evolutionary phase. And that's the
goal of the United Nations, at least in the 21st century and third millennium. So let's start with
some stuff we generally already know about the UN and its agendas, so we don't overwhelm too
quickly so that we can kind of understand how to orient what we already know about the United
Nations in terms of what Mueller is indicating is underneath those agendas, which is the
occult theosophy that this podcast is about. So as a result, I'm going to start near the end of
the document with idea 1912. The creation, he says, by the Rio de Janeiro Conference of an
Earth Council. So we're all familiar that a lot of this environmental sustainability crap
all got kicked off and coordinated at the Rio conference, the Earth Council, in 1992.
So the creation of the Rio de Janeiro Conference of an Earth Council is a great step ahead in human
history. One of its first tasks is to draft an earth charter. An admirable text of that
charter is now in circulation among non-governmental organizations, NGOs, for their comments. It opens
a completely new chapter of world charters. So here's where the NGOs become the relevant bodies
to push all of this crap. We also need a charter for the seas and oceans, a charter for outer space,
for the air and atmosphere, for the world's waters, for mountain areas, and for arid zones,
for the world's forestry covers, for the world's vegetation, for other species, for human settlements,
et cetera. A vast new field of human philosophy, behavior, and future evolution has been opened,
the fundamental rights of the earth. So all of this sustainable crap follows straight from this.
And you hear what they're after. Governance of everything in a evolutionary,
theosophical sense. Governance of everything, the seas, the oceans, outer space, the air,
the atmosphere, the water, mountains, deserts, forests, vegetation, all the species, human
settlements. They want control over all of it. And we see exactly those kinds of things coming
down the pike today. That's exactly what they're working with with this kind of new earth charter.
So, idea 1930. The UN General Assembly 2000 at the heads of state's level must absolutely measure
up to its historical tasks and be remembered for its audacity and long-term views of the future.
It should above all decide to embark on the writing of a Constitution for Proper Earth Government.
If it does not, future historians will not forgive its members. So in the year 2000,
the United Nations General Assembly is tasked, at least in this idea, with embarking on the writing
of a new Constitution for Proper Earth Government. Which does what? What the previous thing said.
It opens up a vast new field of human philosophy, behavior, and future evolution in the fundamental
rights of the earth. So the Constitution, that's supposed to be for global government,
that they're supposed to write in the year 2000, is designed to push the fundamental
rights of the earth. And he says if it does not, future historians will not forgive its members.
Well, it turns out future historians are probably not going to forgive its members,
but it's not because they did not. It's because they did. Idea 1931.
At this stage of our evolution, the concept of completion and survival of, sorry, I messed that
up. At this stage of our evolution, so let's let's frame our heads here. He's talking directly about
our evolution, that means mankind's evolution. At this stage of our evolution, the concept of
competition and survival of the fittest must be abandoned in favor of the concept of cooperation.
Oh, hello, Karl Marx. Hello, all the theosophists. The world future evolution of the earth
and of humanity depends on it. Only cooperation will save the earth and humanity. From now on,
cooperation must be the supreme law of earth and human survival. We must aim at a united
earth and nature. There's the seed right there for the 17 Sustainable Development Goals and how
they operate. And he's not just calling for a global government to be set up through the United
Nations and organized in line with extending the 1992 Rio de Janeiro Earth Council Accord,
but that it must also direct the, I should say redirect, the mechanisms of evolution of humanity,
specifically. Never mind the laws of nature, never mind nature's god, never mind a biblical god,
for sure. It is now time for a whole new principle that just so happens to be cooperation.
AKA communism, but kind of elevated communism, above communism even. And I want to stress this
point that this evolution is meant in a spiritual sense. The goal is to change the consciousness
of man so that man behaves differently. And through changing consciousness and through changing how
we behave, we become new people, a new species, a more advanced species. And in fact, we become a
communal species. And that's very important. These evolutionary leaders that I mentioned
before that he organized, this is very important because they actually see it, that here's the
idea. And I'm stealing from Lisa here. So this is going to be a little bit rough. Lisa Logan,
again, I am Lisa Logan, you should go follow her. So the general idea is they say, well,
look at what you have, you have these bacteria and the bacteria
start to make colonies and groups and they group together. This is a real video. She'll
show you the real video eventually. There's a real video I've seen of this guy given this
lecture. So this isn't us riffing. There's also books explaining this. So the bacteria form,
you know, various colonies or whatever. And some of the colonies figure out that if they
share resources in certain ways, that they're more successful. And so they can outcompete the
other ones. So bacteria colonies, which are kind of communities of bacteria do better. And eventually
a thing called a biofilm can form around them so that the colony itself becomes sort of a single
entity. And then the various different bacteria within it can specialize to do this to do that.
Do the other thing for the collective. And then what you end up with is something like an amoeba.
You end up with a more complex organism. And that's one step in an evolutionary spiral that
happens to look exactly like all the evolutionary hermetic spirals that I've put on Twitter over
time, like they literally use the same graphic, and outcomes a new species. And this is how
evolutionary leaps to higher order creatures, they say are made. And so eventually amoebas
form colonies or something that are like amoebas form colonies, and they get a biofilm, and then
you have a more complex organism and on and up until you end up with animals, and then you end
up with mammals, and then you end up with human beings. And so they think that we're at the stage.
And this is the point of their evolutionary idea, where human beings themselves are ready to take
the next evolutionary leap into a global collective. And the biofilm, we've already formed communities,
but the biofilm that ties us together, that makes us all into one thing is the internet. And the
internet can be directed so that within all the different communities of people, start to work
together for one global program. And so we are meant to become one super organism on the earth.
And in fact, in alignment with the earth as part of the earth. And that's what their that's what
their their idea of evolution is. But to get people to do this, they have to elevate their
thinking. In other words, they have to have consciousness raising. In other words, they have
to have evolution of consciousness into a global and even as we're going to hear cosmic consciousness
or astral consciousness that goes above that, and can picture humanity operating as a global
collective. Again, I urge you to realize that this is the exact same program Karl Marx was was
banging on about. Karl just had a different method and a different formulation. But it's the exact
same method that we are all the same. We're all the same collective, we're all intrinsically meant
to be working together. But only the spiritually advanced what Karl Marx called socialists can
actually see it. And here, it's going to be people with cosmic consciousness. And he is dead serious
that the purpose of the United Nations going forward is going to be to direct the spiritual
evolution of man into a single global collective in a single transformational that is heretical,
evil world religion. So let's skip straight to the end and read idea 2000. And we're going to see
this is pretty explicit. He says from our current world pessimism, we can be saved and uplifted
by this personal conclusion I arrived at an idea 552. Namely, perhaps out of my passion for life
and for this miraculous earth, a new theory of evolution can be shaped. Namely, that with our
recently acquired tremendous human knowledge of the universe and of our planet, we will henceforth
be more than the mere preservers and savers of the earth, but will be her instruments, her most
advanced evolutionary agents, her children endowed with the evolutionary task to make it an even more
astonishing planet and cosmic evolutionary success, perhaps the most advanced ultimate masterpiece
in the universe and God. Since each species born from nature is a miracle, we are certainly a
miracle to what great excitement it will be when in the year 2000 humanity will accept this as its
new all encompassing common objective for the 21st century to make this earth a paradise,
to make humanity a miracle. So I'm not kidding. That's literally what he's about.
That's literally the program. So let's make something extremely clear.
Going to remind you of a word I already used. An intentional theory of evolution for mankind is
eugenics. Let me say that again because that's what the United Nations through Robert Mueller is
advocating for. And like I said, this is the real United Nations, at least in this century. I think
maybe all along, I seriously think that. But at least in this century, let me just say that sentence
one more time and I'll say it slowly so it sinks in. An intentional theory of evolution for mankind
is eugenics. The call for man to complete God's creation is esoteric occult theosophy.
We could talk about whether it's inspired from hermetic ideas. You hear the idea straight up,
the Gnostic concept in idea number 2000 here. From our current world pessimism, we can be saved
and uplifted by this secret knowledge that we can actually have a directed evolution to become the
ultimate masterpiece of the universe and God. So let me make that real clear. This is eugenics.
This is the real United Nations, and its operating system is a call for man to complete
God's creation, which is esoteric occult theosophy. We should have nothing to do with this
organization. It is not merely a meeting place for governance to figure out global treaties and
things like that. It's nothing of the kind. And he's extremely serious about this and devotes
many of his ideas to making this a reality through his vision for a United Nations-centered
world government. Let's read 1904. Idea number 1904. I recommend that a totally new world
organization should be considered for our earth and humanity, a world organization of evolution
into which the United Nations could be incorporated. This organization would listen to evolutionary
scientists who look at evolution in its multiplicity of forms, from the smallest bacteria to the
evolution of humankind, within the basic elements of the planet, its airs, its water, its climate,
etc., and who have a long-term view, Gnostic, who have a long-term view of what the future
evolution of this planet is likely to be. This is indispensable because henceforth everything on
this planet has to be seen in terms of a long-term future evolution. Our species is now in charge of
the earth's future evolution. If we stick to obsolete values, we will put an end to it. But if we
adopt new values, new objectives, visions, institutions, and laws, evolution will continue.
This is henceforth problem number one on this planet. Everything else has to abide to it.
He then continues his thought in Idea 1905. The new world organization of evolution
would issue yearly reports on the state of evolution of our planet, review the prospects of
the future, and recommend corrective actions, including emergency measures and world laws.
Idea 1906. The most important single step that could help save the earth and humanity would be
to create in each government a ministry of the future, and in the United Nations and in each of
its agencies a department and commission of the future. It would be the first step toward the
creation of a world organization of evolution. It is good that the European Union had the vision
to create a position of commissioner for the future. May this good example be followed by
many institutions around the world, public, and private. ESG serves that role, by the way,
in a slightly different capacity without necessarily a direct department. That's what ESG
was designed to do. Besides the redirecting of money and impact investing, ESG was designed to
assess the long-term viability in terms of environmental and social programs,
plus corporate governance practices. Idea 1907. When one considers the vital importance of the
future evolution of this planet and of humanity, it would be also important to create a world
university of evolution and the future, or at least faculties of evolution and the future in
all universities. When I did that episode not that long ago, where I talked about the UNESCO
document, it was a series of four, the strange death of the university, where I talked about how
the sustainable development goals were to be incorporated completely into university education,
ASAP, at all levels. There you go. This stuff is crazy, but it gets way crazier than this. We're
not even close to crazy. I'm going to skip to the first part of super crazy. This might be the
craziest part. I showed this to Charlie Kirk, and he was just like, what? What? Whoa. Whoa.
Overwhelming. It's this freaking crazy. I want my Christian audience to listen very carefully to
what this says, because I need you to understand how off the rails the United Nations is and how
out of step. Why are they attacking Christianity so hard? You just heard the old values are going
to kill the planet. The old beliefs are going to kill the planet. We have to get rid of them.
So what does he propose here? It's not just that he intends his vision to be moved by the governments,
but very explicitly intends it to be moved by a single new world religion coordinated
as an evolutionary religion, that is occult theosophy, headquartered through the United
Nations or through a new body that the United Nations is incorporated into. And the goal is to,
for him, and I'm not kidding, listen, the goal for him is to envision the United Nations as the
body that is tasked with resetting the world. A great reset, right? Resetting the world with a new
creation. I mean that, because the next thing he talks about, at least that I'm going to tell you
about, these are from ideas we were just in the 1900s, we're skipping back to the 1300s.
He literally talks about the concept of a United Nations centered new genesis. Genesis is the first
book of the Bible. Genesis 1 and 2 describe the creation of the world. If you recall your Genesis
1, he talks about the seven days in which God created the world, the six in which he created
it, and the seventh upon which he saw that it was good and rested. So pulling from ideas 1301 to 1400,
which he offers in a single block in this document with the heading, The Spiritual State of the World,
on Earth Day 2013, here's what he writes. Humanity is now a united world community of
nations, not only economic and political, but also spiritual. Following the path opened in the
last century by Doug Homerskold and by Utahnt in the United Nations, by Robert Schumann in Europe,
and also throughout the millennia by prophets and founders of religions and by great sages,
such as Plato, Aristotle, Maimonides, Huxley, Albert Schweitzer, Dillard Deschardin, who was an
outright hermeticist, Thomas Berry, Bishop William Swing, and others. I'm sure digging into all of
those people will uncover that they have very questionable religious beliefs, maybe apart
from Aristotle. Humanity's material, scientific and technological, technological feats of the
20th century, he says, have been transcended first into the moral ethical realm, then into
philanthropy and guiafili, love for humanity and our earth. That's the key value, by the way,
not just of his program, but of the degrowth communism to fix the metabolic rift that Marx
predicted. If you go back and listen to the degrowth communism podcast that I did recently,
you'll see this, the exact same idea, guiafili, love for humanity and for our earth. It's all
theosophical occultism. Marxism is just a branch of theosophical occultism that had a very
powerful success record in installing itself politically. And so he says, sorry, humanity's
feats of the 20th century have been transcended first into the moral ethical realm, then into
philanthropy and guiafili, and finally into the highest form of all the spiritual dimension heralded
for so long by all religions, namely the right understanding of our place and relationship
in the universe and in time and of our fundamental cosmic nature and role. If you needed more proof
that this is occult theosophy, I don't know what to tell you, but he's invoking the underlying
hermetic concept of the priesthood theologiae there, that there is this ancient world religion,
that all sciences, all thought, all cultures, all religions, all everything are just reflections
of. Hinduism is just doing the best it can, just like quantum physics is doing the best it can,
to explain this one true thing about all of reality. And he thinks that we've now hit the
point where we can actually start to articulate that. The phenomenal expansion of human senses
and physical capabilities through science and technology was followed by the birth and development
of a global brain, a global nervous system, a global heart, and a global soul to humanity.
So Hegel's geist. Much remains to be done to perfect and refine these gains and to integrate
them fully into the total life system of our living planet, skipping a bit. We came to understand
that we are all part of a total living planet which is itself a cosmic body of the universe,
and that in this living system we are linked not only to the earth but to each other and to the
heavens in which we live. The miraculous transformation we have experienced in the
progress of humanity is a result of our cooperation of the world's religions along the lines of the
vast frameworks of our knowledge and our needed actions born in the United Nations and its agencies.
So let's be real clear. He's saying that everything is all one, that's the occult
theosophical view, and that it's actually coming together through the United Nations and its agencies.
These led to a better understanding of our planet and place in the universe of our
total human family, of our place in time, and of the miracle of individual human life.
The last decades of the 20th century provided humanity with the global information
and first experiences indispensable for our better behavior, for better earth government,
and for the physical, mental, moral, effective, and spiritual fulfillment of all humans
blessed with the miracle of life. So we're going to skip a few grandiose paragraphs with
fancy grandiose headings about the unique role of humans in place and time. We're going to skip
down to one of his subject headings. It's titled the miracle of individual life.
This fourth framework, so you can guess that we skipped three, this fourth framework which
revolves around the centrality of the human person goes far deeper and beyond human institutions.
It has become increasingly clear that in the vast global quantum change in human consciousness,
so does that sound like Deepak Chopra? It does. Why? Because he's one of them. He's actually
a very important figure. He's one of them. You know about the evolutionary leaders and people
like Deepak Chopra? Because Oprah Winfrey put them on TV all the time, dozens of times,
over and over and over again, and mainline them into our culture.
It has become increasingly clear that in the vast global quantum change in human consciousness,
individuals are the alpha and omega. Oh, we're god. Okay. The basic living cosmic units of evolution.
Individual, what? Don't all biological things evolve on the theory of evolution? But no, human
beings, human consciousness, individuals. Individual human life is the highest form
of universal consciousness. This is just the theosophical belief set that we are the unique
creature that's able to figure out where the divine has been fragmented so that we can lead
God to realize himself so that we eventually, God realizes that we are no different from
one another or anything else. And in fact, that we are always God. That's literally it.
Individual human life is the highest form of universal consciousness. With the recognition
of universal human rights and responsibilities, it became apparent that institution systems,
states, groupings, entities had no consciousness and could only be instruments,
servants, means for the increase of individual consciousness, fulfillment and responsibility.
The highest goal for humankind is to attain optimum physical, mental, effective, moral,
and spiritual lives as a part of the total life system of our planet.
So are you getting the idea that this is a super crackpot religion? It is.
Optimum physical life involves knowledge and care of the human body, the human ability to see,
to hear, to observe, to create, to do, to act, to transform. And the expansion of all senses
and physical abilities. That's, there you go. Optimum meant that, by the way Karl Marx has
the same thing in the economic-philosophic manuscript, by the way. By the way, he says the
exact same thing. It's the exact same theosophical nonsense. And I think that Karl Marx stole it
from the Corpus Hermeticum. It's way too weird that it's in there in Karl Marx's economic-philosophic
manuscripts and that it's so closely parallels to stuff that's in the Corpus Hermeticum, which is
the ancient Hermetic religious text, which by the way has 17 books. The 17s just keep coming up.
Just saying. This is exactly the same thing that's expressed there. And it's not because this guy's
a Marxist. It's because Marx was one of them. It's that they are all theosophical occultists who
think that they have the secret knowledge and the divine right to transform man to complete creation.
They're the Alpha and the, man is the Alpha and the Omega. The beginning and the end. The creator
and the conclusion. He says, optimal mental life involves knowledge and education,
which of course they took control of. The ability to question, to think, to analyze, to synthesize,
to synthesize, to conclude, to communicate. The ability to focus from the infinitely small to
the infinitely large, from the local to the global, from the past to the future, to be what
Hinduism calls trickle darshish. Sorry, I can't say it. I don't know. Omniscient. Particularly,
all knowing across time, past, present, and future. And trickle lanaths, which is omnipotence,
mastery of the three worlds. Optimum, effective, and moral life involves the ability to love,
and the human virtues of truth, understanding, humility, liberty, responsibility, reverence for
life, compassion, altruism, and charity. And finally, optimum spiritual life involves the
ability for interiority, meditation, prayer, communion with the universe, and eternity, and
with God. Here, the United Nations, the United Religions, UNESCO, and other world agencies
stand today in the forefront of human progress and evolution, in the education information,
enlightened democracy, transcendence, and fulfillment of the miracle of human life,
and its contribution and responsibility in the overall cosmic evolution of our planet and of the
universe. We have a role in the evolution of the universe. Like, this is the most ridiculous,
but it's just a cult, theosophy. You've got to understand. You may not even know the word
theosophy yet. You need to know the word theosophy, because the spiritual war that we're in right now
is theosophy versus theology. Theology is a serious pursuit of religious truth, and theosophy is
a cult. I was going to say it's an occult cult, which sounds stupid, so that's why I stalled
out there. But that's what it is. It's a cult based on occult beliefs. He says, this is where
we stand at the moment in the year 2013. I don't know how this is in a document delivered in 1999.
I don't know if it was added later. That's beside the point. It's in the freaking document. You can
go look at it. I can show you the page numbers. He must have added to this and cobbled it together
later as a kind of grouping of things that he thinks. But anyway, this is where we stand at
the moment in the year 2013, 20 years after the Second World Parliament of Religions. It represents
a unique, tremendous quantum jump in consciousness and evolution of humanity. We know our planet
inside out, and we are now in charge of its future. That seems very taking on playing God.
We even know a good part of the heavens. We have entered the cosmic age of our evolution. So skipping
more of this waffle, because I want to get to the scary stuff. Similarly, the pragmatic efforts of
the religions and of the United Religions, that's an organization by the way, are complemented by a
world spirituality university, which has developed a science of spirituality. Alice Bailey called it
the science of right human relations. A strategy for spirituality and a methodology of spirituality
derived from all religious practices, celebrations, and rights around the world,
aimed at the spiritual fulfillment and responsibility of human beings.
As a result, the world is in a new period of full, flowering spiritual renaissance, far beyond
inter-religious dialogue. Remember, that's what he called for back in 1999, and here it is in 2013,
saying that we're there, based on the common spirituality of all religions and on a common
denominator of all human beings. The yearning for answers to the mysteries of life and death and of
our universe, to which the scientific age, despite its amazing advances, was unable to
find satisfying answers. The age of scientific analysis and dissection, our checkered history
of local cultures and national divisions, the millennia of religious dissections, and of the
spiritual nature of humanity, of the earth and of the cosmos, have now led to a new age of
universality, holism, evolutionism, and all-encompassing convergence, synthesis, synergy,
and transcendence. That sounds like some Antichrist stuff, so I'm skipping a lot more after a bunch
of bullet points for what this world might look like in practice, which probably I should cover,
but this is going to be super long anyway. He says, at that point, I looked up from the text,
so he's working on laying out what this should look like. At that point, I looked up from the text
and seized a copy of a book I had written many years ago in the last century, meaning in the 90s,
when I was a young world servant, I don't know if it's in the 90s, so before 2000, I should say,
when I was a young world servant of the United Nations,
entitled New Genesis, Shaping a Global Spirituality, and read the following text of mine. So this is
the vision that was guiding his thought from very early on in his world servant capacity at the
United Nations. He said, he wrote, and God saw all the nations of the earth, black and white,
poor and rich, from north and south, from east and west, and all of the creeds were sending
their emissaries to a tall glass house on the shores of the river of the rising sun,
on the island of Manhattan, to study together, to think together, and to care together for the
world and all its people, and God said, that is good. And it was the first day of the new era of
the earth. Pause. Where is the glass house on the, a tall glass house on the shores of the river
of the rising sun on the island of Manhattan? Hmm, is it the United Nations building? It is.
So let's phrase it more, more straightly. And God saw that all the nations of the earth,
and all its people, from all its creeds, were sending their emissaries to the United Nations
building, to study together, to think together, and care together for this world and all of its
people, and God said, that is good. And it was the first day of the new era of the earth.
This is United Nations. This is the UN. Time to abolish the UN. But he's not done.
And God saw that soldiers of peace were separating the combatants of quarreling nations.
So that's their blue hats, that differences were being resolved by negotiation and reason instead
of arms, and that leaders of nations were seeing each other, taking to each other and joining
their hearts, minds, souls, and strength, that's a reference to Jesus, the Gospels, for the benefit
of all humanity. And God said, that is good. And it was the second day of the planet of peace.
So he just compared the blue hats to Jesus' disciples by the way. And God saw that humans
were loving the entire creation, the stars and the sun, the day and the night, the air and the
oceans, the earth and the waters, the fishes and the fowl, the flowers and the herbs, and all their
human brethren and sisters. And God said, that is good. And it was the third day of the planet of
happiness. And God saw that humans were suppressing hunger, disease, ignorance, and suffering all
over the globe, providing each human person with a decent, conscious, and happy life,
no discontious, and reducing the greed, the power, and the wealth of the few. And he said,
that is good. And it was the fourth day of the planet of justice.
And God saw that humans were living in harmony with their planet and in peace with one another,
wisely managing their resources, avoiding waste, curbing excesses, replacing hatred with love,
greed with contentment, arrogance with humility, division with cooperation, and mistrust with
understanding. And he said, that is good. And it was the fifth day of the golden planet.
And God saw that men were destroying their arms, bombs, missiles, warships, and war planes, dismantling
their bases and disbanding their armies, keeping only policemen of peace to protect the good from
the bad and the normal from the mad. And God said, that is good. And it was the sixth day of the planet
of reason. And God saw humans restore God. And God saw humans restore God and the human person
as the Alpha and Omega. And God saw humans restore God and the human person as the Alpha and Omega,
reducing institutions, beliefs, politics, governments, and all man-made entities to mere
servants of God and the people. And he saw them adopt as their supreme law. You shall love the
Lord your God with all your heart, all your soul, all your mind, and all your strength. You shall
love your neighbor as yourself. There is no greater commandment than these. And God said, that is good.
And it was the seventh day of the planet of God. I let the book rest on my lap and looked around
me at the magnificent divine nature of the sacred Mount Ressur and addressed these words
of thanks to God. Thank you, dear Lord, for having fulfilled my dream. And I seized my harmonica
and played on it the ode to joy of Beethoven. So it turns out this harmonica thing, that's the end
of the page, this harmonica thing actually happened. I kind of meant to play it for you. Maybe we can
work this thing in. I'm not 100% sure. Maybe I'll work in the sound. So you can actually hear that
it wasn't Robert Mueller, but somebody else played the harmonica in the United Nations and played ode
to joy. And what that means is they knew that this was happening. So hopefully we'll cut this in.
Dear, dear colleagues, these are our last decisions in this mandate. And I would like to thank you
for five years of unity and diversity. It is our responsibility to keep Europe together
and let rebuild Notre Dame and happy Easter.
But that's certainly something, isn't it? Something very heretical. So how is it all supposed to
work? Let's go back to his ideas. So now we know what they're up to, a new genesis, a new recreated
world, a new recreation of life where God works on all seven days, by the way, and in which the
United Nations is a tall house of glass that is where God says that it all comes from. Isn't that
great? So evil. And how's it supposed to work? Well, let's listen. Idea 1382 from the 23rd of
April 1998. Like the capitalists and communists did at the end of the last century, we should
think hard and conceive how we can make the next century a paradise. Since both communism and
capitalism have failed, and since we live in planetary conditions very different from those at
the end of the last century, we must think afresh all of our current beliefs, doings, and
institutions, and formulate an entirely new ideology or dreamology for an unprecedented future in
all human history. Heads of governments, of corporations, and of all human institutions
should be excited by this new, wonderful challenge. And what should the challenge solve? Idea 1343,
15 March 1998. Humanity has achieved so much progress, has solved so many problems, avoided
so many dangers, and yet now we face the most colossal problem in the entire human history
and evolution, namely that industry, technology, commerce, transport, overpopulation, and over
consumption might destroy the very essence and future of the earth, including our own, namely,
its nature. We need innumerable great and small ideas and efforts to countervail that.
But there's a huge problem in this idea, and that a huge problem is called the United States of
America. Idea 1338, 10 March 1998. From an evolutionary point of view, the attacks of the
United States against the United Nations and reduction of its roles and means, in other words,
we were pushing away from the UN and defunding it, will be considered someday as one of the greatest
errors and lax of vision in world history. It seems that power went so much to the head of the
United States that it lost its sense of proportions and direction, therefore the United States will
decline as a power, as did all past powers which did not adapt to new fundamental trends of evolution.
This happens regrettably on the eve of a new century and millennium when all countries,
especially the best informed ones, should have the clearest possible mind, views,
and heart toward a future written in the stars. We must deeply mourn the fact that the United
States has lost its consciousness of the world's future and of its guiding role in it. So what's
wrong with the United States? It's powerful enough to be sovereign and to reject this theosophy
in favor of individual rights and liberties instead of a crackpot world cult.
What's happened since? Much of what has transpired in the 20th century, especially
since about 2015, has been a direct attack on the United States for this rejection of the
United Nations theosophical ambitions, exactly like Robert Mueller said would have to be the case.
The United States will have to decline as a power because it's not in line with their
evolutionary agendas. The United States had its run but it's not going along with the program
sufficiently so they're going to have to let it fall. That seems to be very in line with their
program. So the United States should have absolutely nothing to do with this organization.
It should renew its attacks, it should renew its distance, and it should completely defund
this evil organization. So then there's another big section based on another block of hundred,
based on ideas 1401-1500 and it's even crazier than this new Genesis idea that really sets the
stage for what they want. It calls for a global association of scientists and thinkers concerned
with long-range evolution. Now this is an excerpt added in by Erica Erdman in her interim report
published in November of 1997 and it starts off with a quote from so-called quote space scientist
Eric Chison. I don't think I said his last name right but you whatever.
The quote says implicit within our cosmic evolutionary paradigm is a transcendence of
the Darwinian principle of natural selection, a loftier standard that I call the principle of
cosmic selection. Those technological civilizations of any type on any planet that recognize the
need for development time and fully embrace a global ethics will survive and those that do not
will not. Okay so let's be real clear about something here. So my Christian buddies I need
you to listen. When Darwin talked about evolution these people reject that. That is not what they're
talking about. They are in fact remember he said they were going to reject survival of the fittest,
we're going to reject competition. That's what Darwin's ideas were based off of. That is not
what they're advocating. They are not advocating for Darwinism. They're advocating for directed
cosmic evolution and the claim is that cosmic selection is the only planetary civilizations
that survive are ones that adopt global ethics. What does that mean? And fully adopt not just adopt
not just adopt it but fully embrace global ethics. That means global cooperation. That means
something like the vision of communism. That means the theosophical endpoint where we are all one.
So if you don't adopt their theosophical occult views of what humanity is supposed to be
they believe that there's a pressure that all such civilizations will eventually go extinct
and will not survive in the grand scheme of cosmic selection which by the way is not real.
That is not a theory by which anything is said to say speciate or differentiate or persist through
time. But that's where it begins. So then we go back to Erica here and she comments and says
his insight into global problems and his vast perspective led Dr. Robert Muller Chancellor
Emeritus of the University for Peace in Costa Rica and former assistant secretary general of the
United Nations to call for a UNESCO backed summit meeting of the world's scientists and thinkers
concerned with the long-term fate of our earth and of humanity which is endangered by blind pursuit
of short-term goals. He envisions an interchange of knowledge and ideas among the most conscientious
persons on the planet leading to advances in human wisdom that could not otherwise occur
and that would initiate a permanent shift toward a more future-oriented responsible attitude
worldwide. So this global ethic
is supposed to be backed by these ideas that replace blind pursuit of short-term goals. Again
ESG came in in 2003 to start pushing us in that direction from where? The United Nations. Comprehensive
sexuality education to I guess adopt a new global ethic was developed at UNESCO in
2003 all straight downstream from these ideas. So the objective they state the importance and
urgency of the project lies in the need for a transformation of past inspired ethics with
their many contradictions fundamentalist shackles and mutual hatreds to a future-oriented ethic
in which all of humanity can unite in a striving to become more enlightened and more humane.
Apparently we got to take down the US first. Many scientists believe that the universe is
dominated by a quote cosmic principle of self-destruction a universal law that destroys
any civilization in the universe which has achieved a level of intelligence and technical
capacity similar to our own. I don't know who these many scientists are because intelligence
is not the result of the fiercest competition during the process of evolution they argue
our brains cannot possibly conceive of an alternative that would avert our fate.
Other scientists see in the process of evolution a forward march not toward more destructive
competition but toward more foresight insight wisdom and love. These persons most of whom
are inspired by the teachings of Taelhard de Chardin who I mentioned earlier is one of her
medicists believe that the trend from the material to the spiritual from the amoeba to man I told you
there's this other video and then they mention it here will inevitably be continued toward superior
heights of love and wisdom now this was written in 1997 the amoeba to man thing um video that I
mentioned was much later it's much more recent so they've been thinking this for a long time
but this trend from the material to spiritual from the amoeba to man will inevitably be continued
toward superior heights of love and wisdom however threatening present developments on
earth may appear to us now skipping down a bit an association of scientists concerned with long
range evolution would help to sort these contradictions out and to align and attract thinkers and
scientists toward a superior goal it is urgently needed to show the pessimists that alternatives
to competition until death do exist even in non-human nature but especially in human nature
to show the optimists that reliance on non-human determination of our fate might weaken our sense
of personal responsibility for our descendants and our earth and to oppress to impress upon
the majority the importance of a long range and encompassing vision to guide our choices
hello esg and then they put in bold a whole paragraph in bold what unites us is a look
at the miracle of evolution from a cosmic perspective anostic perspective guys it is the
effort put to prevent our species from becoming another dead end bypassed by ongoing development
of life it is a search for principles and values guiding humanity toward further ascent
so we got to spiritually evolve the entire species and what in the world is this based on
where did they get these crazy ideas about oh no everything's going to be bad we're going to destroy
ourselves every civilization of our kind at our level of advancement or whatever destroys itself
and I mean on a planetary sense I don't mean like the fall of Rome I mean like everybody goes
extinct the whole thing falls apart so what is this all based on aside from some weird book
that they do mention uh of questionable worth about cosmic evolution and some quote from a
space scientist the book about cosmic evolution by the way is taken to be the impetus for what I
just read but it turns out that underneath all this are the neo-malthusian ideas of the club
of Rome and the limits to growth you remember when I talked about the limits to growth and
how these guys thought that the that the world was going to outstrip its the humans were going
the humans were going to outstrip the world's resources and we would all have a population
collapse and the whole degrowth premise the whole depopulation premise that we have to
keep putting on the table is all because they believe what was written in the club of Rome in
1971 or two um in the book that they published limits to growth which turned out to make lots
of predictions for the year 2000 that we're all wrong turns out that's their inspiration here's
what they write professor professor dh meadows from the united states is a system analyst and
journalist professor of systems management dl meadows from the us is director of the institute
for policy and social science research and professor j randers is a policy analyst and
president emeritus of the norwegian school of management chairman of the norwegian bank of
industry norwegian institute for market research and deputy director general of the world wildlife
fund which by the way is if you didn't know the world wildlife fund is really part of this
whole global agenda big time well it is and here's why in fact it was probably created as such
i don't know for sure all three authors collaborated on the path breaking book the limits to growth
published 20 years ago their present book beyond the limits from 1992 also provides
such clear convincing and well documented information about our present world and the
dangers of rapid uncontrolled growth that it is difficult to imagine how it could fail to have
an immense impact growth is defined as material resource consuming advance only while other
all other growth is called development the authors however see no indication that people
are reasonable enough to reverse their lifestyles in time once overshoot becomes evident moreover
in most cases it will be too late once depletion is clearly visible so these people are going to
save the world from itself in line with the limits to growth club of rome stuff remember the world
economic forum guys claus Schwab in particular invited these exact same people from the club of
rome to speak at the world economic forum in its second year of existing way back in the 1970s so
this is this is the idea behind almost all of this so almost all crackpot faiths and real faiths
both present two alternatives heaven and hell we know what that looks like in christianity for
example what we can also see what it looks like um from harbert marcusa he says that we're either
going to have communism or we're liberation i should say or we're going to have fascism so we
have heaven or hell those are our two choices and here the the um evolutionary new thought
gnostic new thought of the united nations which is rooted down in this idea of sustainability
inclusion presents us heaven and hell we're either going to degrow to a utopian circular
economy intentionally and intelligently under their global management with their new global
faith heaven or what we're going to do is we're going to collapse our world we're going to have
massive over massive depletion that becomes a downwards a vicious circle that destroys
the capacity for life on the planet and then we all die so they it's the same same same structure
so that's this that crazy setup but let's skip down a little further read idea 1433 which he
wrote the 13th of june 1998 he says we urgently need as we enter a new century and millennium
a world conference to appraise the present state of evolution on this planet and to provide
world views on future evolution in the next century and millennium after humanism after the
environment after the earth now future evolution has become priority number one
idea 1499 18 august 1998 after communism and capitalism frugalism which is degrowth they
just didn't have the word to use in 98 after communism and capitalism frugalism might become
the new ideology and rule of our behavior on earth demanding from us more frugal and simple
lives in order not to destroy life giving nature a new economic system must be born
which will not produce colossal waste unnecessary products built in rapid
obsolescence and colossal duplications between 185 nations that's exactly the argument of
herbert marcusa in one-dimensional man frugalism and simplicity of life might become the salvation
of the earth and future generations it's also the argument of the degrowth capitalism
or degrowth communism book i'm sorry uh marx and the enthropocene that i covered in another
episode of the podcast this is their agenda this is how they think so degrowth is going to be the
way to save the world idea 1510 29th august 1998 we must deeply rethink our world's and humanity's
future it would be good to remember the fathers of the u.s constitution how dare you it would be
good to remember the fathers of the u.s constitution who believed that the function of good government
was to quote affect the greatest happiness of the greatest number of citizens and to affect
harmony between the public and private interests end quote today they would add get their mother
fucking names out of your mouth today they would add harmony with the earth and a worldwide
dimension to the attaining of happiness no they wouldn't you dickhead idea 1557 15th october 1998
speaking of identities we should accept happily that we have a poly identity
our specific individual identity a family identity a local identity a provincial identity a national
identity a continental identity a world identity a cosmic identity an eternal identity the future
earth and human government of this planet should take all of these diverse entities or sorry identities
into account it gets much worse in the next section based on ideas 1601 to 1700 this is where
like new genesis was pretty crazy and totally blasphemous this is where the ideas actually
get nut job because it's his cosmological vision of the future and i'm going to try to do i have
to read a lot of it and i'll try to just kind of slide through it as quickly as we can i will try
this is robert miller i will try to condense briefly my thoughts on a cosmic vision of humanity's
future first of all the most important factor determining our time is that in the entire human
evolution on this planet within the last couple of centuries and especially during the last 50
years the human race has been able to extend its knowledge of this planet and of itself in such
incredible ways that a profound transformation has taken place in evolution this is the talk of
eugenicists guys we now understand the mysteries of life the mysteries of humans the mysteries of
the of the planet and the cosmos and now we can direct it because we understand it we can take
it into our hands we can seize the means of production of man he says this knowledge has
meant incredible benefits for humanity and i skip his big laundry list of them the fundamental fact
that we know our planet that we know humanity that we know how to analyze and recompose matter
has produced miracles of course we believed that the progress of science and technology was for
the benefit of humanity in other words that our reason for being on this planet was to get the
best for ourselves this is the great humanistic age in which we are now living but we did not know
that these great advances would also result in a whole series of crises due to our global ignorance
whoever thought of saving energy whoever thought of the ozoneosphere
whoever thought of possible climactic changes whoever thought of the long-term genetic dangers
of nuclear radiation and radio waves i'm asking this question today what are the things we are
doing today which we think are wonderful and in which in 20 years from now we'll have the same
or worse adverse effects as a few examples i mentioned who is thinking of this who is
heeding the iroquois precept that we should think of the effects on the seventh generation
we do not even think of the next generation there is not a single ministry of the future on this
planet yikes and i will point out that he actually in lots and lots and lots of the ideas invokes
the idea that we need to go back to indigenous especially american indian
knowledges and epistemologies that comes up over and over and over again i don't actually include
any of them i think except for that mention but it's not like a throw in here it's like over and
over and over again indigenous knowledges are the only way why because they are the model for
communism remember marx's model of communism communism is a global state where we all act
like a big tribal family mm that's why now skipping down some of this so we get to the crazy stuff
of late there has been another fundamental change on earth until now we thought that this planet was
at our disposal that it was created for us uh oh christians there's your beliefs that it was here
for us to exploit and develop endlessly i think the word in the bible is subdued well
we are now in the middle of another cupurnican revolution we thought at the time that the
sun was turning around the earth until we learned from cupurnicus that it was not true now we're
learning that perhaps this planet has not been created for humans but that human that humans
have been created for the planet uh oh there's your um earth worshiping gnostic um with gnostic
theosophy we return to the earth he says as our american indians and the great religions have all
told us thus we are temporary living manifestations or incarnations of this earth again the american
indians tell us we are children of the earth and we must take good care of our mother and respect her
we are living earth each of us is a cell a perceptive nervous active unit of the earth
we are earth alive and are beginning to be concerned about the earth the living consciousness
of the earth is beginning to operate through us all over the world a kind of earth democracy a
gayaocracy is taking shape what you're witnessing is the birth of a new pagan cult by the way
you as cosmic and earth cells are part of a vast biological and evolutionary phenomenon
which is of first importance at this stage namely humanity as a whole the whole human
species is becoming the brain the heart the soul the expression and the action of the earth
pause let's talk about carl marx right remember when he said that the earth is
is man's inorganic body and that the point of part of our activity is that as we rehumanize
ourselves we're to humanize the world and make the world fit for human habitation so we're supposed
to turn the earth we're supposed to basically integrate the earth into ourselves and ourselves
into the earth so that it were one symbiotic thing and that would of course avoid the metabolic
rift the capitalism is going to produce and the whole point of degrowth which is the whole point
of the concepts of the club of rome that i just talked about and limits to growth so the whole
human species as a species being namely humanity as a whole the whole human species as a species
being is becoming the brain the heart the soul the expression and the action of the earth we now
have a global brain which determines what can be dangerous or mortal for this planet yeah and
limits to growth it was shitty computer models that he literally talks about it's like the shitty
computer models of um covid but go back to like 1971 and imagine how shitty those computer models
would be because that's what it literally that's their global brain is shitty computer models but
what that means is ai is a future global brain and it can determine what can be dangerous or mortal
for this planet the united nations what does he say is a colon here what is the global brain
according to robert moeller writing in 1998 we have a global brain which can which determines
what can be dangerous or mortal for this planet and it is the united nations and its agencies
the innumerable groups and networks around the world are part of this brain we are a world heart
altruism which we haven't covered altruism and augusta comte yet but that's another bad philosophy
altruism the concern of people to be of help the live aid and international programs etc
all of this is a manifestation of the fact that on this planet after having evolved from protozoas
to metazoas we are now becoming what one would call terrazoas we are living earth that is beginning
to be conscious of its role in the evolution of this particular planet in the universe this is
our newly discovered meaning birth of a cult it is happening every day and we have to draw the
right conclusions from it the world is changing very fundamentally in terms of consciousness
behavior and action we know that we are a global family living in a global home this is more or
less where we stand in other words we are in the process of becoming a global civilization and yet
this is not all there is more to come beyond our global consciousness we are moving into a cosmic
consciousness remember this is a guy that created common core just in case you forgot that in other
words we learn to see the earth process not only as a global planetary process but as a cosmic
manifestation and evolution on a given planet in the universe it is not impossible that the universe
has not been able to produce many live planets like ours we are at the right distance from a sun
we have the right mass to retain an atmosphere and water and we are very lucky that the force that
keeps atoms together on this planet is just right a little stronger and we would be a condensed ball
a little weaker and we would be dispersed into the universe i hate to point out creationist
but he's making the same argument you guys do our planet and its life forms are the result of
many miracles and unique phenomena the religions rightly say that this is a unique planet and that
god has a special design for us science is now discovering that too mathematicians tell us that
the conditions required to give birth to life on any planet in the universe are one of the most
staggering astronomical improbability figures they can conceive new cosmologies are being produced
by the dozens but i do not think that anyone is as yet the right one there are many different views
the physicists the geneticists the chemists the spiritualists each have a view which one of those
is not like the others the idiots i mean spiritualists that's right the theosophists i when i put your
little dig there a second ago christians that this sounds exactly you guys making your creation
arguments i told you the fundamental spiritual battle is theology versus that's you versus theosophy
that's them and they are stepping into the exact same space at the same time as you guys to try to
make these claims into to bring people into their cult rather than keeping them in either reason or
faith he says but it shows that there is an active search for a new cosmology for a new
understanding of what is happening on this planet where there are many life forms and we're one of
them namely the human form humans remember he said before protozoan metazone and a terrazoan
okay humans are becoming cosmos oas the main factor of the further evolution transformation
and possibly destruction of the planet if we do not understand what is going on in act properly
you're witnessing the birth of a cult religion this is something he says absolutely extraordinary
because it means that each of us is a cosmic unit sounds like deepak chopra right he's one of them
that we have the ingredients of the total cosmos in ourselves you only know who deepak chopra is
by the way because they elevated deepak chopra because they needed somebody to go talk about
this and have debates and become very famous pushing these ideas into the public how many
times we see on opera oh shit lots the cosmos is giving birth to billions of humans as seeds
uh-oh the cosmos is giving birth to billions of humans as seeds many seeds fall on stone
are on infertile ground or do not understand what their duties are but growing numbers of
people understand that they have a cosmic function deep in themselves see only some
people are actually nostics and they know that they're going to have to direct the spiritual
evolution of the entire human society or the entire human species and the planet itself
and cosmic evolution these people are esoteric theosophists he says if you look over history
who are the greatest people you'll find the mozart's the betovans the philosophers the sages
the religious leaders they were all people of cosmic consciousness oh all the geniuses were
people like my cult of course they try to claim all the people in history like they always do
they were conscious of living in the cosmos in eternity and in the universe at every moment
really mozart was like fucking really i don't think so isn't this like you say this the sages
and the religious leaders isn't this like kind of fucking exactly what elijah was like it no
wrong there's certainly urnais one of the greats uh cast down these heresies in the first century
he says this is why we listen to them well because they're in the cult you know they're all like
hundreds of years ago before your stupid cult but they were in the cult and this is why we listen
to them because they're part of the cult they're a vibration he doesn't say this i'm saying this
a vibration of the priska theologia the universal religion this is why we listen to him he says when
we read uh when we read them when we see their works we are deeply moved and elevated why because
they are in tune with the universe and make us feel that way this is what the religions are trying
to sell us quote be in tune with the universe be in union with god with eternity remember that
your temporary lives have a meaning a duty to fulfill end quote and when we fulfill this duty
the universe recompenses us recompenses us with a happiness impossibly even resurrection it is not
impossible that the hindu philosophy might be right that only those who had worthwhile lives
contributing to the good and the further evolution of this planet will be allowed to live again and
that worthless seeds will be left aside to wither away the religions can be very helpful in understanding
these new cosmologies let me just pause for a second holy shit okay in other words he says
humanity the same way as it has become recently a global family is also becoming now a cosmic family
this is the united nations gentlemen we will realize that we are a cosmic species which will
find its way on this planet only by following the imminent rules of the cosmos i'm sure ladies
that they alone know those rules and they're going to enforce them through one government
one global government through the united nations some call it god others a cosmic substratum that
is in each of us as the manifestation of the living universe divided and distributed overall
reality well there's the fundamental hermetic belief it is possible that stars are just living
and dying cells of one body the same way as we are living and dying cells of that same body
let me pause again holy shit this realization is of incredible momentous importance it will
occupy humanity and give us great hope and challenges the story was told to us in simple
forms by the religions but now the scientists have come to the same conclusion that the universe is
one in its endless manifestations the recent scientific literature is replete with this finding
so the nostics know the secret interpretation of whatever it is he's talking about and it's whatever
they think my proposal he says is therefore that we proceed toward the year 2000 sorry i left out
the word as my proposal is therefore that as we proceed toward the year 2000 we should pack
this last decade with visions dreams ideas and actions aimed at preparing the next millennium
as the cosmic spiritual millennium of this planet in order to properly respond to the
expectations of the cosmos or god in order to do this i will propose that a number of major
conferences or efforts be undertaken which are not yet considered by the united nations peace
disarmament population the environment economic development etc are all subjects being dealt
with in the un but here is a list of others which should be taken up in order to prepare adequately
the next millennium so he's about to give a list of suggestions that the united nations needs to
take up that it's not successfully taking up even though overpopulation and uh the environment are
already part of the plan how many suggestions do you think he makes how many it's 17 of course it's
17 of course it's 17 first a major conference should be convened on a new cosmology we just
heard what that sounds like one should listen to the physicists to the biologists to the other
scientists and the people who have come up with new cosmologies that's the weirdo spiritualists
like them from their views one would extract a common denominator a priska theologia they all
have very important perceptions but these perceptions vary with the point of view of their
professions physical biological spiritual social political etc at the end of such a conference
we would have a better understanding of what the cosmos is expecting from us in our next phase of
evolution second i would recommend a major conference on a new philosophy a global philosophy
philosophy is the way of life what should be the way of life on this planet in global terms in light
of our fantastic knowledge where are the great sages of our time where are the positive philosophies
who are giving us an explanation of the meaning of life and hope for the future i'll tell you
where the great sages are you're censoring them that's where they are third a new sociology is
needed which will help us understand the meaning and role of all the innumerable groups entities
professions and institutions we have on this planet most of them have a contribution to make to the
progress and success of our evolution many of them do not know it and have not even asked the
fundamental deeper question of why they exist why they were created what their ultimate purpose
and contribution should be in the total human fabric their limited aims and behaviors must be
geared toward the needs of humanity of the planet and to the continued success of our cosmic evolution
this is a vast unexplored urgent subject fourth we need a new anthropology as margaret mead
recommended remember that's the mother of cultural relativism we need world celebrations as we have
them in the family and religions in nations humans in the world have to develop common
paradigms common ideals and benchmarks for the future the science of the total human race leaves
much to be desired we do more research on tribal systems and on global humanity its meaning evolution
and system so we need a science of humanity apparently fifth we need an overall human biology
i wonder if it knows what a woman is a science of human life on this planet we study more animals
and microbes and we study the functioning of the human species to the biologists this is political
it should not be so the biologists should tell us very frankly and honestly how the human species
functions from their point of view as experts in life if they do it for the fishes and the mammals
they can and should also do it for the human species well they're biologists so maybe they
do know what a woman is but it doesn't appear to be the case sixth we need a global cosmic
spirituality we have heard religious leaders of various faiths it was illuminating i hope that
religious leaders will get together and define before the end of this century the cosmic laws
which are common to all their faiths so there's a great ecumenical movement and imagine if you
tied that thing through the church to the businesses and called it the center for inclusive capitalism
they have been cosmic experts and interpreters of the heavens for a long time they should tell the
politicians what the cosmic laws are what god or the gods or the cosmos are expecting from humans
it's good that we had last year the oxford conference of parliamentarian scientists and
religious leaders and that in january 1990 a second conference will be held in mosco
we must hope also that the pope will come before the year 2000 to the united nations speak for
all the religions and spiritualists on the planet and give the world the religious view of how the
third millennium should be a spiritual millennium a millennium in which we will see the integration
and harmony of humanity with creation with nature with the planet with the heavens and with eternity
yeah let the let the integralists do it their system is an integralist system by the way just
pointing that out seventh we need a new world policy and political system uh-oh this planet is
mismanaged to an incredible degree if the united states were managed like the world is managed it
would be a disaster nobody would understand how 50 states in the world has 185 each having
a president a flag an army and absolute sovereignty could ever work together imagine the united
states government in washington being only a kind of united nations without any authority
any legislative power barely any resources you mean kind of like the founding fathers thought it
would be it would be a disaster well we have this disaster for the world and it is about time we
recognize it ken keys i think that's how you say his name excellent book planet hood makes this point
and offers a way for the political reform of this planet the birth of the european union which was
seen by john monette and robert schuman as the first step toward a world union is the biggest
harbinger of hope how's that going for you now fuckers
eighth we need a proper planetary management private firms and the multinationals must face
up to the responsibilities for the management of the planet oh esg they consider themselves
responsible only to profits and stockholders well it's becoming increasingly manifest that this
planet was not created for the purpose of making money we urgently need a science a strategy and a
of proper management of planet earth there's esg right there and there is um these big investment
firms taking control of uh all of the private firms and multinationals for the responsibilities
for the management of the planet environmental social and governance ninth we need a new world
philanthropy people are giving their wealth and monies to a hospital to a local university
to a national foundation or purpose and the world gets little or nothing the university for peace
here in demilitarized costa rica is one of the most beautiful and useful projects on the earth
but where are the philanthropists who are taking an interest in it with the exception of one or two
so he's not getting enough money for his own little stupid project and yet it is here in
this university where a new science of peace must be developed for this planet maybe we don't want
that shit dude and thousands of peacemakers educated for a whole series of professions
oh great more infiltration the people have to take the financing of the world's care into
their own hands in other words you taking it literally into your own hands and giving your
money where you want is not adequate so it's going to be channeled to what they what they want so
philanthropy is going to have to be globally coordinated to go to un designated things got you
we do not even have an intergovernmental world budget well if governments do not want to have
a world budget let the philanthropists and the people do it in their own way a new world democracy
will thus be born tenth we need a new world education sdg4 global education namely in the
education of children and our global home and into the human family is making good progress
but we have to go beyond we need the cosmic education foreseen by the religious and by people
like maria montessori we need a holistic education teaching the wholism of the universe and the
planet i'm glad that one of the first graduates of the robert moeller school in arlington texas
which teaches my world core curriculum will take the floor during this conference to announce
the creation of a united nations of youth how beautiful so the guy who created common core
created common core says we need a new world global education what's it going to focus on
what we now know and i'll do a podcast on this sooner or later the un's idea of global citizenship
and global citizenship education eleventh we need a new world information outer space inspectors
would be shocked by the wrong information that is being spread around the world uh-oh we've
got to manage misinformation and disinformation we need honest objective truthful information
to guide our way and behavior and not manipulate information for all kinds of purposes iron law
vote projection never misses as we've now learned proper world information communications and media
are another subject of paramount importance the united nation and its united nations and its 32
specialized agencies and world programs come closest to that which uh sorry come closest to
what such an information system should be twelfth we need a new world ethics what is good for the
united states russia or any other country like having atomic bombs and there are 40 000 in the
world can be awfully bad for our planet i'm sure that god or the cosmos has not created this planet
that have all these nuclear detonators and its flesh and its water and its air and in the stars
okay i i just have to stop there for a second we haven't put any fucking nuclear weapons in any
stars and stars are literally gigantic nuclear explosions of such vast proportions that we can't
contemplate them so if god made the stars he did want nuclear fucking detonations in the stars
this guy is a sorry lost my temper i'm sick of these crackpots i really don't like these people
anyway and in the stars and in the stars what are you adding that for you freaking moron god
our political leaders must be given to understand that they do not only have a responsibility
toward their people and toward humanity but toward the success of the extraordinary cosmic
process by the way dude the primary energy source of the extraordinary cosmic process is nuclear
detonations in the stars perhaps unique in the whole universe unfolding on this planet
they might finish it or they might help and foster it i know we kind of lost the plot on
that one new world ethics so we've all got to have this new world global ethical system that's
facilitated through their occult theosophical religion that's focused on a gyroocracy 13th and
we remember that 13 is the magical number of power in their numerology just like 17 is the
magical number of one completed turn of transformation 13 is the power to turn that
transformative wheel so what do they say is 13th what does he say robert moeller we need a new
world science and technology the scientists and the technologists must assume a cosmic
responsibility what they are doing might be right or wrong for humanity and for a further evolution
they have to think of the seventh generation and should place orn lion's prayer on their desk and
i do not know what that refers to but apparently it's written down an idea 899 which is i don't
think in this document 14th we need a new world economy oikos nomos means the management of the
home at long last we recognize that planet earth is our home we need a world economy in which all
people have decent cosmic lives and perform the functions for which they were born sounds
exactly like george soros's idea of an open society or herbert marcus's idea of a liberated
society or marx's idea of a completed communism it goes far beyond the new international economic
order it is a restructuring of the economy based on the ecology oikos logos and the knowledge of our
planet we have to put our house which is on the planet in a in good evolutionary order to
become a planet of extraordinary beauty conservation renewal happiness and justice for all so we
need an entire new world economy i bet you it's going to work like agenda 30 by 30 where by the
year 2030 that's the by 30 part 30 percent of the world will be uninhabited and back to the wild
and not used for any commercial or productive purpose 15th we need a new world art see the
table framework for the planetary cosmic role of art in culture i love the way they talk the
planetary cosmic role of art we need a renaissance of art similar to the italian renaissance which
put things into harmony again modern art was the expression of our analytical period we dissected
everything we now know it was probably propped up by crackpots who wanted to put ugly crap in
front of us to demoralize us frankly art has to be paid for we now have to put everything into
harmony again we need a holistic universal art expressing our faith sense of beauty happiness
and planetary humanistic cosmic consciousness as all great poets writers painters musicians and
sculptors have done in the past the classic book by richard berke on cosmic consciousness gives us
a whole list of such people we also need world anthems like the one we heard this morning some
of the sanguinary violent national anthems need to be rewritten i think that that would
might include the national anthem of the united states the star spangled banner which is a very
interesting national anthem because it's actually not about a war a lot of people think it's about
happening within a war the question it's the first stanza of the star spangled banner is a question
is our flag still there are we still going to make it we have a long dangerous perilous night
in this war for our independence attacking us to establish this new nation of ideals and human
liberty and is it still there that's the whole point but i bet you i bet you that's part of it
he says i have a new text of the marsalaise written by young people which starts with the words
aliens and font de la planet come children of the planet why not it is beautiful i hope that
the young people in strazburg will sing it on the occasion of the 200th anniversary of the french
revolution several national anthems have similarly been rewritten by young people
i have a whole file of them that's great no 16th we need a new world psychology
does it know what a woman is we must learn how to love our wonderful earth
and miraculous humanity above anything else now we're being taught to love a nation or a group
or a religion and to kill other human beings other divine beings for them well not really
i mean some do that but there is this whole just war concept where you get to defend yourself
if people attack you or try to steal your stuff i mean there's a thing
this is contrary to nature into cosmic divine laws we have to love humanity we have to love
the planet we have to love the universe and have to be their instruments during our short years on
this earth if we do not life on this planet will come to an end a completely new world
psychology must lay down our right sentimental priorities this is what freud told einstein
see idea 10 20 and their famous exchange of views 17th and he starts this way and this is
very significant 17th but not last let me tell you real quick there's no 18 so it is 17th but last
but he inserts or insists 17th but not last why because it's a cycle of evolution 17 steps to turn
history once and then there will be 17 more steps to turn history again another revolution
revolutions and 17 steps marx identified 17 contradictions in capitalism polo freud he
said it takes 17 generative themes to radicalize or conscientize a learner the corpus hermeticum
has 17 books i'm not going to get into the spiral spiral of theodorus and where this comes from
from the pethagorean mathematical numbers cult but that's ultimately what it is 17th but not
last we must teach the children of this planet a new art of living show them how great life is
how's that going for you guys how's your how's your comprehensive sexuality education working
out for their precious little minds it's killing them we should teach them how thankful they should
be to live today at this time of magnificent consciousness and the incredible knowledge
of the universe that it will be their role to be the right managers of the planet that each of them
is a cosmic unit or as pablo casals said quote a true miracle a potential leonardo or Beethoven
therefore you cannot hurt you cannot kill another miracle end quote um how's that working out guys
how's your how are your things working out for that seems like you're lying yes we are miracles
microcosms cosmos oas of the universe this must be taught to children so that they can flower to
the responsibility for which they're born in other words global citizenship education
which is defined literally in terms of teaching them to meet the 17 sustainable development goals
of the united nations agenda 2030 we also have to teach frugality the deep growth and simple
living in order not to destroy or tax unduly the beautiful creation of god we should follow in the
footsteps of saint francis who preached this 800 years ago we should read voluntary simplicity
by dwayne elgin simple frugal lives of five billion people are the most monumental contribution to
the environment of this planet every human being should know that he or she is an instrument of god
or the universe be it as a mother who gives life to a child as a new divine being or as a father
who in the family is raising a new cosmic unit or an educator who is educating new cosmogens
or an a doctor who will heal cosmic patients or public servants or artists etc there's 17
then we will fully validate life and make children and people proud to be alive how's that going for
you guys we gave you guys a 20 year run on that how's it going is that working is that what's
happening then humans will respect their own miraculous divine cosmicity as buck mister
filler said when he was offered cigarettes quote i will never do anything that might
impair the functioning of the perfect cosmic unit i have been given by the universe end quote
this is a language which we should hold to children this would be the real fight against
drugs alcohol and violent television and literature how's that working out you do not damage your
incredible cosmic entity by introducing poisonous materials and images into its functioning can
we talk about books like genderqueer guys which is part of your comprehensive sexuality education
stuff can we talk about what you're actually doing we can validate life to an unprecedented
degree and extend it to the largest and smallest manifestations of the universe this should be
the philosophy of the next century i would like to conclude by saying that perhaps we should replace
the popular recent saying quote think globally act locally by think cosmically act locally
wherever you live on this miraculous planet thank you very much for giving me some of your
precious cosmic time doesn't just make you want to punch this guy in the head idea 1633 so now
we elaborate on this 29 December 1998 the word politics should be abolished and replaced by
something much deeper i like planet x the management of our planet but it's even deeper than that
what is happening on our earth is a whole series of fundamental biological evolutionary changes
we need to consider the biology and evolution of the earth in its entirety this should be the
only concern of government they have to manage the entire earth the collective preoccupations
of humanity should be for the state of the planet and the conditions and future of all life on it
the word politics must be abandoned politicians should become earth biologists and all faculties
of political science faculties of earth biology and evolution you get the idea that the united
nations sucks in a big way idea 1634 30 december 1998 human history proves that there are always
very great barriers obstacles to a peaceful just and harmonious world in the past it was
futility then the kingdoms and the empires today it is nationalism and tomorrow it will be the big
multinational companies it is a mistake to hope that these barriers will disappear by themselves
all human history proves that they have to be dismantled in order to be replaced by something
else we have reached that point of modern history where both nationalisms and big multinational
corporations must be dismantled and replaced by something else it has come from an outside sorry
it has to come from an outside force a people's revolution that means a communist revolution
guys or revolution of the scientists thinkers visionaries profits globalists futurologists
and synthesizers of this planet so there you have the global agenda we have to get rid of
nationalism and start thinking in terms of global citizenship and there you have esg big multinational
corporations are dismantled none of them can do what they want on their own they are all owned
by one another and act in um monopoly trust they are not what they were before they are dismantled
and replaced by something else that works in line with esg and united nations agendas why are so many
companies so hell bent to achieve their their agenda 2030 net zero targets uh because they've
been dismantled and replaced by something else it's not multinational corporations even
which are their own set of problems they are monopoly trusts that act in the interest of
the united nations agenda idea 1708 regarding globalization one could take my world core curriculum
c volume one and envisions the globalization and futurization of every segment of it an individual
can globalize himself families can globalize themselves states province departments that
is local levels of government could globalize themselves by creating world associations for
local communities states provinces et cetera it would be a benefit to them to learn how other
subdivisions like theirs are governed legislated and administered elsewhere in the world it would
be an incredibly rich reciprocal experience so that's the idea of global citizenship which
is to be implemented on every single level it kind of takes the idea of subsidiarity and turns
it inside out and on its head yeah the local stuff is all going to work you know as much
authority as possible is going to be put into local hands but they are all going to have to be
transformed to only do the big global or i guess cosmic agenda that's coordinated through the central
coordinating and cooperation facilities of the united nations and its new world religion
so if you get everybody in the new world religion you can tell them that they manage
their own affairs as maximally as possible but it's because they all follow the same religion
so that's why it's so important for them to take over and transform all the faiths
into one corrupt global faith and that's why this isn't like if you don't understand that this
this occult theosophy is in fact a cult religion a global cult religion startup that then you're
missing the entire point idea 1745 on the occasion of the year 2000 governments and the
diplomatic community should pay attention to the proposals for a better united nations offered by
herald stassen one of the world's last living members who signed the charter he sees the united
nations change from a place where meetings on political economic and social issues are held
into a creative center where ideas on religion and philosophy are exchanged for a better future
among his proposals are a central cabinet of administrators a universal environmental institute
a united nations legion an inspection corp a world panel of mediators a world board of arbitration
a world court of equity a worldwide conference on religions and a research institute of people
and government his book should be read by every delegate to the united nations by every head of
state before coming to the year 2000 general assembly and in all political science faculties
of universities throughout the world so yeah they're kind of after like everything so that's
you've got now got a taste of how crazy it is and those 17 points and the whole new genesis were
the real big points this is your united nations so i'm going to close by reading three more of
these ideas and that's it but i wanted you to have a sense that the united nations is not what
you think it is the united nations what you might think is if you're one of my followers but generally
speaking people don't realize what the united nations is the united nations is a organization
that is wholly dedicated to global governance under an occult theosophical religion and if we
don't understand what we're dealing with we're going to completely misunderstand what are what
we need to be doing the united states it said needs to decline we absolutely because why because
we're not in alignment or we can we can be not in alignment with their program this is why they
freaked out when trump took office trump actually pulled us back from all of this he removed us from
unesco they know that he was going to put america's interests ahead of their theosophy and that was
why they have to attack the united states so vigorously and that's why they do attack the united
states so vigorously because united states is in in its fully constituted form and its constitution
at its heart is the biggest threat to this cult religion trying to take over the world
that there is but i'll close with like i said three more of these ideas so we don't drag this out
idea number 562 25th january 1996 last but not least humanity has reached a point when we must
consider our human presence past present and future on this particular planet in the universe
we now have a tremendous information sorry no that's what it says sorry i did read it right
we now have a tremendous information on the universe in which we live
in addition to our total consciousness of our earth and its global evolution we are now also
acquiring and developing a cosmic consciousness of the universe this is the greatest of all our
advances in human history so their cult is but the mysteries of infinity and eternity
still escape us and will remain outside of human and scientific grasp this has the result of bringing
together the spirituality or basic faiths of all religions and science faiths by the way is in scare
quotes this this says this as a result of bringing together the spirituality or basic quote faiths
of all religion and science god the gods or the great spirit or spirits or their
emissaries profits and human incarnations like jesus gave humanity its early stages of a cosmic
universal all-encompassing faith or feeling for the mysteries of the cosmos for the norms of love
and for the miracle of life and norms of behavior between all humans and with all other species and
nature that's claiming an awful lot these messages or quote revelations should not be neglected
uh-oh they probably something should happen to them like them being transcended
they contain some of the most uh some of the profoundest answers to human behavior fulfillment
and survival great was our astonishment in the environmental crisis to discover the wisdom and
rules of behavior toward nature dictated by the great spirit to the indigenous people of this
planet the world's five thousand religions are filled with incredible wisdom regarding
human morality belief in life environmental adaptation survival and future evolution this is
strongly coming to the fore at this time as manifested in the following but let me pause
before we talk about the following because i want to go back to the jesus part here uh so god the gods
or the great spirit or spirits and their emissaries prophets and human incarnations like jesus
so all of these characters jesus is just one of many jesus is just another buddha who gave humanity
at its early stages a cosmic consciousness so this is the rise you've heard this phrase recently
probably if you're too tapped in on social media this is the rise and this is part of the new thought
movement that this is all all into this is the rise of the idea of the christ consciousness and of
course the christ consciousness is the awakened cosmic consciousness this guy's talking about
and this christ consciousness was supposed to be embodied by jesus and many of the other great sages
and buddhas of the of history and also the gurus or the shamans or whatever else but christ consciousness
is a counterfeit it is not at all biblical it is a heretical theosophical idea and it is actually
on the rise again um and you you need to be sensitive to seeing that because the battle
at a spiritual level the spiritual battle we're engaged in is theology versus theosophy
jesus didn't stutter he didn't say there's a bunch of us that are like me he didn't say that
he said he is the way the truth in the life he said the way is is straight and narrow
many you know the path of many is the path of destruction he's he was very clear about what's
going on he said to he said to follow the law which law was he talking about the law of the
universe because no he claims or the gospel of john claims that he is the logos itself made flesh
so he is in addition to whatever else on a more profound spiritual level he is literally the
embodiment of truth um this is not what's being presented this is a gnostic counterfeit of that
so the gnostic new thought movement is embodied if you go listen to you can listen to like people
like deepak chopra and all these guys that are their their mouthpieces look up the phrase christ
consciousness and see what comes up i haven't done it but i'm so confident that what you're
going to find is crazy theosophical stuff that i'm not worried telling you to do it okay so all
of this is in our next stages of evolution is strongly coming to the fore at this time he said
has manifested in the following one the dream and plan of my compatriot robert schumann from
alsace lorraine to see the european union which started with a coal and steel community followed
by an economic community followed by a political union culminate in an all spiritual european union
including the eastern european countries especially holy mother russia
let that one sink in two the creation in 85 countries including as a third party in the
united states of the natural law party based on the premise that the laws of nature should guide
humans and their political behavior and organization there is only one step to recognize that natural
laws are in reality cosmic laws so they're going to take the concept of natural law perverted
if they were to get their way with this and then say that that's a step in their cosmic evolution
it's the same gnostic thing i talked about in the past where they say yeah yeah the thing you've got
that's really wise and that's also stepped like four out of ten come with us i've got the other six
and cosmic astral blah blah blah is coming down the pike and only they secretly understand it
three the san francisco and this is the one i really wanted to hit the san francisco initiative
to create a united religions organization similar to the united nations also born in that city
where all religions of the world could cooperate define what they have in common provide their
wisdom on human behavior and morality and write relations with nature and the creation of god
which i don't know if that's a pun i assume that it's relations with the creation of god but
maybe they mean the creating the act of creating god in the process they will hopefully reduce
and progressively give up their fundamentalism and in other words actually believing their real
faiths in favor of some theosophy they will hopefully reduce and progressively give up
their fundamentalism in favor of a global spirituality the same way as nations in the
united nations have reduced the national fundamentalism called sovereignty and given away
their sovereignty to the united nations to govern their affairs from a remote
unaccountable theosophical cult that we should be getting as far away from as humanly possible
he goes on to say may god help us that a world conference be convened on proper earth government
through what the world's religions have in common in terms of universal global spirituality and
worldwide human experience in other words apricot theologia so that was one idea 1998
20 years ago i wrote an essay on the need for global education today i would write an essay on
the need for evolutionary education tomorrow i would write an essay on the need for cosmic
education so i want to phrase those things in different words and i'm just going to say the
same thing 20 years ago i wrote an essay on the need to develop common core today i would write
an essay on the need for a social and emotional learning and tomorrow i would write an essay
on the need for global citizenship education that's what it's going on that's who this guy is
and we did the first two of those and we're working on the third and the united nations
is actually behind all three of them and it's all based in a cult theosophical religion that
they're using education to bring your children into even though it's damaging to them even
though they know that it causes severe anxiety depression and cognitive dissonance that they
can then use the social emotional learning techniques which are effectively brainwashing
techniques to override in the kids that i did that whole podcast on that document called
scl for sdgs social emotional learning for the sustainable development goals so there you go
you can read the sustainable development goals as evolutionary education and global citizenship
is the next step after we achieve that spiritual and then um which is uh the common core and then
material and that's sustainability and then uh sorry i did it wrong ideal that's the common core
and then um material that's the uh the sustainable development education and then
spiritual would be global consciousness or uh cosmic consciousness i guess which is global
citizenship education he goes on to say after world war two humanity acquired beyond national
consciousness a global consciousness see it's about global citizenship education today humanity is
acquiring an evolutionary consciousness a consciousness is a future tomorrow humanity
will acquire a cosmic consciousness after world war two the united nations was born as the planet's
first global organization today the united nations is becoming the planet's evolutionary
organization so it's not meant to be a facilitator of global cooperation it's meant to direct the
evolution of mankind tomorrow he says the united nations will become the planet's first cosmic
organization this is a cult theosophical organization with humanities transcendence
into cosmic consciousness in space and in time the sciences and religions will converge into an
all-encompassing holistic spiritual age dreamt of by our ancestors prophets visionary saints and
earthly incarnations of the divine cosmic forces over eons of time in other words prescott theologia
our future he says is incredibly bright and hopeful if we hasten these processes and think
in time of ways to face very likely emergencies isn't that telling so the goal is to create a one
world theosophical religion that blends all of the faiths all the sciences all the philosophies
all of the activities into one thing one all-encompassing holistic spiritual age
dreamt of by all of the cosmic forces over eons of time wow and we will have a bright future if
we hasten toward that and prepare ourselves to face very likely emergencies which seems to
be what the world economic forum decided it was going to do and what it's what the un subsidiary
the world health organization decided to switch its mission from coordinating you know various
things about diseases and and and medicines and things like that to whatever the hell it's doing
now trying to claim sovereignty over the world which we just heard that sovereignty was the
problem that has to be overcome national sovereignty has to be destroyed and in similar he said
literally in similar ways to the way that we're overcoming national sovereignty to a globalist
consciousness we need to overcome individual faiths and fundamentalism to a global theosophical
occult religion and i think last but not least idea number 1982 he says an idea 502 in volume 2
i listed the three main periods through which the united nations and humanity have gone since 1945
one humanism to the environment and three the earth is number one and these last 500 ideas i
mentioned a fourth period our future evolution that's the really crazy pants part of the document by
the way that i was reading through uh was a reflection on those of course it's these are ideas
500 ish and those are ideas 1600 ish so it's not identical i'm not saying that but that's what he
actually reflects there is these three phases and then the fourth one is our future evolution so
anyway as he continues it suddenly occurs to me that the united nations is still structured according
to the needs and philosophy of the first period namely humanism with the objectives of peace well
being health labor food education culture human rights etc the structure of the united nation system
does not reflect adequately the other three recent and equally fundamental preoccupations
except the environment a basic restructuring of the united nations and its specialized agencies
must therefore be considered to make it the principal central organization of the earth
and future evolution which you create a world air and atmosphere agency a world water agency a
world climate agency a world ocean agency a world outer space agency etc within these fundamental
aspects of the earth we should consider the place action and fulfillment of the human species this
reform should become a priority on the agenda of world affairs at this beginning of a new century
and millennium and i think that's exactly what they did that's exactly what happened
the united nations however bad or whatever it was in its inception at the beginning
in the 21st century in the third millennium became a monster and that monster is completely
imbued with a cult theosophical view of the world and of humanity and of its mission in the world
i don't think that disagrees with its findings from the huxleys but at just a point out
it was being said at the time that the united nations was not making this change satisfactorily
by high-level people in the united nations but that's what it turned to become and that's what
it has become and that's what we're dealing with when we look at the united nations it is the
headquarters of a world theosophical cult it is not what it appears to be we should have
nothing to do with it so i hope that we can start thinking about this more i'm going to in the
notes for this episode put a link to all four volumes not just this particular document but
all four volumes of robert moeller's ramblings and robert moeller's website so that you can go
look through the other god knows how many ideas almost two thousand ideas yourself i didn't even
read a hundred of them so that you have a real sense of how insanely dangerous the united nations
really is i just want you to remember who this guy is he was a very high level player in the
united nations he is the creator of something we're going to be talking more about and i encourage
you to listen to lisa logan about this this group called the evolutionary leaders these are very
important people that you think you don't know about that it's going to sound totally insane
when you find out about them so we'll probably hear more about that as we go but he was also the
creator of the common core curriculum in line with trying to get exactly these corrupt values
pushed into these religious values pushed into education i don't think common core succeeded
i think the primary effect common core had in practice was to separate the ability for parents
to help their children do homework and thus disconnect them so that the children became
more reliant on the teachers and as we've moved into social and emotional learning and global
citizenship education and education for sustainable development they've been able to take advantage of
that broken chain from parent to child and take the children in this other direction in other
words indoctrinating them into this theosophical cult of what they consider to be earth worship
for the direction of mankind and earth's future evolution on every possible level
again the conclusion is simple we had it right when we made them mad we should pull away from the
united nations as quickly and thoroughly as possible we should discredit the united nations
we should project everything the united nations tries to impose on us that whether it's the local
level the state level ideally eventually at the united states federal level and we should defund
it completely it is time for us to recognize the united nations as an evil cult and it is time for
us to abolish the united nations
you
