Professor Warren Goldfarb, chairman of the philosophy department at Harvard University,
is our guest panelist in this program.
He specializes in logic, history of logic, and philosophy of mathematics, and has translated
and edited the logical writings of Jacques Herbrand.
He has also co-authored with Burton Drebben the decision problem in solvable classes of
quantificational formulae.
The program begins with a discussion of Professor Quine's early philosophical career at Harvard
and consideration of his relationship with the logical positivists of the Vienna circle,
most notably with Rudolf Carnat.
This background sets the stage for a thorough discussion of Quine's naturalism, and in particular
his naturalized epistemology.
Questions about the famous two dogmas are raised, and then attention is drawn to his
doctrines of extensionalism and ontological relativity.
We now join the discussion in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Joining Professor Quine for this discussion are Warren Goldfarb, professor of philosophy
at Harvard University, Paul Horwich, professor of philosophy at MIT, and Martin Davies, wild
reader in mental philosophy at Oxford University.
In 1932, the Quine set sail for Europe, destination was Vienna.
Herbert Feigl, who was at Harvard University from Vienna at that time, had suggested to
Quine, who had already achieved a claim as a logician, that the main action in logic
would be found in Vienna, and perhaps in the person of Rudolf Carnat, who was ultimately
to play a great role in Quine's development as a philosopher.
Before going into the influence that the Vienna circle had on your work, I'd like to ask
you, what was the situation at Harvard at that time, particularly in the field of logic?
At that time, logic was very weak in America generally, universities hardly, as far as
I know, hardly any of them taught the subject.
Harvard was looked to, prided itself on being perhaps the greatest center for logic in America.
After I'd been there for a little while, I came to feel that this was, well, this profession
reminded me of the Wizard of Oz.
I was learning virtually no logic that I hadn't already imbibed as an undergraduate from my
own supervised honors reading.
Who were the main characters at that time at Harvard?
In logic, the three names associated with logic were Whitehead, Clarence Serving Lewis,
and Harry Sheffer.
Whitehead, of course, with very good reason, because he and Bertrand Russell had done this
monumental three-volume work on mathematical logic, the work that was far and away the
greatest thing in that subject, and virtually the only great thing that I'd become aware
of up to then.
Lewis had done many years earlier, in fact, as far back as 1918, the book had appeared,
a survey of symbolic logic in which he did a good job of reporting the developments at
the hands of Burst and Bull and the others, and to some small extent, perhaps, Fraga.
His teaching, he was perhaps my most influential teacher, from a point of view of straight
classroom contact, his course in Kant and his course in his own theory of knowledge.
He wasn't teaching logic.
What little logic I associated with him from reading, I was not sympathetic with because
it was modal logic.
In fact, he was very much the pioneer, the American pioneer, or the pioneer, I should
say, in the modal logic of necessity.
Harry Schaeffer was the one who was giving logic courses, but they were just altogether
too thin, and I got no inkling of the current excitement in Central Europe, at the hands
of Tarski and Wilker Schaeffer and others in Poland, and Hilbert Ackermann Bernays in
Germany.
Good again.
So you met Karnath in Europe in 1932, and you clearly found he had a lot to offer.
In 1934, you gave a series of lectures on his program of logical syntax.
Those lectures are very sympathetic to him, but pretty soon you found yourself having
some differences with that program and with Karnath.
I'd like to know, where did you first find your differences with Karnath?
What were the initial difficulties?
Did you first find yourself running into and thinking about executing the program?
Yes.
The first occasion, apparently, and I didn't learn this until just within the past few
years, was as far back as March 1933, when I was there with Karnath and was getting so
much stimulation and knowledge of philosophy from him.
I didn't know that until it was turned up by Neil Tennant and a log that Karnath had
kept in his methodical way, where day after day in Prague, when he wasn't going into
lecture, I would go out to where he lived and we would discuss, because I was reading
his logical syntax of language in the German edition, as it came out of the typewriter.
It hadn't yet appeared, it wasn't to appear for another year.
It turned out better than this log that I had expressed questions about the analyticity,
some doubt about it, and his reflection was that perhaps I was right in thinking, I'm
not sure how accurately I remember this three or four line passage, but perhaps I was right
in thinking that it was a matter of degree.
Until this recent archaeological discovery, I thought of 1935 when I was writing Truth
by Convention that came out of 1936 for a festrift for Whitehead as being my first manifestation,
certainly of that doubt.
And then certainly by 39, 40, it had become really quite a firm doubt and not just tentative
misgivings.
I'd like to ask you about your attitude towards the positivist doctrine that metaphysics is
meaningless in discussing the so-called inverted spectrum hypothesis, the hypothesis that for
all I know, other people are seeing red things the way I see green things in vice versa.
In reaction to that, you said you thought this hypothesis would be unverifiable and
meaningless, and this sounds exactly the sort of thing that the hard line positivist would
have said.
Does this show that you are in fact a hard line positivist in this respect?
No, I can agree this is exactly what the hard line positivist would have said.
I wouldn't say it or I wouldn't mean that anyway.
What I perhaps said, perhaps I started out saying that for one thing, it's unverifiable.
And then I should have gone on to say, whether I did or not, that I can't even see how by
connecting it up with other hypotheses, getting it into the network of the web of belief, that
it would link up indirectly with verification, that it seemed to be simply inaccessible to
scientific developments that we can project, that we can imagine and foresee.
And that, it seems to me, should qualify something that purports to be a statement or a question
of fact as meaningless in the posivist way.
So you do countenance, then, a class of meaningless, unverifiable metaphysical sentences?
Yes, yes, but it's way out, as I feel this is, because I don't even consider it necessary
for meaningfulness that a sentence be indirectly connectable with observation, that it be part
of a network.
I wouldn't require that the sentence be indirectly verifiable in this sense, that there be a set
of sentences which together have what I've called critical mass and that they together
will imply an observationally testable situation and would include the sentence in question
and would lose its critical mass when that was removed from the class.
That would be the way of explaining what it would mean perhaps for a sentence to have
empirical content at all that would share empirical content in this essential way.
I wouldn't insist on that by any means, and I don't think that the bulk of sentences in history
or perhaps all of them even in serious, rigorous physics meet even that test, and I don't think
that for that reason they should be rejected as meaningless, because they are sentences
that we have postulated or accepted, that is we've conjectured them, accepted them, because
they seem to fit in so nicely with the theory that is working, perhaps considerations of symmetry,
perhaps it seems to fill a nice little conceptual gap, and I think that furthermore they can be vital
to the progress of science, because they are, I imagine, a very important, maybe overwhelmingly
large part of the heuristics of the fashioning of worthwhile scientific hypotheses, that
is to say hypotheses that are worth testing, rather than desperately erring away one's time on
hypotheses that we ought to have thought were very unlikely to come out right when tested.
So I think that's a vital part of science, and in fact it's because of including all these
that I can't envision any sharp demarcation, I'm with Carl Popper in this, between science
and metaphysics in the, in the privative sense.
That does raise a question though, the positivists were very fond of demarcation criteria, not just to separate
science from metaphysics, but also to separate science from pseudoscience.
So the question is how would you handle a question which someone might want to bring into question,
something for example like psychoanalytic theory, as to whether that really had scientific
status or not, and the positivists would handle such a question by their general criteria,
and how would you handle such a question?
I think the effect that that consideration has on me is rather that I'm very suspicious of it and dubious of it.
I can conceive that it might be helpful in some of the suggestions, some of the things,
perhaps some of the things that are said about dreams or some of the things that are said about inhibitions
from earlier experiences, this way that can inspire somebody with a more scientific temper
to some constructive ideas that will go on, maybe it's already happened.
But the sort of cult that's developed and the trust that's been put into it as something therapeutic
and worth spending an awful lot of time and money treating oneself to, that makes the thing
certainly a great evil and I'm not sympathetic with it at all.
But I think to this extent, I think it's more nearly continuous with science than it should be
for me to be single-mindedly inclined to brand it as meaningless.
The critics of verificationism used to devise sentences which were apparently meaningful
but which were cooked up in such a way as not to be susceptible of empirical confirmation or falsification either.
I seem to recall some sentence along the lines of there's a planet for whose existence we shall never have any evidence.
Would you want to say the same about those sentences as you say about sentences in the outer reaches of mathematics
which is that overall simplicity can be our only guide?
No, I think the situation isn't as clear with those sentences because those sentences may well
might be related in the way that I was sketching through these various systematic kinships to such sentences
so as to be valuable in the theory that they're fitting into the web of belief
in such a way as to seem very likely to belong.
Now in a way those sentences of higher mathematics have that too in one direction
namely they are results of simply continuing to apply and extrapolate the grammar and lexicon that we've been needing for scientific purposes.
And that's a very clear and unconjectural link that they have
and it's the only reason, my only reason for taking them seriously as a part of science.
So I think a detailed structural connection is different.
What about the idea of taking the inverted spectrum hypothesis or its negation
as just being a sentence in the outer reaches of phenomenology
where once again we'd say well we are allowed to be meaningful
because it's just using over again vocabulary that we use in more workaday circumstances
and we'll once again just let the truth value fall where it may in light of overall simplicity.
I guess in which case you'd go for the denial of the inverted spectrum hypothesis.
Yes, well that's an interesting suggestion because I was about to wonder
all right if we admit it which way is our decision going to go on, its truth value.
People wonder about the outer reaches of mathematics as well.
Well there we can settle for simplicity. I can't see simplicity coming into the act in this case
which is a commentary also on how independent it seems to be from anything scientific.
I wonder if you recognize a class of sentences that are meaningless in a more definitive way
than simply not seeming to have any empirical consequences
or the possibility of any fitting into the web of belief.
I have in mind Wittgenstein's example. It is five o'clock on the sun.
It looks as though although grammatically okay,
how one feels like saying well five o'clock hasn't been defined for the sun.
It doesn't make any sense to ask whether it's fine or not on the sun.
What's your reaction to kind of sentence?
A characteristic of this kind of example I suppose is that we can prove
on the basis of principles that we all unhesitatingly accept anyway I should think
that there couldn't be any criterion
or any criterion that would fit in usefully with the rest of science
in which those same terms are used.
Maybe it's just the virtue of this. If it is a virtue, it's a clear case.
We've been talking about some of the historical influences on you just about Carnap.
It does seem to have been predominant.
But there was one very centrally influential book on all of the philosophers of the inner circle,
not just Carnap, and that was Wittgenstein's Tractatus.
They all read it quite numerous times and it clearly impacted all of their work.
Did it have any direct effect on you and in your work?
I'm not aware of us having had any positive effect. I didn't like it.
I read it early. I can't think how early.
Very likely already when I was a graduate student there in 31, 32, although not in the course.
No, I didn't like it. I didn't like the absoluteness of his atomism.
Also, of course, I was put off somewhat by his being so blithe about construing quantification
as just the infinite case of truth functions.
The analogy is important, but I guess I may have felt at the time anyway that he wasn't taking the difficulties
of actually acting on this into consideration.
I wasn't appreciating.
Also, it seemed to me that his treatment of number in terms of relations was...
It was untidy and I couldn't see why it wasn't clearly so inferior to the much simpler definition of number
that Russell had already given, which followed Frege.
So it was Wittgenstein's later work that I found more sympathetic.
The two dogmas that you reject in your article, two dogmas of empiricism, are the analytic, synthetic distinction,
the distinction between matters of statements that are true in virtue of their meanings alone
and statements that are true in virtue of the facts.
And the other dogma is reductionism, the idea that every meaningful sentence has its own empirical content
can be reduced to observational facts in one way or another.
I wanted to ask you about the relationship between your criticisms of these two doctrines.
In particular, does your critique, your rejection of the analytic, synthetic distinction play any role
in the line of thought that takes you from the denial of reductionism to the web of belief
to your renunciation of a priori knowledge?
Well, my wholism was already present in two dogmas.
In fact, in the two dogmas where everybody reads it, there's a footnote to duem.
Actually, that footnote is misleading in that I didn't know anything about duem
when I presented two dogmas as a lecture or when it first appeared as an article in January 51.
And it was Peter Hempel, that is Carl T. Hempel, and also independently,
Philip Frank, who, having read that article, said, oh yes, that's like duem.
And so I added that footnote when the thing was reprinted in from a logical point of view
by way of giving duem credit.
What it seems to be claiming this is something, some novel contributions,
just a matter of presenting it as being the way things are.
Anyway, so I had come to that somehow, and it's hard to say,
it's not a very clean-cut idea, somewhere along the line from truth by convention to two dogmas,
and then the Web of Belief, well, that was a very, I think, an admirable and catchy title
due to my collaborator, Joe Ullian, but that's just more of the same.
When I was writing two dogmas, I brought that in structurally,
its position in that article is, as one possible consideration to help account for the rather strange fact
that people take analyticity, even analyticity across the board the way they do, so uncritically,
that there may be a failure to appreciate that reductionism won't do, fail to appreciate wholism.
As for whether it was this holistic view that made me skeptical of analyticity in the first place,
I just can't judge because something like an appreciation of that can be vague and inarticulate enough
so that it doesn't come out explicitly, and I had thought of it as such.
It's the same, the two attitudes, the wholism, therefore anti-reductionism
and that particular instance of reduction, and the skepticism about meaning and analyticity are so much of a piece.
Incidentally, that anti-reductionism has certainly caused misunderstandings
because I am not against reductionism as such for heaven's sake, I'm very fond of it.
The more reduction the better, and it's just this particular case of it.
Could your, the line of thought which involves rejecting the reductionism in this epistemological form,
the reduction of any theoretical statement to observation statements,
which goes from there to wholism and the web of belief and the rejection of a priori knowledge,
could that proceed independently of any critique of analyticity?
There are so closely mentioned, it's hard to say, but I think just because of the developing situation,
the circumstances when these questions arose, it was certainly, what became clearly aware of
was giving specifically over analyticity, that was because of the way Carnot was using it.
But I thought of it then as an objection that, and still in two dogmas I thought of it,
as a matter of his not having given a satisfactory definition of his terms, of his term analyticity.
But the difficulty of doing so then is of a piece with wholism.
If he had managed to, or someone had managed to give it a characterization of analyticity,
from which it would not follow that an analytic truth could be known a priori,
then would that conception of analyticity have been able to play the philosophical role
that it was being asked to play prior to two dogmas?
I think it was something like the definition of analyticity that I proposed in Roots of Reference.
No, that's certainly unscathed.
Just going back to two dogmas for a moment,
Fredier cited you as being responsible, or partly responsible for the dismantling of logical positivism
because of your attack, your twin attacks on the analytic-synthetic distinction and reductionism in that paper.
And we've spoken privately a bit about Fredier and his position at that time when you met him,
and subsequently as you observed his philosophical connection to logical positivism and how it differed from your own.
And you've expressed a willingness to say something about this, so would you tell us about that?
Well, it seemed to me in his influential first book, Language, Truth and Logic,
he came out interestingly in between the two phases of Carnop that it seemed to me so abruptly different.
The Carnop of the Logesh or Aufbau, where he was very much the phenomenalist,
and the later Carnop, where he's taken on naturalism along more specifically with his physicalism,
in fact it eases the transition from the earlier Carnop to the later one and makes it more intelligible.
I can't see quite how to pin it down to in the way of specific points.
The book was impressive to me, the way so much in philosophy came under his criticism.
The book, from beginning to end, focuses primarily on meaninglessness of metaphysics
and one metaphysical, one philosophical, traditional philosophical question or issue after another is taken up,
and then he argues, shows how it is hopelessly unempirical and how it goes.
And this is leading up, directed, so this makes for a close continuity again
between the Vanna Circle of the later Carnop and the Wittgenstein of his days in England,
where philosophy becomes under Wittgenstein a straight therapeutic undertaking,
and philosophical problems are results of misuse of language that can be cured.
The point pointing out of just the way air felt that language had gone wrong in these cases,
sometimes is the way he handles the questions and showing them, showing that they're meaningless.
And he certainly produced something that gives the spirit of the Vanna Circle for the reader who runs,
it's not intellectually exacting, it can be read and depreciated by wide circle and was.
Very important point of view of the history and geography of philosophy.
You've said that naturalism is one of the main components of your philosophy.
That's the view, roughly speaking, that science is the only road to genuine knowledge.
I'd like to ask you about this.
Do you think that this naturalist doctrine can be established or in any way justified,
or does it have to be a basic axiom?
Well, no, I think perhaps the avenue has to be something like this,
that you're engaged in science and have recognized implicitly or explicitly
that the checkpoints of science, as far as they exist, are checkpoints in observation
through that channel of applying the observational setup.
And you appreciate that without considering that what doesn't submit to that test is meaningless.
Of course, I've just been arguing against that point of view, but insofar as there is a check, that's what it is.
And so this would make one critical of the transcendental intrusions,
as if there were other sources, either in a priori knowledge of the human or divine revelation,
as a support, an underpinning for science and its method.
But I feel that naturalism is and was very widespread.
There's nothing new about this.
I adopted the term, introduced, I don't know which, naturalistic epistemology or epistemology naturalized
for a specific application, namely getting away from the notion of a phenomenalistic reduction
of scientific concepts in order to endow them with meaning
in favor of going at those questions from within, from within science itself.
And this is certainly quite a clear and undistakeable contrast between my way of doing things
and Karnab's Aufbau to take extreme case.
But on the other hand, naturalistic philosophy generally, it seems to me, Hume was completely a naturalist.
It says that Hume didn't carry out reductions.
And if he did carry them out, well, maybe he would have tried the same kind of thing that Karnab would have tried
if he had had the same apparatus in the way of logic.
And it seems to me most, as far as I know them, traditional philosophers were.
But then there are these intrusions of, in one philosopher after another, of course,
Barkley with his divine intervention.
If one philosopher such as himself say that science is the only road to genuine knowledge, naturalism is correct.
Another philosopher says, I disagree.
I don't think that naturalism is correct.
Is there any way to settle the dispute?
Well, perhaps there's not.
Because it would seem that the other philosopher in this case was not satisfied with empirical evidence
and was prepared rather to, I suppose I should put the other way around,
that he was prepared to welcome the kind of evidence that I couldn't admit
because it doesn't persuade me, because the kind of thing that would persuade me
would be at least the illusion of empirical evidence in observation.
So that he's got something which I suspect is just wrong turning and nonsense.
But in any event, of course, that's taking a partisan position in this particular confrontation.
But to take a symmetrical approach here,
it would just be that inability on my part to appreciate his, what he's counting as evidence is wrong.
You've distinguished between your naturalism and your empiricism.
No.
In empiricism, you have taken to be itself an empirical doctrine
which flows out of your naturalism.
It's your naturalism which leads you to empiricism, which leads you to the view
that the checkpoints should be observable data,
but you could imagine it's turning out that other sorts of data should be taken into account.
Well, I don't think I can, but I'm not getting the synch between naturalism and empiricism.
As I was explaining, my reason for introducing that phrase epistemology naturalized,
that was specifically for contrast with Carnop's building up
and the traditional epistemologist before Carnop,
but Carnop was the one who came closest to actually building it up,
building up a phenomenal language in which science was not expressed
and then getting a language about the natural world, the physical world from that.
And I'm taking the other, specifically the other approach
and going into it from the standpoint of the physical world,
the already accepted ontology itself.
As far as I can see, the alternative that you're picturing
would just be the sort of thing that I'm picturing,
someone who is claiming a kind of mystical or to me anyway mysterious source
of evidence or kind of evidence that I can't appreciate and that doesn't move me.
And it might be a mystical, in some extreme case, a mystical insight
on the part of some guru and the Himalayas.
I think it's in pursuit of truth.
You say that empiricism is itself an empirical doctrine as part of the weather belief
and might have to be abandoned
if it turned out, for example, that there was much more to clairvoyance
or telepathy than we presently think.
We would be led away from the view that the only reasonable checkpoints
for scientific theory are observable data,
and we'd have to accept some other checkpoints.
Maybe we'd even have to accept divine revelation.
So let's see where this leaves us.
I do think it's an empirical doctrine, I mean a scientific doctrine
coming out of science in that science tells us there are only
avenue of evidences through our senses by the impact of physical objects
and forces.
And furthermore that we might get evidence to the contrary
and it would be still evidence of the kind that does count for me
because it would be observable evidence.
And I can well imagine evidence for clairvoyance
just in the prediction of observable events
where I couldn't see what empirical basis
or terms of known scientific forces could have brought this about.
And that would entail a revision not only of empiricism.
Well, would it?
Maybe we're getting a bifurcation here.
I thought that it makes me wonder whether perhaps there's some difficulty
in pinning empiricism on the...
Yes, I think this is the trouble.
Perhaps we should say that empiricism goes on
because I'm still settling only for corroboration in the observations.
Yes, good, good.
But what goes by the board is the doctrine that the input is just through the senses.
At least through the senses that we've so thus far enumerated.
And good.
Well, I think the moral of this may be to have second thoughts about the statement
that empiricism is a scientific result.
Yes, that's good.
That's interesting.
Perhaps you've already answered this question and what you just said,
but I wanted to ask you about which prominent philosophers in the 20th century
would say are clearly not sympathetic to naturalism.
Don't endorse naturalism as you see it.
Well, I wonder.
Certainly the ordinary language philosophers of England are naturalistic,
as one could wish.
But the other extreme, whatever philosophers there are who are religious apologists,
trying still to support notions of revelation would be an example of the contrary.
Those are clear cases both ends, I'd say.
And then in between, what I would think of is just the philosophers who are still reluctant,
even though they're not coming through with epistemological reductions
of the kind that Karnapp in the Aufbau was undertaking.
Something that's never been taken up so far as I know and pursued any further or could be.
Still are dissatisfied with the naturalization of epistemology
in that they apparently still feel that there's a problem there.
And this would be a negative kind still of non-naturalism.
There's a question about where naturalism leaves one with respect to the issue of what is philosophy.
One possibility that you have endorsed is that we think of philosophy as part of natural science.
There are other possibilities.
One might think that philosophy is simply discredited as a possible enterprise.
Or one might think that philosophy, perhaps with Wittgenstein,
the philosophy doesn't really aim at knowledge, but as a therapeutic endeavor.
Is there any particular reason for picking your characterization of philosophy?
No, that's not the characterization I intend.
I may occasionally say things that sound very much like that, or even exactly like that.
But what I mean is philosophy is continuous with science.
My philosophy is continuous with science, I can say that.
Because that follows from the fact that my philosophy at least is continuous with science and it's part of philosophy.
And it may still be, and I think it is, that my philosophy is more continuous with science than it is with some other parts of philosophy.
And I don't think of this sort of thing, the scientific sort of philosophy as being the old philosophy.
There are other parts of philosophy even that I respect, ethics.
And of course my position is that judgments of moral value and likewise aesthetic value are not part of science,
except the anthropology behind them is.
So I think of philosophy as quite a scattered, quite an aggregate.
Oh, and I should add, I think of furthermore, even rather sympathetically,
of English ordinary language philosophy as being philosophy.
It's just that it's not enough of it.
I wanted to ask a question about Peter Strossen's paper, Two Conceptions of Philosophy and the contrast between his naturalism and your naturalism.
In that paper, Strossen says, what's this alternative conception?
In other words, what's his conception of philosophy?
Well, he says, the common as distinct from the scientific understanding is a complicated affair embracing an indefinitely large range of ideas or concepts.
He gives a long list of concepts and then says, the philosophical aim of those who adhere to my alternative conception of philosophy,
I take to be that of elucidating the character of such concepts as these and their interconnections.
What do you make of this alternative conception of philosophy and how does it differ from yours?
It's narrower.
Yes, I would count this as decidedly as philosophy.
In fact, it seems to me it's of a piece with the English ordinary language philosophy.
These concepts in this aren't very ordinary language, of course, but on the other hand, they're also not symbolic logic.
It's of a piece with that and I think it's all philosophy and I think it's useful.
It probably turns out to be very largely true even.
But I wouldn't limit it to that because I think there are a lot more that goes on that interest me in my part of philosophy that doesn't come under that head,
not an analysis of concepts, but naturalized epistemology is one thing.
And then all such ventures are fruitful or not as trying to get a more economical ontology,
such contortions as getting bodies identified with portions of space-time and then portions of space-time in turn with the classes of quadruples of numbers.
That's, I think, decidedly philosophy and it's not analysis of concepts.
It doesn't seem in quite the same sense anyway.
It's the kind of thing that would be regarded as further extension and an unaccustomed direction of natural science.
One of the things that Strawson stresses is the interconnections between concepts
and sometimes he speaks of this in terms of plotting the contours of a conceptual scheme.
Part of what this involves is not just listing a whole lot of things that we do,
but trying to identify, in some sense, though not I think a scientific sense particularly,
what's basic about what we do and so, for example, Strawson says that material bodies are basic particulars,
not in the sense that they're basic for science, but in the sense that identification of material bodies, he says, is basic.
Identification of other kinds of objects depends upon identification of material bodies and not conversely.
So he argues, do you think there's any good prospect for theoretical results of this kind in philosophy?
This does sound good to me and it's interesting in particular perhaps as an extension
and what seems to be an increasingly serious extension of ordinary language philosophy
where what is really coming into consideration is the structure of ordinary language
and not the structure in the linguist sense, but the conceptual structure of our whole ordinary
and even extra ordinary, even scientific conception of the world.
And again, very much a part of what I regard as philosophy and useful
and as conspicuously continuous with science.
Paul asked earlier about whether naturalism could be justified.
Perhaps within the naturalist camp there are these different projects.
I wonder how one or other of those might be chosen ahead of the other.
Strawson himself says of the two conceptions, each has its own worth, he says, and its own appeal.
The choice between them is ultimately perhaps a matter of individual temperament.
Do you think that's right?
The choice of them for what?
One can very well choose music instead of, without casting aspersions on philosophy,
he can choose music instead.
And one can do fiction instead of science.
I think of the insistence on observation as the checkpoint
insofar as any checkpoint can exist for what deserves the name of science.
And although a great deal of what deserves the name of science can't be checked,
directly or indirectly, I claim, still when it is checked, it's going to be checked that way.
And I think of this not as something to establish,
but what distinguishes that scientific endeavor.
Now, why would anybody want to do that?
There, of course, there are two frequent reasons.
One is technology, and the other is just intellectual curiosity.
I suppose the question partly is how large a role science is going to play in one's intellectual life.
Strauss, in effect, takes up the question that you've just asked, the question, for what?
And he says, for one content to lead his life, at least his intellectual life,
in the rarefied atmosphere of science, the choice on this test will go one way.
For one content to lead his intellectual life in the muddier atmosphere of the more mundane,
it will go the other way.
Does that seem to you to be the key?
Whether one has a taste for the rarefied or a taste for the muddier?
Well, I'm wondering just what the other way is in this case, what he has in mind.
He just had in mind what he calls the more liberal or Catholic conception of philosophy.
Well, I think maybe he's a shift to a more liberal or Catholic conception of science,
and he wouldn't find the discrepancy.
It made it sound as if your naturalism consisted in your being prepared to call science
only things that were subject to the checkpoint of observation.
And that makes the doctrine sound somewhat terminological.
It makes the doctrine sound as if it's just about what you are going to call science
and what you're not going to call science and who cares about terminology.
No, I don't think that is a naturalistic position.
I just think of that as the distinguishing trait of anything that any of us would think of as science
in the broadest sense, including history, that if there is a checkpoint, it's there.
And on the other hand, I wouldn't expect one to call something science
if the checkpoints were supernatural, the alleged checkpoints.
Do you think, is this closer to what your naturalism consists in,
that one simply ought to believe things that haven't been subject to these...
Be things that haven't been...
...that aren't subject to those observational checkpoints?
No. No, on the contrary, I hold that a great deal of what's in science
in the broad sense of this broad sense has no checkpoint, direct or indirect,
and is still valuable and valuable for science itself and indirectly for prediction,
but very indirectly, namely as suggesting for further filling out some more hypotheses,
which, unlike those first ones, do link up indirectly, systematically,
with critical masses that can, as whole, imply observations.
And I think that science would be very severely impoverished
if the even the most liberal sort of positivism were put into effect.
But all these things fit into the web of belief in one way or another,
all the things that you think could be believed.
So I don't insist on checkpoints.
All I am insisting on here is negative, namely no checkpoints except observation.
Where did that leave ethics?
Out of science.
In philosophy and in respectable philosophy.
And in what we might legitimately believe.
Well, in another sense of believe, yes.
It has been noted by many philosophers, yourself included,
that there are points of contact between your thinking and that of American pragmatism.
explicitly mentioned, for example, in the Dewey lecture, some agreements you have with Dewey.
To what extent was pragmatism an actual influence on you?
I think, well, it's hard to think of any.
It's hard to think of any.
And I haven't been clear in my own mind on what constitutes pragmatism
and what separates it from epistemology, from empiricism.
I've thought about various tenets held by various card-carrying pragmatists.
James, Dewey, Purse.
And they seem to be far enough from each other, at least as far from one another
as any of them from some non-pragmatists, as far as they're usually classified.
So I've never considered myself a pragmatist.
And that's where that misleading paragraph at the end of Two Dogs
makes all the difference, where I'm picking up Carnop's phrase that he applied to his frameworks
as being purely pragmatic, unlike the rest of science, which is empirical.
And where I say, well, yes, I agree with Carnop about the character of what he's calling the framework,
but, of course, I'm questioning the difference between that framework and the rest of science.
And I'm saying that it's just that my pragmatism is more through or going.
I would apply it across the board.
But that's, as it turned out, was an unfortunate way of putting it.
I was just using his word.
I have an opposed to pragmatism.
It's just that I've wondered just what is distinctive about it.
And so I've never considered myself a pragmatist.
You mentioned Carnop's notion of framework.
One difference between you and Carnop that's come over and over again in various guises in the years
is your attitude toward natural language as opposed to constructed language.
Carnop almost never wants to deal with natural language.
He always wants to define his notions only for constructed languages,
but you always seem to want to pull him back into consideration of what languages people actually speak.
Yes.
Yes, because I think of those constructions as superstructures for one or another particular, generally local, temporary purpose.
And I think of axiom or postulate as an indexical, an indicator word,
namely something relative to the particular project of pedagogy that one's engaged in.
Here's the way he's organizing this law that he wants the reader to master.
He's putting it in this order and deducing these from those.
Somebody might find an even more efficient way of doing it, the other end too,
and that there's nothing intrinsic about those things.
The artificial language, of course, if one thinks primarily in terms of artificial languages,
then there's no problem about analyticity.
What's analytic is the axioms and the consequences.
So what is the point of artificial language?
It depends, of course, on what it's used for, but at one point I presented this artificial example.
A positivist, a logical positivist named Ixman, I thought of that.
Ixman is making some point about the meaning of some metaphysics in which he,
some metaphysical, these things are meaningless,
and his argument is that you could have all of science and all of our predictions and everything
without any of these metaphysical questions even coming in.
And to show this, at least with some examples, he says,
imagine a tribe of Martians who speak a language of the following sort,
and then he sets up an artificial language.
He has to tell us a good deal about the syntax and vocabulary,
but just certain parts, just the parts that are going to make his point
apropos of this particular metaphysical sentence that he's taking the props out from under.
So he lays down these particular traits of the language,
whenever these things, or these sentences, when these are true, these are true,
and that's all he needs to make his point.
All right, there's an artificial language, and there's a perfectly clear sense
in which we can say what's analytic and what isn't, what's in the framework,
and what is empirical outside the framework, namely what Ixman has laid down.
But what was the significance of his laying it down?
Well, in this example, we know exactly what the significance was,
and it doesn't throw any light on a more general notion of analytic.
And it's this sort of consideration that has made me empirical in my approach
or my criticism of these semantical notions.
Besides your naturalism or empiricism, perhaps they're the same thing,
you've singled out as central doctrines of your philosophy,
what you call your extensionalism, and also your skepticism about meaning.
Could you tell us something about what these doctrines are
and how they relate to one another?
Well, essentialism is what's involved in saying that classes that have the same members,
everything that's true of a class is true of a class that has the same members as that class.
In that sense, therefore, they are just one class, not two.
And that's extensionalism, the core of it, that's the law of extensionality.
In an extensional language, any two predicates are interchangeable
if they are true of the same objects, interchangeable without disturbing the truth value of the sentence in which they occur.
So that for an extensional language, therefore, there's no difference between a property and a class.
Properties are identical for such a theory, such a language,
if and only if they're true of the same things.
Therefore, you might as well call them classes, and I do.
And thus, I don't recognize properties.
Well, that's really the whole of essentialism.
I mean of extensionalism, but an important consequence of it is that there's no difficulty in an extensionalist language,
or an extensional language, we can say, no problem about the substitutivity of identity.
It is to say that if two terms are names of the same thing, two singular terms are names of the same thing and nothing else,
you can put one for the other in any context anywhere, and again, the truth will be undisturbed.
It's hard to make sense, really, of that law failing if the things really are identical,
but when you get away from extensional contexts, that law does seem continually to be threatened,
and that's one of the practical virtues of trying to maintain a completely extensional theory.
Could you explain how this extensionalist position, denial or any properties over and above classes,
how that relates to your skepticism about meaning?
It relates in this way, it's not enough to warrant the skepticism, not in itself altogether,
but it does relate in this way that pretty much that are two of the same things still may or may not have the same meaning.
So sameness of meaning is a distinction that goes beyond sameness of extension, sameness of objects denoted.
I wanted to ask about properties.
In the fully austere ontology, where we just have classes of four tuples of real numbers,
well, there, properties as traditionally conceived aren't recognized,
but then, nor are, I suppose, tables and mountains fuzzy blurred objects as normally conceived recognized.
But still, I sense that you're more sympathetic to tables and mountains than you are to properties.
One has to settle for their fuzziness, since all empirically learned terms are vague that way, on their edges at least.
And we can't do without them, and the way I'm inclined to accommodate them, however,
is by taking as my theoretical ontology objects that are not fuzzy,
and it would mean that any of indefinitely many distinct from one another,
mutually distinct bodies, real bodies, could be identified with that table.
It would make no difference in all applications of our scientific theory,
but from the theoretical point of view, we would consider ourselves to be talking about one of that multitude and not all of them.
As for properties, I can understand the antipathy to properties particularly if properties are seen as related to extensions
as sense to reference using Frager's terminology, because properties would come under the scope of skepticism about meaning in that case.
What about the alternative conception of properties where properties are thought of as lying in between a Frager and sense and extension?
How do you feel about admitting those to your ontology?
No, I'm against it, and my objection is, again, just over the principle of individuation,
of what I would want would be an explanation of a clear one,
of just when to say of property A and property B in that sense that they're the same property.
And you're skeptical about that?
Supposing the scientists were more certain that they needed properties
than they were of any account they could offer you just now of the individuation conditions for properties,
and so they just set that as a research project, would that be an okay way to proceed?
Yes, it would.
And it seems to be the way people do proceedings?
Well, it would, yes, in order to proceed that way, of course,
they would have to be thinking in terms of the particular, to me very mysterious, situations where they felt they couldn't do without them.
And then that's what they'd be doing in their continuing investigation,
that would be to try to sharpen, define some concept that would serve that purpose,
and that could appropriately then be called properties.
The situation could be worse still.
The familiar situation in, of course, in theoretical physics, notably,
is to introduce a new term for a technical purpose without giving any definition at all, any clear definition.
The names for the elementary particles without exception are in that status.
They're not defined. We're told a lot of things about them enough so that one can get on.
And conceivably, if there was something that might appropriately be called properties that seemed to be needed in science,
they might even be brought in that way.
And we would learn to put up with them by mastering all the things that can usually be said about them,
even though everyone was at a loss to define them.
I face it, that would be, of course, what one always wishes for something clearer and more elegant,
but nature gets in there sometimes and prevents it.
I wonder whether there'd be another point at which properties might need to come in.
Those who see events as the terms in causal relations are often driven to say something a little bit more,
that some of the properties of an event are causally efficacious, as it's said,
other properties of the event not.
And just to be able to say that, on the face of it seems to be a matter of quantifying over properties.
Yes. Well, the way I handle that one is that I take the events as extensional.
And in fact, I do, in general, think of a physical object as the, in the most general sense,
as the content of some portion of space-time.
It needn't be a continuous portion at all, it could be scattered,
it could be sugar, for instance, as an object for me is a single physical object.
It's all the sugar in the world, past, present, future,
or, of course, one could equally just identify it with the portion of space-time that it takes up.
That's purely a verbal difference at this point, it seems to me.
And I think of events as physical objects, in that sense, and as extensional.
And then the question arises, the question that you raised.
Here you have an event of...
Well, let's see, I remember Davidson had an example that brought this out.
Here's some sort of a contrivance that's rotating, that's right, a heating up.
And the heating up causes a bit of ice to melt in the immediate environment.
As we say, the heating up caused that, there's the property in a broad sense.
But the heating up, in this case, and the rotating, are inseparable.
And so, what I would say is, yes, so far as this, although it's strange, strange usage,
and after all I'm not doing philosophy of ordinary language,
but rather I prefer these things in the spirit of mathematicians
who will bring in new symbols and new terms just in order to clarify what they're doing
or make it simpler and easier to follow.
And as far as I can see, it would fit all the purposes of science
to make the following unidiomatic departure and say that, yes,
that time the spinning melted the ice, the spinning of the event,
the spinning of that wheel melted the ice because the heating of the wheel
and the spinning of the wheel were both what the wheel was doing, was the state of the wheel.
No harm because the fact remains that our general law that nearby heating melts ice stands,
and there's no suggestion of a law that some nearby spinning melts ice.
So I suppose you'd be unlucky if all the spinnings were heatings and all the heatings were spinnings.
Yes, well that would pose a problem which scientists would be eager to get into.
Why is that?
So you're not inclined to go down the path of saying that the heating which is a spinning on this occasion
causes the ice to melt, causes quay heating the ice to melt,
although it doesn't cause quay spinning the ice to melt.
That's a point we could appeal to some, I think.
Yes, well to some, I can imagine philosophy would go down that way.
Yes, well that would be a good day-to-day vernacular way of doing it
despite of the non-vernacular status of quay.
But I wouldn't, because that brings in the concepts that I don't think we need
and that I find it clear to avoid.
I think we will, I'm a hater.
Without ontology, you share with Carnap a certain basic predilection for wanting to rob certain questions of their force.
For example, the question, what is an ordered pair really?
Now, Carnap, one of I think his main motivations is to make sure that those sorts of questions don't make sense.
And he has this elaborate dozen of framework and what's in a framework and what's outside a framework that does that work for him.
So how do you rob that kind of question?
Well, I think I'd agree with Carnap, not framework, no, but that's right.
But I would agree with his conclusion.
I think the trouble with this is that we're using a term that hasn't been sufficiently,
it hasn't been either defined or sufficiently described to cover the particular circumstance that we're questioning.
So that in that sense, it's a meaningless question.
But as you said, there is no entity without identity, so you have to do something.
Yes, but which entity is it?
Of course, that begs the question again, but I don't see how there's any dodging that one.
The ordered pair can be defined serviceably in any number of ways,
and there are several ways that have come into the literature and it doesn't matter which ones you use,
just so you can prove the basic law of the ordered pair.
That x, y is identical with z, w if and only if x is identical with z and y with w.
And so for practical purposes, the meaning of ordered pair is just that.
And then in order for the sake of, and commonly we can leave it at that in practice and do.
And there's a corresponding situation, well known, in the case of saying what numbers are,
what the positive integers are.
Different ways of doing it, all of which are perfectly good, and it doesn't matter which.
But, and then there are two ways of looking at that situation, in both the case of the pair and the numbers.
Namely, one way is, yes here we've got this ambiguous term ordered pair, or the many kinds of ordered pair,
but I think that philosophically the more straightforward way is, in this case, elimination.
And say, now we've shown, here we've defined ordered pair.
We're sure we're not going to need to assume, as an irreducible notion, the notion of ordered pair,
because we've got other notions here, which, if we put them together in the right combination, we'll do the same trick.
So let's do that, and there are no such things as pairs.
Do the same thing about numbers, there are no such things as the positive integers.
We're just talking about these sets.
But then it's awkward to keep, we need a name, a short name for these little constructions that we're serving as stand-ins
for the pair.
And so what better name, since we've already freed the term ordered pair, it doesn't refer to anything anymore, those are gone.
Let's reuse it.
It's another kind of economy.
So that's the way I suggest looking at these situations.
Is there, do you see any relationship between the particular situation one is in here, and thinking about what numbers are and what an ordered pair is,
and your general doctrine of ontological relativity?
That's interesting.
I hadn't.
Yes, yes, yes, there certainly is in very broad terms.
The point about ontological relativity was that there are certain functions, taking functions you might say,
which are various so-called objects we're performing, but serving really, as far as the logical structure,
or even the empirical support and checkpoints of our theory is concerned,
mere nodes in the logical structure.
And so, yes, so that we can reshuffle these objects, put in any others that are in one way correlation with them.
They deserve that purpose just as well.
And so if we had some systematic way of naming these nodes, neutral names,
we could just put those in and just get rid of all these other names for objects.
However, we have no systematic way of naming those nodes.
The only thing we do is name them in our unsystematic way.
And so we have these various terms for these various objects.
And we talk about rabbits and this and that.
But in talking about rabbits, cats, et cetera, we might just as well
be talking about cat compliments and rabbit compliments and the like.
So there's good parallel.
Well, the following, though, would be something of a difference.
In my own language, I'm, of course, using my own language.
I can't use any other one.
And I can think to myself, well, I wonder whether the number one is such and such a set,
or whether it is such and such a different set.
Which of these identity statements should I believe?
And it seems to me to be a genuine question.
But if I contrast that with the question,
I wonder whether my word or my linguistic expression, the number one,
really does refer to the number one.
That doesn't seem in the same way as if it could be a genuine question for me.
It's a trivial matter of what the word refers to means that my expression, the number one,
does, for me, pick out the number one.
Well, but then that raises the question that refers to the number one and what sense of number one.
The, in the case of abstract objects like the number one,
that seems to me that ontological relativity doesn't even, I don't,
I think it doesn't even need to seem counterintuitive.
Frege, I seem to remember, raised the question or mentioned the question.
Or possibly, what is the number one?
It could be Julius Caesar.
It doesn't matter.
He came that, he went at least that far into ontological relativity.
And, oh, and then Ramsey with his, what have come since his day to be called Ramsey sentences,
rather brings out that point again for abstract objects.
And it seems fairly intuitive that even that abstract objects are brought in there just as stopping points
or to bring things together.
It wouldn't matter.
Well, of course, we know it doesn't matter how we go on and artificially define these numbers
as long as we get the behavior out of them, the properties that make them useful in application.
And formally, those properties are just the properties of a regression, a sequence,
the kind called a progression.
But there's an example that we use of two physicists who,
it's a time out, did I have to do this before?
No, I mentioned it, but I'm not sure I did it, about the neutrino in the physicists.
I know you didn't.
Good.
Well, yes, this I think brings out some of the spirit of it.
There's a crisis in physics and something has to be done in revising the theory or supplementing it.
And one physicist suggests that maybe we need a new particle.
In fact, two physicists arrive at that idea of introducing a new particle with certain properties
that will help clear up the paradox.
But one of them brings in a particle that has some rest mass
and the other one brings in a particle that has no rest mass.
But they both apply the same word, neutrino.
And it seems to me it presents no problem to say that there's clearly no meaning to the question
whether A, they are talking about the same particle but disagree in its properties
or B, they're talking about different particles.
One has a rest mass, the other hasn't, but they happen to have given it the same name.
No difference.
And well, I think that applies again to the example of the numbers,
and to the example of the ordered pairs, that one has certain services that,
in case the ordered pair is, I think, particularly conspicuous this way
because ordered pair isn't even a common sense notion to the extent that one, two, three are.
And all that's wanted is something that is going to carry the individuality of both X and Y
and not vice versa, and some further entity then, in addition to the X and the Y,
anything will do, and then they cast about and find,
and yeah, here's something it'll do.
There's a little class of two members, it's easy to describe,
not just the class of the members X and Y, but a little more complicated.
Someone else comes up with an equally simple one, but a different one,
and that's a situation where it doesn't matter, you have this function,
function in the sense of service, not in the mathematical sense, to be performed,
anything will do in the pinch.
And then the sweeping theory, finally, of ontological relativity is
that that's the way with all reference.
But what makes it, I'd say, counterintuitive to all of us
is when it's not a question of abstract objects anymore, like ordered pairs and numbers,
but sensible objects.
And so this is where one has to consider and keep in mind
that the sensory associations are undisturbed
in all this reshuffling of objects in the course of ontological relativity.
One-to-one reinterpretations.
The sensory connotations remain, and when a body ends up being identified
or supplanted as you prefer, either way, by a class of quadruples of numbers,
the sensory qualities of that body, the qualities by which you learned it through
extension or whatever, carry over to that class of quadruples of numbers.
So it's a matter of shifting one's emphasis from the object to the sentence,
ultimately to the observation sentences insofar as they're objects that we've learned by extension,
objects whose names we've learned by extension.
And those go along unaffected.
And what the theory of ontological relativity brings out
is just that really the entity, the object hood,
the object hood is not really what matters here.
The two things that do matter are, one, all this bundle of sensory qualities
to put the thing in the mentalistic terms, all the association
of what it comes to a neuroly with the sensory input.
That's one of the two things that matter.
And the other thing that matters is the role it plays, the service it performs,
as a node in the theoretical structure, the logical structure of the scientific theory.
And then what the thesis of ontological relativity brings out is these are two separate purposes
and can be separated, even be separated ontologically.
In that the ontology can be reshuffled at will to within one to one, for the one.
And on the other hand, the sensory input stays put.
In your long career as a teacher and professor,
you must have encountered a great number of students who have gone on,
some within philosophy and some outside of philosophy to pursue careers.
Does anyone in particular, or do any of them in particular stand out in your mind?
Oh, yes, indeed. Of course, of the earlier ones, Donald Davidson.
Then in logic, there have been a few, certainly, well,
not so much my students have gone successfully into computer theory and the like.
Philosophers, later generations, of course, I think of Doug Finfell-Listau and Roger Gibson.
Here I'm mentioning ones that have gone on carrying on more or less my point of view.
