This video is sponsored by Surfshark VPN. Click the link in the description to get 83% off for
two years plus three months for free. Connection. That's what the Weir and Hell Foundation is all
about. Over the last 20 years, our charitable work has built connections across the world.
Connections between cultures, between communities, between powerful individuals in every level of
your government and shadow cabals, but most of all, between people. However, the last two months
have been the hardest that the Weir and Hell Foundation has ever had to face. Despite the
best of intentions, a recent political scandal has resulted in our foundation's mission,
reputation, and deep involvement in a so-called cult who worships the sea, all being called into
question. To our staff, stakeholder, and you, our fans, we wish to sincerely apologize that
partisan politicians and journalists have decided to direct their completely unwarranted scrutiny
towards our philanthropic organization with absolutely no regard for the effect that their
so-called questions and concerns could have on our work providing structural adjustment
policies to countries in need. Truly a sad sign of the polarized times we find ourselves in.
Neither the Weir and Hell Foundation nor our founder, Lewis Cipher, have ever claimed under
oath to be perfect. Over the past 10 years, we've had our share of growing pains and mistakes,
but like the noble shark, we keep moving forward. For example, while the press has claimed that
Lewis bit a man in a ritual, they failed to explain why this supposed victim had worked
for our foundation for several years if he had such a problem with the founder's religion,
nor have they mentioned that prior to working for us, he had cheated on his wife. For Lewis's part,
under the guidance of his fellow apostles of the jaw, he's holding space for unlearning
difficult accountabilities. However, because of this kind of blatant punching down, Lewis has
made the difficult decision to end our current charitable activities to redirect resources
to completing what he referred to only as the Great Connection. I'll always look back at the
time I've spent serving the Weir and Hell Foundation as the best years of my life, and
I just think that it's sad to see so much time, so much planning, to have so much power
finally within our grasp, only to lose it all. It's a sad reality that when you break the mold,
you often wind up painting a target on your back as well. But in all seriousness,
it really was disappointing to see politicians and the media turn on us just because their puny
minds couldn't comprehend the unrivaled effectiveness of a charitable foundation
partnered with the secretive occult forces sponsoring this video, Surfshark VPN.
The liberal elite in Ottawa will say that it couldn't be done, but behold, by combining
their eldritch sorcery with our unwavering faith in the free market, we were able to harness their
powers, allowing us to create private internet connections, whether at home or on the go,
shielding our online activities from hackers, trackers, and our accursed ISP.
What's more, if, like all too many of us these days, you find yourself fleeing the country to
avoid trumped up charges fabricated by those who simply fear your power, then something you may
not know is that lots of hotels change their prices based on where you are when you book your room.
Using Surfshark, you can change your location to the place that you're traveling to and save on
your stay. Surfshark is also the only premium VPN whose shadowy tentacles extend into and have
servers in over 100 countries, but the media is trying to push a narrative that we're trifling
with forces beyond our comprehension and it's like, no, we can control them!
And to prove it, Surfshark is offering their blessing to members of our foundation for 83%
off for two years plus an additional three months for free. So click the link in the description,
go to surfshark.deal slash we're in hell, or use the promo code we're in hell, all one word no
apostrophe, at checkout to serve Surfshark VPN while supporting our foundation while you're at it.
You guys want to see something weird?
Welcome, man, came a long way. Now, I know Cribs typically is in West Palm Beach, Malibu,
welcome to Cribs East Africa style. So this guy who looks like a lacrosse player who had
to change schools because a pledge died in a hazing ritual is Craig Kielberger.
I've been covering him and the charity that he founded for my last two videos now,
but as a quick catch up, when he was 12, Craig founded the charity Free the Children with his
older brother Mark, later renamed to Wee, the charity that is not his brother, in order to fight
child labor. And I don't mean that he got his classmates to sign a petition or something. While
it may have started there, within a year or so, Free the Children became a full-on international
development charity. This would be like if a kid started a lemonade stand and by the end of the
summer was gentrifying neighborhoods and pushing mom and pop stores out of business. Wee charity
became massive and the Kielberger brothers became stars. In the poorer countries where they operate,
they build schools, hospitals and infrastructure. While they do receive lots of corporate donations,
a large amount of their money comes from the volunteer work of kids in Canada and later in the
US and the UK. In 2008, they also started a social enterprise called Me to Wee, which sells clothes
and volunteer trips where kids would volunteer in poorer countries, which we're just going to stick
a big old pin in and come back to later. All this is done at a profit, most of which Me to Wee then
donates to Wee, to date totaling around 20 million dollars. Wee does also buy a lot of stuff from
Me to Wee and so while Wee does still come out ahead, from 2015 to 2020, the actual number was
1.3 million, which is nowhere near as high as the number on their website, but it is also
probably more than you donated in that time. You selfish pigs! We also did all sorts of domestic
work. The two big ones were Wee Days, massive events that acted as incentives for kids who
did volunteer work, and Wee Schools, a program where they provide schools with teaching aids and
curriculums, along with a host of just about every youth program you can think of, from
ones aimed at teaching kids to recycle batteries, to anti-bullying and mental health awareness.
But then in 2020, things came crashing down. The Liberal government awarded them the contract to
administer a massive government program meant to help young people affected by the pandemic
without making Wee compete with any other charities, or disclosing that Trudeau's family
had been paid to work for the charity, resulting in Justin Trudeau being investigated for a
conflict of interest. Again, an ethics commission did clear Trudeau of any wrongdoing, and then
a second commission was established to investigate further. That investigation ended, however, when
Trudeau shut down the government, a very normal thing that the Prime Minister is allowed to do.
The attention from the scandal resulted in the charity being placed under far more criticism than
it previously had. Suddenly, people were saying things like, man, this children's charity sure
has a massive real estate portfolio. Or, hey, isn't it weird how that anti-bullying campaign
was sponsored by Hershey's, a company that uses child slaves? And even, I used to work for Wee
charity and the way they treat their workers is horrible. And so, as a result of this criticism,
as well as the pandemic causing especially wean times in the massive arena shows and
a volunteer travel industries, in September 2020, the Kielbergers announced that they were
ending all operations in Canada. I talked about all this in much more detail in my video from two
months ago, and then again in my last one, which I made after Wee personally contacted me using my
private email address, still not sure how they got that, they pointedly brought up the multiple
defamation suits that they're currently pursuing, told me that there were dozens of errors in my
video, and that I was causing direct harm to their organization. In my opinion, a lot of their
corrections were pretty granular and strange, but there were also quite a few things that I did
straight up get wrong. I go over all of those in my last video, but there's also one more mistake
that they've pointed out, which was that in a tweet that I've now taken down, I said that their
lawyers were contacting me. Now, they're right that I was not correct, and nowhere in that email
does it say that it's from a lawyer. In my defense, I got a strongly worded email from some very
powerful people that mentioned ongoing lawsuits that they're pursuing and personal information
that they had gathered about me. My incorrect assumption was that this was a legal threat,
and so I talked to a lawyer who basically said, yeah, do whatever they tell you because you
definitely can't afford to go to court against them. In reality, that email was written by the
executive director of Wee, Scott Baker, who I definitely shouldn't have said was a lawyer,
in no small part because in my opinion, it doesn't seem like these emails have been
looked over by a lawyer, a communications department, or judging by the many, many typos,
even just a proofreader. This guy, Scott, who by the way, I think one of the things I did that
pissed him off, and I genuinely wasn't trying to be rude here, was that in all of his emails,
he addressed me as Mr. But I just kept calling him Scott. I'm sorry if that was unprofessional
of me. I've never had an office job. If YouTube doesn't work out, I'm just going right back
to wine cooking. But yeah, Scotty here has been taking time out of his schedule, which I guess
is a lot freer now that Wees stopped operating in Canada to send me very angry and sometimes just
wild emails, sometimes as late as 4am. I've been in contact with Scott while writing this video
and have submitted this script to him prior to releasing it. He also suggested that I read the
book What We Lost written by a former board member of Wee, something I've done. One interesting
point I've noticed is that while the book is extremely supportive of Wee, there is one criticism
that seems to come up a few times. I think it's most succinctly put here. It's worth noting that
sometimes Wee took a bad situation and made it worse. The Kielbergers often felt compelled to
combat any error with a full-throated defense. Over the years, many board members, including
me, had questions whether it was counterproductive to respond in such an aggressive manner. On reflection,
however, I wish Wee had sometimes urged restraint more strongly. Instead of putting out the fire,
we occasionally poured gasoline on it. I don't know, I just think that's an interesting quote to
keep in mind as we go over the notes that Scott made about this video. For one thing, in my last
video, I got my friend CJ the X to read the notes that Scott sent me. For anyone who's never watched
any of CJ's videos, what the fuck are you doing with your life? Other than, I assume,
working as the executive director of Wee Charity. Anyway, here's what Scott said regarding CJ's
performance. In your last video where corrections were issued, you mockingly presented our responses
to your audiences if we were yelling the answers in a funny voice. However, those who criticized
Wee Charity as your sources, including the academics you quoted, were presented in a normal
voice and in a factual manner. Why is that? Now, look, I don't want to make this into a big issue,
but I didn't give CJ any notes. They just read the lines how they wanted to and in more or less
the same way they talk in their videos. Also, I've hung out with CJ and that is more or less just
what they're like. They're just a very, very intense person. Apparently, Wee Charity is upset
that CJ was being themselves. But that just makes what I'm about to say so much harder.
As you probably noticed, CJ is not reading Scott's lines in this video. In order to avoid any
conflicts, CJ, I'm sorry, but I'm gonna have to let you go. Please take down your channel by the end of the day.
Sure. I'm glad they're taking it so well.
I got the YouTuber Ro Ramden to replace CJ as she will replace all of us someday soon.
Hello and welcome back to We Are In Hell, community theater's answer to Tosh.0. I'm a gay
parasite that infected your usual reader via brain-eating amoeba. We're so glad to have you
here. Just make sure to keep all of your arms and legs inside of the vehicle at all times and
keep your shoes on when you use my bathroom because you might get tetanus. I'll be taking
over from CJ reading quotes from The Wee Charity and look forward to delivering them at a
calm cadence that lands somewhere between NPR hosts talking about the Ukraine
and a single dad trying to coax his nine-year-old son into getting his hand out of the garbage
disposal. I hate how much younger you are than me so much. Anyways, in the interest of fairness,
Ro is going to be reading any quotes from Scott in a nice calming voice. Any quotes from the
Kielburgers will be read by Lance from the serfs in a cool, sexy voice. And I've instructed
everyone reading a quote from any academic to do so in a silly voice that makes them sound dumb.
So look forward to that. Scott has also taken issue with the fact that I said that I would be
critiquing the entire charity sector and yet I've pretty much mostly just talked about Wee,
something that he has characterized as an example of me lying and has also insinuated that I'm only
going after them for clout, which is fucking crazy. Like no one knows about Wee outside of Canada
and outside of Canada is where the vast majority of my audience is. Like covering them was a massive
risk. If I was trying to get views here, this video would be about Mr. Beast. No, let me be very
clear. The motivation behind this video, like with most things I do in life, is spite. In all
seriousness though, the way that Scott has started talking to me is extremely consistent with how Wee
goes after anyone who's critical of them saying things like this. Alright, we're getting into the
first quote here, so I figure I should transition into my reader voice. Remember, we're supposed
to be confident, calm, and conscious. From the outset, it was your intention to target Wee
charity. If you are true to your word that you are really seeking to discuss the sector as a whole,
I would think it'd only be fair to produce a video that profiles several charities,
and ideally ones that engage in distinct purposes and are of various sizes and structures,
and you do proper analysis of the sector if this is really your true intention. Otherwise,
any commentary on the sector will be grossly misleading and frankly dishonest. You have
shown a pattern of saying to us one thing, and they're doing another to your tens of thousands
of followers. I realize you wish to grow your audience, grow your own brand, and make money
off of your YouTube channel, but in this case, you are doing this in a manner which causes tangible
harm to our organization and tens of thousands of resource-poor people we serve.
Case study. I think that we would probably see a law the same issues in most charities if this
amount of scrutiny was applied to them as well, but for better or worse, The Wee Charity is the
one we've got to work with, so get used to talking about these freaks and settle in for what please
God, I hope will be my last video about this by first going through this incredibly cursed cribs
episode.
In the episode, which more or less functions as a commercial for Me to Wee trips,
as well as their clothing line, Craig shows off the facilities where volunteers stay in Kenya.
Now, some might find it a bit odd for a charity and its founder to be featured on MTV Cribs,
a show where rich celebrities show off their decadent lifestyles. Personally, I would agree,
it's very weird for a bunch of reasons. For one thing, in my opinion Craig has a very strange
vibe through all of this, like this guy looks like the villain in every 80s swabs vs snobs movie.
Hard to believe he had time to shoot this in between getting pranked by the nerd fraternity
and losing a climactic ski competition to a chimpanzee. In fairness here, Craig's had a very
strange life. He's a devout Catholic, he never had much of a childhood owing to traveling the
world giving speeches since he was 12, and he's written that he fired his first employee before
he went through his first breakup. He's also claimed to have never been drunk or high in his
life out of fear of bringing shame to his organization. So whenever you read about some
horrible thing that the Wee charity has been accused of having done, just take a deep breath
and remind yourself that at least Craig never did something truly unforgivable, like hitting a
joint. But with that context, his grown in a lab vibes make a lot more sense.
What it kind of reminds me of is how like everyone knows what dad jokes are, but dad jokes also have
a deeply cursed relative, which is boss jokes. A classic boss joke is something like seeing
someone carrying some food and going, oh great, you got me lunch. That's the energy Craig brings
to this video. And so in my opinion, it comes off as a bit weird when at the very beginning and end
we see the local Masai people who live in that area interacting with a man who looks like he was
evolutionarily designed to say, do you know who my father is?
Nope, don't like that. Although to be fair here, this definitely isn't all on Craig. The editing
is for sure very weird and also at times hilarious. Like they do these slow motion replays at seemingly
random times in the video, a sweet sounding 5.1 surround sound. And welcome to it, Masai Mara
style. A no-creeps episode we complete without the kitchen, deodorants, mouthwash, pen sanitizer,
malaria pills, don't leave home without them in East Africa.
Just some truly amazing choices happening here. Anyways, after showing the mess tent and playing
some sick beats, Craig stops by the kitchen and drinks some cow's blood, which is a very big
part of Masai cooking, but also it really doesn't look like he's enjoying himself drinking it.
Yeah, me when I'm lying. And then for the next stop, Craig shows us the actual crib.
So first of all, I like how the outside isn't even remotely similar to Kenyan architecture.
They just fully made some cottage core shit. But also, that place is obviously massive, right?
To the point where it's stretching the definition of the word cottage.
Something that's very strange is that Craig makes it so much weirder by instead calling it a hut.
Yeah, almost like that's not a hut at all. And Scott said something similar when he
described it. All structures were made from local materials. They were designed to provide
safety and comfort, but were basic in nature. I feel like this building is like a fun Rorschach
test where what you call it tells how rich you are. For example, Craig grew up extremely wealthy.
Like I'm talking about he and his brother were able to start free the children while they were
themselves children because their parents moved into another house and let them and their friends
use their childhood home as an office levels of wealthy. And so for him, it's a hut. I don't know
much about Scott, but I assume he's doing pretty well for himself though. So for him, it's basic
in nature. And then for me, I'm 29 have never taken a vacation in my adult life. And the only
other job I've had has been working in kitchen. So I'm just over here Googling the difference
between a mansion and a man. I should note though that none of these huts exist anymore
since at the start of the pandemic, we turned all their facilities in Kenya into medical housing,
which seems like a pretty unambiguously good thing to do. So good for them there. Anyways,
Craig gives a tour of the hut showing off the bathroom, the balcony, the master bedroom.
This is mosquito nets that they use here. To be honest, it's more for decoration than function.
Yeah, man, the giraffe print kind of gave that away. Then we get to all the cars and motorcycles.
First of all, I just like how much he looks like a far cry though in here. Maserati, Ferrari,
eat your heart out. Here at Pagani, we have the green machine. But also I was expecting him to
say how they use that thing for something, but I'm not cutting anything out here. Here's what
happens. The green machine. Bet you don't have this in your driveway. Check out a few of the other rides.
That's it. Like, I'm sure that they do actually use it for stuff, but it's so funny how Craig's
just like, check this out, bitches. Anyways, but the part of this episode that definitely comes
off the worst is when Craig shows one of his favorite parts of the hut. So the stairway is one
of my favorite features built entirely at a reclaimed wood. So no trees were cut down for this.
You know, God, it's amazing what they managed to build in the absolute middle of nowhere Africa.
So in my opinion, that line seems extremely ignorant at best and honestly just racist at
worst. Like first of all, I have a pretty hard time imagining him walking into a house somewhere
in North America or Europe and saying the same thing like, wow, it's amazing that you're able
to build stairs. Except I asked Scott about this and he said that actually, yes, that is exactly
what Craig would do. I appreciate your views on the statement. However, please allow me to emphasize
that the context matters greatly. The region is extremely remote. There were no roads at the
time and still today there are now only one dirt road and no electricity or running water or other
structures. The statement simply referred to that reality and the challenges that it presented
when the facility was being built in the same way that one might refer to the middle of nowhere
Alberta and a remote region that similarly lacks such infrastructure. In addition, the context of
the show matters. Craig certainly would have said in the middle of Narrow County. However,
most viewers of MTV Cribs likely would not be familiar with the region. It was filmed for a
broad audience. So I have some thoughts on that. First of all, it is just amazing that apparently
it's official wee lore that when Craig's in rural Alberta, or if he was trying to appeal to a
broader audience, rural North America, and he sees some stairs, he's just like, wow, this hut is
amazing. No, but like, even if it's true that he didn't mean it that way, that wouldn't make it
okay since it's common for people other than Craig, I guess, to say stuff like that, not because a
place is so remote, but because of racist stereotypes of Africans all being primitive, poverty-stricken,
and not having access to modern technology. This is something that it seems safe to say that Craig
knew since, according to Scott, the reason that Craig chose to say the middle of nowhere Africa
was because he knew a lot of people in the audience think of Africa as a monolith, and so
decided it would be better to confirm their prejudices instead of correcting them. Like,
I don't have a lot of faith in the effectiveness of activism that just seeks to raise awareness,
but communicating that Africa isn't a country would have been the absolute least he could do.
Instead, I'm sure that there were people who watched that segment and thought,
this guy obviously knows what he's talking about, and then believed something shitty just
a little bit more. Now this, this is East Africa.
Just to be clear, as much as I may joke about how Craig looks like a proud boy with low self-esteem,
I don't believe that he is some secret evil racist. I think that just like me, he grew up in a
colonialist white supremacist society and has internalized the prejudices that come with that.
Or rather, that's what I used to think. I now believe that that's the case for everyone except
for Craig Kielberger, as Scott explained to me. I would also add that having worked with Craig
for 20 plus years, I would voice in the strongest terms that he is not a racist, and I could never
imagine the word racist in Craig in the same breath. Even if you have a different interpretation of
the context of the MTV Cribs comment, I believe that it's important to not present one line in
isolation to a life's work. This would be irresponsible to do so, and as a result, defamatory.
Since his middle school years, Craig has spent his life working with colleagues in the Global
South who are among his closest friends. Collectively, he has lived and worked for years in the Global
South, and he has dedicated his life to expanding global compassion and solidarity to communities.
So first of all, it's very bold to say that you can't imagine the word racism and the name
Craig in the same breath. Like, even if Craig Kielberger is 100% not racist, Craig is for sure
in the top 50 most common names for racists. Like, it's right below Nigel and above Patricia.
Also, I would love to see them prove that he isn't racist in court. Like, your honor,
I'd like to call Craig's black friend who will confirm that he gave my client an N-word pass.
And like, I'm sorry that I've had to go over so much stuff here that feels like it should be
completely basic. This is starting to feel like a now this video from 2015, but do you see who
I'm talking to here? I didn't plan to spend so much time on this. That Cribbs video is over 10
years old, and while that doesn't excuse it, people can change and learn. When I asked Scott
about that line, I was expecting to get a standard statement that you hear anytime a corporation
gets called out for racism, saying that Craig is making space for starting a dialogue that
centers a conversation about shutting up and listening. But instead, I got this. I don't know,
I just wonder if there's a chance that this kind of defensiveness might be in some way connected
to the hostility that an anti-racist activist experienced while working at We in 2020.
I was given a new speech to read, and immediately I was angry, and this was coming from a panel
primarily primarily of white women and men. So first of all, one of the words that left my
mouth was, I don't know if you understand how oppressive that is. To take the personal stories
of a black woman who experiences a different kind of discrimination, who has definitely
experienced a different, has experienced racism on a different level, to take her words, water them
down, and present her with a speech without her knowledge. I feel like the truth was to make
sure that they were protecting themselves to not really be real. They just wanted to water it down.
They wanted the speech to be more we. I was asked to talk about cornrows, and I was asked to talk
about the Oscars, and I was just like, are we talking about what's really happening in Canada?
Are we talking about systemic racism? Are we talking about the mental navigation of being
a person of color? Are we talking about the incidences of being followed in stores constantly
and carded? And all of these real things that were happening were completely erased.
Shortly after, there was a town hall meeting in regards to some
articles that were written about the culture of fear and employee experience,
and founder Mark Kuhlberger was also there. And we were asked to share if the articles aligned
with our experiences. And I put my hand up because I'm that person. And then I started
and shared that some of the things within this article really did resonate with me.
I saw the culture of fear. And one thing that I said was that so many people are having siloed
conversations that they're so scared to talk to people in positions of power where true change
can get implemented. And not one, not two, not three heads nodded, but the whole room was agreeing
with me. And I believe that was a threatening thing. And then the founder then stepped up from
the wall and completely shut me down in an instant. It was like, no, we're done. We're not
having this cut. Just very blunt, disregarded of anything that I said. Also, if it feels like I'm
being too critical, remember that these people were in charge of writing school curriculums
teaching 4.3 million kids across North America about how to get involved with activism.
With all that said, and I'm genuinely not just saying this to avoid the strangest defamation
suit possible, we is right that this one video of Craig or any scandals don't erase the good that
Craig and the Wee charity have done in the world. And while that certainly doesn't absolve them
from criticisms either, I do honestly get where they're coming from with how a lot of that stuff
feels minor when it's held up against the tens, if not hundreds of thousands of people whose lives
were made better because of this charity. We sent me some testimonials speaking to the work that
they've done for me to refer to in this video. Awful kind of them. All three letters talk about
the great work Wee has done building schools, creating jobs and providing access to education,
clean water and medicine. I'll link them in the description, but should also say that two of the
letters are from people who worked with Wee administering their projects. And one is from a
woman who's now a spokesperson for them. So while I have no reason to believe that the people who
wrote them are lying, they clearly aren't neutral sources either. Along with the testimonials, Scott
added, you also seem to have an interest in quoting academics in your commentary on Wee.
Please see an academic study written by Dr. Jason Saul about the impact of me to Wee tips on
participants and communities. Maybe I'm just imagining it, but it doesn't sound like you
like academics very much, right? I do though. So I looked through this report by Dr. Jason
Saul and his company Mission Measurement, which does say that Wee's been extremely effective
in their work, that it's especially good that they combine their charity work with me to Wee's
for-profit volunteer trips, that they create jobs and bring a ton of money into the community. And
then there's a very detailed breakdown of how people who went on these trips were positively
impacted, showing most significantly that people who go are more likely to actively look for ways
to improve their communities. Students who took it were more confident discussing complex political
issues, and people in corporate management showed improvements in leadership skills,
which were also noticed by their employers. One thing that I thought was a little weird though
was that they also found that people who went on the trip were apparently seven times as likely to
quote, be agents of positive change in their local and global communities. And that's a bit weird,
right? Like, I'm interested to know how they quantify being a positive agent of change. So
I tried to look and see how they were determining that, except the report doesn't include any
discussion of methods, which for a supposed academic study is pretty unusual. Like, Scott's
emails to me are better about citing sources than this paper. The report does mention two studies
that mission measurement conducted for Wee, but doesn't include them or give any way of finding
them. So I emailed Scott to tell him how this all seemed kind of weird and asked him about the studies
if they were peer reviewed or anything, and if he could send them to me. And he said, no.
This is wild to me. If they were just for internal use, then fine, but they bring these studies up
all the time as evidence of how great Wee is. I think they'd want people to see them. You're
supposed to keep the studies that make you look bad in-house. You can release the ones that make
you look good. Sorry if I'm mansplaining to Wee how to run a sketchy corporation here.
But the basis for asking those questions is because Wee described the report as an academic study,
and you know what academic studies include? Methods, data, citations, and ideally they've
also been approved by experts in the field. You know why I like to use academic sources in my
videos? Because they include all of that, and so I don't have to take an author at their word.
That's the whole point. It sucks, Susan. I do genuinely believe that Wee has done good work
and drastically improved a lot of lives, but interacting with them, it's unbelievably
frustrating how they'll claim that they believe in taking responsibility for the mistakes that
they've made, while also refusing to be held to the most basic standards of criticism. So yeah,
bear in mind that Wee has done a lot of good too. Now with all of that in mind, let's dig into
volunteerism and the developments that led to Craig Kielberger making that facility out in
the middle of nowhere Africa. Volunteerism is the practice of volunteers who are usually young,
well-off Westerners traveling to lend a hand in remote and impoverished parts of the world.
Its most vocal advocates tend to be white dudes whose favorite party trick is making everyone be
quiet and watch them play Kendrick off of their phone and rap along including the N words, which
they insist that they can say because they spent a gap year volunteering in orphanage in the middle
of nowhere Africa. Well, yes, that is just a description of something I saw happen once in
university. I think that it's generalizable to the majority of people who take these trips,
and if you want evidence of that, well, that's really not appropriate and rather unfair.
Probably the most common place to spot volunteerists though is on dating apps. People with their favorite
Lou Lemon tote bag quote is their bio and pictures of them posing with a bunch of black or brown
kids in a school with a dirt floor. Now, as far as more formal definitions, one foundational study
on the topic by Wearing in 2007 describes these people as tourists who
from another study. Volunteering their labor for worthy causes
Several studies have found that these companies can often be dishonest about the impact that
their work has. Also, the volunteer work that's usually done on these trips is generally just
unpaid construction work and it'd be better to have just hired local laborers, especially since
most of the people going on these are teenagers who obviously aren't going to be very useful on a
construction site. It's common to hear stories of kids going on these trips and then realizing that
locals were going out at night to redo what they'd spent all day working on. And that's nowhere near
the worst case scenario. A common volunteerist destination is volunteering in orphanages in
Cambodia. The problem is that any business needs to grow and so in order to fuel tourism, there
need to be more and more orphanages. But while orphanages are cheap to build, easy to fund because
they often operate for profit, plus they look amazing on a Tinder profile, they are also widely
recognized as being terrible places for kids and should only ever be the absolute last possible
resort. Not so in Cambodia though, since there's now all these orphanages that have been built by
charities and pressure from the tourism industry to fill them. And so, yeah, the industry is,
to say the very least, fraught. While I don't think that we has been involved in anything that bad,
volunteer trips were a massive part of me to we's operations, although they have been suspended
since the start of the pandemic. A brochure handed out at We Day in 2010 advertised volunteer
adventures in Kenya, where visitors would experience
an intimate and unique learning experience against backdrop of the African landscape.
All the while, you enjoy the comforts of home at Borgani Cottages and Tented Camp.
Come with us and feel the real heartbeat of Kenya as you meet the people,
see the animals, and live the lifestyle. The brochure advertised luxury accommodations and
healthy meals made by We's five-star chefs included in said lifestyle that visitors would be living.
Hey, so I sent Scott a rough draft of this script, and he sent me some corrections.
I assume that he'll want to release a full, more comprehensive statement, which I will wink below.
Scott wanted this point to be corrected. He wrote,
If you have seen the meals yourself in Kenya at our former lodge,
or have heard who the five-star chefs are, please let me know, because this is factually incorrect.
We ask this change be reflected. So the line about five-star chefs,
as well as all the other claims I've made here, are based off of quotes from the brochure that I
mentioned. I have not personally been able to get my hands on that brochure, but it is quoted
in an article by David Jeffress titled, The Me Too We Social Enterprise Global Education
as Lifestyle Brand. In it, he wrote, The all-inclusive trips ensure the compassionate consumer
luxurious accommodation and healthy meals made from organic ingredients prepared by,
quote, our five-star chef, after, quote, a hard day's work volunteering. It goes on,
A typical trip includes five days at the colleges learning about Masai culture,
and working with a FTC that's free the children project in a nearby community,
followed by three days on safari or at a beach resort. But while one might think that that meets
the definition of volunteerism weighed out above, Scott was very adamant that it didn't, saying,
We do not offer volunteerism travel. We provide culturally immersive travel. There is a big
difference. Prior to COVID, when these travel experiences were provided, hundreds of individuals
in the global south were employed. The leadership in the global south designed the schedule for
guests. The purpose of our trips is not for people to simply volunteer in developing countries.
Travelers are instead welcomed into communities in the global south in the spirit of partnership
and learning among each other. The volunteer work is only a portion of the trip schedule,
which includes learning about global development issues and education about the vibrant and proud
culture in the communities. Finally, the reason we have been able to build, for example, a hospital,
a maternity ward, two high schools, a college, and hundreds of schools in Kenya is largely because
of the generosity of donors who have come to the communities on these cultural trips and then made
financial pledges to support the basic needs of these communities. This is done in partnership
with the communities themselves. Hundreds of thousands of lives have been positively changed
because of this form of partnership between travelers and community members.
So I don't think that any companies specifically advertise themselves as volunteerism. They instead
offer a bunch of buzzwords about working with local communities, cultural immersion, and sustainable
development, kind of like how we does. That doesn't mean that we was a bad actor here,
but just that pretty much all companies basically say the same thing. We are nothing like those
horrible volunteerism companies. What we do is offer opportunities to synergize tourism and
volunteering. I said this to Scott and asked him to explain what he thinks volunteerism is and why
specifically we is different. And he replied, whether a company uses the word volunteerism
or any other to describe it is more or less irrelevant. You will need to examine the actual
activities such as the programs and the itinerary to see what elements are included in the experience.
Yeah, that's my point. There are certainly many companies and organizations where volunteering
is the primary focus of the experience and is what the participants are paying to do.
Habitat for Humanity, as an example, runs international trips where participants spend the
vast majority of time building houses in places like Mexico. Such trips are also paid experiences.
As Habitat for Humanity is among the largest providers of such volunteer trips, I assume
you will be profiling them in your video. Here's the link to their website. On me-to-we trips,
volunteering is only a small element of the itinerary. Rather, the activities are intended to
provide participants with meaningful opportunities to learn about the communities they are visiting
and engage in cultural understanding alongside the community members in a genuine manner.
For example, day-in-the-life activities, whereby participants have the opportunity to
meet with community members in various contexts to learn about their lives, and with that,
the issues they in the wider community face. These activities include attending home visits,
assemblies at one of these secondary schools, and meetings with the women's and men's groups.
It is because of we charities' long-standing relationships with these communities that
trip participants have such opportunities to engage with them. This is something that makes
me-to-we's trips vastly different from those offered by other organizations, and why culturally
immersive travel is always a more fitting description. In conjunction with the above
activities, me-to-we trip itineraries also always include workshops and discussion focused on the
activities of the day to give participants the opportunity to reflect on what they have
experienced and link it back to the broader issues, including the impact of our actions in
the global north. That many donors will make substantial contributions to support projects
and programming in the communities that they visit reflects the level of engagement and immersion
that they experience. As you can imagine, they make contributions because of the time they spend
with the people who live in the area, not because of the time they might spend volunteering on a
construction site. I sincerely appreciate that there is also a meaningful discussion to be
had about the various types of trip experiences that are often grouped under the term volunteerism.
However, as I said with we charity, it is not fair to inaccurately portray me-to-we for the
sake of appearing critical of the entire sector, which is also diverse. So it sounds to me like
for Scott, the distinction between volunteerism and culturally immersive travel is that
with volunteerism, they only spend their time volunteering. That's not really in line at all
with any other definition that I've seen, and I just don't think that that's a particularly
important distinction. Like the problems with volunteerism aren't that visitors aren't
interacting with locals enough. Also, no, I don't have any plans to go after Habitat for
Humanity in this video, although I will say that like we, they do not require volunteers to have
any skills or experience in construction, and I will absolutely say that I don't think that anyone
watching this should travel to another country to pay to do a job that you have no experience in.
Anyways, I think that the distinction between volunteerism and culturally immersive travel
is a bit semantic. So I decided to just interview a couple people who've gone on we trips and I'll
let you be the judge. Who are you? Do you want to introduce yourself? Hi, everyone. My name is Ellie.
I am Ellie Grant. You want to Google me? And I am someone who went on a we meet-to-we trip in 2012.
I went to Kenya. We had two weeks in Kenya staying in the Masai Mara in this village. We were told
that we were there to build a school. I'm pretty sure we only built the school, which really just
involved mixing concrete. Like if you could imagine like 16 year old girls with no upper
body strength with these really heavy shovels and trying to like really dig in and mix concrete to
pour, that's what we were doing. But I think that's also why we couldn't do more than four days is
because we didn't have the physical capability to really do the type of labor that they were
required. So yeah, so we spent maybe four days building the school. Half of that time each of
those times was playing with the children in the schoolyard, taking photos of them, all that kind
of crap. And then the rest of the time we were touring around. So we went on a safari. We went
to this local church and joined their gospel. We went to the health center that free the children
had built. Yeah, it was a lot of touring around and not so much doing what we thought we were there
to do. We also did a ton of leadership development. So our facilitators, they were wonderful. I will
say they were great people. We really connected with them. They did a very good job of leading
this trip of teenage girls. But yeah, it was a lot of times spent doing these
sort of leadership talks and activities and trying to strengthen our
ability and also our interest in helping to understand global and economic development.
And then also how we can interact with each other and work together as a team, a lot of team
building kind of stuff. And for that, I also don't think that was necessarily a bad thing,
but it was just not what I expected. And it was also interesting because the students
do all the organizing for these trips, you do all the fundraising and like the I think you have to
do pledges and kind of getting things together. And then obviously a teacher has to sign up and
actually fill out all the paperwork. But they don't send the students I don't remember the
students getting a itinerary being like this is what you're going to do like more than half of
this time is going to be spent touring around. We're going to lead these activities and then
less of that time is being spent actually building a school because it but it was though it was
marketed as building a school. So yeah, it was a kind of a strange way to enter into the space.
I'm going to walk you through the first night and what I remember. We were driven to this compound.
It was like outside of Nairobi. And we stayed there the first night. It was completely gated
guarded by security guards. It was I think from what I'm trying to remember it was quite
like, yeah, kind of more modern like Western development. Nice rooms, flushing toilets, mirrors,
a tiny like a dining hall area where you could sit and eat. And we were completely removed from
the first night. So if we're going to talk about cultural immersion and actually experiencing
the culture, the first night alone like sets the tone for that immersive experience.
And this is just solely based on accommodation. When we went to
the Mara and stayed in this community, you're like, if you can imagine, yeah, this barren field,
you can see these people's homes off in the distance. They're living with the land. They're
used to their routine and their lifestyle. And then these people drive in on these giant,
what are those trucks called? Like the ones that can kind of like drive through water and
over crazy hills and shit. I think I know what you're trying to do. Here at Pagani, we have the green
machine. The name is slipping my mind, but anyways, but yeah, we get there and then we're staying in
these almost like military tents. And there's a mess hall tent that's set up and we weren't
close to anybody's homes. We were sleeping, eating, washing, interacting in a way that,
you know, members there would. And I could see that being problematic on,
I could see being that immersed as problematic as well, because it's, it can be intrusive.
We were, we looked like aliens. It looked like, like man on the moon, like just completely
removed from the actual community. Yeah, it was a lot of just being toured around. We weren't,
we weren't interacting. They brought us to this, yeah, this church. And it was really cool, but I
felt about even at that age, extremely uncomfortable, this group of white teenage girls and their
teacher and leader counterparts are like just sitting, clapping along, pretending that they're,
you know, used to this sort of church setting. But yeah, I felt uncomfortable and like, I feel
like we were, they're putting on a performance for us and we're there and we're not actually
talking to any of these people. We're just hearing them sing, which was, it was cool, but it didn't
allow me to ask any questions. I was 17, so I was like, I'm going to go to school. I was like,
I'm going to be going here. I'm going to be volunteering with the school. I knew that before,
I like to build infrastructure for the school. I knew that before time. I wasn't there the whole
time, but it was a really large part of the trip, the part that I remember the most. And this was
a while ago, so it's foggy, but the part that was like, most sticking in my brain that I feel like
I spent the most time doing was volunteering, or at least a really large part. At least half,
at least half the trip was focused around volunteering in this little community, helping
build some infrastructure around the school. So what I was doing there was a few things. There was
some in some foundation that needed to be done. So we were digging holes to build foundation,
and we were also laying bricks to build a tree. And also just like hanging out with the kids at
the school. I was very much trying to figure out what those trips do best in my humble opinion,
which is grant a lot more to the traveler or the volunteers that I was able to give,
that I will ever be able to give, I took away. Because when I was helping dig a foundation,
a few days later, it rained. When I was helping lay bricks for this latrine, I'm sure that we
did it, because we're not architects, we're not bricklayers, and it seems like, oh, this simple
test of just laying bricks, why would you trust a bunch of 14 to 17 year olds to lay bricks for
the tree? It was a big moment for me to come to terms with that. That was for me. That was
1,000% for me, and that was not for them. And that was a hard part to swallow, because I thought
I was really helping. Anyways, then there was an element for me right next to the school that was
this, essentially, I guess I don't want to use the long terms, but it was like a hut. She was living
in a home made of bricks, like a house, like she was living in a hut. And the hut was made,
and they made a big point of saying this was made with a mixture of bricklay and cowl more,
or goat more, and we entered this person's home. Again, I didn't really know what she was saying,
it was just like, we were just entering this small space into this person's home and watching her
make bread on her stove made from the same materials as her home. And then, I feel so cringy
saying this. This is something I never talk about, and I don't share what I've had this experience
anymore, because I feel deeply, I feel ashamed and I feel terribly proud of this experience.
I learned a lot from it, I learned so much, especially when I look back in a critical lens,
but I don't like sharing this. This is a part that I don't like sharing. After we entered this person's
home, we took turns putting, we put on like a plastic glove, and we picked up some of the like
clay manure mixture and like put it on her house. We weren't, she had a house. She didn't need us to
smear more. They're like, me going mad. I was like, it was like, this is just a person's home,
like, this is just a person's life. And I was like, how is this a person's home? Like,
are these people in Canada that live in like giant houses and have education and all this infrastructure
and like, how like patronizing do you, do you, do you maybe don't feel patronized because they do
have a relationship with me. Otherwise, like, why would we be in that situation? She must benefit
from us being there in some way in regards to the relationship she has with me to be. But man,
I'm like, I'm like red right now. So I went to that poor woman's home and went to dance on her
wall. I carried, we all carried a ton of water from the well back to this lady's home. Hope she
can use all that water. And it was useful that we got it for her. I'm sure it was maybe a ton of
people came to our site. So when we were staying, they had some people come and just follow with
dancing and do henna and bring some scarves and goods and things that we could shop like on
our little location. So again, that feels very curated. And then we went to the city of Udett
for a day and like hung out in the markets and did some shopping and stuff and had like, I even
a restaurant in the city. And that was really nice. I just, I guess that was pretty, that was like
the culturally, that's one of the most culturally immersed because that was shopping. We didn't
talk about like the colonization of India. You know, that was never, we never really talked about
their history, this community that didn't have access to education, this community that girls
can't go to school because there's no vitrine. So if there's no vitrine, they're not in school
once a week because there's nowhere for them to like, deal with their period for that week. And
they've looked down upon it just just being dirty. Like it was very much like a focus on the culture.
I guess we kind of talked, we talked about the caste system, but it's when it kind of like
went back to, it goes back to the culture to have access to, to education because there's
women in this culture or there's poverty in this culture because of estimation of the caste system.
Like we understand like they talk about those systems, but I don't think we ever really talked
about colonialism. My cultural facilitator that I had become close with, like he was the person who
would give us the cultural context and he was just a few years older than I was. So we ended
up just becoming friends and chatting. And it was one day he was really frustrated and mad. And I
kind of asked him what was bothering him and he said that the previous night there was people
there who were from the corporate trip where they were like a bundle group of people
and they had cracked like a couple bottles of wine or something, cracked a couple bottles of,
I don't know, this is not simply and really frustrated because if you're here to do work
or like to make an impact in this community and you're cracking this bottle of alcohol,
that's worth more than someone's like yearly income in that community. Like I really do think
that they think they're doing really great work and that their cause is just
even though they function in a broken system. I guess that's my biggest problem with new
ways. Like they were made in a time that was much more insensitive, much less aware, the peak of
like neocolonialism and they were a part of like combating that and starting a new dialogue.
And that's very admirable. Like the start of their story and their upcoming is admirable
based on like the context of like the global community, but they never learned or grown.
They never grown with the changing information. They never like themselves continue to progress
and learn in a way that's more sensitive and must ignorant. So hey, me again. So Scott wanted to add
a response here. He wrote it in this way that's supposed to sound like I'm just naturally saying
it, which I really fucking hate. Here we go. In fairness, tens of thousands of people traveled
with me to we and many had an extremely positive experience. The impact also helped shape future
decisions, including what they would study in the future and making positive changes in reducing
their consumption patterns and their ecological footprint on the world as a result of the trip.
We provided a study from Dr. Jason Saul, who looked at the impact of its trips showing
an overwhelming positive impact on those who had traveled. So just a small correction there. Scott
actually specifically refused to send me that study. So I'm sure that's just a simple mistake
on his part. Probably got that mixed up. Stepping back a bit, the type of work that
volunteerism is an extension of is called international development. So what that mean?
Development is a really sneaky concept. Just googling it, the Salvation Army's website defines it as
quote, the pursuit of a better world for all through the elimination of poverty, discrimination,
and injustice. Damn, what kind of monster would oppose that? We should throw them in a cage and
set them on fire if you know what I mean. As a side note, I'd just like to say that joining my
Patreon means hope, understanding, rescuing cats stuck up in trees and getting access to the music
from my videos and your name and the credits. No, but that's not what development really means.
Obviously. The term was first used on January 20, 1949, during the first televised American
inaugural address. In it, Harry Truman said, We must embark on a bold new program for making the
benefits of our scientific advances and industrial progress available for the improvement and growth
of underdeveloped areas. More than half the people of the world are living in conditions
approaching misery. Their food is inadequate. They are victims of disease. Their economic life
is primitive and stagnant. Their poverty is a handicap and a threat, both to them and to more
prosperous areas. The material resources which we can afford to use for assistance of other people
are limited. But our imponderable resources in technical knowledge are constantly growing
and are inexhaustible. And in cooperation with other nations, we should foster capital
investment in areas needing development. This was a last minute addition, but it fucking crushed.
Not just in America, but also in European countries whose formal colonial reign was coming to an end.
The idea behind development is basically that countries run on the same rules as historical
strategy games, and any disparities are just because all those countries who just so happened
to have been colonized didn't put enough points into their skill trees for no specific reason.
Don't worry about it. All that was needed to end poverty was for rich countries to help them catch
up by teaching them about farming, medicine, and the free market. Mostly that last one, though.
I promise we'll tell you all about modern irrigation techniques right after you guys prove
that you understand basic economics. Now, for your next project, you'll be building a golden
statue of Murray Rothbard. This was so effective because through this perspective, not only were
imperial countries not responsible for the state of their former colonies, now they were the solution.
And what did that solution look like? Well, what this development aid would often include would be
a push for so-called developing countries to modernize their economies through free trade
and austerity policies. Interestingly, that's actually not at all what so-called developed
countries did. Most countries that are rich today got that way through policies that involved
heavily investing in their welfare state and economic protectionism.
The reason I bring this up is because I think that this flip in how Western countries came
to understand their role in aid reveals two dynamics that we're going to see coming up again
and again. On the one hand, we have the stripping away of all historical and structural causes of
poverty, portraying starving kids in an unspecified part of Africa as victims without victimizers.
On the other hand, aid, whether it be from individuals, organizations, or governments,
is oriented to prioritize being enjoyable and profitable for those providing it over any concerns
about the needs of the people they're supposedly helping. Alright, let's fast forward a few decades
now and talk about neoliberalism. Reagan, Thatcher, Milton Friedman, Frederick Hayek,
we privatized the profits and socialized the losses, and now eggs cost a thousand dollars and
everyone's running on fumes. That basically covers everything, but if you want a more detailed
explanation of neoliberalism, check out any of my videos. By the 90s, neoliberalism had gone from
a radical fringe ideology to the world's dominant economic paradigm. Something that happened in
North America during this period was that we saw the rise of bands that I like to sing at karaoke
and a movement aimed at making capitalism an instrument for social justice through ethical
consumption. The main form that this takes is what's called purchase triggered philanthropy,
which is when companies donate some of their profits to some charitable cause generally
tied to an ad campaign. At the same time, as the government withdrew more and more, it's just been
staying home and really going goblin mode right now, but as the government shrank into a small
little bean and took on less of a role in things like welfare and international development,
there was simultaneously an explosion of non-profit organizations and non-government
organizations. Soon, NGOs and NPOs came to take over some of the state's functions in
welfare and development respectively, but while these organizations are by definition not meant
to be for making money, with government funds drying up, the charity sector came to rely more
and more on private funds. Non-profits have always worked closely with corporations looking to seem
like they're making a difference. Corporations will hand over their advertising budget to a charity
and the non-profit adds expertise and legitimacy to the project, but charities didn't just receive
money from the private sector. They also got something that an endless stream of crypto
bro turned motivational speakers on Instagram have taught me is far more valuable than money.
A business grind set. One very messed up example of this is a little charity that you might have
heard of. That's right, World Vision. While World Vision is probably best known for those old sponsor
child commercials where they'd film African kids with flies on their faces, but despite the fact
that they had a policy banning the hiring of gay people until 2014, World Vision's marketing
has actually kept with the times, albeit in a shockingly cursed way. The World Vision gift
catalog, which you can find on their website or as physical copies that they mail out,
presents charitable donations as products laid out like any other online shopping experience,
except instead of spending 50 bucks on a 3-in-1 combo foot massager, squatty potty, and instapot,
you can spend the same amount to buy some chickens for an impoverished community,
like somewhere in the world. It actually doesn't say. On their site, they show this video about
the impact that chickens have, but don't tell you where it was filmed at all.
But whatever, so they have chickens for 50 bucks. Let's see what else. Oh, for 65, you can buy
help for sexually exploited girls. That feels gross, right? Like, I feel like I shouldn't
have to explain why depicting sexually abused children as products is beyond fucked.
In a paper on this, Vincy Lee describes the World Vision gift catalog as an expression of
philanthropy capitalism, the merger of business with charity. This is absolutely nothing new,
but Lee points out that what is unprecedented is the scale at which it's taking place,
and with that, how shamelessly its supporters will celebrate it for its profitability.
The way this plays out is that charity is seen as good because of its profitability.
Donations, then, are now an investment that drives innovation and develops infrastructure,
which can be used by major corporations. Thanks to your generosity, the child that you
sponsor could grow up to be the next Satoshi Nakamoto or Elizabeth Holmes.
You can see this in the World Vision gift catalog, not just in the little tags they
put on products advertising, multiply 6x impact, but also in how the first thing that you see when
you load the page and on the first pages of the physical copies all have to do with animals.
The reason they pushed this is because the recipients aren't meant to raise some livestock
and live off of that themselves, they're given them to start a business. And to be clear here,
you can make a good case for that being the most efficient and effective way to help people.
My issue, though, is with who decides that and what their motivations are.
Let's come back to Canada's favorite philanthropy boys now and talk some more about we.
I'm sorry, I'm sick of having to write jokes about these guys who look like they're about to
go on Tucker Carlson to argue that wealthy is the new N word too. But Craig and Mark are very
explicit that this blend of business and charity is what we is all about. The two brothers, along
with Richard Branson's daughter Holly, wrote a book called Wee Economy that makes their stance
very clear. And Craig has been hired to speak at events saying stuff like this.
My name is Craig Kilburger. I'm the co-founder of the Wee Organization and I appreciate you joining
me today for a conversation on the power of purpose. Purpose is the differentiator. 75%
millennials would take a pay cut to work at a company that gives greater purpose. Let me tell
you the story of Tanya Carnegie. She was a young accountant at the firm APMG, one of the biggest
accounting firms in the world. After a volunteer trip overseas to Africa, she came back and
questioned whether her nine to five was equaling the social impact she wanted. She almost quit her
job. But then she thought about it and realized that in her company, a company that had reached
around the world, she could do more good. Issues like climate change, issues like global poverty
or forced migration, issues like gender empowerment, the world's problems are innovations waiting
to happen. That is what we're going to talk about today. How business and charity aren't two
opposites. But in fact, they're merging on this path together of social entrepreneurship. You can
achieve both purpose and profit in the process. Thanks so much for listening today. If you want
more tips and ways to get involved, please check out the Weeconomy book. It is the Blueprint for
Purpose and Profit in the Workplace. I was going to write a joke about how these look like presentations
for a sketchy crypto scam, but then looked it up and found this article that of course Craig wrote.
Moving on in a paper by Jessica Wirgu at all. Honestly, shout out to at all unbelievably
slept on writer. They argue that one of the key assumptions of flant through capitalism
is that the market is a capable and appropriate medium for providing aid. The problem with this
though is that there are certain values that are fine to expect from a market when we're just consuming
regular things that aren't as great for distributing aid. The big one is choice. It's good that we can
have a say and make choices when we're buying things normally, but not so much when it comes to
charities. With the World Vision gift catalog, for instance, products are sorted by most popular,
which makes sense in other kinds of online shopping. But the people donating to World Vision aren't
experts. They don't know what's most needed. I don't care if 9 out of 10 Karens agree that
kids in Ethiopia need horses. Until I hear it from someone in a lab coat, I'm not buying those kids
a single fucking horse. In a paper called Humanitarians of Tender, Constructing Whiteness and
Consuming the Other, Nisha Toomey analyzes the Facebook page Humanitarians of Tender, where
people submit pictures of white people just being gross. I'm just a Pam looking for her gym. I love
staying active, Harry Potter, and being the savior of Africa. Asian swipe left. The paper is
actually so much better than it has any right to be for how funny of a thing it's looking at.
In it, Toomey writes, The notion of the individual being able to do what she pleases,
so as long as she pays for it and their specific consent, is central to the proliferation of
violent tourism programs. Violent tourism programs that claim to work with fully consented
individuals, groups, or communities actively shape geographies of who gets help and who does not,
according to which markets better work and which representatives can better recruit
travelists to them. Low community members are viewed as passive subjects, the opinions are
not considered, nor asked for, and they become spectacles for the volunteers to observe.
In the worst cases, the work of community organizations is seriously undermined by the
presence of volunteers. The view that community desires and activities are somewhat besides the
point to the volunteers' personal experiences, cinematic of an overall view of community members
as items of consumption. So, bearing that in mind, a common critique of the practice of
volunteerism is that it'd be a lot more effective if people just donated the money they'd spend on
a trip directly to the people they're trying to help. So, why don't they? I think a good question
to ask here as we look at this is what's gained by not doing that? In Lee's paper, she argues that
in addition to purchase-triggered philanthropy, there's also what she calls consumption-oriented
philanthropy. Things like the World Vision gift catalog where, unlike a campaign where you buy
something and profits are donated to a charity, there's not really an obvious product, but instead
the person receiving the aid becomes the product. When we donate in this way, what we're in a sense
buying is the performance of gratitude from the recipient. In my opinion, this fits pretty well
with the way that we present their trips and activism as a whole in terms of the good it does
for those volunteering, allowing them to find meaning, explore, not to mention impress colleagues and
their bosses. In their book, Me to We, Craig and Mark lay out what they call the rich but poor
phenomenon, the idea that while countries in the global north may be materially rich,
they're spiritually poor, unlike the people in the global south who can teach us true happiness.
What initially surprised us most in our travels to many poor countries of the developing world
was not the misery or the extents of poverty, but the happiness and the hope that survived
despite it. We saw not only the scenes of hunger and suffering, but also moments of community,
compassion, trust and laughter. These people have something valuable to teach us.
Something that's like funny too is that they claim that they came up with this concept, which
is absolutely not true, because this is actually a very common trope appearing in a lot of writing
where indigenous people are portrayed as noble savages by their colonists, and so it's wild
to want to claim that. Mark and I came up with this cool new concept that we're calling the
white man's burden. Hey, so Scott asked me to clarify a couple things here. First of all,
he said that Mark and Craig never claimed to have invented that idea. I had based that claim
off of a couple of lines in their book, Me to We, Finding Meaning in a Material World,
where they wrote, quote, when we get caught up in the race to get ahead, taking time away from
our spouses and our children, we risk falling victim to an overwhelming emptiness we call
the rich but poor phenomenon. We coined this term a few years ago at the World Economic Forum,
and then later in the same chapter they write, despite their immense wealth, they, meaning the
super rich, cannot afford to spend even a day enjoying one of the most magnificent winter
resorts in the world. This is how we discovered the rich but poor phenomenon, the tendency to live
to work rather than work to live. So I guess that's my bad there. I shouldn't have assumed that when
they said that they discovered something, that they meant that they had come up with it. Scott
also said that this is not an example of the noble savage trope saying, quote, the idea of the noble
savage is different. The concept essentially refers to stereotypes of indigenous people in
communities where they are idealized and portrayed as being frozen in the past and having moral superiority
for being uncorrupted. He goes on to say that Craig and Mark were simply commenting on the, quote,
resilience of people faced with adversity. So while admittedly Craig and Mark never used the
phrases frozen in the past or uncorrupted, in my opinion, what they wrote comes off as, at the
very least, adjacent to the idea of the noble savage. But the point here is that while volunteerism
does for sure bring money into communities and helps the inhabitants by creating jobs and funding
larger aid projects, the people in these communities are absolutely providing a service for the visitors.
And so the key thing to be aware of here is that this is absolutely not a relationship between
equals. But these trips do something more than just that. In Tumi's paper, she argues that the
people who go on these trips are exposed to the horrors of global inequality, but in a context
that prevents them from reflecting on their own involvement in the system that causes it. The
reason why they're able to go on this expensive trip is because of the same economic and geopolitical
order that robs the people they meet and take pictures with of the ability to travel in the
same way. But I think that this really speaks to how the type of activism that we and lots of other
organizations just like them advocate for is one that not only ignores ongoing historical and systemic
issues, but actively works to prevent volunteers from engaging with those issues by presenting them
through the lens of global capitalism. And speaking of, let's talk about some of we's
corporate donors. We has, for instance, partnered with Dow Chemical with Craig sharing a stage with
then CEO Andrew Loveris. Here, some exciting programs for your school, some exciting programs
right here in Michigan. So they are a big deal here, but they're a big deal everywhere in
how they help out. So please join me and give it a round of applause to the chief executive officer
of Dow. Andrew, please come on up here. A man who was also at that time head of Trump's American
Manufacturing Council, where he was pressuring the Trump administration to ignore studies
warning about the harms of the pesticides Dow was producing. Craig has been very outspokenly
in favor of public private partnerships, but I didn't think that this was what he meant there.
So regarding Dow, Scott said, quote, I have included a high level description of the programming
Dow made possible. You continue to attack we charity on the engagement of corporate donors,
but fail to adequately share what kinds of programs they were doing with us and the value
these programs create. The high level description reads, the purpose of the partnership was to
teach students in resource poor high schools in Michigan State the purpose of STEM education.
Damn, that really was some high level shit there. Anyway, the point is next time you criticize
we for working with the company responsible for the Bhopal disaster and the ongoing contamination
in the area, just remember that they also teach high school students that STEM is important.
Coming back to the question of why not just donate to these places instead of adding all
the extra steps involved in volunteerism, the answer is that doing it this way is far more
beneficial for everyone other than the people who are supposed to be the ones receiving aid.
For the volunteers, they get an unforgettable vacation, a fire pick for Tinder, and something
that looks great on a resume or college application. In fact, Craig is pretty clear about one of the
target demographics of we economy being people at corporations looking for ways to stand out.
For corporations, they benefit from good PR or as we have referred to it when reaching out to
potential sponsors, the halo effect. They also get potential access to new markets in the global
south. And finally, they produce more people to hire with this kind of valuable experience.
That's a very common reason why corporations support charities, by the way. Like,
you know how tech companies love supporting programs that teach people how to code?
That's to drive down the wages of programs. As for the charities like we, when those people
who've taken their trips go on to try to get their companies to make a difference through
brand partnerships with an NGO, they're probably going to suggest the one they took a trip with
all those years ago. With all that said, I do want to close out by being fair to we here. I
obviously have a lot of problems with how they operate, but I think that it is worth engaging with
what I think is the steel man of their approach to charity, which is that from a strictly utilitarian,
consequentialist view of things, they are helping people. And even with all the criticisms of them,
they're still doing it on a scale that more grassroots organizations can't really do.
When I ask Scott about this, I don't think that the answer he gave me was totally unfair.
There is no easy set of choices for a charity. For us, it is a matter of seeking to do the most
good. We Charity conducts a rigorous and thorough vetting process to determine suitability of any
partnership. In short, the charity has long utilized a numerical ranking system based on
several factors. Corporate partnerships have helped us, like other charities, ensure financial
efficiencies, secure sustainable funding to be able to deliver long term programming that are
critical to empowering communities in situations of extreme poverty. And in Canada, ensure full
accessibility of our programs to all stakeholders, regardless of socioeconomic factors. We Charity
has only sought partnerships with companies whose behavior on balance demonstrates a willingness
to exercise a high level of corporate social responsibility. And that demonstrates a commitment
to and affinity with our charitable mandate. There are many companies that we have turned
down without providing specific names. There were, for example, various resource extraction
companies, oil and gas companies, and certain apparel companies that we declined affiliating
ourselves with. Now, I do think that that is reasonable, although I will say that I am pretty
skeptical about what that line is for who they will or won't work with. For example, while I
think it's great that they've refused to partner with clothing manufacturers, they have also sold
needleweed merch in Walmart. Scott went on to say, I understand that you are looking to offer a
critical commentary. However, if you are seeking to look at both sides of the matter, the impact of
the work we did with our partners financial support really cannot be ignored. Thanks to the support,
over 200,000 students received an education, 30,000 women have alternative sources of income to
escape poverty and provide for their families, and 1 million people have access to life saving
healthcare and clean water. We believe that it is important to listen to local voices in the
global south. Local leaders work with families who face the difference between life and death when
a child gets access to healthcare and clean drinking water, and a young girl can escape early
childhood marriage and FGM through opportunities with education. Leaders in the global south often
are the strongest advocates to partner with companies because that corporate support funds
these essential programs. Lastly, it is easy to critique a charity for working with corporations.
However, it is important to consider the other side of what this funding means for a charity's
beneficiaries. We hope you are planning to offer some degree of balance in your future commentary.
Carol Mora, who has worked with the Wee charity for many years overseeing community
programming in Kenya and previously serving as the principal of our all-girl secondary school,
has commented on this in the past. She has noted that partnerships with corporations
are literally what keeps our communities alive. Anyone seeking to impose a Western mindset on
these issues and not recognize them for what they are, which is in essence a source of funding that
would not otherwise be available, must consider the place of privilege that they are coming from.
Coming back to our question about why do volunteerism, instead of just directly
donating to the people who you are trying to help, Wee's response would probably be that
that would be great, but people aren't just going to donate without traveling to these areas,
meeting these people, and seeing why it's important for them to do that. And I think that's fair,
but also speaks to the problem of treating charities as an individual action in this way.
Like, this isn't a matter of making the most of a bad situation. This is a feature of the system
that they champion. In the book, The Revolution Will Not Be Funded, there's an essay talking
about the charity Sista Sista, which had their funding placed in jeopardy after they tweeted
their support for Palestinians. And they make a case for why charities should abandon foundations
and take on a more grassroots model. And I think that they make a lot of good cases for how
grassroots organizing is not the dead end that people tend to think it is and can be very effective
and in fact has a lot of advantages. I think that those arguments are true and make good points.
But also, realistically, they could have helped a lot of people with the funding that they lost.
And I do think that there's an important question about how much was that tweet about
Palestinians really work. And yeah, I don't really have an easy answer to that. I think that
it is very clear that it's impossible to make systemic change while being dependent on people
and organizations whose wealth and power depends on the system. For instance, Bill Gates' charity
has done great work fighting disease in poorer countries, but also a big part of the reason
why diseases are so prevalent in those countries is because they can't afford medication and aren't
allowed to use generic versions because of the intellectual property laws responsible for Bill
Gates' wealth. With that said, while I do think that grassroots movements have a lot more potential
than people like the Killburgers like to believe, I'm not confident in them being able to cause
systemic change either. And in the meantime, that corporate money does help a lot of people.
I guess one place where I will agree with them is that there aren't easy answers to this.
Although, I think that hopefully we can do better than these schools. Thanks for watching.
You'll have to break me
Even with my heart of pain lost in my head
I could feel your face, lights in my head, humbled by pain
Words from the future that held me in my stead, lost in the flames
I won't change for you
You'll have to break me
Even with my heart of pain lost in my head
Oh, I won't lose myself
Oh, I will be far from now
I swore
Even if identities are lost with my grief
Oh, I won't lose myself
Oh, I will be far from now
I swore
Even if identities are lost with my grief
Oh, I will be far from now
Oh, I will be far from now
I swore
Even if identities are lost with my grief
Oh, I will be far from now
I swore
Even if identities are lost with my grief
Even if identities are lost with my grief
Even if identities are lost with my grief
My burning arrow fits up from under me
Growls like leaves
Reform the mirror, it smiles with tears
Guard well my grief
Thanks for watching!
