I
Obviously perception wise as a kid
You know, I didn't associate a green lantern and immortal even though it makes sense like musically and it was dope
But yeah, I think it like like you said like you pointed out so much stuff
Early because again at that time we didn't have access to YouTube and like jumping down a rabbit hole and it's like wait a minute
What is he talking about like, you know, I think um, I think that you
definitely, uh, you know in terms of
Shedding the light to a whole generation of kids who were just hip-hop heads
You definitely did open their eyes to a lot of wild shit man and a lot of truthful shit, right?
And also, I think that even to this day
There's songs that I've written that people still ask me questions about like I'm not gonna lie, Kev
Even 20 years later people ask me is dance with the devil a true story and I have to look these people right in the eye and say
Sir, I am not responsible for raping or killing any women. That is absolutely crazy
It is a song. However, yeah, I can take people if they really want to the building where this incident happened in Harlem
And the truth is that that actually did happen and those people that were allegedly responsible for that began dying
And that's why it became such a powerful story because everyone's like, oh, you're telling hoodtales
What if these motherfuckers come back for you and I said let them right what they're gonna do like you think that the neighborhood is gonna
Protect them after they find out what they really did that they raped a woman
Do you realize that in rich communities you can get away with stuff like that?
Yeah, oh, they're little kids coming in all hours of the night
No one says anything billionaires, but if you live in a ghetto and someone says a rumor in the hood
Oh, someone's touching kids in a partner. You think they're gonna kill everybody from the neighborhood
Get my door down. Yeah the fuck is going on in your homes
So that's the kind of energy it was and these people literally started dying and one of them
We're not gonna mention names because these people don't deserve to be remembered in a good light
But this is a sad story
They couldn't find this man can and I would I explain to people about the street is that there's no there's no rules
Just like there's no such thing as a safe gun. You have to respect everything. I'm a big second amendment guy
The respect the weapon is no such thing as a safe gun
These people were out here thinking that they could get away with a crime and that they wouldn't be found and they murdered this man's son
To get him to come to the funeral so they could kill him
This is the type of shit that people were doing. That's one of your would you say that your most popular song?
It's like one of them, right? Probably yeah
For people who because there's gonna be people watching this YouTube video who subscribe who maybe are not hip to your catalog
That's fine. Give us a break like for people who haven't heard dance with the devil. What is the premise of the record?
Well, I mean without giving the entire thing away. I would say that
It's definitely a very realistic tale of what happens when people feel peer-pressured
To commit violence to join a gang or when they feel like they have to overcompensate
For not being as tough as everybody thinks they is and they commit violence and do horrible things to people to try to prove
Something to somebody I remind individuals that are really living in the street. We don't deal with gratuitous violence
We deal with people that have offended or hurt us who have come into our neighborhood and cause problems the premise of going into another neighborhood and just
Trying to hurt people right doesn't make sense now
I mean even if you ask the essays that run each block to be like, why would I start a war for no reason?
But in New York City, it was structured differently. It wasn't so much gangs. It was crews back in New York
Right, right, right. So if you heard about a story like this, it became an urban legend immediately and not just that Kev
It was that
The story was always a little bit different instead of it being the guy's mom
It would be the person's stepsister. It would be the aunt
It would be someone related and I think when you have tales about, you know
Murder or killing people. It's a grand eyes
Some sometimes in hip hop to the point that you never really see the impact of what that is
Like even if y'all kill someone that's not a kid if y'all kill someone that's 30 years old
You think that's not somebody son, of course
You don't think you have a target on your back, right? You don't think that somebody's coming back for you
That's the reality then and more often than not when people come up to me and they say
Oh, do you think the guys from dance with the devil were really cursed by the devil?
And I'm like, no, they live the horrible lifestyle where they thought they could get away with hurting people at random and
Eventually it's not just to them, but to their children as well
