I'm Aaron Wolff. I'm creating FUTO to try to get back tech freedom. I'm here with Curtis Yarvin
Who's been programming for decades like me and created the urban platform both for programming for a while in our lives and
We kind of met we kind of
experienced the decline of
Freedom for programmers
So I don't know what do you have to say about this? I don't know um freedom for programmers
I mean, you know my whole life. I've seen the decline of the internet. I mean the internet has really
Been declining for my entire adult life or mine, you know, since I was a teenager
Because really just in terms of the I mean, it's all eternal September
It's sort of the quality of material and the quality of the network becomes more centralized
The quality of content goes down, you know
Usenet which was my first social introduction of the internet in like, you know, the late 80s was like miles beyond
Like what the reddit, which is the closest equivalence now
You know Usenet was like a decentralized reddit with collective community governance. It was in an ontology
It was insane and today
Yeah, I mean, it's like weird. It's kind of like why do you think Usenet even went away?
Like it was it was fun. It was Usenet was godlike
Usenet was sort of clearly the future it went away, you know, my hypothesis is that Usenet was
essentially
Filled prey to something that happens to a lot of things, which is that it essentially
assumed
its quality
Was not the result of quality control. It had accidental quality control
It had accidental quality control because the only people who can get on Usenet were like students at major universities or people working at tech companies
You know, and so this is a population, you know with an average IQ of like 125 or whatever
Probably has the same average IQ as like Burning Man, right?
And when you have a large community that's sort of strongly selected in various ways
Even if the selection process is totally it's not like you had to apply to be on Usenet
You just had to be in a certain kind of place at a certain kind of time and
What they realized was that especially well, I mean the thing that really killed them was the binaries groups that was
But but that was just retarded but
the and like more generally what killed them was what was called eternal September back then because
If I can explain the concept briefly the idea was that in September a large group of clueless newbies would show up as freshmen at the local
University and then when they put AOL, you know with alert all the little, you know floppy disks that they sent in the mail
Or I guess there were CDs
Online suddenly all of the world's population
Could come on this thing and it just wasn't scaled for that
It wasn't scaled at the quality level and so basically it just suffered really rapid
Quality collapse. There's a term that I've heard about this sometime
Sometimes evaporative cooling where basically as you get like lower quality stuff people enter the higher quality people leave
I mean like and you know this drama
This happened to like clubhouse like just last year, right?
You know and so you need some kind of mechanism for things like this where you start with
Maybe it starts with a kind of accidental quality control and then when it starts to scale it develops like active quality control
Okay. Yeah, I mean, yeah, it's like Cora went through the same quality goes down and then some centralized solution comes because they actually
moderators and yeah
You would hope that it would be possible to do distributed moderation, but it's obviously very hard problem
right and so you have this, you know internet where
You know, I was just talking to Joe about you know search and it's like Google has created this like search desert like when you're searching
You're looking for
UGC you're not looking for a content that's put there to manipulate you you're looking for quality
And this is why everyone starts to search with like reddit.com
On right there in their searches and reddit is no great shakes either
but otherwise what you're getting is basically mainstream media articles and
SEO'd garbage and Wikipedia right right and then even now reddit starts to censor those things too
Yeah, of course. Yeah, it's reddit. It's not the reddit doesn't have a censorship problem
But it's also that reddit has a just like shit to your redditor problem, right?
You know and you know occasionally you get these little glimpses of the kind of quality content that could exist on the internet
You get early use net you get Quora
Early Quora you must remember early Quora. I was actually very I used use net and then I just disappeared into my little
My little startup that I did at Yahoo and it was very much programming
But yeah, I mean if we were Yahoo message boards for the yeah for finance just over on finance
Yeah, they were there and there was there was quality content there, you know
But like these these these sort of accidental coherences of quality
Because of some sort of accidental filter are really hard to maintain and of course the other thing that happened then was that
You know things were sort of there was more of a default public ethos and then you know, there's another like
The death of the protocol I think is really like a super important event remember how everything was going to be RPC
Okay, you know or like, you know, you're you're only there are bad protocols though. Yeah. Well, yeah, sure sure sure sure
But but I mean it's more than that so so it's like basically, you know the story
I tell or one of the stories I tell about the death of the distributed internet was that it was in
Something I think it was 98 and I'd convinced my company to send me really for no good reason to an ITF meetup
And we were doing operating systems for like pre iPhone, you know early Japanese self remember how the Japanese had had mobile
You know smartphones first, so we were doing operating systems for the Japanese. This was a geo works in Berkeley and
The way that the Japanese expected hardware manufacturers expected to work with us as an operating system founder
It was very simple. They would produce screenshots of what the device would show and we would make it show those screenshots
Okay, this is a very innovative way of specifying an operating system that perhaps you've never encountered before
You know there you go. Yeah, so, you know, they sent me to this ITF, you know
Meeting and I'm in the instant messaging and presence group
Which is basically working on standardizing what would later be called social network
So what year would this be 98? Okay, so so I'm in I'm in the room, you know with these people and basically this is where XMPP if
You know, I mean, this is when Yahoo messenger and ICQ. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, Jabber Jabber
XMPP is basically Jabber I think great
We're all these things but it was an assumption that this would work the way email works and it was like
Oh, you know, there's gonna be a protocol and if I want to talk to you my server, we'll talk to your server
You know through some like, you know, and that will be the normal way that we talk and I'll like connect to a port on your thing
And you know, if you could have walked in there like 10 years later and be like
Okay, here's how we're actually gonna solve the problem
Everyone is gonna use one big server
Yeah, I mean even things like signal and telegram are just yeah centralized
Yeah, they're just Facebook even right, you know, like basically because Facebook was instant messaging and presence
And it's just like one big server and you've basically gone back to you know, mainframes essentially
and and like that itself is sort of such a like
Compromise in the like revolution that we all expected
Right, right. I mean, I do feel like, you know, people are still trying to make progress, right?
We've got you know, various projects like matrix product the matrix project
I know I feel like it's a problem. We're the best engineers who I think this is all very solvable
But the problem is the best engineers. They're just tied up at Google or you know, Apple or whatever
They have no incentive to do things properly. No, no, no, no, no, I mean that like, you know, the the
I mean, I started working on this problem in like 2002, right?
And it was just like clear that nothing
Well, I have a very maximalist approach to the problem
But like it was sort of clear that nothing like what I wanted to do could be done either in academia or in
big companies or really in as a straight open-source project and had too much sort of structure for that
It was like so it's sort of like startups was sort of the only form left and it was not a good fit
Yeah, I mean startups basically want to get acquired by Google. Sure. I mean and start sure
I mean and they have the lifespan in a mark and recent calls them like firefly startups
They have the lifespan of a firefly. It's like so like, you know, Y Combinator like funds
I don't know. I don't know what it even means for like Y Combinator to fund like a fusion thing
Like we actually got into Y Combinator and then we were like, but why would we do this? Like, okay?
You know and you know, well, I mean it doesn't hurt. I mean, well, they want seven percent, right?
Okay, I don't think it was I don't know that it was the right decision. It was a bad decision taken by my first
I mean, they're gonna steer you to what most I'm gonna steer you either to like be a
An Airbnb, but probably they're gonna steer you to get aqua hired by Google. That's mostly what Y Combinator does
But like that's better than what do you think the percentage around the street
Oh, the percentages are not great, but the percentages enable them to make money. I don't know, you know
