In this part, we aim to address the uniqueness question by suggesting something stronger than
the mutual coherence, the bubble function.
We start by the statement that while simple to use, the mutual coherence is in fact very
crude.
Why is it so?
Consider the case where A has two identical atoms.
In this case, mu becomes one and all our analysis collapses.
Furthermore, if two columns are closed by, this implies that mu is very close to one
and again, our results become too weak.
Indeed, we have seen that there is a large gap between the one plus one over mu and the
spark bounds for uniqueness.
One is of the order of square root of n, at best, and the other could be as high as n
plus one.
An interesting question to ask is this, does the mutual coherence has a true practical
meaning or is it only a theoretically convenient tool with a pessimistic prediction?
While we will not answer this tough question here in full, we turn now to propose the
bubble function which fixes some of the difficulties that the coherence has.
The definition of the bubble function mu one of k is given here and the first thing to
notice is that it looks quite complicated.
So let's make sense of this formula.
We get the matrix A and choose an arbitrary set of k columns from it denoted as capital
lambda.
We choose another column, aj, from outside of this set and then compute the sum of the
absolute inner product of all the vectors in lambda with aj.
Now imagine that we repeat all these process for all the possibilities of choosing lambda
and aj and let's maximize the above mentioned sum.
This is mu one of k, the bubble function.
The above description must leave you with the impression that computing the bubble function
is a combinatorial task of exponential complexity.
Actually this is very far from the truth and in fact computing mu one of k is rather easy.
We start by computing the gram matrix g.
Then we take the absolute values of the entries of g and sort each row in descending order.
The maximal element in each row is obviously one taken from the main diagonal and it will
be leading each row after the sorting.
The rest of the row contains values in the range zero to mu.
We remove the first column from the resulting matrix as these ones contribute nothing to
the computation of the bubble function.
We are nearly done.
Now replace each row with an accumulated sum of it from the left to the right.
That is the first entry remains unchanged.
The second becomes the sum of the first two, etc.
As a last step, go to the kth column and search for the maximal value.
The row it is found in defines the index j in the computation of mu one of k.
And the first k elements are in fact the set lambda.
The maximal value itself is mu one of k.
Why should we turn from the mutual coherence to the bubble function?
Well, because the mutual coherence characterizes pairs of columns from A whereas the bubble
function naturally extends this to larger sets.
How are the two related?
First observe that by bounding each of the inner products by the regular coherence
mu we see that mu one of k is upper bounded by k times mu.
Secondly, mu one of one is trivially mu the regular coherence by definition.
Indeed, this implies that the bubble function does not provide a remedy to the case where
the two columns are identical.
Another property of mu one is the fact that it is monotonically increasing as k grows
and the steps are getting smaller and smaller.
This exposes the source of strength of the bubble function over the regular mutual coherence.
If the growth is slower than mu in each step of the increasing k, the bubble function is
more faithfully describing the situation for us.
We will not provide a complete analysis of the bubble function, but the following observations
are easy to verify.
First, as long as mu one of k is smaller than one, this implies that any set of k plus one
columns is linearly independent.
This in turn says that the spark is bigger than k plus one.
Here is a graph illustrating this property.
Observe first the line mu times k and the curve describing mu one k which grows slower
than the line.
The spark is predicted as the first k that causes mu one of k minus one to cross the
value one.
Due to the slower growth, this prediction is better than using the regular mutual coherence.
Can we use the bubble function to get a new and alternative uniqueness result?
The answer is positive.
Here is the original theorem that we have already seen which bases its claim of the
uniqueness on the regular coherence.
But with the bubble function, a new condition for uniqueness can be posed if the given solution
is sparse enough, having k non-zeros, and if mu one of k plus mu one of k minus one
is smaller than one, then this solution is necessarily optimal.
