Let's go over this question about the brain reflex.
We work on those reflexes.
And you remember that you have about, I said 28
because we don't count some reflexes
that are left, right, up, down.
You can have to 40 reflex at birth
that are active for survival.
The first one that we know, but you may start earlier,
is the fear paralysis reflex,
which is an equivalent of a frozen response.
We feel the baby touching the wall of the uterus
between five and seven weeks in trial utero.
And most of those reflex,
which is them integrate three months, six months,
some stay up to three years.
But if you go to school today
and you test seven years old, nine years old, 15 years old,
you feel that they have a lot of reflex,
not integrated steel.
And that is gonna create a lot of problem.
And sometimes I describe this as a tadpole
that needs their tail in water to be able to move.
But once a tadpole turn into a frog,
you don't want your tail when it's time to jump.
You need to have those structure regress,
not be active anymore.
And unfortunately when your reflex is still active,
after six months or after three years,
depending on the reflex, it creates a lot of problem.
One of them is learning
and it could be balance posture, memory, math problem,
all kind of things, including emotional problem,
postural, mental, emotional, even spiritual problem.
So it's really something and many team look into it,
but the main treatment are movement.
So there's one called the grasping reflex,
but you still grasp.
And if you do movement like that
once or twice a day for six months
before you inhibit the reflex,
it makes the parents so tired of doing it every day
that kids are so sick of it.
It takes a long time, it takes a few months up to six months.
So it's very long.
So we find a way to gently being able
to inhibit those reflexes.
We have those reflex that also come back,
especially after a trauma, emotional trauma,
in adults.
So when you see someone that's very nice
and very balanced and very polite,
but in a stressful situation,
and you have seen that all of you,
someone that regress,
beginning to be like,
it's beginning to be an animal,
in the worst case.
When you have this,
you regress in the hierarchy of your nervous system
and most probably you reactivate
one of those primary reflex.
Rather than use a sophisticated behavior,
a location, talk and movement,
you're gonna go back into a very primitive way.
Whatever you regress into,
you most probably have one of those neonatal reflex
or perinatal reflex that are reactivated.
So they can reactivate emotionally,
or there's a stress, there's a fire,
but they can also happen if you have a stroke,
if you have Parkinson's, dementia, brain cancer,
something like this.
So it happened in adults,
and especially when you see people in old age,
bent in half, that's a reflex that come back.
Sometimes if you go to your grandpa,
they begin to like to put a lot of things in their mouth,
sucking reflex, they grab your hand,
they don't let go, grasping reflex.
You need to reinvigorate them at some point with aging
and especially if you had some pathologies
described here in the slides.
In kids, it's an enormous amount of problem
that can happen to them
and you often discover them
when they have school problem, learning problem.
And you have a list here,
from sensory disorder, trauma, PTSD,
ASD, autism, ADHD, ADHD.
So any kind of problem that must focus,
concentration, writing problem,
vestibular balance problem, posterior problem,
social skills, they can be really isolated in their tower,
they can be really aggressive.
Dyslexia, dyscalculia, dysgraphia, dyspraxia,
speech developmental disorder,
auditory and visual processing,
autism, down to trauma exam.
All those things gonna tell you,
wow, this is a red flag to use one of those reflex.
So those reflex become not integrated, not inhibited.
We call that retain reflex.
All those were the synonym.
This reflex as persistent in adult.
This, there's a description I found somewhere of,
this and that reflex is in the brainstem.
This reflex in the medulla, this reflex in the midbrain,
this affects in the cortex,
but this is absolutely not what we find.
This is not really scientific.
Any reflex can be searched anywhere
in the central nervous system.
This is one of the question I see a lot
and some would describe that,
but that's absolutely not what we find
when we test and palpate.
Because there's a theory,
there's no imaging done on that.
They're just an assumption.
When you feel with your hand
and that's the benefit of feeling,
you can really see what's happening.
You don't feel that at all.
Any reflex can be stuck anywhere.
That was a question, basically.
I just went over to give you an overview.
This is brain reflex, brain neonatal reflex.
And the treatment is very, very gentle.
Just type on YouTube, reflex and cheeky.
And you could see us working with a lot of reflex.
See how gentle and how fast it is to treat
with like six or eight videos on the brain.
Reflex is very, very fast.
